@@@@@


doc= 29090


West, Joseph (d. 1691), army officer and colonial governor, was probably born in England, with a possible connection to the West family in Sussex. Little else is known about his early life, except that he was a London merchant before his departure for America. West served in the Royal Navy during the Second Anglo-Dutch War under the command of James Carteret. James was the son of Sir George Carteret, one of the eight proprietors of Carolina. On 27 July 1669 the lords proprietors gave West command of a small fleet and ordered him to sail from England to Port Royal, South Carolina, by way of Ireland and Barbados. This 'first fleet' arrived at its final destination in April 1670, and settled along a waterway named the Ashley River (in honour of proprietor Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Baron Ashley and first earl of Shaftesbury) at a place called Charlestown. The designated governor, William Sayle, then took command of the colony. West established residence in the settlement and soon became the proprietary shopkeeper and a member of the grand council. When Sayle died in March 1671, local leaders gave West the responsibility of governing the fledgeling colony. His wife, known only as Joanna (died in or before 1681), joined him in Carolina in August 1671. 
Historians credit West, through his rational management of material resources and people, with the early survival of the South Carolina colony. However, the proprietors were less pleased with his performance. West routinely ignored directives from London, which typically offered advice ill suited to circumstances in the nascent colony and which demanded that the settlers search for a profitable staple crop. He favoured a more practical plantation programme. As a result, the proprietors replaced West as governor, appointing Sir John Yeamans to the office in April 1672. West then returned to his position as proprietary shopkeeper and he also became the registrar of the colony's land records. 
Yeamans quickly proved an unsatisfactory choice; during his administration the settlement did not become self-sufficient. Planters exported locally grown produce to the West Indies, the lords proprietors continued to supply the settlers with foodstuffs, and the governor pocketed the profits. When Yeamans died in office in August 1674, the grand council appointed West as his temporary replacement. The proprietors had already commissioned West as the permanent governor the previous April, but the slow transmission of information across the Atlantic delayed news of his official return to power. 
In his second administration West again pursued the physical and economic security of the colony. In 1678 the settlement moved to a more defensible geographic position at Oyster Point. West fostered the deerskin trade and peaceable relations with the neighbouring American Indians, and he promoted agricultural and pastoral farming sufficient to meet the needs of residents and create a surplus for export. In May 1682, again dissatisfied with West's performance (he was accused of failing to suppress both trade with pirates and traffic in American Indian slaves), the proprietors of the colony commissioned a new governor named Joseph Morton. West returned to office briefly in September 1684 as a replacement elected by the council. He was later recommissioned by the proprietors, but persistent political factionalism and increasingly poor health appear to have caused him to resign as governor the following summer. 
In an attempt to reverse the course of his illness, West left South Carolina for Massachusetts in late June or early July 1685. He arrived in Boston on 15 September and received visits from many of the colony's leading figures. Diarist Samuel Sewall recorded that the suffering West went to New England 'for cure of Dry Gripes', a common ailment caused by drinking rum distilled through lead pipes. Historians suggest that he may also have contracted malaria, which plagued Charlestown in 1684. The colony's governor, Simon Bradstreet, called on West ten days after his arrival in New England. In January 1686, with his health greatly improved, he dined at the governor's home. The following autumn West returned to South Carolina. 
During his tenure in South Carolina West amassed a considerable fortune in land and slaves. As a cassique and landgrave he was entitled theoretically to 60,000 acres of land in the province. Records indicate that West actually owned a house and lot in Charlestown and a 130 acre plantation. He also obtained a grant for 1500 acres along the Cooper River in 1680. A magnificent illumination of the plan and grant of this property survives in the South Carolina Historical Society in Charleston. In 1685 West also owned ten African and two American Indian slaves, as well as the indentures of two male servants. After his return from Massachusetts in late 1686 West sold much of his estate. No evidence remains regarding his activities from the summer of 1687, when he left South Carolina, until his death in New York city in 1691. At this time his estate consisted of $800 of gold and silver, an enslaved girl named Moll, and an enslaved man called Will. Without a surviving wife or children, West designated the Quaker poor of London as his residual heirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 29091


West, Nicholas (d. 1533), bishop of Ely and diplomat, was born at Putney in Surrey. His father, John West, was a baker in that town. Nicholas was educated at Eton between about 1478 and 1483, and was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar in the latter year. He incepted as BA in 1487 and MA in 1490, having become a fellow of his college as early as 1486. While he was a scholar he was involved in some disturbance which ended in part of the provost's lodgings being set on fire, but this does not seem to have affected his career adversely. John Fisher was a contemporary on the arts course, and became a lifelong friend. West took his higher degrees in the civil law: his LLD was taken before 1500, possibly from Oxford. Sanuto's Venetian diaries allege that he studied at Bologna as well. 
The first benefice that West acquired was the rectory of Yelford in Oxfordshire, which he held from 1489 to 1498. It was another decade before decisive evidence of his future career success began to emerge. In 1499 Richard Fox, then bishop of Durham, presented him to the rectory of Egglescliffe, Durham, which he retained until his elevation to Ely. Fox then became his active patron, making him his vicar-general when he moved to the diocese of Winchester in 1501, and launching him on the beginning of his career in royal service. Other benefices rapidly followed: West was vicar of Kingston upon Thames from 1502 to about 1505; rector of Witney, Oxfordshire, from 1502; treasurer of Chichester Cathedral from early 1507; vicar of Merton, Oxfordshire, from 1508; and finally dean of St George's, Windsor, from 1509 to 1515. Like many of his successful ecclesiastical contemporaries he had become a pluralist on the grand scale, mainly in return for services rendered to the regime of Henry VII. 
Fox sent West on his first foreign embassy in November 1502, when he became junior colleague to Sir Thomas Brandon on a mission to Emperor Maximilian. Two years later he became a royal councillor: on 26 November 1504 he was one of those sitting in the Star Chamber when a dispute between the merchants of the staple and the merchant adventurers was resolved. In 1505 West was the sole ambassador negotiating a treaty with Georg, duke of Saxony, at Calais, which aimed to prevent him from protecting the Yorkist claimant Edmund de la Pole, earl of Suffolk; this was ratified at Dresden in December of that year. The following year West was one of the commissioners who negotiated the important commercial treaty with the Low Countries known as the 'malus intercursus'. Within a few months he was abroad again, ratifying a treaty at Valladolid for a marriage between Henry VII and Marguerite of Savoy, sister of Philip the Fair of Castile. Although this project failed it must have marked West as a suitable marriage broker: in 1508 he was one of those deputed to assist with marriage negotiations between the Archduke Charles of Austria and Henry VII's younger daughter Mary, the treaty being signed by Henry on 8 December 1508. His final service to his royal master was a visit to France to receive Louis XII's oath to observe the treaty he had agreed in March 1509. 
The accession of Henry VIII brought a short respite from the routines of diplomacy, but by November 1511 West was nominated ambassador to James IV of Scotland and travelled to York before his journey was stopped for political reasons. In February 1513 he was appointed with Lord Dacre to settle differences with the Scots: a commission to resolve border problems was established and met in June 1513, but nothing was resolved and the Scots invasion of England followed. West was then pressed into action in France again, appointed in August 1514 with Sir Thomas Docwra to take Louis XII's oath to the 1513 treaty, and to celebrate by proxy the marriage of Henry's sister Mary to Louis XII. He had scarcely returned from this journey to Paris when Louis XII died, and West was again sent, with the duke of Suffolk and Sir Richard Wingfield, to condole Francois I and organize a defensive alliance. He received Francois's oath to observe the treaty and his promise to pay the 1 million gold crowns due for the return of Tournai. It was this burst of diplomatic activity that seems to have won Nicholas West the prize of the bishopric of Ely. The temporalities were granted to him from 18 May 1515, and he was consecrated by Warham at Lambeth on 7 October. 
The grant of Ely enabled West to live in the grand manner. The see was worth approximately $2000 per annum, the fourth wealthiest of the English bishoprics. Robert Steward, last prior of Ely, asserted that he had a hundred servants, and a level of largess that allowed for the feeding of 200 poor with warm meat and drink at his gate. There can, on the other hand, have been only limited evidence that Nicholas West would emerge as a committed pastor to his Ely flock. He had admittedly given some attention to his office as dean of Windsor, residing there at the beginning of Henry VIII's reign, and overseeing the work of completing the vaulting of the chapel. In 1513 he negotiated with the crown for lands granted to the chapel in fulfilment of Lady Margaret Beaufort's will. But, like his old patron Bishop Fox, he must have assumed that he was too necessary to the governmental system to be allowed to reside steadily in his see or make it the prime focus of his attention. Events in the next decade partially confirmed this view. West was on his travels again in May 1516, when he went to Scotland with Lord Dacre and Thomas Magnus, archdeacon of the East Riding, to settle a treaty. Between October 1517 and October 1518 he was deeply involved in ambassadorial work in France, and with Wolsey's spectacular negotiations for a treaty of universal peace, and two years later he was one of the essential attendants at the Field of Cloth of Gold. He was also at Wolsey's side during the Calais negotiations of the summer of 1521 with Charles V and Francois I. After a brief respite in the early 1520s he was made a principal negotiator of the truce between England and France which ended the second French war, and the final 'Treaty at the More', signed on 30 August 1525, seems to have owed something to his skill. 
Despite these heavy commitments West showed from the beginning of his episcopate that he had absorbed lessons in more than diplomacy from Fox. He inherited a see that had been neglected by his aristocratic predecessor, James Stanley, who was noted mainly for his hunting skills and the mistress he kept at the episcopal palace of Somersham. West was resident in his diocese for significant parts of each year from 1516 and 1528, when the bishop's register (which provides most of the relevant information) ceases. Only in 1527 is there a prolonged absence that cannot be explained by diplomatic activity. The bishop conducted his primary visitation in person in 1516, complaining to Wolsey on 4 April about the disorder at Ely Priory that 'if it had not been looked upon betimes I suppose it would not have been able to have continued a monastery four years' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/13/396). He usually undertook his own ordinations, either in the diocese or at the London residence, Ely Place; moreover he adjudicated disputes about benefices in person, and his register suggests a certain interest in the learning of his clergy. Two candidates for admission to benefices were required to engage in further study, in one case to gain a better knowledge of scripture. Although no records of his sermons survive, there is the testimony of Fisher that he was a preaching as well as a resident prelate. 
West also showed a close interest in the University of Cambridge and its humanist learning. He became visitor of St John's College in the foundation statutes of 1516, and patronized John Siberch, the printer to the university, and Richard Croke, the second holder of the official lectureship in Greek. The latter dedicated his 'Orationes duae' (1520) to the bishop, as a favourer of 'good letters'. As the Lutheran threat became more visible, however, West had to turn his attention from such cultural civilities to the maintenance of orthodoxy. When John Fisher offered him the dedication of 'Defensio regiae assertionis' (1525), with its defence of Henry VIII's tract against Luther, he observed that West had already seen and discussed drafts of the work two years earlier and had urged him to publish. By the time Fisher finally went public his friend was already assailing heterodoxy among his clergy. In October 1525 George Giles, instituted to the Cambridgeshire parish of Little Eversden, had to take an oath additional to the usual promises of canonical obedience and residence, by which he renounced all heretical Lutheran teaching and swore that he would neither preach nor maintain it. West's successor, Thomas Goodrich, believed that the new oath was then administered to all those instituted in the diocese, though the evidence of the episcopal registers is that it was offered selectively, probably when there was fear about the candidate's credentials. It was, for example, administered to West's own nephew, Nicholas Hawkins, who was rumoured later to have been made to recant heretical beliefs by his uncle. In 1528 West issued statutes at his diocesan synod which, among other things, forbade the use of Tyndale's translations of the scriptures and tightened control over unlicensed preaching. The latter issue was particularly sensitive for the bishop, who in 1525 had inadvertently licensed that dangerous figure Thomas Bilney to preach in the diocese. Two years later West was present at Bilney's submission before Wolsey, and his registrar duly recorded that the licence was cancelled because of heresy. 
West's most noted encounter with Cambridge heterodoxy came when he confronted Hugh Latimer. Though Latimer was licensed to preach by the university, West could claim jurisdictional interest because his preaching was heard by townsmen as well. According to Cranmer's secretary Ralph Morice, he therefore appeared at a Great St Mary's sermon to judge the danger himself. After the sermon, in which Latimer had supposedly changed his theme to address the worldliness of prelates, West tried to persuade him to preach against Luther, only to be checked with the response that he knew nothing about the German's ideas since his works were banned. This elicited the retort 'well, well, Mr. Latimer I perceive that you somewhat smell of the pan, you will repent this gear one day' (BL, Harleian MS 422, fol. 85). Latimer was prohibited from preaching in the diocese, and in the university by the vice-chancellor. Wolsey then created confusion by overturning both these decisions on appeal and giving Latimer a legatine licence, asserting that he could preach on the worldliness of prelates to the bishop of Ely's beard, 'let him say what he will'. West's only resort was to preach against heresy at Barnwell Abbey on the outskirts of Cambridge. 
The running sore of Cambridge heterodoxy and university independence deeply disturbed the bishop. In the aftermath of the Latimer incident his official principal, Robert Cliffe, fell foul of the vice-chancellor for attempting to discipline a cleric from Barnard Hostel for conjuring and fornication. The incident may have started as a jurisdictional mistake, but it escalated until West had excommunicated the entire senate for their opposition to his authority and Wolsey and Fisher had become deeply involved. In June 1529 Wolsey even took the extreme step of seeking a papal bull to free both universities from all forms of episcopal control, allegedly so that he could better ensure orthodoxy. Nothing came of this, and in 1531, in the reforming sessions of convocation provoked by the divorce crisis, the tables were turned when it was proposed that the bishops of Ely and Lincoln should be given full powers of visitation in their respective universities in order to root out heresy. Such a challenge to the privileges of Oxford and Cambridge was more than even convocation could stomach, and when its legislation was promulgated in 1532 there was no mention of the issue. 
Nicholas West was a chaplain to Katherine of Aragon, and the beginnings of the divorce crisis once again caught him up directly into national events. In July 1529 he offered testimony to the legatine court appointed by the papacy to consider the validity of Katherine's marriage to Henry, supporting, with some equivocation, the queen's denial that she had had sexual relations with Prince Arthur, and appealing to Rome as the only proper place for the case to be tried. West remained one of Katherine's key supporters in the next two years, and in the process incurred royal wrath. He was one of the group of eight bishops charged with 'praemunire' in 1530, supposedly for their acquiescence in Wolsey's abuse of legatine power, but more significantly for their opposition to royal policy. In September 1530 Fisher, West, and Clerk of Bath and Wells took the bold step of appealing to Rome against the decisions of the 1529 parliament, especially the legislation limiting the number of benefices a cleric might hold. This led to arrest and a brief period of imprisonment for all three, perhaps the issue that broke West's resistance. 
During the next eighteen months very little is known of West's movements, though he managed to attend sessions of convocation while complaining of the burden of growing ill health. He was, by curious accident, one of the rump of only three bishops who finally gave assent to the submission of the clergy in May 1532, though his continuing sympathy for Katherine is indicated by the fact that she retired from London to his house at Hatfield in August 1532. He must have felt, however, that he needed to accommodate to the new regime, for his last letters, dated from his manor of Downham in February and March 1533, address Cromwell in tones of loyal devotion previously reserved for his correspondence with Wolsey. He stressed personal connection through shared geographical origins and 'god-brothership' to trade in favours, though it is doubtful whether the new political star would have appreciated the 'token of St. Audrey, whereof you shall be sure for your life' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 6, no.218). West died at Downham on 28 April 1533, and was buried in the magnificent chantry chapel that he had constructed in Ely Cathedral. He died rich: the extraordinary inventory of his goods shows over 5000 ounces of silver and silver gilt, more than, for example, either the monasteries of Ely or Ramsey surrendered at the dissolution. The inventory also reveals a cultivated mind: his library consisted of approximately 250 volumes. 


@@@@@


doc= 29092


Raphael Lamar West (1766-1850), history painter, trained under his father whom he often assisted. He pursued the career of an artist with some success, but lacked his father's industry. He painted 'Orlando and Oliver' (1789), from 'As You Like It', for John Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery, and exhibited at the Royal Academy for a decade beginning in 1781 and ceasing when he failed to be elected an associate member. A large painting, 'The Battle between Michael and Satan' (stolen, 1982), of which a photograph exists, is possibly the picture exhibited by R. L. West at the Royal Academy in 1782 (von Erffa and Staley, no. 406). Very little of Raphael West's output is known to survive other than some of his drawings, etchings, and lithographs inspired by the work of his father and that of Salvator Rosa. In 1800-02 he tried unsuccessfully to emigrate, with his wife, Maria Siltso to an undeveloped part of the United States of America. He inherited a considerable fortune after his father's death and, with his brother, Benjamin West, erected West's New Gallery, at 14 Newman Street, London, to display his father's pictures in a commercial venture. In his later years, however, he had to apply to the Royal Academy for financial assistance. He died at Bushey Heath, Hertfordshire, on 22 May 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 29093


West, Richard (c.1569-1645/6), poet, is identified by Venn and Cooper as graduating BA from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1588. West was ordained deacon and priest in Lincoln on 24 May 1592 and remained in Lincolnshire to hold ecclesiastical office at Thorpe (1593-1600) and Burgh in the Marsh (1605). In July 1606 'Newes from Bartholmew Fayre' appeared, of which a fragment is preserved at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. The poem is a lively description of the scenes at the fair, of the exporters supplying it, and of the public visiting the stalls and displays. This was followed, in August 1607, by 'The Court of Conscience, or, Dick Whippers Sessions'. The text, dedicated to West's friend Francis Moore and to his master William Durdant, was influenced by a contemporary outbreak of satire. The author confesses his own poverty, and proceeds to denounce the profanities, conceits, and sins of his age. Dick Whipper dominates the framework of this exploration, having summoned an exemplary jury 'To be inpanneld on the worser sort' (line 70). After illuminating society's major short falls his valedictory gestures are, however, conciliatory: '
But my desire is that we may bee friends, 

And all the world leave their disorder quite, 

If you do so, ile make you all amends, 

Ile breake my corde, and fling away my whip 
(sig. [E4]'v')' In 1619 a new edition of Francis Seagar's 'School of Vertue', previously issued in 1557, appeared with a second part by West. The work was intended to regulate the behaviour of children in a variety of social environments. Commonly known as the 'Booke of demeanour' it was reprinted in 1677 and in 1680. In 1868 F. J. Furnivall included its secular precepts, together with 'The babees book' and other similar treatises, in a volume edited for the Early English Text Society. One other work has been attributed to West: 'The Wits A.B.C., or, A Centurie of Epigrams', which was printed, as a first experiment in verse, in April 1608. West died in Lincolnshire in 1645 or 1646. 


@@@@@


doc= 29094


West, Richard (c.1691-1726), lord chancellor of Ireland, was the eldest son of Richard West, a London merchant. Some sources, including O'Flanagan, suggest that he was born in 1670, but a later date is more likely, since he entered the Inner Temple in 1708 and was called to the English bar on 13 June 1714. In April that year he had married Elizabeth (1692-1748), daughter of Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury; they had a son, Richard West, and a daughter, Molly. 
In addition to the impeccable whig credentials derived from his marriage, West was clearly a man of remarkable legal ability, being appointed king's counsel after only three years of practice, on 21 October 1717. He was made a bencher of the Inner Temple in the following year, although on the understanding that he was to have neither chambers in the inn nor a claim to the office of treasurer. Also in 1718, he was appointed standing counsel to the Board of Trade. He was the first appointee to this important post, which made him a legal adviser to the government on matters concerning colonial trade. 
While at the bar West published some political pamphlets, including 'A Discourse Concerning Treasons and Bills of Attainder' (1716) and 'An Enquiry into the Origin and Manner of Creating Peers' (1719), in which he argued in support of the 1719 'Peerage Bill'. These pamphlets 'attracted much notice, and gave him strong claims to Government patronage' (O'Flanagan, 39). Accordingly, West was returned in the whig interest for the Cornish borough of Grampound in a by-election on 13 March 1721, and for the neighbouring borough of Bodmin in the general election of 1722. 
West appears to have been fairly active in parliament, speaking on matters as diverse as army increases and elections in the City of London. His most important political role was, however, as one of the managers of the trial of Thomas Parker, first earl of Macclesfield, in 1725. In a 'masterly' speech (Ball, 102), delivered on 11 May, he summed up the case for impeachment with great skill and vigour, and was scathing in his condemnation of the lord chancellor's corruption and avarice ('State trials', 16.1057-80). 
West's legal reputation was in no way dulled by his foray into politics. In 1724 he was considered for both the Irish chief justiceship of the common pleas and the recordership of London. In the end, however, he was appointed lord chancellor of Ireland, receiving his patent on 23 July 1725. Ball considers his appointment fully justified, describing him as 'a man of brilliant talents, of which he had given proof by a phenomenally rapid rise in his profession' (Ball, 102). Burke, on the other hand, says his only qualification for the post was that he was a 'pamphleteering partizan' (Burke, 119), although in the light of his previous legal and political successes this is clearly unfair. 
It cannot be denied, however, that West's elevation owed much to his politics and to his friendship with Hugh Boulter, archbishop of Armagh. Boulter was strongly of the view that English dominance in Ireland could be maintained only by appointing men of English birth to the great Irish offices of state. Disconcerted by the recent appointment of Thomas Carter, an Irishman, to the mastership of the rolls, Boulter lobbied strenuously for the placing of an Englishman on the Irish woolsack. As a friend of Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, and one of the three lords justices of Ireland, he exerted considerable influence on crown appointments, and so it was that West became head of the Irish judiciary. 
West's brief tenure of the Irish lord chancellorship was fairly unremarkable, although he apparently acquired a considerable understanding of Ireland and her people, and 'he appears... to have given much satisfaction' in the execution of his office (Burke, 119). It was his duty, as head of the Irish courts of equity, to administer the Irish parliament's penal laws against Catholics. West had previously shown some sympathy with the plight of English Catholics. In 1723, for instance, he had twice spoken against a bill which sought to raise $100,000 from Catholic subjects. This sympathy was also discernible in some of his judgments from the woolsack. Thus he ruled that under the statute 9 William III c. 28 there had to be a conviction before any property could be forfeited, and it was not unknown for him to deprive protestant plaintiffs of their costs where the action, though legally required to succeed, was plainly unfair. None the less, West was by no means a champion of the Catholic cause -- had he been, he would hardly have acquired high Irish office -- and some of his judgments reflect the protestant zeal prevalent at the time. Thus in 'Leymore v. Burke' he held that: '[the] Protestant who marries a Popish wife is a more odious Papist than a real and actual Papist in profession and principle... the Acts against the growth of Popery, expressing 'every Papist or person professing the Popish religion', &c., take in and regard 'constructive', as well as 'actual', Papists. (Howard, 1.261)' West continued his literary endeavours during his chancellorship, and in 1726 he published a tragedy, 'The Hecuba'. It was performed at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane, London, but was not well received, a fact attributed by West to the gods' intimidation of the actresses and audience. 
West had been in office for less than a year and a half when he succumbed to 'a fever of the most malignant type' (Burke, 119). It was hoped to the last that he would recover, but after twelve days' illness he died in Dublin on the afternoon of 3 December 1726. Archbishop Boulter wrote that 'his death is very much lamented by all here, but especially by the lawyers, whose good-will and esteem he had entirely gained, by his patience, civility, and great abilities' (ibid.). He was buried in St Anne's, Dublin, on 6 December. 
West's death gave rise to some suspicion, and there were rumours to the effect that his wife, having taken West's secretary John Williams as her lover, had poisoned her husband. The rumours were never substantiated, however, and in fact Williams went on to marry West's daughter. On his death, West left 'little more than would answer his debts on both sides of the water' (Cruickshanks), but through the exertions of Boulter and John Carteret, second Baron Carteret, a state pension of $250 per annum was granted to his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 29095


West, Richard (1716-1742), poet, was the only son of Richard West (c.1691-1726), lawyer, playwright, and politician, and Elizabeth Burnet (1692-1748), daughter of Gilbert Burnet. He was educated at Eton College with Thomas Ashton, Thomas Gray, and Horace Walpole, forming a 'quadruple alliance' of friendship, and was known among them as Favonius. In youth he was 'tall and slim, of a pale and meagre look and complexion' ('Works of Thomas Gray', 1.cv), and he was then reckoned a more brilliant genius than Gray (Mason, 3). The rest of the friends went to Cambridge, but West matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 22 May 1735 at the age of nineteen. 
West was from his youth marked out for the profession of the bar, through the influential positions of his father and his uncle, Sir Thomas Burnet, and he was admitted a student at the Inner Temple between November 1732 and November 1733 ('Calendar of Inner Temple Records'). On 21 February 1738 he was at Dartmouth Street, Westminster; by the following April he had left Oxford, and was studying at the Inner Temple. Gray went to London in September 1738 to join him at the bar, but was drawn off into travelling to France and Italy with Horace Walpole. West wearied of legal study, and moved out of lodgings at the Inner Temple in June 1740. West wrote to Gray from Bond Street to inform him of his move (5 June 1740); Gray wrote back from Florence (16 July 1740), encouraging West to persevere with the law ('Correspondence of Thomas Gray', 1.164, 167-70). West then thought of the army as a profession, but his strength was failing, and in September 1741 Gray found his friend ill and weary in London. 
In March 1742 West was at Pope's (or Popes), 2 miles to the west of Hatfield in Hertfordshire, the seat of David Mitchell. He wrote to Gray from Pope's (4 April 1742), enclosing Latin verses he wrote at 4 a.m., being unable to sleep for chronic coughing ('Correspondence of Thomas Gray', 1.189-91). He died at Pope's of 'a consumption' (Horace Walpole, letter to Sir Horace Mann, 24 June 1742, Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.468-9) on 1 June 1742. He was buried in the chancel of Hatfield church, immediately before the altar-rails, and a gravestone to his memory was placed in the floor. Thomas Ashton wrote an elegy on his death, which was printed in the 'London Magazine' in June 1742 (11.305). The elegy was later reprinted in the 'European Magazine' in January 1798 (7.45). Before reading of West's death, Gray sent him a letter enclosing his 'Ode on the Spring'. This letter was returned unopened. In response to West's death Gray wrote an English sonnet ('In vain to me the smiling mornings shine') and elegiac verses in Latin with which he abruptly concluded 'De principiis cogitandi', a poem addressed to West. 
Most of West's small output of poetry was enclosed in letters to Gray. 'Ad amicos', an imitation of Tibullus (book 3, elegy 5) was sent from Christ Church, Oxford (4 July 1737). An elegiac epistle in heroic couplets, it describes the poet's isolation and anticipates his early death in obscurity. He expresses the desire only to raise his tomb in the breasts of his friends. Two Latin elegies were sent in later letters, and an 'Ode to May' ('Dear Gray, that always in my heart') on 5 May 1742. The 'Ode to May', which invokes Gray to join West in summoning the 'tardy May' to resume her reign, produced Gray's 'Ode on the Spring' in response. These poems by West were published in Robert Anderson's collection (1795; 10.237-9). West also wrote a 'Monody on the Death of Queen Caroline', which was published in Robert Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems by Several Hands' (1748; 2.269-75). Gray and John Mitford both intended to collect and publish West's remains, but did not carry out their projects. West's works are included in section 2 of Duncan C. Tovey's 'Gray and his Friends' (1890). 
West's letters to Gray were first published in Mason's edition of 'The Poems of Mr. Gray' (1775). The standard modern edition is 'Correspondence of Thomas Gray', ed. Paget Toynbee and Leonard Whibley (3 vols., 1935; with corrections and additions by H. W. Starr, 1971, vol. 1). West's letters to Walpole and Ashton, in addition to those to Gray, were published in 'The Correspondence of Gray, Walpole, West and Ashton' (ed. Paget Toynbee, 2 vols., 1915). The standard edition of West's letters to and from Walpole is 'Horace Walpole's Correspondence' (ed. W. S. Lewis, vol. 13, ed. George L. Lam and Charles H. Bennett, 1948, 90-250). Appendix 6 (14.249-55) of the Lam and Bennett volume also includes extant parts of West's unfinished play 'Pausanias'. 
West's premature death limited his writings to a small number of poems. But Edmund Gosse commented that they 'are of sufficient merit to permit us to believe that had he lived he might have achieved a reputation among the minor poets of his age' (Gosse, 5). As it is, his name lives in his friend Gray's poetry, and in his letters to the members of the Quadruple Alliance. 


@@@@@


doc= 29096


West, Robert (d. 1770), drawing-master, was born in Waterford, Ireland, the son of a city alderman, and studied in Paris with Francois Boucher and Carle Vanloo. He then started a drawing school in George's Lane, Dublin, and in 1744 was employed by the Dublin Society to teach twelve boys there. When the society established its own drawing school in Shaw's Court, off Dame Street, in 1757, West was appointed the first master. Many of his pupils went on to become well-known artists. He suffered a mental breakdown, and in 1763 was replaced by a former pupil, Jacob Ennis. On Ennis's death in 1770, West was reappointed, but died in Dublin in the same year. His drawing of Lawrence Richardson was engraved in mezzotint by R. Purcell in 1748 and published in Dublin. 
His son 




@@@@@


doc= 29097


Robert Lucius West (d. 1849), drawing-master, was the son of Francis, and acted for some years as his father's assistant. On his father's death he succeeded to the mastership of the school, which he retained for about forty years. He painted portraits and historical subjects, and in 1808 exhibited at the Royal Academy, London, a work inspired by Thomas Gray's 'Elegy'. He was a member of the Irish Society of Artists, and on the foundation of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1823 was one of the original academians. He died in early 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 29098


West, Temple (bap. 1715, d. 1757), naval officer, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 27 March 1715. He was the son of Richard West (1687?-1716), archdeacon of Berkshire, and his wife, Maria (died 1763), eldest daughter of the politician Sir Richard Temple and sister of Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham, and Hester, Countess Temple, wife of Richard Grenville, Earl Temple. These links bound him closely to the Grenville 'cousinhood' that was growing in political power at this time. The author and translator Gilbert West was his elder brother. 
West entered the navy in September 1727 as a volunteer per order on board the 'Revenge', with Captain Conningsby Norbury, in the fleet at Gibraltar under Sir Charles Wager. In July 1728 he was moved into the 'Canterbury' with Captain Edmund Hook, on the home station and in the Mediterranean, and as volunteer and midshipman continued in her for over three years. In 1733 he was in the 'Dursley Galley' with Captain Thomas Smith. He passed his examination on 21 December 1733. Two months later, on 23 February 1734, he was promoted to be third lieutenant of the 'Dorsetshire', from which in May he was moved to the 'Norfolk'. On 7 April 1736 he became second lieutenant on the 'Gloucester'. On 14 May of the following year he was promoted to be commander of the sloop 'Alderney'. On 6 June he married Frances Balchin (1710-1793). In June 1738 West was posted to the frigate 'Deal Castle', which he commanded in the channel or on the coast of Portugal until February 1741, when he was moved to the 'Sapphire', and from her in April to the 'Dartmouth', one of the ships with Rear-Admiral Nicholas Haddock in the Mediterranean. 
On 3 June 1743 Haddock's successor, Vice-Admiral Mathews, moved West into the sixty-gun ship 'Warwick', which he commanded in the action off Toulon on 11 February 1744. The 'Stirling Castle', followed by the 'Warwick', formed the head of the British line, and both ships kept aloof from the French, firing on them from a distance. The ships astern did the same, and thus in the van there was no close action. At the time there was no criticism of either West or Captain Cooper of the 'Stirling Castle', but West was called to give evidence to the House of Commons inquiry into the battle on 28 March 1745. Although he was in the van and the main subject of the inquiry was Vice-Admiral Lestock's failure to bring the rear division into close action, he did venture the opinion that all the officers he had spoken to, except Lestock's flag captain, blamed the vice-admiral for failing to intercept the rear of the Franco-Spanish line. A month after Lestock's court martial and acquittal in June 1745, West was dismayed to find that Lestock had charged him and Cooper with disobedience in failing to engage the enemy van closely. Both officers were brought to a court martial. After five days' hearings, West's court martial ended on 13 December 1745. Notwithstanding his defence, like Cooper's, that he had had to keep to windward of the French van to prevent it from tacking around the front of the British line and doubling the leading ships, he was found guilty of not keeping to the line of battle and was cashiered. Although he was certainly in breach of the fighting instructions and article eleven of the articles of war, his actions were probably correct under the circumstances of the battle. This and the powerful political support of the Grenvilles earned West and Cooper a reinstatement by order in council in 1746. 
In 1747 West commanded the 'Devonshire', as flag captain to Rear-Admiral Peter Warren in the action off Cape Finisterre on 3 May. In 1748 he was commodore and commander-in-chief at the Nore. During the peace he remained on shore, and was for a short time (January 1753-April 1754) MP for Buckingham, on the accession of his cousin, Richard Grenville, to the peerage as Earl Temple. He did not stand again in the general election of 1754. On 4 February 1755 he was promoted rear-admiral of the red, and during the summer commanded a small squadron in the Bay of Biscay. In the following spring, with his flag in the 'Buckingham', he went out to the Mediterranean as second in command, with Admiral John Byng. In the action near Minorca, on 20 May, he had command of the van, which did engage closely, and, being left unsupported, received a good deal of damage. He was afterwards summarily superseded and recalled to England, but no blame was attached to him and he was released while Byng was taken into custody to face a court martial. 
The Grenville 'cousinhood' were important supporters of William Pitt and when Pitt came to power with the duke of Devonshire on 15 November 1756, West was nominated a member of the Board of Admiralty, of which his cousin, Lord Temple, was the head. On 8 December he was promoted to be vice-admiral of the blue, and shortly afterwards he was appointed to command a squadron on particular service. He hoisted his flag in the 'Magnanime', but despite having given evidence against Byng at the admiral's court martial, he none the less refused to 'serve on terms which subject an officer to the treatment shown Admiral Byng'. He accordingly struck his flag. He was dissuaded by Temple from resigning his seat on the Admiralty board, despite Byng's execution on 14 March 1757, until the Pitt-Devonshire ministry was dismissed in early April 1757. With Pitt's return to power in July he resumed his seat on the Admiralty board, but only for a few weeks, dying on 9 August. He was buried at St John's, West Wickham, Kent, on 15 August 1757. He was survived by his wife, who died on 27 January 1793. His grandson, Sir John West, had a distinguished naval career, being made admiral of the fleet in 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 29099


West, Thomas, eighth Baron West and ninth Baron de la Warr (1472-1554), soldier and courtier, was the son and heir of Thomas West, seventh Baron West and eighth Baron de la Warr (1448-1525), and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh Mortimer of Mortimer's Hall, Hampshire, where West was probably born. The younger Thomas was made a knight of the Bath on 29 November 1489, the occasion of the creation of Henry VII's son Arthur as prince of Wales, and in 1492 he may have been admitted to Gray's Inn. By August 1494 he had married Elizabeth ('b'. 1474), daughter of Sir John Bonville of Halnaker, Sussex. It was through her that West inherited Halnaker in 1498, which was to be his seat for forty years. 
West attended the funeral of Henry VII and was a server at the coronation of Henry VIII, and for the first twenty years of the new reign he fulfilled all the duties of the eldest son of a provincial lord. He undertook administrative duties as a JP in Sussex and Hampshire, and was sheriff of Sussex in 1524-5. He fought in the French wars of 1513-14, where he was knighted, and served again in France in 1522-5. He was present at the wedding of the king's sister Mary to Louis XII of France in August 1514, the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520, and the meeting with the emperor Charles V in 1522. He was appointed a carver at court in 1521, and witnessed the creation of the king's bastard son Henry Fitzroy as duke of Richmond in June 1525. In October that year his father died, and West inherited the de la Warr barony. Consequently his duties increased, although he was usually able to appoint a proxy for parliament, pleading poverty. He did, though, sit on the panels of peers summoned to condemn Anne Boleyn and her brother in 1536, and lords Darcy and Hussey in 1537. He also carried out ceremonial duties by uncovering the basins for the presiding bishop at Prince Edward's baptism in October 1537, and by carrying the canopy for the funeral of the queen in the following month. 
During the 1530s, however, de la Warr became increasingly dissatisfied with the regime. He was close friends with Viscount Lisle, the marquess of Exeter, and Robert Sherburne, bishop of Chichester, all ageing conservatives who were unhappy with the reforms of the 1530s. De la Warr's intimate friend George Crofts, a prebendary of Chichester, said that he had never found de la Warr wavering from his conservative opinions regarding the intercession of the saints, pilgrimages, purgatory, free will, and justification, and Anthony Wayte, Bishop Sherburne's servant, told Lady Lisle that de la Warr was 'the whole stay of our corner of Sussex, for if we lacked him we might well say to have lost the greatest part of wealth and catholics, for he is surely a good lord and just' ('Lisle Letters', 2.265). 
None the less, de la Warr was prepared to conform, and he was made a commissioner of oaths for the royal supremacy in Sussex in 1534. Given his own beliefs, and the friends that he kept, this was undoubtedly an act of policy by the government. When Crofts told his friend that he was planning to flee the kingdom, de la Warr persuaded him to conform, and Crofts, too, took the oath of supremacy. 
De la Warr's conservative conformity is best seen in the dissolution of Boxgrove Priory. As owner of Halnaker, de la Warr also inherited the rights of the priory's founder, and in the early 1530s he established a chantry there. However, when the prospect of dissolution arose in 1536, he immediately wrote to Thomas Cromwell in the house's defence. He pleaded for Boxgrove's survival as a priory, but if it were to be dissolved he asked that he might have the farm. He reiterated this request a few months later, asking also if he might buy the ornaments, and that the church of the priory might remain as a parish church. De la Warr can be seen as sincerely wishing to preserve the priory, but eventually conforming, and by doing so making the best of a bad lot, both for himself materially, and spiritually for the locality. Following its dissolution de la Warr was granted a lease of the priory, and the commissioners reported back to Cromwell that 'the King, by the vigilance and diligence of lord Lawarre, has more profit there than in any other house dissolved in Sussex' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/1, no. 747). 
Yet despite his conformity de la Warr nearly came unstuck in 1538 through what has become known as the Courtenay conspiracy. During 1537 and 1538 Henry VIII's cousin Cardinal Pole was trying to raise Catholic Europe in a crusade against schismatic England. Towards the end of 1538 Pole's brothers, mother, and close friends were suddenly arrested, allegedly on the discovery of a plot against the king. It is now generally accepted that no such plot existed, although it is not clear whether Henry was making a pre-emptive strike, or whether it was simply a useful time to remove the last of the Plantagenet line. 
Several of de la Warr's intimate friends were arrested, including the marquess of Exeter, Sir Geoffrey Pole, and George Crofts. De la Warr feared that he too would be arrested, shouting up to Bishop Sampson of Chichester from the pavement outside his palace that he must defend him if he were attacked. The bemused bishop carefully responded that if de la Warr was innocent there would be no need. But de la Warr was right to be worried, for throughout October and November 1538 the interrogations of the accused, and depositions of others, show that the regime was becoming increasingly interested in him. Sir Geoffrey Pole told his interrogators that de la Warr had grumbled against the regime throughout the 1530s, discussing a better world with Pole, although he was less interested in Pole's opinions after the king had stayed at Halnaker during his progress through Sussex in 1536. Crofts told them that in his opinion de la Warr had never wavered in his traditional beliefs, and that de la Warr had persuaded him to conform and take the oath of supremacy against his conscience. He also told them that although de la Warr had condemned the Pilgrimage of Grace, he had said that the peers had only been prepared to condemn Lord Darcy because they had been led to believe that he would receive a royal pardon. Most worrying was the evidence of de la Warr's own brother-in-law, Sir Henry Owen, who stated that he had heard de la Warr openly criticizing acts of parliament, and saying that God would punish the dissolution of the monasteries and the reading of new English books. 
On 1 December 1538 de la Warr was examined by seven prominent members of the privy council. They wrote to the king saying that they could find no sufficient ground for sending him to the Tower, though they had placed him under house arrest. However, the next day he was transferred to the Tower. It is not clear exactly what accusation was made against de la Warr. His examination took place on the day before the trials of his friends, and in the light of his comments about the trial of Lord Darcy it might be that he refused to serve on the panel of peers trying them. Otherwise, the worst that could be laid against him was that he had known of Crofts's objections to the supremacy and had not reported them. However, de la Warr was not perceived as a threat like Exeter or Montagu, and was a useful magnate in Sussex, so he was released on 21 December, undertaking with a bond of $3000 to appear before the council when summoned. This was not to be his only punishment, however, for early in 1539 the king, who had taken a liking to Halnaker, suggested an exchange of land. De la Warr's forgiveness was clearly dependent on this, and he agreed to exchange his home of forty years for the nunnery of Wherwell in Hampshire. At the same time his bond was discharged. From 1539 de la Warr lived at Offington, Sussex, where his father had lived before him. 
De la Warr continued to act as an important provincial lord after his release from the Tower. As early as February 1539 he was being trusted to defend the Sussex coast, suggesting that he had never seriously been suspected of conspiracy, and he was made vice-admiral for Sussex in 1543. He attended the reception of Anne of Cleves in January 1540, and in March 1542 he held the mantle for the creation of John Dudley as Viscount Lisle. The latter had been a ward of de la Warr's brother-in-law, Sir Edward Guildford, and his mother had married de la Warr's friend Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle. This connection gave the conservative de la Warr protection under Edward VI, and was no doubt influential in gaining him the Garter in December 1549. He continued to be a leading agent for the government in Sussex, serving on the commission to collect church plate from 1552, and as lord lieutenant of Sussex from 1551. Dudley's support must have been particularly helpful in 1549 when de la Warr placed a private bill before parliament to disinherit his nephew 
Despite his links with Dudley, de la Warr did not help him in his attempt to place Jane Grey on the throne; indeed, he was given an annuity by Queen Mary for his assistance against the duke. He was admitted to the privy council on 17 August 1553, but seems to have attended only two meetings. He died at home at Offington on 25 September 1554 and was buried on 10 October, with his father in the church at Broadwater, Sussex. Henry Machyn, in reporting his funeral, gave him the epitaph of the 'best howsse-keper in Sussex' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 71). 
Now reinstated as his uncle's heir, William West was unable to inherit the barony owing to the act of parliament. Some time previously he had married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Strange of Chesterton, Gloucestershire; after her death he married Anne, widow of Thomas Oliver and daughter of Henry Swift of Andover, Hampshire, who survived him. Involved in the Dudley conspiracy, West was arraigned in the Guildhall on 30 June 1556. He insisted on answering the charge as William, Lord de la Warr, forcing the heralds to prove that he had no right to the title. He was convicted of treason and sentenced to death. The punishment was not carried out, however, and he was pardoned in 1557, shortly before fighting for the queen at St Quentin. In 1563 he was restored in blood by Elizabeth I, and on 5 February 1570 he was knighted and created Baron De La Warr. This was regarded as a new creation, and in his lifetime he sat in the House of Lords as junior baron. Like his uncle before him he was the government's agent in Sussex, serving at times as lord lieutenant. Unlike his uncle he was a protestant and was particularly active in the prosecution of recusants. No doubt for that reason he took part in the trials for treason of the duke of Norfolk in 1572 and the earl of Arundel in 1589. He died at Wherwell, Hampshire, on 30 December 1595, and his son Thomas succeeded to the barony, successfully claiming the precedency within the peerage that had belonged to his title before his father forfeited it. 


@@@@@


doc= 29100


West, Thomas, third Baron De La Warr (1577-1618), colonial governor, was born on 9 July 1577 and baptized at Wherwell, Hampshire, the third child and second son of Thomas West, second Baron De La Warr ('c'.1550-1602), and Anne, daughter of Sir Francis Knollys and cousin of Elizabeth I. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in March 1592, and toured Italy in 1596-7 following the death of his elder brother, Robert, in 1594. On 25 November 1602 he married Cecily or Cecilia (died 1662), daughter of his godfather Sir Thomas Shirley of Wiston, Sussex, at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. He served in parliament as member for Lymington, Hampshire, in 1597-8 before campaigning in Ireland and perhaps the Low Countries. West was knighted by the earl of Essex in Dublin on 12 July 1599, and his association with the condemned lord lieutenant resulted in his temporary imprisonment in 1601. Essex's declaration that West was unacquainted with any rebellion cleared him of treason. Soon after his release West enjoyed considerable political influence. He became third Baron De La Warr upon his father's death in March 1602, served as a privy councillor to both Elizabeth I and James I, and was created MA at Oxford in 1605. 
De La Warr made his greatest impact as a colonial promoter and administrator. On 20 November 1606 he was named to the fourteen-member king's counsel of Virginia, overseeing American colonial projects between thirty-four and forty-five degrees north latitude. In 1609 the Virginia Company of London appointed him first lord governor and captain-general of Virginia for life (commission dated 28 February 1610). After two years of dissension, desertions, high death rates, and damaging relations with the Powhatan Indians the Jamestown colony needed stronger governance by a respected authority, broad reforms, and military leadership. Given his rank, court connections, and generous support of the company ($500 invested in 1609), De La Warr was an obvious choice to become the first nobleman to govern in English America, replacing the previous leadership of untitled, self-made men such as Captain John Smith. 
During De La Warr's governorship Virginia was transformed from an infant colony struggling for life in 1609 to a more mature and populous colony with a profitable tobacco economy by 1618. But De La Warr himself was not personally responsible for most of that progress. Alexander Brown's 1890 assessment that he was the 'one man' who deserved to 'be called the founder of Virginia' greatly exaggerated his contribution (Brown, 2.1049). He only resided in America for ten months, much of which he spent aboard ship, debilitated and bedridden with fevers, diarrhoea, gout, and scurvy. His hasty and embarrassing return to England in March 1611 was so potentially damaging to investors' confidence that the Virginia Company quickly issued 'The relation of the right honourable the Lord De-La-Warre,... to the... counsell of Virginea, touching his unexpected returne home, and afterwards delivered to the generall assembly of the said company' (1611). In his long absence from Virginia critical leadership duties fell to a succession of talented deputy governors -- Sir Thomas Gates, Sir Thomas Dale, and Captain Samuel Argall. De La Warr contributed more style than substance to the stabilization of the Jamestown colony, and his most significant accomplishment occurred by accident. When Deputy Governor Gates reached Virginia on 23 May 1610, he found only ninety emaciated and terrified colonists who had survived a six-month Powhatan siege of Jamestown (the 'Starving Time', November 1609-May 1610). He evacuated the indefensible settlement on 7 June and set sail for England -- only to encounter De La Warr's arriving relief fleet the next day while still in the James River. This providential meeting was made possible by Argall's brilliant navigation of a faster Atlantic crossing -- thus preventing a second lost colony and altering American history. 
De La Warr formally assumed office with great pomp on 10 June 1610 in an elaborate ceremony with fifty red-cloaked halberdiers in his livery before the pitiful ruins of James Fort. He carried out the orders of company and crown by instituting harsh martial law over the colonists and by launching military offensives against the Indians in the First Anglo-Powhatan War. Between July 1610 and December 1611 Gates and Dale used well-supplied and armour-clad veteran troops to conquer key portions of the James River, from present-day Richmond to Hampton Roads. Although he rarely saw combat himself, De La Warr treated the native 'Canaanites' with 'Old Testament' wrath, ordering an Indian warrior's hand to be sliced off and desiring that a Powhatan mother be burned alive after the English murdered her children. Thanks to Dale and Argall, diplomacy, not cruelty, finally ended Virginia's first Indian war in April 1614 -- three years after De La Warr had left the scene. 
Lord De La Warr, who contributed more of his purse than his person to Virginia, was 'en route' to quell a new political crisis in the colony when he died at sea, perhaps along the Nova Scotia coast, on 7 June 1618. His mixed and controversial legacy includes receiving credit for the deeds of others and demonstrating all too often that an excellent pedigree does not guarantee excellent performance. He left behind three brothers, Francis, John, and Nathaniel, who settled permanently in Virginia, as well as his name on Delaware Bay, which Argall discovered in 1610. 


@@@@@


doc= 29101


West, Thomas (1720?-1779), antiquary and writer, was born in Inverness, probably on 1 January 1720. The identities of his parents are unknown. He received his early education 'in the public schools in Edinburgh' ('Antiquities', 409). For some time he was 'a traveller in trade' (Oliver, 39), possibly travelling on the continent. It is uncertain when or why he changed his name to West. About 1749 he began divinity studies at the College of the English Jesuits at St Omer, and in September 1751 he entered the noviciate of the English province of the Jesuits at Watten; subsequently he studied at Liege. In October 1750, when he was apparently living in Deptford, he applied for membership of the Society of Antiquaries: he is described in the minute book as 'well skilled in several curious parts of antiquities' (Holt, 'Father Thomas West', 131). He was elected two years later. West was ordained as a priest on the continent about 1757. After returning to Britain, he may have spent time at Swynnerton, Staffordshire, and Holywell, Flintshire. After a further period on the continent he returned once more in 1765, and was appointed to Dalton in Furness, Lancashire. For about ten years he lived at Titeup Hall near Dalton; later he may have moved to Swarthmoor Hall near Ulverston, and to Ulverston itself. West was on friendly terms with Lord George Cavendish of Holker, to whom he dedicated his 'Antiquities of Furness'; he spent much time at Sizergh, near Kendal, the seat of the Catholic Strickland family, and probably lived there in the last months of his life. His correspondents included his fellow Jesuit William Strickland, who lived at Alnwick in Northumberland, as well as other prominent antiquarians such as Thomas Pennant. 
West's reputation as an antiquary rests chiefly on his 'Antiquities of Furness', first published in 1774, which is primarily concerned with the history of Furness Abbey. His 'Guide to the Lakes', which first appeared in 1778, was revised and enlarged for the second edition of 1780, with a distinctly patronizing preface by the editor William Cockin; the 'Guide' reached its eleventh edition in 1821. Drawing freely on the work of previous writers, notably Thomas Gray, Thomas Pennant, and John Brown, and very much reflecting the contemporary interest in what West himself calls 'landscape studies', the 'Guide' is nevertheless a work of considerable individuality, displaying a real sensitivity to the visual qualities of the district. The recommended 'stations' for viewing the landscape were a significant innovation. The author's antiquarian passion and his curiosity about industrial activities are clearly evident. The 'Guide' undoubtedly did much to popularize the district. West also published 'An account of a volcanic hill near Inverness', in 'Philosophical Transactions', 67 (1777), 385-7, and 'Antiquities discovered in Lancaster, 1776', in 'Archaeologia', 5 (1779), 98-100. 
West died at Sizergh, Westmorland, on 10 July 1779, and was buried close to the Strickland family chapel in Kendal parish church. The editor of his 'Antiquities', William Close, remembered West in disappointingly conventional terms as 'a man revered for his piety, and the benevolence of his disposition, as much as for his learning' ('Antiquities', 410). 


@@@@@


doc= 29102


West, William (c.1548-1598), legal writer, was the son of Thomas West of Beeston, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of William Bradbury of the Peak, Derbyshire. He was descended from the Wests of Aughton near Sheffield, Yorkshire. He may have attended Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and on 25 June 1567 was licensed as a schoolmaster in the diocese of York, having been found sufficiently competent in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1568, then being of Darley, Derbyshire. He was not called to the bar, but practised as an attorney. By 1571 he had married Winifred, daughter of Adam Eyre of Offerton, Derbyshire; she was dead by 1596 at the latest. He subsequently married Audrey Mann, who also predeceased him. With his first wife he had five sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, William, was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1590. With his second wife West had one son. 
From 1580 until 1597 West acted as steward of the court baron and of the manor court of Sheffield to George and Gilbert Talbot, successively earls of Shrewsbury, and is said to have made a fortune in the practice of the law. He was living at Rotherham, Yorkshire, by 1583, playing an important role in the town's administration, and by 1594 had purchased land at Firbeck outside Sheffield where he built Firbeck Hall. In 1590 he published 'Symbolaeographia', dedicated to Sir Edmund Anderson. Incorporating material from Thomas Phaer's 'A Newe Boke of Presidentes', first published in 1543, West's book was the first printed systematic treatise on the writing of legal instruments, including not only precedents in conveyancing but also of indictments and proceedings in chancery. West introduced his precedents with theoretical discussions of the relevant legal principles, drawing upon civilian and continental scholarship. The book, which came to be regarded as a work of authority, was useful and popular, and rapidly revised in two parts. The first part of the new edition (dealing chiefly with covenants, contracts, and wills) appeared in 1592 and was reissued with further corrections eleven times between 1594 and 1647. The second part of the new edition appeared in 1593, and again a further ten times between 1594 and 1641. 
Shortly after the appearance of the 'Symbolaeographia' West, 'being now minded to cease his practice and employ himself in study' (Davies, 1188), applied to be called to the bar by the Inner Temple. Letters were written on his behalf by Sir Christopher Wray, Sir Edmund Anderson, Sir John Puckering, and Mr Justice Beaumont, but it was resolved in November 1595 that call would not be permitted until he had performed the necessary learning exercises. Beyond the 'Symbolaeographia' West produced an edition of Littleton's 'Tenures' in 1581, and contributed a table to Richard Crompton's edition of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert's work on justices of the peace. West was ill by December 1597, and despite nursing by Elizabeth Grene, a widow whom he had intended to make his third wife, he died between June and August of the following year at Firbeck, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 29103


William West, first Baron De La Warr (c.1519-1595). The latter was the son of the ninth baron's half-brother Sir George West of Warbleton (died 1538) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Robert Morton of Lechlade, Gloucestershire. His uncle was childless, and had at some time adopted William as his heir. However, West tried to gain the de la Warr estate early by poisoning his uncle. The attempt was unsuccessful and he was in the Tower by October 1548. He was disinherited by an act of parliament in 1550, although he had been reinstated as heir by the time of his uncle's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29104


West, William (1770-1854), bookseller and antiquary, was born on 23 October 1770 at Whaddon, Surrey, into a family of eleven children. While the identity of his parents remains unknown, it is understood that his father's side of the family had a long heritage of agricultural pursuits with West's great-grandfather owning an estate near Stonehenge before moving to a property in Surrey. To this rural background West, by his own admission, attributed his limited education and as a young boy was undecided in his pursuit of a trade. 
According to West it was the death of Samuel Johnson in 1784 which inspired him to move to London and pursue a career in the world of literature and bookselling. In December that year he travelled to London on foot in the company of his elder brother, determined to be bound as an apprentice stationer. In the following January West repeated the journey and found employment with the bookseller Thomas Evans, to whom West's brother had been apprenticed since 1778. Within months he was apprenticed at Stationers' Hall to Robert Colley before being turned over to Evans. 
As a young apprentice West was shy and timid but exhibited a thirst for literature and a passion for the bookselling trade, such that in 1788 he was appointed manager of Evans's business. By this time, before the end of his apprenticeship, and unknown to his master and parents, West had settled on marriage, which produced two daughters and one son named Samuel West. For three years following the completion of his apprenticeship West continued to work for Evans's son James, until the latter was declared bankrupt and fled to America in 1795. West then went into business for himself and in 1800 was joined as partner by Thomas Hughes. On 3 October 1801 both were declared bankrupt, but by 1808 West had re-established himself as a bookseller in Cork, where he published 'A Picturesque Description of Cork and its Environs' (1808). Although the 'Gentleman's Magazine' states that West spent some thirty years residing in Ireland, the dates of his sojourn remain unknown and, given the known chronology of his career, it seems unlikely that he spent so long out of England. It is known that West remained in Cork until 1830, during which time he wrote the anonymous 'Tavern anecdotes and reminiscences of the origin of signs, clubs, coffee houses, streets, city companies, wards... by one of the old school' (1825) and the disjointed biographical miscellany 'Fifty Years' Recollections of an Old Bookseller' (1830). 
In 1830 West moved to Birmingham, there composing two topographical works including his significant 'The History, Topography and Directory of Warwickshire' (1830). He wrote two further books, one published in Cork in 1835 and the other published in Leeds in 1839, before taking control as editor of the 'Aldine Magazine of Biography, Bibliography, Criticism and the Arts', which was published in London between December 1838 and June 1839. The 'Aldine Magazine''s 'great object' was 'to be 'useful' and 'instructive' as well as 'amusing'', and such was their belief in the superiority of their product, that the editors challenged 'comparison with the similar articles of any other Miscellany' (preface, 'Aldine Magazine', collected volume, 1839). The magazine contained not only poetry, reviews, and announcements of new books and upcoming events but, perhaps most importantly for book historians, the series 'Letters to my son at Rome'. Written by West, these informal pieces recount 'the experiences and vicissitudes of the 'Old Bookseller's' life and acquaintances' ('Aldine Magazine', 1/1, 1 Dec 1838, 1). They cover such topics as 'Notice of the Rivington family', 'Liberality and illiberality of booksellers', 'Account of the firm of Messrs. Longman and Co.', and 'Pros and cons between authors and booksellers'. 
It is likely that West by this time was again living in London; although he did not return to bookselling, he appears to have secured a living as a bookseller's assistant or in a literary occupation. His last years were spent as a pensioner at the Charterhouse, where he died on 17 November 1854 from a condition that caused paralysis. It is not known where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 29105


William West (1797/8-1888), actor and composer, lived to be called the Father of the Stage. His father was connected with Drury Lane. After studying music under Thomas Welsh and C. E. Horn he appeared at the Haymarket in 1805 as Tom Thumb. He then at Drury Lane played parts such as Juba in the 'Prize' and Boy in 'Children in the Wood'. In 1814 he followed Sarah Cooke to Edinburgh, and the next year married her in the teeth of much competition. His first appearance in Edinburgh was on 10 November 1814 as Don Carlos in the 'Duenna'. After playing in Bath and Bristol he appeared in London at the East London Theatre, and on 9 May 1822 at Drury Lane played Lord Ogleby in the 'Clandestine Marriage'. He also acted at the Olympic and other theatres. He gave in 1842 an entertainment illustrative of the clowns of Shakespeare. For some time he was a teacher of music. He died at 45 Tavistock Crescent, Kensington, London, on 30 January 1888, aged ninety. His most popular songs were 'When love was fresh from her cradle-bed', 'Alice of Fyfe', and 'Love and the Sensitive Plant'. His glees included 'The Ocean King', 'Up Rosalie', 'Oh, Bold Robin Hood', and 'The Haaf Fishers'. He was also responsible for a sonata entitled 'Maid Marian' and 'An Ancient English Morris Dance with Variations'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29106


Westall, Richard (1765-1836), painter and illustrator, was born on 2 January 1765 at Reepham, Norfolk, the eldest son of Benjamin Westall (1736-1794), a brewer, and his first wife, Mary (1739-1770), the daughter of John Ayton of London. He was baptized at All Saints', Norwich, where his father was a churchwarden, on 13 January 1765. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' suggested that he was born in Hertford: this error is of some significance, as he was never regarded as a Norwich artist, although one of the Cromes (probably John) purchased his pictures and the Norwich artist, John Thirtle exhibited 'Venus and Cupid (after Westall)' in 1805. However, the Westalls were an established Norfolk family. The family residence of Kerdistone Manor has been traditionally linked to the Chaucer family, and a connection with Geoffrey Chaucer's grandmother Mary de Westhale -- who is believed to have been the model for the Wife of Bath -- is possible. 
The death of Richard's mother in 1770 left Benjamin Westall with four young children, the youngest of whom was blind; at about the same time his brewery failed and he was made bankrupt. Westall later referred to these difficult times in his poem 'A Day in Spring' (1808), describing how a relation of his mother, William Ayton, provided assistance: '
Thou, the parent of my fame, 

Thou, whose warmth preserved the flame, 

Which was dying in my breast, 

By cold penury opprest. 

' Benjamin Westall soon married again, and, with his second wife, Martha Harbord, went to manage a brewery in Hertford: here Richard's younger brother William Westall (1781-1850), also an artist, was born on 12 October 1781. 
After being placed with an attorney in Norfolk, Westall moved to London, where in 1779 he became apprenticed to John Thompson, a heraldic engraver on silver; he also studied at an evening school run by Thomas Simpson. The Norfolk artist John Alefounder instructed him in the execution of miniatures and advised the young man to become a painter. Accordingly, in 1784 Westall exhibited the first of 384 pictures at the Royal Academy. He was admitted as a student of the Academy Schools in the following year, when he exhibited an illustration of Chaucer's 'Wife of Bath's Tale', became an associate of the academy in 1792, and was made a full academician in 1794 -- the same year as his close friend Thomas Lawrence, with whose family he lived between 1790 and 1794. 
Westall 'soon attracted attention by his large and highly finished drawings in watercolour' ('DNB'), including the noteworthy 'Mary Queen of Scots on her Way to Execution' (exh. RA, 1787). Horace Walpole described the figure of Sappho in 'Sappho Chanting the Hymn of Love' (exh. RA, 1796) as 'beautiful beyond description' and his 'Hesiod Instructing the Greeks' (exh. RA, 1796) as 'by far one of the finest compositions ever painted in England' ('Letters', 15.404). Joseph Farington recorded in his diary that 'the King particularly dwelt on Westall's drawings and said he had never seen anything equal to them' (Farington, 'Diary', 2.527). However, Westall had his critics. John Williams, who wrote under the pseudonym Anthony Pasquin, remarked of the 'Hesiod' picture, 'This is such an effort, as no person, possessing taste and knowledge, can regard with satisfaction; yet it involves that trickery and finery which is so captivating to vulgar minds' (A. Pasquin, 'A Critical Guide to the Royal Academy', 1796, 24). Some years later William Hazlitt exclaimed to James Northcote: 'I confess I never liked Westall. It was one of the errors of my youth that I did not think him equal to Raphael and Rubens united, as Payne Knight contended' (W. Hazlitt, 'The Round Table', 1908, 382). A further comment from Pasquin, in his critique of the 1794 exhibition, provides stimulus to thought: 'He [Westall] has been precipitated to the command of the fleet, before he well knows the principles of navigation' (A. Pasquin, 'A Liberal Critique on the Present Exhibition of the Royal Academy', 1794, 25). Richard Payne Knight was Westall's most liberal patron and sympathetic critic. In his 'Analytical Enquiry into the Principles of Taste' (1805), he singled out Westall's 'Storm in Harvest' (1796) as one of the 'most interesting and affecting pictures that art has ever produced' (p. 304). Indeed, he purchased the picture, along with another, 'The Grecian Marriage', in which he discerned 'the utmost purity and dignity of heroic character and composition embellished and not impaired by the most rich and splendid harmony of colouring' ('Edinburgh Review', 23, 1814, 287). 
In the 1790s Westall was a contributor to Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery and to Fuseli's 'Milton Gallery'. He went on to illustrate several editions of Sir Walter Scott's novels, the works of Byron (of whom he also painted several portraits, one of which is held by the National Portrait Gallery, London), William Cowper, James Thomson, Robert Burns, George Crabbe, and many leading authors and poets. Byron provided a generous accolade by remarking that Westall's illustrations for 'Don Juan' 'are quite beautiful -- the drawings are superb -- the brush has beat the poetry' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', ed L. A. Marchand, 1973-82, 7.165, 168). Westall's naval associations were evident from several oils depicting the life of Nelson, shown at the Royal Academy in 1807 and now in the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich. He also negotiated with the Admiralty, through Sir Joseph Banks, over his brother's pictures of Australia. 
Westall's career reached its height in 1814, when he staged his own exhibition in Pall Mall of 312 pictures, 240 'never before exhibited'. The names of the proprietors of his paintings and illustrations (listed in the exhibition catalogue) reflect the high contemporary standing of Westall's art. As well as Knight, they included Thomas Hope, the earls of Oxford, Carlisle, and Harrowby, Byron, Samuel Rogers, the prince regent, Isaac D'Israeli, and Westall's brother-in-law and fellow artist William Daniell. Publishers, naturally, were prominent among those who owned his illustrations. The exhibition met with enthusiastic reviews. The critic in the 'Repository of Arts' commented: 'That honour which Great Britain has derived from the discovery of the art of painting in transparent water colours, and which most enlightened foreigners have so willingly accorded to us, is in great degree to be ascribed to Mr Westall. His drawings for many years formed the principal feature of attraction at the exhibitions of the Royal Academy. ('Repository of Arts', 1814, 357-8)' The critic of the 'New Monthly' reviewed the exhibition over two issues and remarked that 'Dionysius and Damocles', owned by Hope, was 'one of the most splendid, tasteful and elegant cabinet pictures of any modern master' ('New Monthly', 1814, 141-2, 248-9). Another painting which attracted interest was 'Elijah Raising the Widow's Son', exhibited at the British Institution in 1813 and then purchased by that body for 450 guineas. 'The Times' of 5 February 1813 extravagantly compared it to the works of Titian and Rembrandt. This painting was presented to Egham parish church (St John the Baptist) in 1834 but was badly damaged by fire in 1950. The head of Elijah, however, is still visible. John Nash's only surviving London church, All Souls, Langham Place, has an altarpiece by Westall of 'Christ Crowned with Thorns', presented to that church by George IV at its opening in 1824. 
From about 1815 onwards Westall's reputation slowly declined. In addition, he broke his right arm after falling from a horse and the injury took two years to mend. Almost bankrupt, he considered leaving for France. Perhaps the most interesting exhibited paintings of his later years were from Goethe's 'Faust'. His 'Faust and Lilith, the Young Witch' (exh. RA, 1831) bears comparison with Eugene Delacroix's 1828 lithograph of the same subject. In this instance, it appears that Westall may have been inspired by the French artist's illustration, but Delacroix profited by Westall's works in turn. His painting of 'Gulnare rend visite a Conrad en prison' (1822/3) drew on the composition of Westall's drawing of this scene from Byron, engraved by Charles Heath. This was not the only instance of Westall's illustrations influencing the work of foreign artists. Engravings of his works were widely available abroad, particularly in France, and won him an international reputation that outlasted his celebrity at home. William Etty, after a visit to France in the 1820s, mentioned Westall as among those whose work is 'not only admired but imitated' (D. Farr, 'William Etty', 1958, 44, 120). Recent research has shown that the French lithographer Camille Rocqueplan made use of Westall's illustrations of Scott, while Gericault drew on his Byron illustrations, and his 'Faust' paintings have been found to have influenced the German artist Theodore Matthias von Holst. Westall was also a major inspiration for the American artist Edward Hicks. 
Westall remained a bachelor but was apparently once engaged to a Miss Bennett, the sister of his pupil William James Bennett; he painted a portrait of his intended bride for the 1804 exhibition at the Royal Academy. He died on 4 December 1836 at his home, 4 Russell Place, Fitzroy Square, London. For the last nine years of his life he had been drawing master to Princess Victoria; he visited her twice a week and painted a charming portrait of her (Royal Collection), which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1830. Echoing his own poem, the princess sorrowfully recorded that the once popular painter had died 'by cold penury opprest'. 
Also saddened by Westall's death was John Constable, who attended his funeral. The link between the two men was not an artistic one. As a representative of another generation of painters, Constable had been critical of 'the School of Westall'; C. R. Leslie, Constable's biographer, no doubt echoed the opinion of his subject when he wrote in 1812 that 'His [Westall's] faults seem to arise from a wish to improve upon nature' (C. R. Leslie, 'Autobiographical Recollections', ed. T. Taylor, 1860, 18-20). Westall had clearly belonged to the neo-classical, romantic, and historical schools of the late eighteenth century, and his reputation declined quickly in the robust atmosphere of the early nineteenth century. Nevertheless, he was a significant and innovative figure in the development of the English watercolour, his elegant and precise book illustrations set new standards in that field, and his portraits and historical and religious paintings have deservedly received more scholarly attention recently than hitherto. He was a leading artist for some twenty years, and fruitful comparisons of his works with those of other better-known contemporaries can and have been made: his portraits have been considered alongside those of Thomas Lawrence, while his more sentimental pieces resemble the pastorals of Francis Wheatley and his illustrations to Milton stand comparison with the works of Henry Fuseli. Examples of Westall's work, including 'Milton and his Daughters', are in Sir John Soane's Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 29107


Westall, William (1781-1850), painter and engraver, was born on 12 October 1781, in Hertford, the son of Benjamin Westall (1736-1794) a brewer, and his second wife, Martha, (1752-1806) daughter of Henry Harbord of Norwich. He was the younger brother of Richard Westall RA. William attended schools in Sydenham and Hampstead, exhibiting early an artistic talent. His first known drawing, of Kelso church, was made when he was fourteen. He was taught by his elder brother, Richard, until he became a probationer at the Royal Academy in 1799. In that year he was engaged as landscape draughtsman for a voyage to New Holland (Australia) and the south seas under the command of Matthew Flinders. The painter and traveller William Daniell had signed up for the voyage but decided to stay in England to marry Westall's half-sister, Mary. 
Under Flinders's command the 'Investigator' set sail on 18 July 1801, calling at Madeira and the Cape and arrived off the west coast of Australia on 6 December. Moving along the west and south coasts with occasional stops for visits ashore, the ship spent four weeks in St George's Sound. Westall's oil painting of part of the sound showing two Aborigines making a fire was based on this experience. In February a disaster befell eight members of the crew who were lost when returning from shore. Westall's sketches later resulted in an oil painting 'The Entrance to Port Lincoln from behind Memory Cove' (exh. Royal Academy, 1812) where Flinders had commemorated the lost crew members. 
In May 1802 the 'Investigator' arrived in Sydney and Westall sketched Government House from Sydney Cove. Leaving in late July, they sailed up the east coast. A painting by Westall of the view from the summit of a mountain named after him by Flinders was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1810. In August 1802, Flinders discovered Port Bowen, Queensland; Westall's 'View of Port Bowen' was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1812. After carrying out a survey of the Gulf of Carpentaria, where Westall completed sketches on which his 'View of Sir Edward Pellew's Group, Gulf of Carpentaria' (exh. Royal Academy, 1812) was based, Flinders called at Timor (of which Westall made at least two drawings) and found that the condition of his vessel made a rapid return to Sydney imperative. They sailed via the west and south coasts, during which journey six deaths occurred due to illness. On reaching Sydney the 'Investigator' was deemed unseaworthy. 
Westall sailed for England on the 'Porpoise', but the vessel was wrecked on a reef in the Coral Sea on 27 August 1802. Westall's sketches on Wreck Reef resulted in an oil painting now at the National Maritime Museum. He was among those saved by the 'Rolla'. Having arranged for his drawings of Australia to be sent without delay to England, Westall travelled to Canton (Guangzhou), arriving on 14 December 1803, and staying until 5 February 1804. During this time he sketched a merchant's garden and later painted the beautiful 'Scene in a Mandarin's Garden' (exh. Royal Academy, 1814). 
Westall journeyed, on board the 'Carron', to India arriving in Bombay at the end of April for a three and a half month stay. Perhaps the most successful paintings of his career were based on his experiences there. A scene in the Indian mountains appeared in a number of versions, at the Royal Academy in 1817 and 1824 and at the British Institution in 1818 and 1825. A reviewer in the 'Literary Gazette' found it 'striking, grand and picturesque' (10 July 1824, 442) and another in the 'Repository of Arts' described it as 'peculiarly romantic and well painted' (June 1823, 3rd ser., 355). The 'European Magazine''s reviewer suggested that 'Turner's absence is in great measure compensated by Calcott and W. Westall', the latter's picture exhibiting 'a grand assemblage of Indian Forest scenery' (85, June 1824, 547-8). 
William Westall arrived back in England in February 1805. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society that December and set out to re-visit Madeira and go on to Jamaica. An exhibition of his foreign views at Brook Street, in 1808, did not succeed. John Landseer maintained that this was due to lack of advertising ('The Athenaeum', 2 Feb 1850, 136). He exhibited ten foreign views in watercolours at the gallery of the Associated Artists in 1808, and fifteen drawings in 1809. He became an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours on 11 June 1810, and a full member on 10 June 1811, and contributed thirteen drawings in 1811 and 1812 to that society's exhibitions. His drawing of Rievaulx Abbey, Yorkshire, 1811, is in the British Museum. 
The Admiralty commissioned Westall to paint oils of the Australian voyage and on the basis of two paintings exhibited in 1812 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. Matthew Flinders had returned to England in 1810, and his account of his voyage was written and published with an atlas in 1814 as 'A Voyage to Terra Australis' with nine engravings after Westall's drawings and twenty-eight coastal views. Bernard Smith suggested that Westall's coastal profiles are 'more elaborate and more skilful than the profiles drawn by Hodges or Webber' ('European Vision and the South Pacific', 1960, 142). 
In 1815 Westall appears to have had a mental breakdown (Farington, 'Diary', 13.4749; 14.4759). Helped by Sir George Beaumont he became a regular visitor to the Lake District and became acquainted with Robert Southey and William Wordsworth. Southey wrote the introduction to Westall's 'Views of the Valley and Vale of Keswick', published in 1820 and regarded him as 'by far the most faithful delineator of the scenery of the Lakes' ('Southey's Correspondence', 5, 1850, 52). Wordsworth penned three sonnets in 1818 'suggested by Mr W. Westall's views of the caves etc. in Yorkshire' ('Blackwood's Magazine', January 1819 cited in M. Moorman, 'William Wordsworth: a Biography -- the Later Years, 1803-1850', 1968, 372). After Westall's death Wordsworth wrote on 6 March 1850 to the artist's third son, Robert: 'His delineations of this country (the Lakes) must always be valued by those who visit it and wish to carry away faithful portraitures of its beautiful scenery' ('The Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth', ed. A. G. Hill, 7, 1988, 916). Works by William Westall are in Admiralty House, the National Maritime Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the British Museum, London; the National Library of Australia, Canberra and the Library of New South Wales, Sydney; at Dove Cottage, Grasmere; and the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester and the Glasgow Museum and Art Gallery. Others are in private collections. His 'View of Fort Cornwallis, Prince of Wales Island, Penang' (1804), made the year before Stanford Raffles arrived in Penang, was included in the exhibition 'The golden sword: Stanford Raffles and the East' at the British Museum in 1999. 
Westall married Ann Sedgwick (1789-1862), daughter of the Revd Richard Sedgwick, vicar of Dent, on 22 September 1820. Her brother Adam Sedgwick, became professor of geology at Cambridge University where he taught Charles Darwin. Sara Hutchinson, Wordsworth's sister-in-law, wrote on 12 September 1820 of Mrs Westall that she 'will take good care of her husband a thing very necessary as he is a reckless sort of person' (K. Coburn, ed. 'Letters of Sara Hutchinson', 1954, 209-10). William and Ann Westall had four sons, William, Thomas, Robert, and Richard. 
As an engraver and lithographer, William Westall was always interested in the mechanics of print work. Michael Twyman noted that 'Westall is of special interest because of his range of skills as a printmaker; there can't have been many draughtsmen of the period that mastered so many different processes' (letter, 14 April 1983, priv. coll.). His lithographs of London and the aquatints for Ackermann of the Thames, the universities, and public schools are highly regarded. The steel-engravings for 'Great Britain Illustrated', first published in parts (1828-29) by Charles Tilt, brought topographical prints to a wide audience. A number of Westall's Indian views appeared as aquatints in Robert Grindlay's 'Scenery, Costumes and Architecture Chiefly on the Western Side of India' (2 vols., 1826; 1830), and his work appeared in the new print format patented by George Baxter (for example, 'The Pictorial Album, or, Cabinet of Paintings, for the Year', 1837). 
In 1848 Westall exhibited at the Royal Academy 'Commencement of the Deluge' (1848; Tate collection), an oil painting which contemporaries compared poorly with John Linnell's 'Eve of the Deluge', although more recently it has been regarded as a painting of considerable merit. In total, William Westall exhibited seventy works at the Royal Academy, thirty paintings and drawings at the British Institution, and seven in the Suffolk Street Gallery. Seven hundred prints after his work have been located. 
William Westall died on 22 January 1850, at Northbank, St John's Wood, where he was living, and is said to have left 'a considerable fortune' (A. Story, 'James Holmes and John Varley', 1894, 45). He was buried in the churchyard of St John's, Hampstead, near John Constable. His son, Robert Westall, wrote an obituary for the 'Art Journal' (April 1850, 104-5) with an afterword by Landseer. 


@@@@@


doc= 29108


Westcote, Thomas (bap. 1567, d. 1637?), topographer, was born at West Raddon, Shobrooke, Devon, and baptized on 17 June 1567 at Shobrooke, the third son of Philip Westcote (died 1600), gentleman, of West Raddon, and his wife, Katherine (died 1614), daughter of George Waltham of Brenton, Exminster, Devon. He fought in Drake's Portuguese expedition of 1589 together with his older brother George who was killed in the assault on Lisbon. After further travels he settled in London, probably at Lincoln's Inn, of which his relative Richard Waltham was a member, although there is no record of his having been admitted there. He retired to Devon and about 1606 married Mary, the daughter of Richard Roberts of Combe Martin, where his son and heir Philip (1607-1647) and the first of his four daughters were born. He may also have lived at West Raddon with his older brother Robert (1560-1637) and in 1627 he held a lease of Thorn Park in the neighbouring parish of Holcombe Burnell. 
At the insistence of Edward Bourchier, earl of Bath, Westcote undertook a survey of Devon in the same manner as Richard Carew (1555-1620) had published for Cornwall. The resulting 'View of Devonshire', completed about 1630, is greatly indebted to the manuscript survey of John Hooker ('c'.1525-1601) and he was also acquainted with the topographers Tristram Risdon ('c'.1580-1640) and Sir William Pole (1561-1635). Westcote's survey is arranged by river systems and his style is more literary than that of other contemporary topographers, but he had little sense of history and he has been criticized for his ready acceptance of fanciful ideas. His other compilation 'An account of the pedigrees and matches of most of the antient and eminent gentry of this county, with their coats of arms' traces the descent of some 300 families, not always accurately. A copy of this work was annotated by the historian John Prince (1643-1723) who often compounded his errors. Both works circulated in manuscript until published in 1845, when the editors George Oliver and Pitman Jones corrected many of the errors and extended some of the pedigrees. Westcote probably died at either Holcombe Burnell or West Raddon in 1637, in which year a will proved in the archdeaconry court of Exeter, whose records have since been destroyed, is listed for Thomas Westcott of Holcombe Burnell. By this time he would have been seventy; his wife died in 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 29109


Westcott, George Blagden (bap. 1753, d. 1798), naval officer, was baptized at Honiton on Otter, Devon, on 24 April 1753, the son of Benjamin Westcott, possibly a baker, at Honiton; his mother, Susanna, whose obituary is given in the 'Naval Chronicle' (29.352), died at Honiton in 1813 aged eighty-two. Westcott joined the frigate 'Solebay' (28 guns), as master's mate, under the command of Captain Lucius O'Bryen, in 1768. As master's mate, able seaman, and midshipman he continued in the 'Solebay' for nearly five years under O'Bryen and George Vandeput. He then served for three years in the 'Albion' as midshipman with Samuel Barrington and John Leveson-Gower, and passed his lieutenant's examination on 10 January 1776 when he was described as 'appearing' to be 'more than twenty-two'. On 6 August 1777 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Valiant', still with Leveson-Gower, and afterwards with Samuel Granston Goodall. In this position he saw action at the battle off Ushant on 27 July 1778, and served in the fleet under Sir Charles Hardy the younger in the summer of 1779, and under Vice-Admiral George Darby at the relief of Gibraltar in April 1781. 
In November Westcott was moved into the 'Victory', and he thus carried the flag of Rear-Admiral Richard Kempenfelt in his brilliant attack on the French convoy on 12 December, and of Richard, Lord Howe, in the relief of Gibraltar and the action off Cape Spartel in October 1782. Gaining scarce peacetime employment in the 'Medway', he became, in 1786, first lieutenant of the 'Salisbury', carrying the broad pennant of Commodore John Elliot, the commander-in-chief in Newfoundland, and on 1 December 1787 he was promoted commander. In 1789-90 he commanded the sloop 'Fortune', and from her he was promoted captain on 1 October 1790, during the Nootka Sound crisis with Spain, and he was thereafter appointed to the 'London' as flag captain to his old chief Goodall. The 'London' was paid off in late 1791, at the conclusion of the Ochakov confrontation with Russia. 
Westcott remained on half pay until September 1793, when he joined the 'Impregnable' as flag captain to Rear-Admiral Benjamin Caldwell, with whom he took part in the battle of 1 June 1794. Afterwards he followed Caldwell to the 'Majestic', went with him to the West Indies, and remained there with Sir John Laforey, whom he brought to England in June 1796. As a private ship the 'Majestic' then joined the Channel Fleet, was with John Colpoys off Brest in December, and with Lord Bridport during the mutiny at Spithead in April and May 1797. Towards the end of the year she joined the fleet off Cadiz under the earl of St Vincent, and in May 1798 she was one of the ships sent up the Mediterranean to join Sir Horatio Nelson ['see 'Nelson's band of brothers]. In the battle of Abu Qir Bay (1 August 1798) her position in the rear of the line made her one of the last to join the action, and in the darkness and smoke she ran afoul of the French 'Heureux', in which position she remained caught for several minutes and suffered heavy loss. At this time Westcott was killed by a musket-ball in the throat. He was buried at sea in Abu Qir Bay on 2 August. 
It is as one of the celebrated 'band of brothers' and by his death in the hour of victory that Westcott is best known. Lord Collingwood wrote of him: 'A good officer and a worthy man; but, if it was a part of our condition to choose a day to die on, where could he have found one so memorable, so eminently distinguished among great days?' For Samuel Granston Goodall: 'He sleeps in the bed of honour, and in all probability will be immortalised among the heroes in the Abbey. 'Requiescat in pace'. Never could he have died more honourably. I have him to lament among many deserving men whom I have patronised, that have passed away in the prime of their lives. ('Dispatches and Letters of... Nelson', 3.86-7)' A monument to his memory was erected at the public expense in St Paul's Cathedral. At Honiton also a monument was erected by subscription. However, it must be noted that he had no close links with Nelson, and in fact he was one of five captains never called to Nelson's ship. Samuel Hood remarked uncharitably that his loss was 'not felt' (Lavery, 218). 
Westcott was survived by his wife, about whom further details are unknown, and their daughter. In January 1801, while passing through Honiton, Nelson invited them to breakfast, and presented Westcott's widow with his own Nile medal, saying, 'You will not value it less because Nelson has worn it'. On 17 January 1801 he wrote to Lady Hamilton: 'At Honiton I visited Captain Westcott's mother -- poor thing, except from the bounty of government and Lloyd's, in very low circumstances. The brother is a tailor, but had they been chimney-sweepers it was my duty to show them respect. (Gamlin, 1.64)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29110


Western, Charles Callis, Baron Western (bap. 1767, d. 1844), politician, was the elder son of Charles Western of Rivenhall, Essex, and Frances Shirley, daughter and heir of Frances and William Bollan of Rivenhall (he was agent for the council of Massachusetts), and grandson of Thomas Western (died 1765) and his wife, Anne Callis. He was baptized at Rivenhall on 9 August 1767. His great-grandfather Thomas Western (died 1733) of Rivenhall married Mary, daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Shirley of Preston, Sussex, a near relative of the three famous brothers of Elizabethan fame, Sir Anthony Shirley, Robert Shirley, and Sir Thomas Shirley. 
Western was educated at Newcome's school, Hackney, at Eton College, and at Queens' College, Cambridge, but apparently left the university without graduating. From his youth he was a close friend of Thomas Creevey. His father died when he was four years old, and upon attaining his majority he succeeded to the Rivenhall estates, purchasing, two years later, that of Felix Hall, Kelvedon. To this mansion, where he lived, he added a fine classical portico, constructed from a scale drawing of the Roman temple of Fortuna Virilis, given in Desgodetz's 'Edifices antiques de Rome' (1682). He filled the house with valuable busts, urns, sarcophagi, and other objects collected during his travels abroad. They are given in a 'Descriptive sketch of ancient statues, busts, &c. at Felix Hall... with plates of the most striking objects in the collection' (1833). 
Western was elected on 16 June 1790 as MP for Maldon, which borough he represented until 1812, with a break in 1806-7. In these years he was seen as a moderate Foxite. In 1812, he stood successfully for Essex 'upon the old Whig interest', distancing himself from the more radical Burgoyne and receiving some tory support. He represented Essex until 1832. During his forty-two years in parliament he became the mouthpiece of the agricultural interests in the Commons, and boldly attacked, although without any immediate result, the currency question, with which the welfare of agriculture was, he considered, indissolubly bound, for he believed the sinking fund kept stocks artificially high. If not the author, he was one of the leading promoters of the 'Corn Bill' of 1815, and advocated even more protection than it provided. He supported out-and-out protection, being as strongly opposed to the fixed duty of the whigs as to the free-trade doctrines of the Anti-Corn Law League. He became known, inevitably, as 'Squire' Western. 
Western was also interested in penal policy. He toured gaols and published 'Remarks upon Prison Discipline' (1821) and 'Thoughts on Prison Discipline' (1822), which included a design by William Cubitt, the inventor of the treadmill, for a model house of correction to contain 400 prisoners. The earlier tract was highly praised in the 'Edinburgh Review' (36, 1821-2, 353), and both were answered by George Holford in a 'Vindication of the General Penitentiary at Milbank' (1822). 
Despite his pronounced protectionism, Western remained whiggish on Catholic emancipation and parliamentary reform, differing from many Essex men on both. At the first election after the 'Reform Act' he was defeated by thirty-two votes. Melbourne at once created him Baron Western of Rivenhall, Essex. On 21 March 1834 a presentation was made to him at Chelmsford by the county, where he was personally extremely popular. But although he had made his mark in the lower house as a speaker of great ability, he seldom took part in the debates of the Lords, and thenceforth lived in comparative retirement, devoted to practical improvements in farming, and experiments which he invited all agriculturists to examine. He gave his attention particularly to creating improved breeds of sheep; his name was long known and honoured in the colonies for his skilful efforts to 'place Merino wool upon a Leicester carcass'. 
Western died at Felix Hall on 4 November 1844, and was buried on the 13th in Rivenhall church with his ancestors. He was unmarried, and the peerage became extinct. The estates devolved upon Western's cousin, Thomas Burch Western, of Tattingstone Park, Suffolk, who was created a baronet on 20 August 1864 and died in 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 29111


Westfaling, Herbert (1531/2-1602), bishop of Hereford, was born in London, the son of Harbert Westphaling, whose family originated in Westphalia. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1547, aged fifteen, where he graduated BA in 1551 and proceeded MA in 1555. In 1561 he took the degree of BTh, and incepted DTh in 1566. In February 1562 he was ordained priest by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, and the same year was appointed a canon of Christ Church, Oxford, through the influence of Sir William Cecil. His radical sympathies were apparent early in his career, when in 1560 he was one of a number of petitioners to the earl of Leicester who requested the appointment of Thomas Sampson as dean of Christ Church. At the end of 1562 he was appointed Lady Margaret professor of divinity, a post that he held for little more than a year. In September 1567 he was made treasurer of the diocese of Lincoln, in 1570 was mentioned by Archbishop Parker as a possible bishop of Oxford, and in 1572 was appointed to the living of Brightwell Baldwin in Oxfordshire, which he was licensed to hold in plurality. His preferments continued with his appointment as vice-chancellor of the University of Oxford in June 1576, and the acquisition of a canonry at Windsor the following May. 
In 1576 Westfaling was appointed by Grindal, now archbishop of Canterbury, to a commission to investigate complaints against the dean and chapter of Gloucester. This resulted in a report incorporating articles for the better observance of capitular duties. The experience may well have influenced Westfaling's subsequent attitude to his own cathedral chapter after his consecration as bishop of Hereford on 30 January 1586. Since at the beginning of his primacy in autumn 1583 John Whitgift had suggested Westfaling as a possible dean of Windsor if William Day became bishop of London, it seems likely that he owed his elevation to the bench to Whitgift's further efforts and the acquiescence of Lord Burghley. Once installed at Hereford Westfaling, like his predecessor John Scory, experienced the problems of a bishop of somewhat advanced protestant views in a remote diocese with profoundly conservative religious opinions. He had particular difficulties with his own chapter, not least because of the machinations of Bishop Scory's venal and corrupt son Sylvanus, against whom Westfaling conducted a suit for dilapidations. In 1586 he castigated the vicars-choral for their suspect religious views and the use of superstitious images and pictures. Although the cathedral had been granted new statutes in 1583, they left unresolved the vexed question of the rights of the bishop to conduct visitations of the chapter. Although Westfaling insisted that the 'staffe or rodde of discipline God hath undoubtedly given to all trewe bishops' (Hereford Cathedral archives, 7031/2 fols. 123 ff.) his four attempts to visit, in 1586, 1588, 1589, and 1598, all met with defeat. More successful was a survey of the morals and educational qualifications of the diocesan clergy conducted in 1587. This revealed that most possessed no degree, and few of those who were licensed to preach were considered to have attained the status of 'painful' preachers. Although Westfaling was noted for his zeal in converting Roman Catholics, and was regarded by the lords in council as a fit and able person to be employed in conferences with Jesuits and other recusants, he appears to have had little success in Hereford, for his successor Bennett complained that the diocese was full of traditionalists and recusants. 
Westfaling was noted for his gravity, and Francis Godwin, a long-time acquaintance, commented that he had scarcely ever seen him laugh. Portraits in the bishop's palace in Hereford and the Bodleian Library, Oxford, are suitably austere in appearance. His effigy in the north transept of Hereford Cathedral, possibly by the sculptor Samuel Baldwin of Stroud, conveys a similar impression. In December 1592 he gave an oration before Queen Elizabeth in the university church, Oxford, during which he was twice ordered by the queen to be brief so that she could herself deliver a speech later in the evening. Westfaling refused to be hurried and the queen was forced to postpone her own speech until the next day. 
In 1582 Westfaling published a collection of seven sermons under the title 'A Treatise of Reformation in Religion'. He was also the author of a number of manuscript poems in English and Latin, now in the library of Cambridge University (MS Ff.v. 14); but a manuscript translation of 'A discourse of Quintus Cicero to his brother Marcus concerning Suete for the consulship', in the Bodleian Library (MS Rawlinson D. 303) formerly attributed to the bishop, is in fact the work of his son. His personal library contained works by leading reformers of his time, his will mentioning the works of Calvin in folio, which he donated to Christ Church, Oxford, and nine volumes by Wolfgang Musculus, which he bequeathed to Hereford Cathedral Library. Shortly before his death he donated $20 to the Bodleian Library for the purchase of new books. 
Westfaling married Anne, daughter of William Barlow, bishop of Chichester, and widow of Augustine Bradbridge, prebendary of Salisbury and brother of William Bradbridge, bishop of Exeter. Anne Westfaling died at Westminster on 9 December 1597, while her husband was attending parliament. The marriage produced a son and three daughters. Anne, who married William Jeffries, would appear to have remarried, as 'my sonne Jenkes' was named with the bishop's other two sons-in-law as an overseer of his will in 1601. Margaret Westfaling was married to Richard Eedes, dean of Worcester, while her sister Elizabeth married Robert Walwyn of Newland, Worcestershire, from whose father Westfaling purchased an estate at Batch, in Herefordshire; he subsequently bequeathed it to Jesus College, Oxford, to endow two fellowships and scholarships. Significantly, the bequest contained the proviso that 'my kindred shallbe always preferred before anie others' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/99, sig. 12, fol. 90'r'). Westfaling also acquired the Herefordshire manor of Mansell Gamage, and in 1591 conveyed it to his son, Herbert, whose heirs possessed it until the late eighteenth century. Westfaling died at Hereford on 1 March 1602, and was buried in the north transept of his cathedral. His will contained generous provision for his servants and for the poor of the city of Hereford and the parish of Whitbourne, as well as bequests of plate to his grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 29112


Westfield, Thomas (1573-1644), bishop of Bristol, was born in the parish of St Mary's, Ely, Cambridgeshire, the son of William Westfield. After attending the free school there, in 1589 he matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1593, proceeded MA in 1596, held a fellowship from 1599 to 1603, and proceeded BD in 1604 (incorporated at Oxford on 9 July 1611). Between 1600 and 1605 he was apparently rector of South Somercote, Lincolnshire, and vicar of Barton, Cambridgeshire, but he spent most of his long clerical career in the diocese of London. After assisting Nicholas Felton at St Mary-le-Bow, he became rector of St Bartholomew-the-Great, Smithfield (18 December 1605) and of Hornsey (28 April 1615), a living he retained until 1637. His patron at St Bartholomew's was Robert, Lord Rich, and Rich's son the earl of Holland also admired him. Westfield received the prebend of Ealdstreet (12 April 1614) in St Paul's Cathedral, which he exchanged for that of Caddington Major (1 March 1615). Thomas Fuller characterized Westfield as a 'contented meek man' because in 1617, having sufficient means for himself, he declined the see of Bristol (Fuller, 'Worthies', 232). At an unknown date he married his first wife, Ann; she was buried at St Bartholomew's on 11 December 1619. 
A theological Calvinist, Westfield was from 1631 to 1632 the first president of Sion College, yet he was also William Laud's choice, on 14 November 1631, for the archdeaconry of St Albans. He continued to steer a moderate path, and to enjoy the confidence of those of different viewpoints. In May 1640 he helped lead a protest against the continuation of the convocation after the dissolution of the Short Parliament, and on 6 August he joined a group of London clergy who signed a petition against the 'etcetera oath'. In March 1641 he was among a varied group of clergy named as assistants to the House of Lords committee on innovations in religion but revealed his essential conformity when, in a sermon at St Paul's on 14 November, he defended episcopacy by praising Morton, Buckeridge, Ussher, Davenant, and other bishops of the Church of England whose books against 'popery' proved they did not deserve trampling by 'the dirty feet of some Sectaries in their scurrilous libels and pamphlets' (T. Westfield, 'Eleven Choice Sermons', 1656, sig. Kk2'r'). In sermons published much later as 'The White Robe' (1660), he asked 'what offence it will be to God' if clergymen 'come to the Lord's Table in their white garments?' (p. 55), and argued that only kings are 'the lord's anointed' (p. 113). John Walker claimed that Westfield suffered abuse in the streets and sequestration that forced him to flee to Oxford. Here, preaching before the king for the first time, he was so overawed that he fainted, although his preaching 'was reckoned powerful and heart-searching', and Bishop John King said 'he was born an Orator' (Lloyd, 303). On 26 April 1642 he was consecrated bishop of Bristol; none the less, he was approved by the Commons as a member of the assembly of divines on 31 May and was back in London in 1643. On 13 May, the Commons committee for sequestrations praised his 'Learning and Merit' and, on the information of the earl of Holland, ordered the tenants on his episcopal lands to cease refusing to pay the rents they owed him. Westfield attended the Westminster assembly's first session on 1 July, the only bishop to do so, but did not return. According to Fuller, 'Dr. Westfield and some few others seemed the only nonconformists amongst them, for their conformity whose gowns and canonical habits differed from all the rest' (Fuller, 6.251). 
Westfield died on 28 June 1644 and was buried, as he had wished, in Bristol Cathedral near the tomb of the first bishop of the diocese. He left his estate to his widow and executor, Elisabeth (died 1653), the daughter of Adolphus Meetkerke of Flanders, and sister of Edward Meetkerke, who was an overseer of his will. They had a son, Edward, who went to Christ Church, Oxford, and a daughter, Elizabeth, who in memory of her father made an anagram of his name: 'Thomas Westfield -- I dwell the most safe' (Lloyd, 304). 


@@@@@


doc= 29113


Westgarth, William (1815-1889), merchant and politician in Australia, was born on 15 June 1815 at Edinburgh, the eldest son of John Westgarth, surveyor-general of customs for Scotland, and his wife, Christian Thomson. The Westgarths were a landed family from Weardale, co. Durham. William attended high schools at Leith and Edinburgh and Dr Bruce's academy at Newcastle upon Tyne. On leaving school he entered the mercantile firm of George Young & Co., Leith. 
In July 1840 Westgarth emigrated to Port Phillip district, Australia, and arrived in Melbourne on 13 December. 'The grand bent of all is the making of money', he wrote on Christmas eve to his mother, 'and I do think some is to be made here.' Within two years, however, as an important merchant he was caught in a depression and settled with his creditors. He soon recovered, and formed a prosperous partnership with Alfred Ross in 1845. An 'improver', Westgarth was an unostentatious and indefatigable supporter of good causes such as the Mechanics' Institute and the benevolent society. In 1844 he began his prolific writing career with his first book, 'Observations on the present commercial, agricultural and civil condition of the Australian colonies', published at Leith, and the first of a series of six-monthly commercial and statistical reports on the progress of Port Phillip. In 1846 he reported sympathetically on the 'condition, capabilities, and prospects' of the Aborigines. During a prolonged absence on business in Britain in 1847-9 he persuaded the imperial authorities to subsidize the emigration of German rural workers; the first few arrived in Port Phillip in 1848. 
On his return Westgarth soon became one of the two or three most respected men in the infant colony. He was a campaigner for separation from New South Wales, the Melbourne secretary of the League for the Abolition of Transportation, and a leading spokesman for the broad radical front, including many Scottish businessmen, opposing Lieutenant-Governor C. J. La Trobe and the conservative, largely Anglican, official class. He topped the poll for Melbourne at the first election for the Victorian legislative council in 1851, campaigned to unlock the lands, and carried the 'Convicts Prevention Act' (to exclude criminals from Van Diemen's Land). He formed the Melbourne chamber of commerce almost single-handedly, and acted as its first president. He also helped to draw up a straightforward free-trade tariff and proposed a uniform Australian tariff. Soon he became an almost automatic choice to chair important public meetings. 
Westgarth was again in Britain in 1853-4 on business and to find a wife; he married Ellison, the daughter of John Macfie, on 6 June 1854 in Edinburgh. It was unfortunate that he was absent for the debates on the Victorian draft constitution. He did not rejoin the legislative council, but chaired the commission of inquiry into the goldfields of Victoria after the Eureka rebellion. The wise report, forced on Governor Sir Charles Hotham by public opinion, recommended an export duty on gold in place of a licence fee, a cheap miner's right which included the vote, and creation of local courts. Affable, modest, urbane, and, above all, tolerant, Westgarth was the complete liberal free-trader for whom Adam Smith was gospel and belief in progress towards the greater happiness of humankind axiomatic. He was also the complete democrat, supporting manhood suffrage, the secret ballot, state education, abolition of state aid to religion -- even direct taxation of the wealthy. Yet he was not of the stuff of which popular politicians are made, being a rather tedious speaker, though convivial and a natural peacemaker. 
Late twentieth-century Australian historians describe Westgarth as 'the John Stuart Mill of Victoria', 'the outstanding sociological thinker of the colonies', and 'the most perceptive of early Australian historians'. His political-historical writing is a landmark in early Australian intellectual history. Though unpretentious and hurriedly written, his five books on Victoria and his 'Australia: its Rise, Progress, and Present Condition' (1861) are distinguished by his probings for explanations of historical change and by generalizations of some profundity about the nature of colonial society. 
In 1857 Westgarth left Victoria to establish a sharebroking firm in London, specializing in advice on colonial loans, and carried out innumerable minor diplomatic tasks for colonial governments. A founder of the Colonial Institute in 1869, he gave the first paper to its first ordinary meeting, and many more later, and was the institute's auditor for twenty years. Westgarth was one of the preliminary committee of six which founded the Imperial Federation League in 1884. He frequently presented papers at meetings of the British Association and the Social Science Congress on such matters as bimetallism and land taxation, and was prominent in the foundation of the London chamber of commerce in 1881. He interested himself in economic theory, and in 1887 published a 'Sketch of the Nature and Limits of a Science of Economics'. He also became engrossed in the problems of poverty and social inequality. 
Westgarth returned to Victoria only once, in 1888 for the centennial celebrations, and met with a great reception. In mid-1889, in declining health, he retired from business. He died on 28 October, when he fell from the attic window of 10 Bolton Gardens, South Kensington, his London home; the inquest recorded accidental death. His funeral took place in Edinburgh. Westgarth had taken $100,000 from his business on retirement and left a considerable estate. He had been a member of the Church of Scotland and held regular morning prayers in his household. His wife and three daughters survived him; the firm of Westgarth & Co. failed in 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 29114


Westmacott, Sir Richard (1775-1856), sculptor, was born in Grosvenor Square, Westminster, London, on 15 July 1775, the eldest of the thirteen children of the sculptor Richard Westmacott ('bap'. 1746, died 1808) and Sarah Vardy (1750-1826), daughter of the furniture carver Thomas Vardy. The journalist and writer Charles Molloy Westmacott (1787/8-1868) was his half-brother. The elder Westmacott worked primarily as a sculptor of chimney-pieces and in 1777 published a series of twenty chimney-piece designs. He also executed about fifty-five church monuments, the best-known examples of which are those to Jane and James Dutton (1791, Devizes, Wiltshire) and Mrs Sarah Shrimpton ('c'.1783, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire). At the age of fourteen the younger Richard Westmacott was apprenticed to his grandfather Thomas Vardy. He also probably received some training in his father's studio, though he never acknowledged it. In 1792 he travelled to the continent with his tutor, a sculptor from Carrara known only as Casoni, and studied at the Accademia di San Luca in Rome from 1793 to 1795. In the student competition of 1795 he won first prize for his terracotta relief 'Joseph Confiding Benjamin to Juda' (Accademia di San Luca, Rome). In Rome Westmacott purchased antiquities for the architect Henry Holland and became acquainted with the well-known neo-classical sculptor Antonio Canova. After he returned to London in 1796, he resided at 24 Mount Street, Mayfair, where he lived until 1818, when he moved to 14 South Audley Street. On 20 February 1798 he married Dorothy Margaret Wilkinson (died 1834), daughter of a Dr Wilkinson of Jamaica, at St George's, Hanover Square. They had eight children, the eldest of whom, also named Richard Westmacott (1799-1872), became a successful sculptor. 
Westmacott made his debut at the Royal Academy in 1797 with two marble busts, including one of Sir William Chambers (Sir John Soane's Museum, London). He was elected an associate member of the academy in 1805 and became a full academician six years later when he submitted his diploma piece, the relief 'Ganymede and the Eagle' (Royal Academy of Arts, London). In 1827 he succeeded John Flaxman as professor of sculpture at the Royal Academy, a post he held until his death. During his forty-year career he created about 275 works and early on distinguished himself as a leading sculptor of civic and national monuments. He obtained eight of the thirty-six commissions for national monuments ordered by the Committee of Taste from 1803 to 1823. The most remarkable of these is the monument to Sir Ralph Abercromby (1803-9, St Paul's Cathedral, London), a dramatic marble group which established his reputation. George IV commissioned one of his most unusual war memorials, the 'Waterloo Vase' (1820-27, Royal Collection), which was carved from an 18 foot-high block of Carrara marble on which Napoleon had originally intended to represent scenes of his conquest of Russia. 
In 1809 Westmacott gained fame for the monument to Francis Russell, the fifth duke of Bedford (Russell Square, London), one of the first large-scale bronzes created in England in the nineteenth century. He helped revive the craft of bronze casting in Britain with such monuments as those erected to Lord Nelson in Birmingham (1806-9) and Bridgetown, Barbados (1810-13); the duke of Wellington ('Achilles', 1814-22, Hyde Park, London); George III (1818-22, Liverpool; 1824-31, Windsor Great Park); and the duke of York (1830-34, Carlton House Terrace, London). In addition he produced the colossal bronze group designed by M. C. Wyatt for Lord Nelson in Liverpool (1808-13). 
Westmacott's works are generally neo-classical in style, which he sometimes carried to an extreme. His 'Achilles' and memorials to George III are only variations of esteemed Graeco-Roman sculptures. The 'Achilles' unintentionally became his most sensational monument because the idealized nude male figure was commissioned with funds from British women and because some mistakenly believed it portrayed Wellington himself. In his monuments he sometimes tempered his classicizing inclinations with lifelike portraits and contemporary dress. Many of the figures he made for the galleries of private collectors were initially inspired by antique works but overlaid by rococo sentiment or influenced by Canova, notably the 'Cupid' (1823) and 'Psyche' (1822, both Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire) he made for John Russell, the sixth duke of Bedford, and 'Cupid Made Prisoner' (1827, Petworth House, Sussex) for George O'Brien Wyndham, the third earl of Egremont. Westmacott received an unprecedented $1050 for 'Psyche', a sum which put him on a par with Canova, who was then considered the greatest sculptor of the day. He departed from classical sources in the series of eight Maltese stone figures ('c'.1813-18) for the staircase of Ashridge Park, Hertfordshire, which represent the medieval founders and benefactors of a monastery formerly on that site. 
Of the 240 marble tomb memorials attributed to Westmacott at least sixty are plain, inscribed, or simply decorated tablets which were largely, if not entirely, executed by studio assistants. Some of his church monuments are among his greatest works. The relief erected to the Hon. John Yorke ('c'.1801, Wimpole, Cambridgeshire) characterizes his early, short-lived austere style which reflects the impact of John Flaxman's sculpture. Abstract tendencies soften in his mature funerary sculpture. The monument to John William Egerton, the seventh earl of Bridgewater (1825, Little Gaddesden, Hertfordshire) suggests the tender intimacy of Italian Renaissance groups of the Holy Family. Sensual female figures appear in several of his tomb sculptures, notably the graceful entwined angels in the monument to Mrs Elizabeth Eardley-Wilmot ('c'.1818, Berkswell, Warwickshire) and the charming peasant girl from the monument to Lord and Lady Penryhn (1819, Llandygai, Caernarvonshire). The girl is depicted with a figure of a quarryman, both intended to symbolize the deceased couples' agricultural and industrial improvements on their estate. The monument to Mrs Elizabeth Warren (1824, Westminster Abbey, London) commemorates the wife of the bishop of Bangor as a benefactor of migrant workers. Westmacott portrayed a pathetic group of a destitute young mother and her infant which captivated the public when it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1822 under the title 'The Houseless Traveller'. The exhibited version was purchased by the marquess of Lansdowne (Bowood, Wiltshire) and the sentimental image was immortalized in poetry, engravings, and Parian ware reproductions. He later created a companion piece for it, 'Madonna and Child' (exh. RA, 1825; church of the Transfiguration, New York city), popularly known as 'The Happy Mother', which did not achieve as much popularity. 
Throughout his career Westmacott remained a highly respected member of the British art establishment. He was elected to the Society of Antiquaries in 1811 and the Society of Dilettanti in 1817. In 1816 he was one of the experts who testified before the House of Commons in favour of the purchase of the Elgin marbles. From that time on he served as an unofficial adviser to the British Museum and helped in the display of antiquities, and even recommended purchases. He received the honorary degree of DCL from the University of Oxford on 15 June 1836 and was knighted by Queen Victoria on 19 July 1837. He exhibited at the Royal Academy for the last time in 1839, at the age of sixty-four. His son Richard appears to have taken over his business after that time, but he remained active until shortly before his death. In 1843 he served as one of the judges for the parliament fresco competition and supervised the erection of Nelson's monument in Trafalgar Square in London, and two years later he reported to the government on the condition of the royal tombs in Canterbury Cathedral. He acted as commissioner for the Great Exhibition of 1851, and in 1855 served on the committee for English sculpture at the Universal Exhibition in Paris, where he exhibited 'The Houseless Traveller' and 'Lady Susan Murray' ('Sleeping Infant', 1839, Scone Palace, Perthshire). His last documented work, the pediment group for the British Museum, 'The Progress of Civilization', was installed in 1851. After a brief illness Westmacott died peacefully at his home at 14 South Audley Street, London, on 1 September 1856. He was buried in the churchyard at Chastleton, Oxfordshire, where his son Horatio was rector. 
Few details of Westmacott's character and private life are known, in the absence of most of his personal correspondence, contemporary accounts provide only brief glimpses of him. When he applied for family arms in 1829, one of the king of arms is said to have declared, 'You are an industrious fellow -- I'll give you a bee' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 5.390). His arms do in fact feature four bees, appropriate symbols for this vigorous, prolific artist. The diarist Caroline Fox, who visited him in his studio in 1842, described the 67-year-old artist as 'a man of extreme energy and openness of countenance, real enthusiasm for his art, and earnest to direct its aim as high as heaven' ('Memories', ed. Pym, 2.390). He was a popular member of the Royal Academy and often socialized with other artists, notably Joseph Farington, who mentions him in his 'Diary' on several occasions. Westmacott was on friendly terms with most of his aristocratic patrons. His name appears many times in the 'Dinner Books' of Henry Vassal Fox, third Baron Holland, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Holland. His association with this couple, as well as with Thomas Coke of Norfolk, first earl of Leicester, suggests that he was a whig, as do some of his commissions for John Russell, the sixth duke of Bedford, notably the relief 'The Progress of Mankind' ('c'.1818) on the temple of liberty at Woburn Abbey. Very little is known about Westmacott's family life, or his children other than his son Richard. His unmarried eldest daughters, Dorothy ('b'. 1800) and Eliza ('b'. 1802), cared for him after his wife's death in 1834. 
Richard Westmacott's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 29115


Westmacott, Richard (1799-1872), sculptor, was born in Grosvenor Square, London, the eldest of the eight children of the sculptor Sir Richard Westmacott (1775-1856) and Dorothy Margaret Wilkinson (died 1834), the daughter of a Dr Wilkinson of Jamaica. He attended Ealing School, near London, from the age of nine. He originally wanted to become a barrister but yielded to his father's wish that he should enter his studio and be trained as a sculptor, and in 1818 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools. In 1820 his father sent him to Italy, where he remained six years, studying ancient sculpture and its history. In Rome he received a few commissions, including a tomb monument for Rosa Bathurst (1824, protestant cemetery, Rome) and a marble figure of Diana for William Morritt (date unknown, Rokeby Park, co. Durham). 
On his return to London, Westmacott resided in his father's house, 14 South Audley Street, until 1830, when he moved to 21 Wilton Place. In 1827 he exhibited his first sculpture at the Royal Academy, 'Girl with a Bird'. During his career he exhibited eighty-two marble figures, reliefs, and busts at the Royal Academy and four works at the British Institution; most of these sculptures are now lost. In the 1830s he executed several important classicizing figures and reliefs, notably 'Venus Carrying off Ascantus' (exh. RA, 1831) and 'Venus Instructing Cupid' (exh. RA, 1838) for Francis Egerton, the earl of Ellesmere. His 'Cymbal Player' (exh. RA, 1838; Chatsworth, Derbyshire) was purchased by the sixth duke of Devonshire, who commissioned Westmacott to make a chimney-piece ('c'.1833) for the dining-room at Chatsworth. For Henry Petty, the marquess of Lansdowne, he carved two reliefs, 'Mercury Presenting Pandora to Prometheus' (exh. RA, 1837; priv. coll.) and 'Paolo and Francesca' (exh. RA, 1838; plaster version ex Sothebys, London, 12 May 1995). 
In 1838 Westmacott was elected an ARA and became a full member in 1849, when he presented the relief 'Go and Sin No More' as his diploma piece (Royal Academy, London). From 1840 until he retired in 1855 he executed mainly portrait busts and funerary monuments. One of his most accomplished busts portrays John Henry Newman (exh. RA, 1841; Birmingham Oratory), the future cardinal and his childhood friend from Ealing School. His greatest tomb monuments are those raised to Charles Hussey Packe ('c'.1842, Prestwold, Leicestershire), Philip Yorke, third earl of Hardwicke ('c'.1845, Wimpole, Cambridgeshire), and Charlotte Egerton (1847, Rostherne, Cheshire). He also made a commemorative memorial to the Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin (1859, Royal Naval College chapel, Greenwich). His only important public work in London was the sculpture in the pediment of the west front of the Royal Exchange, erected 1842-4. On 26 June 1845 he married Caroline Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Harry Edgell of Cadogan Place, London; the couple had several children. 
In 1857 Westmacott succeeded his father as professor of sculpture at the Royal Academy, an office which he held until 1867. He was a fellow of the Royal Society, to which he was elected on 25 May 1837. Well known as a writer and lecturer on art, he contributed articles on sculpture to the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', the 'English Encyclopaedia', and the 'Penny Cyclopaedia' and published 'The Handbook of Ancient and Modern Sculpture' in 1864. In addition, in 1839, he designed eight engraved illustrations and wrote the text to a moral allegory 'The Fighte of Freewille'. Richard Westmacott retired from the Royal Academy about a year before his death, which took place at his home at 1 Kensington Gate, Hyde Park, London, on 19 April 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 29116


Thomas Westmacott (1776-1798), architect, was born in Grosvenor Square, Westminster, London. He was a pupil of James Wyatt and exhibited four architectural designs at the Royal Academy between 1796 and 1798. He died on 3 December 1798, only three weeks after he had received the silver medal for architecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 29117


Paris, Matthew (c.1200-1259), historian, Benedictine monk, and polymath, reveals very little about his own life and personal circumstances. This is disappointing as well as ironical, considering his compulsive concern to collect and record information relating to the events and affairs of his own time, and his acute inquisitiveness concerning times past. Even his parentage, nationality, and social origins remain uncertain. 
His surname, which Matthew Paris usually wrote as Parisiensis, occasionally as de Parisius, might suggest French origins, but Parisiensis was by no means an uncommon patronymic in thirteenth-century England, and there is nothing in his many works, or elsewhere, to indicate that he was anything other than English, especially in view of his characteristically Anglocentric attitude towards the events of his day. Nevertheless, it is quite possible that he studied in the schools of Paris early on in his career. If so, this might account for his surname, his knowledge of French sources for many of his chronicle illustrations, his keen interest in the affairs of the University of Paris and of French affairs generally, and the number of French correspondents and contacts revealed in his works. But Paris himself says only that he became a monk of St Albans, Hertfordshire, on St Agnes's day (21 January) 1217, which suggests that he was born 'c'.1200. The house remained the focus of his life and activities until his death, almost certainly in late May or June 1259. He describes very little about that life, but plainly he was soon attached to the scriptorium, where he worked in some undefined capacity with the first great historian of the abbey, Roger of Wendover, many of whose attitudes profoundly informed those of Paris himself. Upon his mentor's death in 1236 Paris took up the mantle, be it as official historiographer of the house or not, but necessarily with the abbot's licence, and devoted himself largely to his various writings until his own death. 
Despite his seclusion, Matthew Paris was by no means isolated from the world. He had access to papal bulls, imperial 'acta', royal writs and charters, news reports and correspondence from a wide range of sources, English and continental, secular and ecclesiastical; his closest informants, many of whom knew him personally, included Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), a number of Henry III's councillors and 'curiales', and a variety of clerics and nobles, apart from the king himself. Some of these are known to have visited St Albans in this period, a direct and personal means for the transmission of documentary material, as well as gossip and news, which Paris then worked upon for inclusion in his various historical works. Indeed, there are a number of clear indications that it became known to many who mattered that Paris was compiling a vast, universal, contemporary history, the 'Chronica majora', and they fed his voracious appetite for information, some naturally hoping that he would repay his debt in appropriate fashion by means of his pen. This expectation certainly lies behind his presence at Westminster for the celebration of the feast of St Edward the Confessor on 13 October 1247, when Henry III presented to his beloved abbey his recent, precious, acquisition of a vase of the holy blood. According to Paris, Henry required him to write an accurate and full account of what had transpired for the enlightenment of posterity. He then invited Paris and his companions to dinner. The event was supremely worthy of record in Henry's mind, and Paris surely attended the ceremony, doubtless at royal command, precisely because the king was already well aware of his abilities as a historical writer and wished to press them into service. 
The two men certainly came to know each other well. Henry is known to have visited St Albans on at least nine occasions between 1220 and 1259, and these provided opportunities for discussion between monarch and monk in which Paris, or so he would have his readers believe, was frank in his views. In 1250, for example, he remonstrated with Henry for granting rights contrary to the privileges of St Albans, and for allowing others to do the same. During what was probably their last meeting, in March 1257, the two appear to have spent much time together, at table and in the king's private chamber, discussing current affairs, notably the election of Richard of Cornwall as king of the Romans, and Paris records that he took the opportunity to argue with the king on behalf of the masters of the University of Oxford in their dispute with the bishop of Lincoln. Paris was no sycophant. Indeed, he was highly opinionated, and Henry, in particular among his various informants, would not have been happy if he ever knew of the charges that Paris brought against him on various grounds, even though some were later tempered, toned down, or erased. 
Paris's monastic routine was interrupted on other occasions, when he travelled beyond St Albans. He records that he attended the king at Winchester in July 1251, and he was most probably present at the dedication of the abbey church of Hailes, Gloucestershire, in November; the founder, Richard of Cornwall, urged him to give a correct account of the event in his chronicle. At Christmas that year he was at York, for the marriage of Henry III's daughter Margaret to Alexander III of Scotland. But the detail and vividness of his descriptions of some other events, along with the long list of contacts and informants that he acknowledges, suggest strongly that he was more frequently absent from St Albans, meeting members of the English social elite and attending ceremonial gatherings of the court, than he himself reveals. He was undoubtedly well known to many of the great and the good and respected by them. A precious confirmation of some of his contacts, and the relationships engendered, is provided by the list of the various gifts that he had received and then left to his house, including silks and copes from Henry III, Eleanor of Provence, and Hakon IV, king of Norway. 
King Hakon had a part to play in Paris's greatest adventure when, in 1248, he was sent by Pope Innocent IV to reform the monastery of St Benet Holm, on the island of Nidarholm in western Norway. Paris had already been involved in the house's affairs in 1246-7 when, for reasons that remain unclear, he was requested by Hakon to mediate between the monks and their creditors, merchants of Cahors resident in London. He was successful, and this prior contact probably explains why it was Paris who was chosen to go to Norway himself in 1248. He describes himself as visitor to the entire Benedictine order in Norway, but the papal mandate, which he reproduces, indicates that his remit was altogether more modest, for only the abbot and monks of St Benet Holm are mentioned. His arrival in Bergen in early June 1248 occurred at a dramatic time: a great fire was raging through the city, followed by a severe thunderstorm, the lightning shattering the mast of the ship in which he had sailed. He was unharmed and visited King Hakon, who was in Bergen at the time, and delivered letters to him from Louis IX of France, requesting Hakon's participation in Louis's projected crusade and granting him victualling rights in France. Why Paris should have acted as letter-bearer and probably as a fully accredited envoy of the French king is a mystery, but if he was previously known to Louis this would strengthen any surmise that he had spent time in the schools of Paris. On completing his mission to Norway he returned home, presumably in 1249. 
The paucity of detail concerning Matthew Paris's life contrasts sharply with the astonishing volume of information and material that he provides in relation to the events and issues of his contemporary world, and which renders him such an important historian. He will always be known chiefly for his historical writings, but his cultural significance extends far beyond them. As a cartographer, his contribution was considerable. He produced one world map, four versions of an itinerary from London to central or southern Italy, four maps of the Holy Land, a diagram showing the principal Roman roads of Britain, another showing the kingdoms of the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy, and four versions of a map of Britain. The maps, in particular, are of the greatest significance, not because they were influential at the time, but because of their originality, since Paris was experimenting with cartographic concepts virtually unknown in his time and when the idea of a map was not generally understood. His interest here is closely linked to his general interest in collecting and recording information of every kind, and the same may be said of his common practice of illustrating his historical texts with paintings of the shields of individuals mentioned in them. His own observations make it plain that he had a keen interest in heraldry, leading him to reproduce nearly 300 devices, coloured and uncoloured, continental as well as English. At a critical moment in the development of heraldry these representations are precious to the historian of heraldry, and Paris was certainly one of the first to perceive the value of systematic collection of coats of arms. His interest, however, stemmed from his artist's eye and the sense of the illustrator, as well as from his awareness of the historical value of heraldry. Most of his representations occur as marginal illustrations to his historical works, the shields of the persons involved in a battle or other event described being painted in the margins of the text, or at the point when the text mentions the individual's death. 
This urge to illustrate and extend the text pictorially also underlies the inclusion of the scores of drawings that adorn Paris's works, some 130 in the 'Chronica majora' alone. Their attribution was once highly controversial, but on the basis of palaeographical, codicological, and stylistic analysis it is now generally agreed that, with a few exceptions, Paris was solely responsible for these drawings. Comparison between his first tentative efforts, and those more mature and polished drawings executed later in his life, strongly suggests that he was not trained as an artist but was self-taught, taking ideas from models available to him. These included the products of the goldsmiths, led by Walter of Colchester, who are known to have flourished at St Albans in Paris's time, and the illuminated manuscripts then extant in the abbey library. On the basis of these and other influences, some external to his house, Paris came to evolve a highly distinctive and personal style, eclectic, experimental, and innovative, which developed over about twenty-five years. The drawings that resulted are almost all of the same type, either line alone or tinted line. Whether he knew it or not, Paris was following an old Anglo-Saxon tradition which had been revived in England in the first decades of the thirteenth century. But as a result, in particular, of his distinctive use of tints, his extension of the range of colours applied, and his interesting blend of elements of late Romanesque and early Gothic styles, Paris contributed to a notable advance within the genre. 
Finally, it is probable that metalworking should be included among his accomplishments, if credence is given to the words of Thomas Walsingham when he wrote his renowned eulogy and summing-up of Paris 150 years later: 'Matthew Paris, monk of St Albans and an eloquent and famous man full of immeasurable virtues, a magnificent historian and chronicler, an excellent author... Diligently compiling his chronicle from the earliest times up to the end of his life, he fully recorded the deeds of magnates, both lay and ecclesiastical, as well as various and wonderful events; and left for the notice of posterity a marvellous record of the past. He had such skill in the working of gold and silver and other metal, and in painting pictures, that it is thought that there has been no equal to him since in the Latin world. ('Gesta abbatum', 1.395)' 

During his forty-two years at the monastery of St Albans, Matthew Paris wrote or supervised five chronicles, six hagiographies, two domestic histories, a cartulary, and a collection of fortune-telling tracts. They amount to well over a million words, most of them penned by Paris himself. Eighteen St Albans manuscripts containing his hand testify to a staggering diligence in the scriptorium. The 'Chronica majora' fuelled Paris's later historical reputation. A universal chronicle, it is the longest of his annalistic works, spanning two and a half manuscript volumes. Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MSS 26 and 16 (conventionally termed A and B), contain the annals from the creation to 1253, with the volume division occurring at the end of the annal for 1188. The remainder of the 'Chronica' (1254-9) is to be found in BL, Royal MS 14 C.vii (R). These volumes comprise the original, complete manuscript of the 'Chronica', much of which, after the annal for 1213, is autograph. The 'Chronica''s entries up until the mid-1230s are culled in the main from Roger of Wendover's 'Flores historiarum'. Yet there is some debate as to the precise point at which Wendover's 'Flores' ended and Paris's original contribution in the 'Chronica' began. The argument for July 1235 rests in part on a marginal note occurring in B after the account of Frederick II's marriage on 20 July 1235. The note, written in a hand of 'c'.1300, states that 'Master Roger of Wendover, once prior of Belvoir, arranged his chronicle up until this point. Here begins Brother Matthew Paris' (text B, fol. 95'r'). The earliest extant manuscripts of Wendover's 'Flores' (BL, Cotton MS Otho B.v, and Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 207) close after July 1235 with a colophon indicating that Roger of Wendover was author up to this point. However, in a copy of the 'Chronica' supervised by Paris (see below, C), a note similar to that in B occurs in the hand of the original rubricator at the foot of folio 252'r', on which events of April-May 1234 are described, and a heading in the Otho manuscript of Wendover's 'Flores' suggests that the work ends in 1234. 
The authorship of the final eight folios of the annal for 1259, which are not in Paris's hand, has been disputed, yet the closing colophon is generally considered supportive of Paris's claims: 'Be it known that up to this point wrote the venerable brother Matthew Paris; and although the hand may vary in style, the manner of composition being retained however, the whole shall be ascribed to him' (text R, fol. 218'v'). Paris can therefore be credited with the 'Chronica''s annals for the period from either May 1234 or July 1235 to May 1259. His sources for the period 1235-59 included royal letters, exchequer records, and papal documents as well as a host of informative personal acquaintances, Bishop Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), Henry III, and Hakon IV of Norway among them. The 'Chronica' was produced over a period of two decades, 1240-59. It was completed as far as the annal for 1250 by February 1251, and the continuation from 1251 through to 1259 was not begun before 1252. Although continued into the fifteenth century, the 'Chronica' was not a popular work, failing to gain wide circulation. Two copies of the section up to 1188 (A), made after Paris's death, are extant as BL, Cotton MS Nero D.v, part 1 and BL, Harley MS 1620. Paris himself supervised the copying of the section from 1189 to 1250 into BL, Cotton MS Nero D.v (termed C). This was made in or shortly after 1250, before Paris decided to continue the work beyond this year. Partial expurgation of the 'Chronica' in C resulted in the omission of all matters that Paris had considered, in hindsight, to be 'offensive' to Henry III. The 'Chronica' was edited for the 'Rolls Series' by H. R. Luard between 1872 and 1883, and was translated by J. A. Giles from an inferior edition under the title 'Matthew Paris's English History' in 1852-4. 
The 'Chronica' was the prime source for Matthew Paris's 'Flores historiarum', a selective abridgement of the text, intermingled with additional material derived from the monastic annals of Reading and Southwark. The earliest extant manuscripts of the 'Flores' are Manchester, Chetham's Library, MS 6712 (Ch) (datable to the mid-thirteenth century) and Eton College, MS 123 (E) (datable to 'c'.1300). A common exemplar is believed to underlie these two manuscripts. Only the annals for 1241-9 in Ch (fols. 173'v'-202'v') are in Paris's hand, yet he is credited with authorship of book 1 (ending at 1066 and datable to 'c'.1240-45) and book 2 up until the annal for 1249 (datable to 'c'.1250-55). The 'Flores' was previously ascribed to the mythical Matthew of Westminster (supp. fl. 1300). The provenance of the Chetham manuscript is disputed. It has been argued that Ch was produced by Paris at St Albans for a Westminster audience and that it did not reach Westminster until after 1265. But a more recent view is that Ch up to folio 170'r' was compiled at Westminster from an adapted text by Paris. It was returned to St Albans, probably in 1256, so that Paris could insert his revised version of the annals for 1241-9, and then it was sent back to Westminster. The 'Flores' was edited by Luard for the 'Rolls Series' in 1890. 
There is no doubt as to the provenance of the 'Historia Anglorum'. Bound with the third part of the 'Chronica' in BL, Royal MS 14 C.vii, it is written almost exclusively in Paris's hand. Apart from abridging the autograph manuscript of 'Chronica', it draws upon Wendover's 'Flores' and the epitome of the 'Chronica' in C. It omits matter that Paris had pronounced 'impertinent' to English history in the margins of the 'Chronica', and it tones down passages critical of king and pope. On the first folio of the 'Historia' Paris declares that 1250 is his time of writing. By 1255 the work was complete as far as the annal for 1253 with which the work ends. Sir Frederick Madden edited the 'Historia' for the 'Rolls Series' in the years 1886-9. 
Two further abridgements of the 'Chronica' resulted in the 'Abbreviatio chronicorum' (included in volume 3 of Madden's edition of the 'Historia', 159-348) and the 'Chronica excerpta a magnis cronicis'. The former, covering the years 1000-1255, made additional use of the 'Historia', Wendover's 'Flores', and Henry of Huntingdon's 'Historia Anglorum'. It probably dates from 1255, and remains unfinished. The 'Chronica excerpta' is the shortest of Paris's abridged editions of the 'Chronica majora', extending from 1066 to 1246. It is difficult to prove Paris's authorship of the work, but it was certainly written under his supervision, for he wrote some of the text himself in the unique manuscript BL, Cotton MS Vitellius A.xx (fols. 77'r'-108'v'). Datable to approximately 1246-59, it draws upon the 'Abbreviatio', Wendover's 'Flores', and the 'new material' that Paris added in the margins of his 'Chronica' (from the annals of Southwark and Reading). Several charters, Henry III's forest charter of 1225 for example, are to be found in the 'Chronica excerpta', in a less corrupt and more complete form than in any other of Paris's manuscripts. 
The universal history of the 'Chronica' and its abridgements found its domestic counterpart in Matthew Paris's 'Gesta abbatum monasterii sancti Albani', a work of local history which was edited by H. T. Riley for the 'Rolls Series' in the years 1867-9. The 'Gesta' is a history of the abbey of St Albans from 793 to 1255, arranged according to the twenty-three abbacies that spanned the period, beginning with Willegod and ending with John of Hertford. The autograph manuscript is extant as BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i, folios 30'r'-62'r', and 63'v'-68'v'. How great a debt Paris owed to a twelfth-century cellarer Adam in his writing of the first eighteen lives of the 'Gesta' has yet to be determined. Opinion has commonly supposed that Paris made considerable use of a lost chronicle roll of Adam the Cellarer for the early section of the 'Gesta' ending in 1166. This belief was spawned by an ambivalent note that Paris wrote at the beginning of the autograph copy of the 'Gesta': 'According to the ancient roll of Bartholomew the Clerk, who was for a long while with Adam the Cellarer, serving him, and he retained for himself this roll from among his writings, choosing this one alone' (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i, fol. 30'r'). Yet the grounds for considering Adam the abbey's first domestic chronicler are not altogether firm. While the 'Gesta' chronicles in some detail Adam's role in the abbey's quest for royal confirmation of its papal privileges, and his acquisition of land for the monks' kitchen, it makes no reference to his historical endeavours. It even terms him 'illiterate'. Adam is praised in later sources for his sanctity and the healing powers of dust from his tomb. Again, there is no mention of a domestic history. Walsingham praised Wendover and Paris for their historical writings but all he could say of Adam was that he was 'a Martha in worldly affairs and a Mary in contemplation' ('Annales... Amundesham', 2.304). 
It is significant, too, that Wendover betrays no sign in the 'Flores' that he had used or even knew of a history of St Albans. With the early lives of the 'Gesta' bearing Matthew Paris's stylistic imprint, it seems reasonable to conclude that Paris was responsible for their literary reconstruction of Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-Norman St Albans. The dating of the 'Gesta' is less contentious. The portion of the text that ends with the death of Abbot William of Trumpington (1214-35) was penned some time before 1250, since the 'Historia', which was begun in this year, refers to it on five occasions. Paris resumed the 'Gesta' in 1255 for, at the end of this short section, he proclaims the year in which he is writing to be the twentieth year of the abbacy of John of Hertford (1235-63). Although the 'Gesta' did not pass into general circulation, it was abridged in Paris's lifetime by John of Wallingford (d. 1258), infirmarer of St Albans some time between 'c'.1246-7 and his death in 1258. John's historical miscellany (BL, Cotton MS Julius D.vii) was culled chiefly from the works of Paris, whose friend he was; Paris himself executed the portrait of John on folio 42'v'. The 'Gesta' was continued at the end of the fourteenth century by Thomas Walsingham. 
The 'Vitae duorum Offarum' shares the 'Gesta''s interest in the early history of St Albans, although it might also be termed a work of hagiography. While ostensibly chronicling the reigns of Offa, a fourth-century king of the Angles, and Offa, king of Mercia ('r'. 757-96), the 'Vitae''s narrative pivots on Offa of Mercia's foundation of the abbey of St Albans in fulfilment of a promise made by his earlier namesake. The antiquity of the abbey is stressed and the character of its royal founder whitewashed. Authorship of the work was once accredited to John de Cella, abbot of St Albans (1195-1214), yet the discovery that it made use of Wendover's 'Flores' as copied into the 'Chronica majora' resulted in its reattribution to Paris. The work is littered with stylisms characteristic of his prose. Although it precedes the 'Gesta' in BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i, the 'Vitae''s later date of composition is betrayed by its closing words: 'The deeds of all the abbots who presided over the church of St Albans from the time of its founder, King Offa, up until the year 1250, are also described in this volume' (Paris, 'Historia duorum Offarum', 31). The 'Vitae' thus dates to 'c'.1250. It was last edited by William Wats in 1639. 
Matthew Paris's literary talents also found an outlet in hagiography. Two Latin saints' lives occupied some of his time in the 1240s and 1250s. The 'Vita Stephani archiepiscopi Cantuariensis' has survived in three fragments, all written in Paris's hand (BL, Cotton MSS Vespasian B.xiii, fol. 133'v', Nero D.i, fols. 196'r', and a leaf attached to 196'v'). They describe the journey to Rome in 1216 of Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury (1207-28), whom Paris charitably declared the equal in theology of Augustine, Gregory, and Ambrose. The fragments also contain accounts of Stephen's meeting with Innocent III, his preaching on the return journey, and the translation of Thomas Becket in 1220. They were edited by F. Liebermann in 'Ungedruckte anglo-normannische Geschichtsquellen' in 1879. Paris's 'Vita beati Edmundi' documents the life and sanctity of a later archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Rich (1234-40). It is extant only as a fourteenth-century copy, in BL, Cotton MS Julius D.vi, folios 123-156'v'. Although initially attributed to Eustace, a monk of Canterbury, the work has lain firmly at Paris's feet since the late 1890s. It was written some time after 1247, for it contains a letter of Richard of Wyche recounting the translation of St Edmund in June 1247, and it must have been completed before 1253 for it refers to the French queen Blanche of Castile as still living. A date nearer 1247 than 1253 would explain the apparent use made of this work by the 'Historia Anglorum'. The 'Vita' is based on a collection of materials made at Pontigny, but it depends also on information supplied by Richard of Wyche, Robert Bacon, and Edmund's brother, Robert of Abingdon. It was published in 1996 in an English translation by C. H. Lawrence. 
Paris translated his Latin life of Edmund into Anglo-Norman octosyllabic verse for the 'Vie de Seint Edmond', one of his four vernacular saints' lives. A late thirteenth- or early fourteenth-century copy of the work was discovered at Welbeck Abbey, Nottinghamshire, at the beginning of the twentieth century, compensating in part for the loss of another copy of the work (BL, Cotton MS Vitellius D.viii) in the Cottonian fire of 1731. Paris's claim to the authorship of 'Edmond' rests on three pieces of evidence. First, it is dedicated to Isabel de Warenne, countess of Arundel (died 1282), who had also borrowed Paris's lives of Thomas Becket and Edward the Confessor. Second, the author says that he has written the life of Edmund in two languages and the source for 'Edmond' is, as stated above, Paris's Latin life of the saint. Third, the author discloses his name -- Maheu (Matthew) (Paris, 'Vie de Seint Edmond', 1.1692). A recent suggestion that 'Edmond' is the work of an anonymous translator has yet to gain acceptance. It was written some time after 1253, for the reference to a living Queen Blanche in the Latin life is lent a posthumous feel in 'Edmond'. 'Edmond' was probably the latest of Paris's Anglo-Norman hagiographies. It was edited by A. T. Baker in 'Romania' in 1929. 
The 'Vie de Seint Thomas de Cantorbery' drew its inspiration from the twelfth-century 'Quadrilogus'. P. Meyer edited the 'Vie' for the Societe des Anciens Textes Francais in 1885. While there is general agreement that the four extant leaves (BL, Loans MS 88, not in Paris's hand) date from 'c'.1220-30 to 1240, opinion is divided as to their provenance and their author. Some consider them a close, 'first' copy of Paris's lost autograph manuscript, executed in the scriptorium of St Albans during Paris's lifetime. Others argue for their production in London by an unknown poet; it is suggested that Paris was not the creator of the first Anglo-Norman version of the 'Vie', and that the leaves have nothing to do with him. The evidence for the former position is twofold. In a note on the flyleaf of his 'Vie de Seint Auban' in TCD, MS 177, Paris mentions 'a book about St Thomas the Martyr and St Edward which I translated and illustrated ['transtuli et protraxi']'. Over a century later Thomas Walsingham stated that Paris had 'written and most elegantly illustrated' ('conscripsit et depinxit elegantissime') lives of saints Alban, Amphibalus, and the archbishops Thomas and Edmund (BL, Cotton MS Claudius E.iv, fol. 331'v'). Textual and stylistic similarities between 'Thomas' and these other lives appear to confirm common authorship. The evidence for the view that Paris did not write 'Thomas' hangs on an interpretation of the word 'transtuli'. It is suggested that Paris may have meant simply that he had 'transferred' an existing saint's life into his own manuscript. 
If, as seems probable, Matthew Paris was the author of 'Thomas', then the implication of Paris's Dublin note is that he wrote it about the same time as his 'Estoire de Seint Aedward le Rei', for they were originally in the same book. The 'Estoire''s most recent editor, K. Y. Wallace, who edited the text for the Anglo-Norman Text Society in 1983, confines it to the period 1236-45. Attempts to date it to the 1250s have failed to gain support. The 'Estoire' is a verse hagiography of King Edward the Confessor. He was staunch in his repulsion of foreigners, wise in his dependence on baronial counsel, and his reign was a paradigm of conciliatory kingship -- the Edward of the 'Estoire' was everything Paris wished for in Henry III. Paris's dedication of the work to Henry's queen, Eleanor of Provence, possibly sought to communicate these wishes. The provenance of the earliest extant manuscript of the 'Estoire', CUL, MS Ee.iii.59, is debated. It has generally been labelled a close copy and adaptation of the prototype by Paris, executed at St Albans during the 1250s. More recent assessments favour London as its place of origin. The Cambridge manuscript, it is suggested, was a metropolitan copy of between 'c'.1250-55 and 1260, produced perhaps for Eleanor of Castile, daughter-in-law of Henry III, about the time of her marriage to Prince Edward in 1254. 
Attitudes regarding the authorship of the text it contains are similarly shifting. A monk of Westminster initially received credit for the work. He was ousted by Matthew Paris in 1920. Paris's authorship of 'Edward' rests on the documentary foundations shared by 'Thomas', namely the Dublin note and the statement by Walsingham. Although the 'Estoire''s latest editor has fought Paris's corner, an attempt has also been made to credit the work to an anonymous poet. This poet, it is suggested, may be identified with the poet to whom is dubiously attributed the authorship of 'Edmond'. A recent resurrection of a theory that Henry d'Avranches (died 1262/3) was author of the 'Estoire' rests on a statement in the exchequer liberate rolls of 1244-5 that a certain Henry the Versifier was paid $10 for his writing of the lives of saints Edward and George. Yet the majority rally round Paris, while acknowledging that the extant copy hails from Westminster. For the most part the 'Estoire' constitutes a free translation of Ailred of Rievaulx's 'Vita Edwardi Confessoris', with an introductory section derived from Ailred's 'Genealogia regum Anglorum'. Yet it also made use of Paris's 'Flores', and this may explain the Westminster angle that led earlier commentators to ascribe the 'Estoire' to a Westminster monk. In addition, Paris sprinkled the text with original material; his detailed description of Edward's church at Westminster probably sprang from firsthand observation of the abbey before it began to be rebuilt in the 1240s. 
Paris's 'Vie de Seint Auban' is his only vernacular saint's life extant in the autograph. Both the text and illustrations of the 'Vie' in TCD, MS 177 (fols. 29'v'-50) were executed by Paris himself, at a date that has yet to be firmly established. Scholarship in the 1950s and 1960s settled on the decade 1230-40 for production of 'Alban' and this was a dating with which the work's only editor, A. R. Harden, concurred (Paris, 'Vie de Seint Auban', xv-xvii). It was argued that 'Alban' was probably the first of Paris's Anglo-Norman saints' lives, for its handwriting and illustrations were tidy and controlled and it was written in archaic alexandrine 'laisses' instead of the octosyllabic couplets of the other three lives. Recent studies, however, have placed the work a decade or so later, in the 1240s and early 1250s. It is suggested that Paris began 'Alban' in the 1240s, temporarily suspended work on it when he visited Norway in 1248-9, and finished it on his return. 'Alban' is a verse hagiography of England's first Christian martyr, who died in the third century. The central theme of conflict between Christian and pagan dictates its epic form. William of St Albans's twelfth-century Latin life of Alban, of which 'Alban' is a literal, vernacular translation, was written out by Paris himself in the Dublin manuscript. 'Alban' was produced for a monastic audience and the Dublin manuscript is probably that to which Thomas Walsingham refers when he tells of Paris's Lives of saints Alban and Amphibalus. 
A short genealogical chronicle, a collection of fortune-telling tracts, and a cartulary comprise the remainder of Matthew Paris's written legacy. His genealogical chronicle, 'Cronica sub conpendio abreviata a fratre M. Parisiensi', appears in three different versions on the opening and closing leaves of his manuscripts of the 'Chronica' and 'Abbreviatio' (text A, fols. iv'v' and 285, text B, fol. iii'r'- 'v', and BL, Cotton MS Claudius D.vi, fols. 6'v'-8'r'). Sketching the reigns of the kings of England from Alfred onwards, this work proved to be popular outside St Albans, for two contemporary copies are known to exist. Paris's collection of fortune-telling tracts is extant in a single autograph manuscript. Decorative portraits of Socrates, Plato, Euclid, and Pythagorus adorn the pages of Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 304, which is datable to 1240-50. Prognostic works, including the 'Experimentarius' of Bernard of Chartres, constitute the bulk of this volume. 
The 'Liber additamentorum' (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i) was the name by which Paris himself referred to his cartulary. The documents contained therein are those mentioned by Paris in his historical chronicles, and they span the years 1242-59. A number of earlier St Albans charters and papal privileges complete the collection. The 'Liber' began as a small appendix of documents at the end of the 'Chronica''s annal for 1250; after the annal for 1247 Paris no longer wished to clutter his text with documentary transcripts. This appendix, which survives as folios 85-100, was detached 'c'.1251-3 when Paris decided to continue the 'Chronica' beyond 1250. It became part of a separate volume of miscellaneous material (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i), which also contains the 'Gesta abbatum' and the 'Vitae Offarum'. Most of the 'Liber' was pieced together in the last ten years of Paris's life. B's documentary appendix, however, was produced before 1250, and the series of St Albans charters and privileges which occupy folios 149-61 had an even earlier genesis. Instead of compiling this series himself, as was previously thought, Paris copied it from a twelfth-century St Albans cartulary which is preserved, in a seventeenth-century hand, in the Bollandist manuscript Brussels, Bibliotheque Royale, MS 7965-7973 (3723), folios 151'r'-216'v'. The order of charters relating to the abbey's early endowment in the Brussels manuscript is the same as that found in the 'Liber'. Paris's alterations comprised the omission of vernacular boundary clauses, which suggests that he felt uncomfortable with Old English. Thus the 'Liber', which was once considered the abbey's first cartulary, reproduces and extends a cartulary compiled a century earlier. 
Beyond St Albans, where his chronicles at any rate were known to Thomas Walsingham, a great admirer, Matthew Paris's works were largely unknown in the later middle ages. Only the 'Flores historiarum', of which there were a number of continuations, enjoyed some popularity. His reputation began to revive with Polydore Vergil (died 1555), who set Paris and William of Malmesbury (died 1142) on a pedestal apart from other medieval chroniclers, but it was the Reformation that led to a notable renewal of interest in his work largely because his acid-sharp anti-papal streak inevitably appealed to protestant scholars. As John Bale (died 1563) commented to Archbishop Matthew Parker (died 1575), 'no chronycle paynteth out the byshopp of Rome in more lively colours, nor more lyvely declareth hys execrable procedynges' (Levy, 96). It was Parker himself who produced the first printed editions of 'Flores historiarum' in 1567, and of the 'Chronica majora' (from 1066 onwards), in 1571, drawing attention in the process to Paris's exposure of the pride, greed, and tyranny of the pope. A similar position was taken up by such other historians as Edward Hall (died 1547), John Stow (died 1605), and John Hayward (died 1627). The learned puritan controversialist William Prynne (died 1669), too, clearly knew Matthew Paris's chronicles well, and drew upon them for anti-Roman ammunition. Paris was also important, moreover, for the growing opposition to the Stuart monarchy, as the source for the received text of 'Magna Carta', even though he presents a conflation, inherited from Roger of Wendover, of the version of 1215 and the reissues of 1217 and 1225. Only the exceptionally learned John Selden (died 1654) appears to have noticed this. Against this background of controversy the edition of the 'Chronica majora' (also from 1066 onwards) which was published in 1640 by William Wats (died 1649), appears as the epitome of moderation, despite anti-papal invective in the introduction. 
Wats's edition was reprinted in 1644 and 1684, and no doubt this was the text used by Sir William Dugdale (died 1686) and other historians and antiquarians in late seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century England. However, Paris fell from sight in the later eighteenth century as medieval scholarship gave way to the Gothicizing antiquarianism of Horace Walpole (died 1797) and his contemporaries, although a copy of the 'Chronica majora' in the edition of 1684 was one of the very few medieval English narrative sources recorded in the library of Edward Gibbon at the time of the historian's death in 1791. Another change in literary and historical fashion, identifiable with the influence of Romanticism, seems to have been needed to bring about a renewed interest in Matthew Paris in the nineteenth century. That this was a development led by fashion rather than scholarship, at least initially, is suggested by the fact that English translations of the 'Chronica majora' and 'Flores historiarum' were published in 1852-4 and 1853 respectively, although, remarkably, they were preceded by a French translation published in 1840-41. These works were published before the scholarly editions of Paris's chief historical works appeared in the 'Rolls Series'. Sir Frederick Madden's edition of the 'Historia Anglorum' (1866-9), and H. R. Luard's editions of the 'Chronica majora' (1872-84) and 'Flores historiarum' (1890), provided texts altogether more reliable than those of Wats and Parker, and they remain the standard editions of these works. They also furthered significantly the understanding of Paris and his works through their accompanying editorial apparatuses, and thus helped to make further advances possible, notably in the work of V. H. Galbraith, who elucidated such issues as the transmission of Paris's texts and the relationship of his work to that of Roger of Wendover, and in the comprehensive monograph study of Richard Vaughan (1958), the first to consider Paris's talents, interests, and productions as a whole. 
Despite a well-provisioned library, as evidenced by the twelfth-century catalogue of Walter the Chanter, the historiographical flowering of St Albans postdated that of other monastic institutions by several decades. Its successful propagation required a well-equipped scriptorium and creative personalities. St Albans possessed wealth for the former. Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris contributed the latter. For a man who disclosed so few autobiographical details, Paris found intrusion of private thoughts and prejudices upon his works remarkably easy. Monastic humility battled with historical subjectivity. Foreigners riled him. The Savoyards and the Poitevins, he felt, greedily fattened themselves on English revenues and deprived native Englishmen of wealth and rank. The French as a whole he denounced as proud and effeminate. Yet Paris's xenophobia did not feed upon rife patriotism. Although the persistent incursions of the devious Welsh into English territory irritated him, he could admire their bravery, which he considered infinitely preferable to the imbecility and gullibility of the English. The English displayed these characteristics, said Paris, in the face of papal avarice. 
Paris's hatred of the papacy spawned many a torrid passage in the 'Chronica'. He considered its draining of ecclesiastical revenues, and its intrusion of Italians into positions of prominence within the English church, to be evidence of loose morals. Its morals, he said, were those of a prostitute. It practised usury and simony in an endeavour to satisfy its insatiable greed. The secular arm of divine authority fared no better in Paris's hands. Henry III suffered a barrage of criticisms, ranging from poor financial management to cowardice and self-indulgence. He preferred foreign over native counsel, he obstructed abbatial and episcopal elections, and he violated his coronation oaths. He was indecisive, bending one way and another like a reed in the wind. Together, king and papacy comprised the 'two millstones' between which England was metaphorically crushed. Paris was fond of such imagery; commenting upon the detrimental effect of pope and foreigner on the material wealth of England, he likened his country to a vineyard without a wall, open to plunder by all. 
Matthew Paris's irreverent attitude to authority has been lavishly termed 'constitutionalism', and his 'Chronica majora' labelled an 'apologia pro baronibus'. That constitutional matters held some fascination for Paris is certain. Frenzied assaults on taxation, royal extortion, forest inquisitions, and itinerant justices constitute some of the most vibrant passages in the 'Chronica'. His constitutional sensitivities also operated in the domestic arena. His support for the convent in the question of an abbot's right to banish monks to distant cells is evidenced by the 'Gesta abbatum'. The latter text, in addition, maps out the procedures of abbatial elections, such as that of John of Hertford in 1235, with painstaking attention to detail. Yet Paris's constitutional interests appear amateur. They give no impression of having coagulated into coherent political theory. He no more conceived of the 'communitas regni' wielding complete power over a monarch than he conceived of monks ruling abbots. Even his thoughts on the events of 1258 and the implications of baronial reform lack complexity. As a Benedictine monk he lived within the constraints of a traditional hierarchy. This, in itself, may serve to explain why his constitutional leanings lack the definition and impetus that characterize his other attitudes and prejudices. 
Ardent though Paris's prejudices may have been, they never choked his narratives. Documentary evidence comprised the backbone of his historical methodology. 350 documents are preserved in the 'Chronica' and 'Liber additamentorum'. He knew that it was his duty to adhere to the facts. 'The lot of historians', he said, 'is hard indeed, for, if they speak the truth, they provoke man, and if they record falsehoods, they offend God' (Paris, 'Chron.', 5.469-70). Divine displeasure did not prevent him from tampering with documents. Noble intentions floundered beneath his burning desire to communicate a personal vision of the world. He lent an anti-papal slant to a letter of Patriarch Germanos of Constantinople to Pope Gregory IX written in 1232 but included in the 'Chronica''s annal for 1237. Germanos laments the tyranny of the papacy, holding it responsible for the disharmony between the Greek and Roman churches. Interpolations provided literary release for Paris's staunch convictions. In describing a dispute over three knights' fees in Horncastle between Hugh Fitzralph and Silvester of Everdon, bishop of Carlisle (died 1254), he relished attacking the royal absolutism that he felt stamped the actions of the king's agents in the affair, misrepresenting the facts in the process. Furthermore, Paris's ahistorical acquittal of King Offa of Mercia of the murder of AEthelberht of East Anglia in 794, undertaken in the 'Vitae Offarum', stemmed from little more than loyalty to the founder of St Albans. On occasion, Paris can be charged with plain carelessness rather than wilful adulteration. His pastiche of the 'Magna Carta' originated in a thoughtless conflation of the version of 1215 with the reissues of 1217 and 1225, inherited from Roger of Wendover. He had failed to question whether the charters of John and Henry were significantly different. 
The scholarly liberties Matthew Paris claimed render his works unreliable in places. Yet he was not consistently inept. Neither was he an obsessive trickster. The accurate transmission of documents was not beyond his technical mastery. His account of Henry III's speech at the exchequer in October 1256 can be checked against the exchequer memoranda rolls and it fares well. Many of the writs and charters that he copied into the 'Liber additamentorum' from the twelfth-century cartulary of the abbey remain faithful to their originals. He alternated fraudulence with precision, prejudice with impartiality. A recent description of him as 'tolerably accurate' captures the duality of his approach. He battled to control his material, shaping and tailoring hundreds of documents and endless amounts of detail into a narrative style. Success could never be unqualified. His historical works as a whole were shifting entities, undergoing endless stages of revision and censorship. They were flighty works, diverse in content. In his sprightly if crude Latin, Paris told of a thunderbolt which struck the queen's bedroom in 1251, crushing her bed to a powder, and a disease that drove cows mad in the autumn of 1252. He wondered sometimes like a child. The sparkling disintegration of a comet in 1239 seemed to him the fiery trail of a dragon. 
Paris's fascination with the world probably fed on his uneasy conviction that human history was drawing to a close. For most of his life he laboured under the notion that time would end in 1250. Apocalyptic verses conclude the 'Chronica' in this year, although Paris had later to resume the work when the last judgment failed to occur. Within Paris's closed historical chronology the wheel, or die, of fortune played havoc with men's lives and tempered human joys with human woes. In maudlin moments he lamented the deceptive and transitory nature of earthly events. Yet melancholia was not his favourite state. His works bear the hallmark of an effervescent imagination partially constrained by scholarly purpose and historical integrity. Together they comprise a spirited and evocative portrayal of political and intellectual life in England and Europe in the first half of the thirteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29118


Weston, Edward (1565?-1635), Roman Catholic priest, was the son of William Weston of Lincoln's Inn and Ellen, daughter of the martyr John Story (d. 1571), and was born in London. He matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, on 20 March 1579, and was there placed under the private tuition of the Catholic John Case. After five years at Oxford he ended what Wood calls 'his conversations with the Muses' without taking a degree and entered the English College, Rheims, in 1584. From there he proceeded to the English College, Rome, in the spring of 1585, and in 1586 signed a petition of fifty students on behalf of the Jesuit administration against a faction of malcontents. After being ordained priest at the Lateran on 26 March 1589 he was made doctor of theology at the University of Monreale, Turin. 
Weston returned to Rheims on 7 June 1592 as lecturer on cases of conscience, but moved to Douai the following year to prepare for the return of the English College to that town. He continued to lecture there until 1602, when he was described by the spy John Fawther as 'a proper man of person and of all sort of knowledge and learning', adding, 'They make the comparison betwixt him and Campion to be equal'. That year he published 'De triplici hominis officio' 'against atheists, politiques and sectarians', with particular mention of John Reynolds of Oxford in his preface. He was then sent to labour on the English mission in the Durham district, where he spent some ten years. 
On Weston's return to Douai, on 23 September 1612, he was caught up in the controversy on the oath of allegiance, supporting Cardinal Bellarmine against the Benedictine Thomas Preston (alias Roger Widdrington). In reply to the latter Weston drew upon his correspondence with the cardinal for his 'Iuris pontificii sanctuarium' (1613). The following year he published a manual of controversies in two parts under the general title of 'The Trial of Christian Truth': the first part treated of faith, in 1614, and the second of hope, in 1615. But he failed to bring out his promised sequel on the further virtues of charity and religion. Instead, he was involved in the political troubles of his college, as he supported his colleague William Singleton in opposition to the president of Douai, Matthew Kellison, on the question of the oath of allegiance. For this he was summoned to the internuncio at Brussels on 6 August 1617 and to Rome on 28 August. Thus it was under a shadow that he departed from Douai and was appointed canon of the collegiate church of St Mary at Bruges. 
Some years later Weston again appears on the side of the Jesuits in the controversy between the two Jesuits, John Fisher (or Percy) and John Sweet, and the two protestant ministers, Daniel Featley and Francis White. In 1624 he published a book, 'The Repair of Honour', in the form of a letter to the Jesuits, noting that their dispute had brought about the conversion of two earls to the Catholic church. Weston went on to publish two further books in Latin, 'Theatrum vitae civilis ac sacrae' (in 5 vols.) in 1626 and 'Iesu domini nostri coruscationum... enarrationes' in 1631. He died at Bruges in 1635. 


@@@@@


doc= 29119


Weston, Edward (1703-1770), government official and author, was born at Eton, Buckinghamshire, on 3 January 1703, the second son of Stephen Weston (1665-1742), bishop of Exeter, and his wife, Lucy Sleech (died 1742). He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1719 and graduated BA in 1723 and MA in 1727. Early in 1730 he married Penelope (died 1754), the granddaughter of Bishop Patrick and the eldest daughter and coheir of the Revd Symon Patrick, of Dalham, Suffolk, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Fountayne, of Melton, Yorkshire. 
Upon leaving Cambridge, Weston obtained the post of tutor for the children of Charles, second Viscount Townshend, and in 1729 he was appointed Townshend's secretary when the latter became secretary of state for the north. When Townshend retired in the following year Weston became under-secretary to his successor, Lord Harrington, and he remained in that position until 1746. In November of that year Harrington went to Ireland as lord lieutenant and Weston accompanied him as chief secretary and privy councillor. He stayed in Ireland until 1751 and then, for reasons of health, went into retirement for ten years. He enjoyed a moderate income from several sinecures, including comptroller of the salt office, to which he had been appointed in 1728, and editor of the 'London Gazette', at a salary of $500 per annum. He also acquired by purchase the parish of Somerby and much of the parish of Searby in Lincolnshire. Following the death of his wife, Penelope, in 1754, Weston married two years later Anne, the daughter of John Fountayne of Melton. 
At Lord Bute's earnest request, Weston, 'a very able, worthy, good man', returned in March 1761 to his old post in the northern department. He was a diligent secretary, interested in enhancing departmental efficiency, and Bute valued his administrative expertise and relied on his authoritative grasp of European affairs. Following Bute's elevation to the Treasury, Weston served under his successor as northern secretary, George Grenville, and then, in October 1762, transferred to the southern department, headed by Lord Halifax. Despite intermittent bouts of ill health, he pursued his official functions until August 1763, when he accompanied Halifax upon the latter's move to the northern department. There he again occupied a vital position, drafting and modifying state papers and preparing commissions and warrants, including the general warrant against Wilkes and others connected with the 'North Briton' affair. Weston was also a clerk of the signet, and was allowed to perform his duties by deputy. In August 1762 he received a grant for thirty-one years of the office of alnager in Ireland, but resigned it a year later, on receiving a pension of $500 per annum for the same period. On 1 September 1763 he was appointed one of the commissioners to execute the office of privy seal. 
Unremitting ill health finally forced Weston to retire in April 1764. A yearly pension of $750 was granted to him for his valuable services. He continued to provide informal advice and guidance on diplomatic matters over the next few years, but he declined to resume office when asked by Grafton in July 1765. He remained in retirement, pursuing classical studies, writing pamphlets and sermons, and contributions to the 'London Gazette'. Among the various pamphlets attributed to him, only two can be definitely identified as his: 'The Englishman Directed in the Choice of his Religion' (4th edn, 1767) and 'Family Discourses by a Country Gentleman' (1768). He also wrote an answer to Bishop Warburton, and the long epitaph in Fulham churchyard on Bishop Sherlock was composed by him. He died at Buxton, Derbyshire, on 15 July 1770, and was buried on 17 July at Somerby, Lincolnshire, where a monument records his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 29120


Weston, Elizabeth Jane (bap. 1581?, d. 1612), Latin poet, was born in Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, on 2 November 1582 according to information on her tombstone; but an undated record of her baptism appears in the parish register between records dated 4 March and 31 October 1581, respectively, and a date within this period would accord better with her statement (in a poem on the death of her mother) that she was some six months old when her father died. She was the second of two children of John Weston (identified only as 'clark' in the record of his burial on 6 May 1582) and Jane Cooper ('bap'. 1563). Her mother subsequently married Edward Kelley, associate of Doctor John Dee, and accompanied him in 1583 to Poland and eventually to Prague, where Kelley was appointed alchemist to the emperor, Rudolph II. Elizabeth and her brother John Francis (1580-1600) apparently remained behind with their grandmothers before joining their mother and new stepfather in Prague a few years later. 
Weston was later to thank a John Hammonius, or Hammond, for teaching her Latin (this may be the John Hammond whom John Dee had employed as tutor in Trebon in 1588), but beyond this nothing is known of her formal education, though her brother was schooled locally at the Clementine College and then sent to the University of Ingolstadt in 1598. Kelley prospered at first in Rudolph's service, receiving the title of 'eques aureus'; but his fortunes turned for the worse after a duel in 1591 when he killed a member of the court. A series of prison stays ensued, with rumours of attempts at escape and even of a suicide in prison with the assistance of his family. 
Kelley's death some time about 1597 left his family destitute, with their properties in the hands of creditors. At this point Weston began to compose the many letters and lyrics (all of them in Latin; no document has survived in any of the modern languages that she was said to have mastered) which she addressed to members of the court and to other learned members of the international republic of neo-Latin letters who might be able to intercede for her with Rudolph. 
The pathos of Weston's position -- as an orphaned 'Virgo Angla' with widowed mother and sickly brother away at university -- awakened enthusiastic responses of chivalric empathy from a wide range of European humanists. That she was able to express her anguish clearly and simply in elegiac distichs that generally avoided straining after arcane allusions suited her maidenly image and led her to be acclaimed as a tenth Muse, a fourth Grace, a new Sappho or Theano. The librarian at Heidelberg, Paul Melissus, sent her a laurel wreath and thereby formally welcomed her into the circle of laureated humanist poets. A Silesian aristocrat, George Martinius von Baldhoven, undertook to edit and collect her writings, first in a two-book volume, 'Poemata' (1602), and subsequently ('c'.1607) in an expanded three-book collection of her poems and letters which he entitled 'Parthenica', or 'Maidenly writings', even though in the meantime (April 1603) she had married the jurist Johannes Leo, an agent of the duke of Brunswick and prince of Anhalt. 
Manuscript verses, addressed to the reader and signed 'Elisabetha Joanna, Uxor Joannis Leonis in Aula Imperiali Agentis, ex Familia Westoniorum, Angla' and dated 16 August 1610, appear in two copies of 'Parthenica', one in Prague and the other in the British Library. In them Weston complains that all her writings have been categorized as 'maidenly' even when written after her marriage, and she hopes that a more accurate edition, purged of the many errors that have crept into this one, may emerge with the passage of time. 
Kelley's disgrace at the time of his death presumably accounts for Weston's almost total failure to mention him by name in her writings; references to her nobility have been taken to link her with a noble line of Westons (one of whom presumably, recusant and/or spendthrift, died in Prague), when in fact they must refer to Kelley's Rudolphine title. It was not until Karel Hrdina discovered a unique copy of the pamphlet lamenting the death of her mother and reported it in 1928 that Weston's connection to Kelley became known to readers of Czech; and not until 1990 that J. W. Binns made this information more readily available to readers of English. 
Baldhoven's addition of letters to and from Weston in 'Parthenica' gives a fuller picture of Weston's position in the humanist world than is seen from the poems alone in the 1602 volume. Poems to influential men in the Rudolphine court usually appear without answering poems or letters, or are sent with a letter to a mutual friend who is asked to intercede on her behalf. Her correspondents outside the court, on the other hand, are typically seen responding to requests (often from Baldhoven himself) for poems to include in the forthcoming volume, and they usually ask for similar poems by her in return, for the same reason. Some of these correspondents are connected to Paracelsian circles and may have been associated with Kelley, such as Oswald Croll who asks for a poem to include in his forthcoming 'Basilica chymica' (1609). Weston's possible involvement in her stepfather's alchemical projects is hinted in letters to her brother; and the esotericism of Rudolph's circle may have been part of her appeal to scholars outside Prague, who could also understand her anxious dependence on a patronage that continued to elude her. 
In one of her poems Weston develops parallels between her condition and that of Ovid in his 'Tristia', rejected by his emperor and forced to live far from his native land, all because of some mysterious scandal. The conflicting explanations of Ovid's own exile -- whether because of his scandalous 'Art of Love' or because of his knowledge of some scandal at court -- are deftly echoed to hint at Weston's own fate, as a victim of her stepfather's disgrace or perhaps blamed for her own 'art' that speaks out against envious courtiers who begrudge her mother and herself their rightful property. In this way, Weston makes her own position (with its need for prudent suppression of details) expressive of the hopes and frustrations of life at the centre of an imperial court. 
Although her correspondents frequently ask Weston to send a portrait of herself, few images of her have been identified. An engraved portrait by Balzer appears in F. Pelcel's biography of her ('Abbildungen bohmischer und mahrischer Gelehrten', 1777, 3.77); a more reliable contemporary likeness may be the anonymous portrait bearing her name in the Hessisches Landesmuseum, Darmstadt (inventory number Hz.1696). 
Weston died of consumption in Prague on 23 November 1612, having borne seven children, three daughters who survived her and four sons who did not. Her tomb in the church of St Thomas in Prague bears a eulogistic epitaph along with the date of her death and a precise (if mistaken) statement of her age as being thirty years and three weeks. 


@@@@@


doc= 29121


Weston, Sir Francis (1511-1536), courtier, was the only son of Sir Richard Weston (c.1465-1541) and his wife, Anne Sandys. He followed his father to court, where by 1526 he was a page. A contemporary French account attributes his rise to favour to his skill at games and his good graces and manners. Weston frequently appears in the privy purse accounts as receiving small sums of money from the king. In 1530 he won a total of sixteen angels by winning four times against Henry at tennis, and at other times the king also lost to him at dice, bowls, 'imperiall', and 'pope Julius's game'. His closeness to the king was acknowledged in 1532 when he was made a gentleman of the privy chamber, while in 1533 he was appointed governor of Guernsey jointly with his father. In May 1533, during the festivities of Anne Boleyn's coronation, he was made a knight of the Bath. 
Among the games at which Weston excelled were those associated with courtly love. In May 1530 he had married Anne, daughter and heir of Sir Christopher Pickering of Killington, Cumberland. It may be significant, however, that in the 1550s George Cavendish remembered him as one 'That wantonly lyved without feare and dreade... Followyng his fantzy and his wanton lust' ('Life of Wolsey', 30). On 18 May 1535 Queen Anne took him to task for neglecting his wife, and for flirting with Margaret Shelton, possibly an old flame of the king's who was then being pursued by Henry Norris, the groom of the stool. Weston replied that Norris came to the queen's chamber more for Anne than for his intended bride, and capped this by saying that he himself loved someone in her household better than either his wife or Margaret. When the queen asked him who that was, he replied 'it ys your self, and then she defyed hym' -- quelled his impudence (ibid., 452). The role of the courtier who proposes to the great lady who rejects him with scorn was part of the courtly love convention, but in the sexually charged and suspicious atmosphere of Henry VIII's court it was a dangerous one for Weston to play. 
How dangerous became clear the following year. On 1 May 1536 Queen Anne was arrested on a charge of adultery, and soon afterwards, in the hearing of Sir William Kingston, the constable of the Tower, she told of Weston's heavy-handed flirtation of the previous year. Consequently Weston was himself arrested, probably on the 5th, and taken to the Tower. He had links with opponents of Thomas Cromwell, who was probably glad of an excuse to strike at him. On 12 May he and three others were brought to trial in Westminster Hall, where it was claimed that Anne had given money to Weston and the others accused, as she had done to many of the commonly penurious young courtiers, gifts which were now interpreted as tokens of a treasonable contract. Weston pleaded not guilty both to treason and to charges of adultery with Anne at Whitehall and Greenwich in May and June 1534. But despite efforts to save him by his family and by the French ambassador, Jean de Dinteville, he was condemned to death. The sentence of hanging, drawing, and quartering at Tyburn was commuted by royal mercy to beheading on Tower Hill. 
Weston was executed on 17 May 1536. That he then failed to protest his innocence was conventional, for royal mercy could be withdrawn and friends and family might suffer. Instead he declared that his fate was a warning to others not to presume on life's continuance, 'for I had thought to have lived in abomination yet this twenty or thirty years and to have made amends' (Ives, 392). He had written a farewell letter to his parents, one which sums up the tragically curtailed life of a rather shallow young man caught out of his depth. He left debts totalling $925 7's'. 2died, which he asked his parents to pay -- his creditors included his draper, embroiderer, tailor, goldsmith, shoemaker, barber, and saddler. He was buried outside the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower. The poet Sir Thomas Wyatt, himself under arrest in the Tower, but released after Anne's execution thanks to Cromwell's protection, wrote a lament in prison over the dead, Weston among them: '
Ah! Weston, Weston, that pleasant was and young, 

In active things who might with thee compare? 

All words accept that thou diddest speak with tongue, 

So well esteemed with each where thou diddest fare. 

And we that now in court doth lead our life 

Most part in mind doth thee lament and moan: 

But that thy faults we daily hear so rife, 

All we should weep that thou are dead and gone. 
(Wyatt, 192)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29122


Weston, Hugh (c.1510-1558), dean of Windsor, was born at Burton Overy, Leicestershire. He was educated at Balliol College, Oxford, and St Mary Hall, where he was elected exhibitioner on 21 April 1529, vacating by October 1531. He was fellow of Lincoln College from 1532, sub-rector (1538-9), and rector from 8 January 1539, vacating by August 1556. He was admitted BA on 18 July 1530, incepted MA on 17 February 1533, supplicated BM on 30 May 1537, was admitted BTh on 2 May 1539, incepted DTh in July 1540, and incorporated the last degree at Cambridge in 1554-5. He had an exhibition of the crown in 1537, and was senior proctor in 1537-8. From 1542 to about 1551 he was Lady Margaret professor of divinity. Lincoln College presented him to the free chapel of Petsoe, Buckinghamshire, to which he was instituted on 3 February 1541 and which he held until death. He became rector of St Nicholas Olave, London, on 15 September 1541, vacating by December 1548. On 17 October 1545 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Cornwall, retained to August 1554. On 21 March 1546 he was instituted rector of his native parish, and on 1 April 1547 he was dispensed for a further benefice. 
In September 1549 Weston was arrested in Leicestershire and committed to the Fleet because of his conservative religious views. He was released into Cranmer's custody in the following autumn, in hope of his being converted, but he remained unreformed, and led opposition in London to the archbishop's forty-two articles in May 1552. It is supposed he lost his Oxford chair at the time of his arrest, but payment of his stipend continued for about two years. Mary made him her chaplain and, on 14 September 1553, dean of Westminster. He was installed on 18 September and assisted at the coronation on 1 October. On 16 October he was elected prolocutor of the lower house of the convocation of Canterbury; his 'Oratio coram clero' was printed. In a sermon at Paul's Cross on 22 October he publicized the eucharistic debate which dominated the session of convocation. On 22 January 1554 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Colchester. On 7 February (Ash Wednesday), when Wyatt's rebels entered London, Weston celebrated mass before the queen at Whitehall, when (by his own admission) he wore armour beneath his vestments. He subsequently attended Wyatt and the duke of Suffolk at their executions. On 3 March he arranged his own presentation by the dean and chapter of Westminster to their principal living, the Oxfordshire rectory of Islip, to which he was admitted on 20 April, and retained to death. On 2 April he was presented by the crown to the rectory of Cliffe-at-Hoo, Kent, where he was instituted on 25 October 1555, and where he remained incumbent until his death. 
In April 1554 Weston was reappointed prolocutor of the Canterbury clergy, in order to preside at the disputation in Oxford which would convict Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer of heresy. He opened proceedings with a speech in the church of St Mary the Virgin on 14 April, and chaired the sessions in the divinity school. At times he lost control of the debate, and of his own temper. His conduct earned him much vilification, which subsequent allegations of drunkenness and debauchery appeared to validate. Ridley complained of his not allowing him written submissions as had been promised. Weston pronounced the three bishops excommunicate on 20 April, and returned to London to certify the sentence. Foxe's story that he opened and refused to deliver a letter Cranmer sent with him to the council has been doubted, but it is likely enough that he advocated execution of the adjudged heretics without further process. As a devoted servant of the regime he led public intercessions at the time of the queen's supposed pregnancy; he also composed a prayer to be said by the boys of Westminster School for the occasion ('STC, 1475-1640', 25291.5). During 1555 he was among the examiners of John Bradford and John Philpot. In the following year he interrogated suspects in the Dudley conspiracy. 
In order to make way for the revived monastery at Westminster, Dean Weston and his secular chapter resigned (with some reluctance) on 26 September 1556. But on 8 November the queen appointed him dean of Windsor, and on 5 January 1557 he received the associated office of register of the Order of the Garter. In August 1557 he was deprived of his deanery on a charge of indecency, which he denied. Weston also lost his archdeaconry of Colchester but (apparently at Bonner's instance) retained his parochial livings. He attempted to travel to Rome to appeal against his deprivation, but was arrested and sent to the Tower. On 3 December 1558 Elizabeth released him on medical grounds to the house of William Wynter in Fleet Street, where he died on 8 December and was buried the same day in the Savoy. He made bequests to Oxford University, and to Balliol and Lincoln colleges. The many other beneficiaries included one of the monks of the revived Westminster Abbey, and an old woman of Eton who had brought Weston flowers. 


@@@@@


doc= 29123


Weston, Jerome, second earl of Portland (1605-1663), politician, was born on 16 December 1605, the eldest son of Richard Weston, first earl of Portland (bap. 1577, d. 1635), and his second wife, Frances (died 1645), daughter of Nicholas Waldegrave of Borley, Essex. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, at Easter, 1623, graduating MA in 1626. Although he entered the Middle Temple on 11 May 1626, he was never called to the bar. He married, at Roehampton Chapel on 25 June 1632, Frances (1617-1694), third daughter of Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox. 
In 1628 Weston entered parliament as member for Gatton, Surrey, being returned with Sir Thomas Lake at the behest of one Copley, a Lincolnshire Catholic who claimed an electoral monopoly in the borough. The election was disputed, however, and on 26 March the indenture of the return was torn off the file by order of the House of Commons; Samuel Owfield and Sir Charles Howard sat instead by the election of all the inhabitants. Weston, however, continued to sit in that parliament, though for what constituency does not appear in the returns, and on 2 March 1629 he defended his father, the lord treasurer, against Sir John Eliot, who had demanded Sir Richard's impeachment. This well-attested intervention makes unlikely the claim that Weston had a hand in the diplomacy which led to the Anglo-French treaty of Susa, signed on 14 April 1629. But in pursuance of his father's foreign policy objectives he certainly was sent as ambassador-extraordinary to Paris and Turin in July 1632 to urge Louis XIII to declare in favour of the restitution of the palatinate. In November Charles I instructed him to protest against the proposed division of the Spanish Netherlands between France and the Dutch. He returned in March 1633 with Richelieu's proposals for a defensive alliance against the house of Austria; he also brought with him unlicensed letters he had intercepted written by Henry Rich, earl of Holland, and the queen of England, both enemies of his father. The opening of these letters provoked Holland to challenge Weston to a duel, but Charles I approved of Jerome's conduct, placed Holland under house arrest, and suspended him from the privy council. 
Styled Lord Weston after his father's creation on 17 February 1633 as earl of Portland, Jerome succeeded as second earl on 13 March 1635 whereupon his career in government and politics stepped up a gear. He appears to have succeeded his father as captain-general of the Isle of Wight, and on 28 May 1635 he was made vice-admiral of Hampshire. On 3 June 1641 he was appointed joint lord lieutenant of Hampshire, but his royalist and religious sentiments rendered him suspect to parliament, and on 2 November the House of Commons resolved to deprive him of the government of the Isle of Wight. Upon conference with the House of Lords on the 18th this 'resolution was put off', the lords professing themselves much satisfied with Portland's 'solemn protestation of his resolution to live and die a protestant, as his father did' -- a somewhat dubious promise, considering that it had been widely rumoured that his father had died a Roman Catholic ('CSP dom.', '1641-3', 154, 167). On 8 August 1642, the Lords, acting on the recommendation of the committee of safety, committed Portland to the custody of one of the sheriffs of London on suspicion of complicity in the plot to deliver Portsmouth into the king's hands, and he was sent to the Tower on 12 August. After a protracted campaign for his release he was granted a conditional discharge on 11 January 1643. According to Clarendon, after his release Portland remained in London 'as a place where he might do the king more service than anywhere else' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.142). Prominent among the royalist 'peace lords', he was soon accused of having had some share in the plot of his friend Edmund Waller. Waller himself alleged Portland's complicity, and, although the earl denied the charge, he underwent another seven weeks' imprisonment. On 31 July 1643 he was released on bail, for which the earl of Denbigh and Lord Hunsdon stood security. A fortnight later he made use of his liberty to take refuge with the king at Oxford, where he sat in the royalist parliament. Entangled in the factional rivalries which divided the king's court at Oxford, Portland tried unconvincingly to dissemble best wishes towards George Lord Digby and his circle. 
On 1 March 1644 the king appointed Portland lord president of Munster, an office coveted by Murrough O'Brien, earl of Inchiquin. Probably as a result of this disappointment the powerful Inchiquin turned parliamentarian, and, as a nominee of the parliament, made himself master of the province. Replaced by Philip Sidney, Viscount Lisle, in 1646, Inchiquin again changed sides, whereupon he received Charles's commission as lord president, so that Portland had no opportunity of taking up his appointment even had he been so inclined. He had surrendered his patent by 8 February 1662 in return for an annual pension of $1000, and the leases in reversion on several properties in Surrey. 
Portland was apparently at Oxford until its surrender on 24 June 1646, and then at Wallingford, which held out until 27 July. On 6 October following he compounded for his delinquency on the 'Wallingford articles', and on 10 November he was fined two-thirds of his estate, $9953 10's'.; on 14 September 1647 his discharge was ordered after a division of the house, and on 11 June 1650 his fine was reduced to $5297 11's'. 8died, possibly at the intercession of his brother, Benjamin, MP for Dover, who had declined to act in the trial of Charles I, yet conformed with the kingless regime after 1649. 
Portland lived quietly at Ashley House, Walton-on-Thames, during the Commonwealth and protectorate, and in 1660 took his seat in the Convention Parliament, greatly assisting the accomplishment of unconditional restoration. The resumption of Stuart rule saw Portland attain not inconsiderable influence as a key supporter of the Clarendonian regime in the House of Lords. Although his father had been the object of Clarendon's intense hatred, the second earl was a close personal friend and ally of the lord chancellor, and he shared intimately in the responsibility for delivering the government's legislative programme in the Cavalier Parliament. In spite of his background he had an important hand in strengthening the 'Act of Uniformity' as a bulwark against informal toleration of Catholicism. He also helped turn a reasonably interventionist corporation bill into a measure for the emasculation of municipal self-government. Conversely, he worked to scupper the kind of cavalier measures, such as the earl of Derby's bills for restitution of estate sold in the 1650s, which threatened to undermine the whole basis of the Restoration land settlement. 
Never anywhere near as close to the throne as his father had been, none the less Portland was rewarded for his services. He was restored to the posts he held before the war, and received grants of other lands. On 7 November 1660 he was made a councillor for trade and navigation, and on 1 December for the colonies; on 3 April 1662 he was sworn of the privy council. Had he lived longer, he might have attained higher office, at least while Clarendon's star was in the ascendant. He died at Ashley House on 17 March 1663, and was buried on the 22nd in the church at Walton-on-Thames, where there is an inscription to his memory. His wife survived him by thirty-one years; she died in 1694 and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 17 March of that year. The couple had at least two daughters, one of whom was baptized Henrietta Maria, and a son, Charles (1639-1665). He succeeded as third earl of Portland, but was killed during the naval battle with the Dutch off the Texel on 3 June 1665. He died unmarried, and the earldom and barony devolved upon his uncle Thomas Weston. He died in 1688 with no surviving heirs, with which the barony of Weston and earldom of Portland became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 29124


Weston, Sir Richard (c.1465-1541), courtier, was the eldest son of Sir Edmund Weston (died before 1509) of Boston, Lincolnshire, and Katherine, daughter of Robert Cammel of Fiddleford, Dorset. By 1502 he had married Anne, daughter of Oliver Sandys of Shere, Surrey; they had a son, Francis Weston, and two daughters. Sir William Weston, who was the last prior of the knights of St John of Jerusalem and died on the same day as the dissolution of his order in 1540, was his brother. 
Edmund Weston had been a supporter of the Lancastrians and gained favour at the court of Henry VII, to whom he was an esquire of the body. Richard entered the service of Henry's queen, Elizabeth of York, and his wife, Anne, may have been one of Elizabeth's ladies-in-waiting. She later served Katherine of Aragon. Richard began to accumulate profitable positions during the last years of Henry VII's reign: he was a groom of the chamber by 1505, acquired a number of keeperships and stewardships, and became forester of Windsor Forest and lieutenant of Windsor Castle. Further offices followed under Henry VIII. He was named an esquire of the body and also (like his father) governor of Guernsey and neighbouring islands in 1509, a position he held until his death. In 1510 he was granted the manor of Ufton Pole, Berkshire, which had been forfeited by the attainder of Viscount Lovell. He was a JP for Berkshire (from 1510), Kent (1518), and Surrey (from 1524). In 1511 he was a member of the small English contingent sent to aid King Ferdinand of Aragon in a campaign against the Moors. Knighted in 1514, Weston was made a knight of the body in 1516 and a knight of the Bath in 1518. In 1514 he was among those present at the marriage of Henry VIII's sister Mary to the French king Louis XII. He was named keeper of the swans on the Thames (1517), one of the king's cup-bearers (1521), a commissioner for the subsidy (1523), and a commissioner for the tenths of spiritualities (1535). 
In 1518 Weston was appointed to join the ageing Sir Thomas Lovell as master of the wards. Under Henry VII the crown's rights of wardship had been exploited with ever increasing thoroughness, a process which continued under Henry VIII. It was in keeping with this development that when Sir Edward Belknap succeeded Lovell in 1520 he and Weston were no longer 'masters' in their patent but 'surveyors, governors, keepers, and sellers of wards and their possessions', with a salary of $100 each ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 3, pt 1, no. 1121 [10]). They were also licensed to call on members of the council for assistance with legal problems. Belknap died a year later, and Weston remained in control of the office. It does not seem to have brought him much profit, since in 1525 he tried to exchange it for the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster. 
Weston made his bid for the exchange of offices through Cardinal Wolsey. There is some evidence that he was a follower of Wolsey. In particular, when in spring 1519 the cardinal attempted to control the king's privy chamber by ejecting Henry's young 'minions' and replacing them with courtiers of a more mature and sober stamp, Weston was one of the latter. The minions soon recovered their former places, but Weston was present at many of the great events of Henry's reign: the Field of Cloth of Gold (1520), the meetings between the king and Emperor Charles V (1520, 1522), the christening of Prince Edward (1537), and the reception of Anne of Cleves (1540). He did not obtain the chancellorship of the duchy, suggesting that his influence with Wolsey was limited, but late in 1525 was made treasurer of Calais, a position he held until 1528. His term there was dogged by financial difficulties and by quarrels with Baron Sandys, the captain of Guines, but he did at least reinforce the sea defences with a new wharf. On resigning from Calais he was made under-treasurer of the exchequer, and held that office until his death. 
In 1521 Weston had been a member of the jury which convicted Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham, of treason. Following the duke's execution Weston was granted his manor of Sutton in Surrey. Here he proceeded to build a great country house that ranks with the king's palace of Nonsuch, Baron Sandys's house The Vyne, and Sir William Fitzwilliam's Cowdray as one of the chief monuments of the early Renaissance in England. He himself was probably responsible for much of the architecture; a few years earlier he had visited the French royal chateau of Blois, then still under construction, and was evidently eager to copy some of its details in his own residence. Built in the shape of a square surrounding a central courtyard, the house has since been altered by the demolition of the entrance front. 
Weston sat in the Reformation Parliament which began in 1529. Possibly through the influence of Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, he was returned as a knight of the shire for Berkshire. In 1536 Weston's son, Francis, was implicated in the fall of Anne Boleyn. Convicted of adultery with the queen, he was executed on 17 May, the king having refused to grant him a reprieve. Sir Richard remained one of Henry's confidants and councillors, however, and, when the Lincolnshire rising broke out later in the year, he was summoned to attend the king with 150 men. In 1539 William Fitzwilliam, earl of Southampton, visited Weston to see if he would serve again in the coming parliament, but found him sick in bed, protesting that he was more likely to die than perform any further service. He recovered sufficiently to greet Anne of Cleves in January 1540, but died on 7 August 1541, probably at Sutton. His brief will, drawn up on 16 May, included a traditional preamble leaving his soul to the Virgin Mary and made lavish provision for masses for his soul. He left his lands and possessions, which according to an earlier assessment were worth more than $400 a year, to his wife. After her death, because of his son's execution, they were to pass to his seven-year-old grandson, Henry Weston; should Henry die they were to pass to the children of his daughters Margaret, who had married Sir Walter Denys, and Katherine, who had wed Sir John Rogers. The executors, in addition to Lady Weston, were the earl of Southampton and Sir John Russell, the lord high admiral. Weston requested burial in Holy Trinity Church, Guildford, in a chapel he had built for the purpose. If an imposing tomb marked the site of his interment it no longer exists. 


@@@@@


doc= 29125


Weston, Richard (d. 1572), judge, was probably a grandson of William Weston (died 1513/14) of Essex and London, mercer, and lived in Essex until his death. The arms on his monument were the same as William's but differenced by a martlet charged with a molet, indicating that he was the third son of a fourth son. To judge from his standing in the Middle Temple, he was probably admitted in the mid-1530s, in which case he would have been born in the 1510s. That makes it difficult to identify him with the youngest son of Richard Weston of Colchester, Essex, who (together with two elder brothers) was under age at his father's death in 1541-2. Some pedigrees make him the second son of John Weston of Lichfield, Staffordshire, who was the fourth son of John Weston of Rugeley, and whose descendants included two judges in the reign of Charles I. Nothing is known of the lawyer before 1548, when he was counsel to Admiral Seymour. In 1553 he was returned to parliament by Lostwithiel, and he served for three other constituencies in the 1550s. About 1554, the year in which he became a justice of the peace for Essex, he succeeded Anthony Browne (another Essex Middle Templar) as clerk of assize on the home circuit. That was also the year in which he delivered his only reading in the Middle Temple, on a statute of 1539 concerning joint tenants and tenants in common. Now well established in his profession, he purchased in January 1555 the manor of Skreens in Roxwell, near Writtle, Essex, which he made his principal seat. He acquired various other lands in Essex, from Tilbury in the south to Dunmow in the north. 
On 20 November 1557 Weston was appointed solicitor-general, an office that ended on the demise of the queen one year later. However, on 26 January 1559 he was created serjeant-at-law at a single call, the first of its kind for a serjeant who was not being appointed a chief justice. It seems that he was already marked to fill the vacancy in the common pleas created by Catlin's promotion on 22 January, but he was made to serve at the bar for most of the year as one of the queen's serjeants before he received his judicial patent in October 1559. He remained a puisne justice of the common pleas until his death on 6 July 1572, when he was buried at Writtle, Essex, near the body of his second wife. There is a tomb chest in the church with three brass shields of arms, but no inscription or effigy, in accordance with his testamentary wish that it should be 'made withoute curiositie'. The impalements on the shields record his three marriages. His first wife was Wyburgh (died 1553), daughter of Anthony Catesby of Whiston, Northamptonshire, and widow of Richard Jenour (died 1548) of Great Dunmow, Essex, clerk of the court of surveyors. Their only son, Jerome, was the father of Richard Weston, first earl of Portland. They also had a daughter. The judge's second wife was Margaret, daughter of Eustace Burneby and widow of Thomas Addington. They had one son, Nicholas, still under age in 1572, and two daughters. His third wife, whom he married in 1566, was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Lovett of Astwell, Northamptonshire, widow of Anthony Cave and of John Newdegate. Elizabeth died in 1577. 


@@@@@


doc= 29126


Weston, Richard, first earl of Portland (bap. 1577, d. 1635), politician, was baptized at Chicheley, Buckinghamshire, on 1 March 1577, the elder son of Jerome (later Sir Jerome) Weston (died 1603) of Skreens in Roxwell, Essex, and his first wife, Mary (died 'c'.1593), daughter and coheir of Anthony Cave of Chicheley; Sir Richard Weston (d. 1572) was his grandfather. His father was a conscientious mid-Essex JP from 1586 and a devoted captain of a trained band company of 600 foot, 'one of the fairest in the shire' in the view of his deputy lieutenants, and one so big that he was excused the shrievalty while he remained in command (TNA: PRO, SP 12/254/58). There seems to be no record of Richard's education before he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA early in 1594, and he entered the Middle Temple on 18 June following. He spent 'some years' studying law, according to the earl of Clarendon, before travelling abroad, probably quite briefly late in the 1590s and possibly for the only time prior to service as an ambassador in 1620 (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.59). About 1597 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Pinchon of Writtle, Essex, and Rose, daughter of Thomas Reding of Pinner, Middlesex. She died in 1603, and was buried on 15 February at Roxwell, leaving one surviving son and two daughters. About two years later Weston married Frances, daughter of Nicholas Waldegrave of Borley and Catherine, daughter of Weston Browne of Rookwood Hall, Abbess Roding, Essex. 
In 1601 Weston sat for Maldon in Essex in the first of seven consecutive parliaments as a commoner, always for different seats. He was knighted on 23 July 1603, a few months after his father. On Sir Jerome's death late in December 1603 Richard inherited Roxwell and other Essex estates, as well as property at Nayland in Suffolk. He was among the signatories to the indenture for the Essex shire election of 1604, which had much exercised its peers and gentry, but owed his own return to parliament to an early by-election for the Catholic Montagu family's seat at Midhurst in Sussex. By March 1607 he had become an Essex JP, remaining so for the rest of his life. In June 1612 the earl of Sussex nominated him as one of his deputy lieutenants for Essex and kept him in commission until July 1620. He returned in June 1623 but was left out, with the duke of Buckingham's approval, in September 1626, before coming back in January 1628. From 5 February 1629 until his death he served as joint lord lieutenant of Essex, intended as a courtly restraint on his puritanical partner, Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick. While his other interests allowed he contributed what he could to local administration, blending occasional out of sessions work with frequent attendances at quarter sessions and assizes until 1619-20. He became a privy councillor in September 1621, and thereafter matters of state began to claim his whole attention. In the difficult days ahead he was to prove deaf to the urgings of his fellow deputy lieutenants and JPs to 'bee pleased upon all just occations to bee the patron and father of our countie' (4 April 1627; Quintrell, no. 444). Between 1626 and 1629 the Essex deputies, with some difficulty, gained concessions from the council on at least seven occasions, based either on their heavy expenditure during an invasion threat in 1625 or on Elizabethan precedent; but there is no indication that Weston ever provided the help that other councillors sometimes did for counties with which they had an association. 
Weston sat for the only time as a knight of the shire for Essex in the parliament of 1614 and, possibly under the influence of Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, pressed for action against the suspected practice of undertaking. Unlike his father he was not content with county life, but was moving into circles in the City and Whitehall where men of business mingled with hopeful courtiers. In 1615 he was busy assisting Sir Arthur Ingram in raising a loan for the lord treasurer, the earl of Suffolk, while in July of the following year he and his unstable eldest son, Richard, were jointly appointed collectors of petty customs in the port of London, with a life grant in February 1618. He paid $1000 for the collectorship of the pretermitted customs in London about 1620 and held it until 1624. Lionel Cranfield's influence secured him a place in the commission for reducing the royal household's expenditure in November 1617, as it did in a more effective commission for the reform of the navy in June 1618. This had similar membership and, under the new lord admiral, the marquess of Buckingham, went on to implement its own recommendations and build ten new warships in the next five years. Weston was one of the commissioners for the East India Company chosen to negotiate with their Dutch counterparts about trading practices in July 1619, and was among those often named in newsletters as hopeful of substantial offices falling vacant in and around the court. As early as 8 January 1620 Chamberlain noted a rumour that he was about to join Fulke Greville, the chancellor of the exchequer, as his assistant and under-treasurer, and in the autumn, after filling the office informally for a month, Weston finally replaced Greville as chancellor of the exchequer on 7 November 1621. Seven years later Archie Armstrong recalled that the earl of Carlisle even then would have preferred him as lord treasurer, but Weston himself was content to serve under his friend Lionel Cranfield, whose elevation to the Lords as Baron Cranfield had recently enabled Weston to be returned to parliament at a by-election for the Howard seat at Arundel. 
During a fruitless embassy to Brussels and Prague with Sir Edward Conway in 1620, after James's son-in-law Frederick, the elector palatine, had paid a humiliating penalty for accepting an invitation from rebel noblemen to take the throne of Bohemia, and another embassy to Brussels in 1622 to press for the recovery of the Palatinate from Habsburg forces, Weston provided a shrewd commentary for Cranfield as well as for Buckingham. Unlike John Digby, earl of Bristol, at Madrid, Weston in 1622 was quick to appreciate the limits of Spanish influence and the emptiness of imperial assurances, and was by 1624 treading a characteristically cautious line between the king's continuing preference for peace and the offended sensibilities of a prince denied a Spanish match, who, as men of ambition could not afford to forget, represented a reversionary interest to which James feared Buckingham increasingly subscribed. Whereas in the 1624 parliament Cranfield's aversion to war enabled Buckingham to bring him down, Weston pursued a more subtle line, appreciating that calling off the treaties with Spain would necessitate precautionary funding on a substantial scale. 
Weston's position remained a moderate one, by a narrow margin sufficiently acceptable to the king to ensure that at least temporarily he succeeded Cranfield in the treasury. Writing to Buckingham on 24 May, with the sealed patent to hand, Lord Keeper John Williams reported that Prince Charles had hoped his father would not have gone ahead with the appointment, and remained opposed, even though he 'durst not speak to crosse it'; yet Williams also assured Buckingham that he himself did not doubt Weston's loyalty to the duke's interests, and concluded that he knew 'no fitter man in England for the office if he come in as a creature of the Prince and your Grace's; nor unfitter, if he should offer to take it without your likings' ('Cabala', 94). But although the acting treasurer's busy 'tricking and trimming' of Winchester House, newly leased in August 1624 on his removal from Holborn, prompted speculation about a more secure future, and Conway reported that under his influence the king 'beginnes to instruct his large heart to keep intelligence with his Exchequer', a limit was soon put on his immediate aspirations ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.577; TNA: PRO, SP 14/175/48). Weston expected to be at Cambridge for Ambassador Ville-aux-Clerc's first audience, due to take place on 12 December 1624 prior to negotiations over the French marriage treaty, but at a late stage James decided he need not come. On 11 December James Ley, the elderly but still ambitious judge married to one of Buckingham's young nieces, was sworn in there by the king as the new treasurer and promptly ennobled, as Prince Charles's reservations about Weston as Cranfield's man belatedly took effect. Weston nevertheless remained chancellor of the exchequer and sat in the parliaments of 1624, 1625, and 1626 for Cornish seats where duchy influence was overlaid with Buckingham's interest: at Bossiney in 1624, Callington in 1625, and Bodmin in 1626. 
As acting treasurer Weston had proved insistent on maintaining the full authority of his office, punctilious in observing proper administrative process, and unhesitating in suspending pensions and other claims on the exchequer by courtiers lacking what he considered to be adequate warrant. With the inexperienced Ley as treasurer he found it harder to keep his grip on finances, and struggled to accumulate the funds needed for wars with Spain and then also with France. Neither the 1625 nor 1626 parliament provided war supply. At the Oxford meeting in 1625 Weston was among those ministers relatively conversant with foreign affairs whose contribution was overshadowed by the prominence the king allowed Sir John Coke, a leading naval commissioner yet to be made a privy councillor, who performed resolutely in the king's presence at short notice but whose lack of seniority attracted much adverse comment. Nevertheless, in both parliaments Weston stressed the king's financial exigencies without conceding the impracticality of what he was attempting, and from firsthand experience was able to defend the duke's contribution to naval reform. He also exercised a moderating influence where he could, most notably in the case of Sir Thomas Wentworth. Drawing on his association with Cranfield and Ingram he managed to persuade Wentworth that there were sound practical reasons for tempering his criticisms of Charles's war policy, honest and well considered though they might be. In the process Wentworth lost all confidence in Buckingham's assurances of amity, followed as they invariably were by blows to his influence and esteem. Most, however, seem to have been the work of the king; and despite the duke's preference for the Saviles, Wentworth's rivals in Yorkshire, Weston persevered. Just before Buckingham's death in August 1628 he brought Wentworth into the ambit of court favour, and in the 1629 session of parliament Wentworth joined Weston, ennobled on 13 April 1628 as Baron Weston of Nayland, in the upper house. Soon afterwards he also managed formally to reconcile Arundel with the king, at odds since 1626. 
Weston's own relationship with Buckingham was still compromised by his association with the fallen Cranfield, whose intermediary he continued to be, leaving him uncertain of the duke's approval. He assured Buckingham that summer that his expeditions had priority over all else, but he had not entirely escaped the sharp criticism which Ley's inadequacies drew from the king, and remained a man who ventured little. Buckingham's own political future, in urgent need as it was of an emphatic military success, had come to depend unduly on a cautious man bent on retrenchment, more concerned with shoring up the royal economy by reducing its expenditure and securing peace than he was with generating new revenues. For all his familiarity with the fevered language of the court the duke must have wondered at Sir Humphrey May's description of Weston in October 1627 as 'not a sparke but a flame of fire in any thinge that concernes you' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/80/60). He may have recalled that earlier that year Weston, never neglecting his own interests, had acquired the manor of Mortlake from the crown for a modest outlay, and had thus begun on the lavish development of his Roehampton estate, with intermittent help from Tobie Matthew, a courtier who had turned to Rome in 1606 and who by the mid-1620s was very probably a Jesuit priest. 
Ley resigned as treasurer following the appointment on 26 June 1628 of a nine-man committee of councillors to report to the king on his financial obligations. Weston succeeded him on 15 July 1628, and may well have drawn on the committee's deliberations in setting out on 13 August his assessment of the state of the king's finances and proposals for remedial action. He astutely sent the details first to Buckingham so that he could deliver them to Charles and make sure that the king appreciated them. The paper was then to be destroyed, and nothing more done until the duke had set out on his impending expedition. Buckingham thus found himself closely associated with the economical measures the king wanted. Clarendon's speculation, long afterwards, that Buckingham would have had Weston 'cashiered' on his return may reflect what the duke would have liked; but it is more probable that, had Buckingham not been assassinated that August, he would have learned to adapt to what the new lord treasurer hoped would become 'a quiett and settled court' where 'rest and vigilancy' would, in their different ways, remedy current financial failings (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.61; TNA: PRO, SP 16/112/75; TNA: PRO, SP 16/113/14). In the 1629 session of parliament Sir John Eliot, bitter that Wentworth was now enjoying court favour while he was not, adopted a different perspective in calling for the treasurer's impeachment: in Weston's person, he feared, 'is contracted all the evill that we doe suffer: If we looke either into religion or policye, I finde him building on the grounds layd by the Duke of Buckingham, his great Master' (Notestein and Relf, 259; 2 March 1629). Like William Laud, Weston had no wish for the early recall of parliament in the 1630s. He felt much more comfortable with retrenchment by prerogative means, an approach which had been favoured by Northampton and Cranfield. 
Although the absence of parliament was not to keep him from political hostility within the court, in less than seven years in office Weston paid off the bulk of the war debt ($2 million in 1629), and added $50,000 a year to the king's ordinary income, by then in excess of $600,000 a year. As treasurer he served on all five of the council's standing committees and, despite occasional bouts of taciturnity, combined effectively with Sir Francis Cottington, who, as he had hoped, had replaced Edward Barrett as chancellor of the exchequer in March 1629. He worked closely with the customs farmers, restoring three-year grants of farms in December 1632, and improving customs revenues so that they represented almost one half of that total, and, with Cottington, he encouraged alderman Abraham Dawes, an experienced customer and (according to John Harrison) Weston's 'great creature', to draw up a well-contrived book of rates which, launched in 1636, swelled crown revenues in the later 1630s, although too much remained appropriated (BL, Stowe MS 326, fol. 60'r'). Unlike his father Charles resorted to the expedient of distraint of knighthood, a levy on those of sufficient substance throughout the country who had failed to take up a knighthood they had not actually been offered at the time of his coronation, and he succeeded in legitimately tapping the wealth of the elusive mercantile and professional classes of London so effectively that overall $174,000 was raised during the early 1630s with little resistance. Weston was less successful in his leadership of one of the two English fishing associations, intended to compete with the Dutch in the North Sea, and, despite his lengthy concern with naval reform and his current role as the most senior of the admiralty commissioners, he played a relatively minor part in introducing a new version of ship money in 1634-5. Despite Weston's participation in recent negotiations with their agent Necolalde, the Spanish had failed to deliver financial support promised for Charles's growing fleet, which was intended to demonstrate his sovereignty of the British seas, partly for their benefit. Weston may not have welcomed an alternative means of funding which held out a distant prospect of direct parliamentary support for the navy, and was certainly agitated at the speed with which Charles insisted on having John Coke present an outline of his 'great business' to the council early in June 1634 (Scrope and Monkhouse, 1.94). To his relief, and perhaps after his intervention, Coke in the event provided little more than a catalogue of obstructions to British trade in continental Europe and beyond, which matching assertiveness in home waters might remedy; no foreign policy or financial implications were raised. The managers of the new levy's introduction were leading courtiers with firmly Calvinist convictions, principally Lord Keeper Thomas Coventry, Lord Privy Seal Henry Montagu, earl of Manchester, and Secretary John Coke, assisted by the attorney-general of the day, William Noy. However, Noy died on 9 August 1634 and his successor, Sir John Bankes, was closer to Weston. The treasurer's hand may also be seen in the number of Catholic-leaning officers in the fleet of 1635, prompting the application of the oaths of supremacy and allegiance to those in command in 1636. 
Weston's influence within the court was widely apparent by 1634. Although never a favourite he was firmly established in the king's regard from the early days of personal rule, and enjoyed the goodwill of the earls of Dorset, Carlisle, and especially Arundel. In April 1630 he had been the king's nomination for the chancellorship of Oxford, left vacant by the death of William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, only for it to transpire that Laud had somehow already been elected. Weston did however succeed Pembroke as steward of Bristol, after accepting a similar office at Exeter in 1629. He was appointed to the Order of the Garter in April 1630, filling the vacancy left by Buckingham, and during the year commissioned from Hubert Le Sueur an equestrian statue of the king for the garden of his house at Roehampton. He leased Wallingford House, London, after the duke's death, and began to hold meetings of the admiralty commissioners there, prompting a rumour in June 1631 that he was about to become lord admiral. 
During 1632 Weston sought to strengthen his association with the inner court by ambitious dynastic alliances. In June his heir, Jerome Weston (1605-1663), married Lady Frances Stuart, the youngest daughter of the late Esme Stuart, third duke of Lennox, the king's cousin, in a ceremony in the chapel at Roehampton attended by Charles and Henrietta Maria, at which Laud officiated; Arundel's heir had married her sister in 1626. In December Weston's daughter Anne married Basil Feilding, heir to William Feilding, first earl of Denbigh, whose wife, Susan, was Buckingham's sister and first lady of the queen's bedchamber; James Hamilton, third marquess of Hamilton, another courtier close to Charles, had already married a Feilding daughter. On 17 February 1633 Weston was created earl of Portland, a title reflecting a recent association with the strategically important county of Hampshire, where in February 1631 he had become sole lord lieutenant and captain of the Isle of Wight in succession to Edward Conway, Lord Conway, the former secretary of state. His kinsmen, the Tichbornes, who had never found their Catholicism a serious handicap to county office, had long been established there. 
Portland's health had been uncertain since at least 1631, when Sir Edward Stanhope, in advising Wentworth against accepting the deputyship of Ireland, assumed that the treasurer was 'not likely to injoy his place long, his corpulency and corporall infirmityes fitt enoughe to subtract from whatt nature might have allowed him', and became more erratic in 1634 as kidney disease took hold (Zagorin, 304). At much the same time his critics at court made a sustained attempt to undermine his entrenched position. Most prominent were his 'great opposite', Coventry, Archbishop Laud in vexed association with Wentworth, growing testy and untrusting in Ireland, and the earl of Holland, a fading favourite of the queen, upset at his inability to become lord admiral, and smarting at the disappointing outcome of a clash with Jerome Weston over interference with innocent correspondence of Henrietta Maria and himself with France early in 1633 (BL, Add. MS 35332, fol. 29'r'). A series of threads ran through their complaints. Coventry resented Weston's part in working against an early recall of parliament, looking increasingly improbable by 1632, and, like Sir John Eliot, deeply distrusted his popish connections. Laud allowed himself to be aggravated by Weston's enduring friendship with his old enemy, Bishop John Williams, and, like Wentworth, deplored his handling of business in both state and church, which combined a sluggish but self-righteous approach with an eye to his advantage rather than theirs. Henrietta Maria's favour, on which her husband insisted, was seldom wholehearted: not only did Weston take it upon himself to urge on her the economies imposed on the household in 1629-30, but he had welcomed Cardinal Richelieu's survival of the 'Day of Dupes', and consistently advised Charles against inviting her exiled but extravagant mother, Marie de Medici, to live in England. He managed, too, to get the king to appoint his friend Sir John Bankes as Noy's successor in preference to her servant Finch. There were many others about the court, like Henry Cary, Viscount Falkland, Walter Aston, Lord Aston, Sir Thomas Roe, and Sir Henry Wotton, who, as either creditors or pensionaries of the crown, found themselves brusquely denied payments due to them. Further pleading served only to aggravate matters. As James I had noted, Weston had a sharp tongue, and continual ill health was not improving his temper. The king's subjects, he believed, had a duty to make sacrifices while he attended to his master's financial well-being. In time, such high-handedness left him so heavily dependent on the support of the king that he became openly fearful of losing it. 
Portland was the more vulnerable, as Coventry and Eliot appreciated, because of his inescapable associations with popery and with Spain. His wife, Frances, had been born into one of the leading Essex Catholic families, the Waldegraves of Borley. In 1624 she and her children were held to have attended the Church of England sufficiently often, even if not communicating, to gain exemption for her husband from the list of Catholic office-holders then being drawn up by parliament, but in 1628 Weston had been named, alone among the king's leading ministers, in a mainly provincial list, as one 'vehemently suspected to be ill-affected in religion' because of his household's failings, an assessment supported by his son Jerome's disqualification from the Commons after a double return for Gatton, a seat notoriously susceptible to popish influence ('Portland MSS', vol. 1). Lady Weston was seen again at church, despite keeping her own priests and being busy during the 1630s among the proselytizing women around the queen. Yet whatever parliament thought, English Catholics did not accept that Weston was among their number. He not only attended church, but helped his household chaplain, Dr James Halsey, to a prebend of Winchester Cathedral in 1631 and, as Laud later claimed, was sufficiently concerned with the church to advance the career of the scholarly bishop, Augustine Lindsell. But godly Calvinists noted that both men were Arminians, thus reinforcing their political reservations about Weston. He had dealt with Spanish and French diplomats at intervals since 1620 and, although not uncritically, was party with Cottington to the treatings in 1629-30 which had sealed the peace with Spain and to the maritime negotiations since then, none of them welcome in godly circles. In February 1632, moreover, he took advantage of the death of Dudley Carleton, Viscount Dorchester, 'for a tyme [to] supplye the service' of secretary of state himself, in order to dash Calvinist hopes of an agreement with the Swedes over recovery of the Lower Palatinate by force (TNA: PRO, SP 16/211/74). 
The antagonism increased in 1633-4. Coventry, who was obstructive over recusant forfeitures early in 1633, joined with Laud the following May in attacking the popish soap monopolists, in whom Portland had an interest, and, with Manchester, later refused to draw the proclamation authorizing them to go ahead. In April 1634 Coventry and Laud took up the rumour that Portland had subverted the king's intention of selling just enough royal forest to cover the costs of building two new warships, the 'James' and the 'Unicorn', by setting aside more than was needed and, having sold the surplus cheaply by arrangement, subsequently bought it back for himself. Clarendon believed he thus acquired the whole of Chute Forest; but it would have been a clumsy and impractical way of doing so, and there seems no hard evidence that Portland, who was then quite ill, dealt improperly with any part of the royal forest. The duke of Lennox and the duchess of Buckingham interceded on his behalf, and Charles demonstrated his belief in his innocence by inviting him to kiss his hand in open court at Greenwich on 24 May 1634. 
A more sweeping attack on Portland, and those thought to be associated with him, came in the summer of 1634 when Holland, as chief justice in eyre south of Trent, conducted a court of justice seat in Dean Forest. Noy was too sick to accompany him, and his place was taken by the queen's attorney-general, Sir John Finch. How much Henrietta Maria knew of what they intended has never become clear; but it seems likely that Holland and Finch believed that their efforts to embarrass Weston, by prosecuting his supposed associates for alleged exploitation of Dean's resources, would be well received, even though the treasurer's standing with the king had been emphasized in May when he had been appointed to the newly constituted queen's court charged with administering the consort's estates. Finch reminded the court of justice seat of the widely held belief that, had the Spanish been defeated in 1588, English Catholics would have destroyed Dean, traditionally the staple source of timber for the royal navy. Not all the prosecutions were well grounded, and some of the fines were eventually reduced, but Portland was fearful enough to shed his friends, including his long-serving secretary, John Gibbons, leaving them to further prosecution, on other grounds, in the law courts at Westminster. 
While rumours of his possible successor circulated Portland returned subdued from the waters at Tunbridge Wells, but he recovered his spirits by recalling the king's instruction 'to believe nothing of those things which may seem of importance, and are brought to me, till I speake with him' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/273/64, 22 Aug 1634). Within a month he was trying to rout his critics. At the end of a council meeting on 29 September 1634 he asked the king to stay while he laid a complaint. Laud made to defend himself, but Portland indicated that he was aiming at Coventry, who had evidently been reflecting on his fondness for gratuities. Charles refused to hear them out, but ordered Portland to provide him with a list of gifts and payments since July 1628. It amounted to $44,000 and duly met with royal approval on 21 October. Charles himself was responsible for the biggest sum -- $10,000 bestowed 'within a while... for his present support' -- while Burlamachi, anxious to extricate himself from impending bankruptcy, had, as the king knew, given $9000 (Scrope and Monkhouse, 1.158). The other fourteen contributions were smaller. The list suggests that Portland averaged at least $7000 a year in perquisites, in itself not an unusual sum for a lord treasurer, and acceptable to the king, but it is not likely to have been exhaustive. 
Portland again reacted sharply when Sir Anthony Pell's bill, 'of strange coinage' as Laud put it, came before Star Chamber late in 1634 ('Works', 7.97). The defendants were Sir James Bagg, Sir Richard Tichborne, Gibbons, and another of Portland's secretaries, William Lake, and it cast an oblique shadow over his activities while concentrating on those of his subordinates. He intervened after the defendants, in his absence, had entered a demurrer on 26 November. On 1 December, according to James Howell, Portland 'out of the light of honour and innocencye knowne to himself and beleeved in the accused... wa[i]ved it in court and pressed a proceedinge to proofe'. He readily acknowledged what some privy councillors had said earlier, that his 'Honour could not be vindicated in any Place more properly than in this [court]... Therefore', he added, 'I desire that this Business may be ordered to be heard with all Speed'. Howell thought it risky, for 'if it fayle [it] will like a stone fall heavie on the thrower's head' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/278/3; 'Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 1.377-8); in the event it was Pell who had reason to feel sore. Such was Portland's determination to protect his interests towards the end of his life that in his last two active months, January and February 1635, he was attending routine meetings of the privy council more frequently than he had done for years. Customarily he had been present at one meeting in three; but on the evidence of the council register he managed to attend twelve of the eighteen meetings to 22 February, most of them when the king was present as well as his leading critics. 
Portland died on 13 March 1635 at Wallingford House, 'in great pain, entring his bed not above one hour' before, according to the account given to George Garrard by his friend Lord Cottington ('Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 1.389). Laud and Bishop Matthew Wren offered to attend him, but Tobie Matthew was at hand, and it was 'whispered and believed he died a Roman Catholick' (ibid.). Charles had briefly visited him shortly after giving him charge of Winchester Castle. Appropriately for the lord lieutenant of Hampshire he was buried, on 24 March, in Winchester Cathedral, where a bronze effigy, thought to be by Francesco Fanelli, was erected in the north-east chapel. Depressed by the state of his own finances Portland had proved reluctant to turn to testamentary matters. There was said to be less than $100 in the house at the time of his death. On 9 March Cottington, 'with much difficulty... brought him... to make his will, asking him, from his wife to his youngest child, what he would bequeath to them', so that Attorney-General Bankes, at the bedside, could get down the details ('Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 1.388). Yet, although formally drawn up, and signed and sealed by Portland at the time, the will does not seem ever to have been sent for probate. Cottington's questions had necessarily been direct and specific, concerned with essentials and not attempting to range over the whole of Portland's financial affairs and miscellaneous assets. No mention, for example, was made of his plate, some of which was sold for $1200 to pay for his burial, or of the $12,000 which Charles had given him at Christmas 1634 or, indeed, of the inheritance of Jerome, his eldest son from his second marriage, regarded as his heir even before the death of his first son Richard 'mad and kept at Coventry' in April 1634 ('Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 1.243). Garrard reckoned that Portland left land and property worth at best $6600 a year, but charged with debts of at least $25,000. His widow had $1500 p.a. for her jointure and was given the use of Roehampton for life; of their younger children, Thomas got the Roxwell estate (worth $600 p.a., and promptly sold), Nicholas and Benjamin were left annuities of $300, Mary received $4000 and Catherine (who married Richard White of Hutton, Essex) $1000. His daughters from his first marriage, Elizabeth, wife of Sir John Netterville, and Mary, wife of Walter Aston, second Baron Aston, and two daughters from his second, Anne Feilding (who predeceased him by three days) and Frances, wife of a staunchly Catholic Staffordshire squire, Philip Draycott of Paynesbury, went unnoticed. The sole executor was Jerome, who, his father hoped, would find a suitable place at court and make his seat at Winchester. A report in 1634 that Jerome was about to replace secretary Coke had proved ill-founded, and his father's strenuous efforts in his last days to secure him the mastership of the court of wards came to nothing. Charles was prepared to protect his treasurer but not to promote a ministerial dynasty. 
Portland was the first lord treasurer to die in office since Robert Cecil in 1612. That he did so owed much to Charles's determination to support a minister who set out to achieve financial stability without resort to novel ways, and on such terms Portland served his master well. But the king's experiences in the early 1630s, and the tensions within the treasury commission after Portland's death, persuaded him of the almost equally pressing need to establish a quiet and settled court. William Juxon, who was chosen to succeed Portland in 1636, carried little contentious baggage even though he was a senior bishop, and, in Sir Henry Wotton's words, seemed 'the very reverse of his proud predecessor who made a scorn of my poverty and a sport of my modesty' (Smith, 2.375). Without Buckingham as a focal point for court politics Portland had found himself subjected to continual criticism from rival interests on a variety of fronts, and his religious ambivalence and conspicuous expenditure made him an easy target. So did his erratic manner, at times overbearing, at others fearful. The nature and extent of his errors and excesses is by no means entirely clear, however, and it seems unlikely that he profited from office to the degree his enemies believed he did. Nevertheless he felt isolated, and grew notably anxious that those corresponding with the court should not pass him by. Although he was party to many of Charles's more confidential dealings he lacked the status of a favourite and his patronage, both political and cultural, was circumscribed, primarily directed to procuring from the king those he wanted around him like Cottington, Bankes, and Secretary Sir Francis Windebank. As a creature of the court he had limited time and little inclination to develop local connections, yet he proved unable to build an effective body of support at the centre; even Cottington found himself torn between Portland and Wentworth. Wentworth, whom Portland had once brought into favour but then helped to remove to Ireland, prudently let him know before he left for Dublin that he remained 'the very principall' of his courtly friends, but on Portland's death confessed himself to be 'delivered from the heaviest adversary' he ever had ('Earl of Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 1.79, 411). Like Wotton, who deeply regretted his misjudgement in sending the treasurer a eulogy 'of the richest materials' as a new year's gift in 1633, he could now lay such conceits aside (Smith, 2.334, 375). Portland had come to depend almost entirely on the king, who knew his value and did not desert him. In a few years he had done much, by imposing economies on others, to stabilize royal finances; but at the last he found it hard to face up to the extravagant confusion in which he was leaving his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 29127


Weston, Sir Richard (1578/9-1658?), lawyer, was the son of Ralph Weston (died 1605) of Rugeley, Staffordshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of George Smyth of Appleton, Lancashire. He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 14 October 1596, aged seventeen, and was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1599. About 1605 he married Anne, daughter of Richard Barbour of Hilderstone; they had three children, Elizabeth, Richard ('b'. 1608/9), and Ralph. Weston was called to the bar in 1607. Six years later he inherited the family estates at Rugeley on the death of his grandfather, Philip Weston. 
In 1621 Weston was elected as MP for Lichfield. Like his namesake, the chancellor of the exchequer and future earl of Portland, he was an active member. In June he obtained for himself and his son Richard the office of pretermitted customs in the port of London but in the course of acting as solicitor for alehouse keepers, who were petitioning parliament, was temporarily committed by the house to prison. For many years Weston was a Staffordshire JP. He became a bencher of his inn in 1626 and a judge on the Welsh circuit in 1632. On 19 April 1634 he was created serjeant-at-law and subsequently, on 6 May, became baron of the exchequer in place of his recently deceased kinsman Sir James Weston, probably at the behest of Portland. 
Weston suffered from a pronounced lameness in one leg: he remarked at his investiture as serjeant 'that he was himself soe lame of the left leg, but he was upright of the right syde and that he knew he would be soe, his hart was right' (Baker, 'Serjeants', 370). He appears to have been largely confined to the unpopular home circuit throughout his career, although this may have been a concession to his disability which would have made travelling difficult. He was knighted at Whitehall on 7 December 1635. In 1638 he was one of seven judges who, in 'Hampden's case', affirmed the crown's right to collect ship money. His opinion is of some significance. Weston affirmed that the king could act independently of parliament as sole judge of when the kingdom was in imminent danger, and that he himself was convinced that such a danger currently existed from foreign navies. Furthermore, he concluded that the form of the ship money writ was good in law and that ship money extended to the nineteen inland counties and not just to the thirty-three maritime counties. He justified his opinion not simply with a direct appeal to the equity of 'necessity' of the matter, but also with an appeal to precedent and English history, citing previous 'custom and usage' in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries ('State trials', 3.1265-78). 
In the two elections of 1640 Richard Weston the younger was elected MP for Stafford; he probably voted against the attainder of Strafford. The following year Weston senior was one of six judges impeached and imprisoned by parliament for their support of ship money, although he was not brought to trial. Both father and son seem to have joined the king in August 1642; the latter was disabled from parliament on 30 October that year, while the former was disabled from the judiciary on 24 October 1645 'as though he was dead'. By this time the family's estates in Staffordshire had been plundered, and on 29 March 1645 the county committee ordered that Lady Weston hold the lands of her husband, described as a delinquent, in return for $104 a year. 
The Westons' misfortunes may have been somewhat mitigated by the fact that both their son-in-law Richard Floyer and Lady Weston's nephew Leicester Barbour were committee members, but the family continued to suffer for its royalism. Richard Weston the younger, who had become a colonel, was taken prisoner at Colchester in July 1648 and was killed in the king's service on the Isle of Man in 1652 (a date often erroneously given for his father's death). Weston himself was described as a 'papist' in 1648, and by the time he drew up his will on 18 November 1655 reckoned that 'these late troublesome times have much impoverished me' just as 'the late death of my late dear wife hath much troubled my mind'. The disposition of his remaining goods was left to his executors, his son Ralph and his grandsons Philip (son of Richard the younger and his wife, Catherine Cockayne) and John. Weston probably died on 18 March 1658; Ralph obtained probate of the will on 17 April 1660 and Philip succeeded to the family estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 29128


Weston, Sir Richard (1591-1652), canal builder and agriculturist, was the eldest son of Sir Richard Weston (1564-1613), of Sutton, Surrey, and great-grandson of Sir Francis Weston. His family was quite distinct from those of the first earl of Portland and of Sir Richard Weston, baron of the exchequer. The agriculturist is said to have been educated in Flanders, or at least to have spent a considerable part of his early life there; but there are phrases in his 'Discours' which imply that he was visiting Flanders for the first time in 1644. In 1613, on his father's death, he succeeded to the family estates at Sutton and Clandon. On 27 July 1622 he was knighted at Guildford. He married Grace (died 1669), daughter of John Harper of Cheshunt, and they had seven sons and two daughters. 
A promoter of the pound lock as a means of improving navigation on canals and rivers, Sir Richard Weston attempted by this means to make the Wey navigable from Guildford to its junction with the Thames at Weybridge. In 1635 he was appointed one of the royal commissioners for the prosecution of the work. It was perhaps the expenditure necessitated by his canal scheme which forced him in 1641 to sell Temple Court Farm at Merrow, with the mansion at West Clandon, to Sir Richard Onslow, MP for Surrey in the Long Parliament. Shortly after this the river undertaking was interrupted by the civil war. Sir Richard was a royalist and a Catholic. The manor house of Sutton was entirely unsuited for defence, while the neighbouring town of Guildford was in the hands of the parliamentarians; Sir Richard's possessions were sequestrated, and he seems to have been compelled to flee from the country. In 1644 he was at Ghent, Bruges, and Antwerp. It was in the course of his exile that he made those observations on the agricultural methods of the Low Countries which were subsequently embodied in his work, 'A Discours of Husbandrie used in Brabant and Flanders' (1650). 
In 1649 Weston entered into an agreement with Major James Pitson, commissioner for Surrey under the parliament, that the latter should solicit the discharge of his sequestration and forward his schemes for rendering the Wey navigable. Accordingly a petition was presented in the names of Pitson and the corporation of Guildford. A bill authorizing the works was brought into the House of Commons on 26 December 1650, and passed as an act on 26 June 1651. The capital was $6000, of which Sir Richard was to find half, undertaking at the same time to complete the canal within six months. Sir Richard employed two hundred men at a time, and used timber of his own to the value of $2000. Materials and timber were also taken, by permission of the parliament, from the king's estates of Oatlands and Richmond. Weston died in May 1652, less than a year after the passing of the act, and by then some 10 out of the 14 miles of canal were completed, though at an expenditure much exceeding the original estimate. 
The work was continued by Weston's son and Major Pitson, and the canal was opened in November 1653. The completed canal had ten locks, four weirs, and twelve bridges; but, although it produced a large revenue, it involved the family in litigation which, when finally settled in 1671, had more than swallowed up all the profits. At the Restoration an attempt was made by a certain John Radcliffe to gain control of the canal. A committee of the House of Commons which sat to investigate his claims came to the conclusion that 'Sir Richard Weston was the designer of the navigation, and they were satisfied that Mr. [John] Weston's estate was left to him encumbered by reason of his father undertaking the navigation' (Manning and Bray, 3, appx lvi). 
Even more important than Sir Richard Weston's canal schemes were his agricultural improvements. He writes himself that at the time he went out of England he had had 'thirtie years' experience in Husbandrie' and had 'improved my Land as much as anie man in this Kingdom hath done both by water and fire' (Weston, 5). Following Rowland Vaughan, Sir Richard raised rich crops of hay by 'floating' water meadows, and these are referred to by a contemporary writer: 'Because hay is dear in those parts this year, near three pound a load, Sir Richard Weston told me he sold at near that rate one hundred and fifty loads of his extraordinary hay which his meadows watered with his new river did yield. (Speed, 35)' Sir Richard's account of Flemish husbandry was written about 1645, and addressed to his sons from abroad. This was circulated in manuscript, and there is no evidence that it was printed before 1650, when an imperfect copy was published by Samuel Hartlib, with a dedication to the council of state. Hartlib did not at this time know who the author was. The account is the first English description of the use of a farming rotation including turnips and clover to obtain maximum output from heathlands formerly considered of little agricultural value. Although it is not known to what extent Sir Richard emulated on his own estates what he saw in Flanders, he described a farming system that was to become the cornerstone of the English 'agricultural revolution' a century later. 
An 'enlargement' of the 'Discours' was published in 1651 (Perkins, 61), and on 2 May of that year and again on 10 October Hartlib wrote to Sir Richard, whom he had been 'credibly informed' was the author of the 'Discours', asking him for some further information on the subject of clover cultivation and requesting him to 'make compleat and sufficiently enlarged' for the benefit of all 'his former treatise'. As Sir Richard took no notice, Hartlib published a second edition of the pamphlet in 1652, adding transcripts of his two letters to Sir Richard. Hartlib's 'Legacie... of Husbandry' (a collection of anonymous notes on agricultural matters) has sometimes been erroneously attributed to Sir Richard Weston. 
Weston died at the age of sixty-one, in May 1652, and was buried in Trinity Chapel, Guildford, on 8 May. His wife died in February 1669, and was buried with her husband. Sir Richard was succeeded by his second son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 29129


Weston, Sir Richard (1620-1681), judge and politician, was the son of Edward Weston (died 1645) of Hackney, Middlesex, and his wife, Mary. The Westons were descended from a Sussex family and owned land in the county. Richard Weston was his father's heir and, presumably, his eldest son. Weston matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1639, and from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1641. He took no degree, however, and entered Gray's Inn on 10 August 1642. Weston was called to the bar in 1649. In 1645 his father died and Weston took possession of the family lands. On 30 June 1657 he married Frances Marwood, daughter of Sir George Marwood, baronet, of Little Busby in Yorkshire. No children are mentioned in Weston's will. 
After the Restoration, Weston practised law, and his arguments in court were sufficient to gain mention in Sir Thomas Raymond's 'Reports of Divers Special Cases'. Weston also had a brief parliamentary career, as the member from Weobley, Herefordshire, in the Convention Parliament of 1660. He served on eight committees, including those which drafted the 'Indemnity Bill' and confirmed parliamentary privileges. His legal expertise probably proved useful to the committee to continue judicial proceedings, and he also served on the committee that examined Oliver Cromwell's counsellor and spymaster, John Thurloe. In his few recorded speeches Weston emerged as a supporter of the episcopal church, and it seems likely that he was already displaying the strong royalist bent for which he later became known. Weston's parliamentary career was cut short on 16 July 1660 when, for unknown reasons, the House of Commons voided the Weobley election. 
Weston never re-entered parliament. In 1664, probably due to his wife's Yorkshire connections, he was made a justice of the peace in Cawood, in the West Riding. Weston purchased the Yorkshire estate of Little Cattall in 1669. He served as a commissioner for assessment in the West Riding from 1673 until 1680, and as the recorder of Beverley from 1675 to 1678. As for his legal career, Weston was made reader of Gray's Inn in 1676, serjeant-at-law on 23 October 1677, and king's serjeant on 5 February 1678, whereupon he was knighted. The climax of his career came with his appointment to the bench of the exchequer on 7 February 1680. Weston's ascent seems to have been fuelled by the favour of Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby. He apparently repaid this patronage by drafting Danby's pardon in 1679. This was no doubt unpopular with the House of Commons, which responded by expressly forbidding Weston from acting as Danby's counsel. By this time Weston had become entangled in the factionalism of these tumultuous years, and he was known as a staunch defender of royal prerogative. 
As a judge Weston was 'obliging, condescensive, and communicative' (Irving, 114), but he also displayed a hot temper (reportedly exacerbated by gout). Weston caused a stir while presiding over the Kingston assizes in July 1680. When a group of nonconformists was brought before him, Weston's charge to the grand jury included scathing remarks about Calvin and Zwingli. He also declared that 'now they were amusing us with fears, and nothing would serve them but a parliament... for my part I know no representative of the nation but the king; all power centres in him' (Foss, 'Judges', 719). These intemperate remarks would haunt Weston. At the same assizes he made an enemy of George Jeffreys, who appeared before him as an advocate. Weston abruptly rebuked Jeffreys when the latter engaged in an overly hostile examination of a witness. When Jeffreys complained of this treatment, Weston exclaimed 'Ha! Since the King has thrown his favours upon you... you think to run down everybody. If you think you are aggrieved, make your complaint. Here nobody cares for it.' Reports of this exchange soon worked their way to London. Jeffreys may have had a hand in Weston's subsequent troubles before parliament. When the Commons moved to impeach a number of tory judges (including Chief Justice Scroggs) Weston was included for his remarks at the Kingston assizes, which were considered derogatory to the Reformation and tending to raise discord. Undaunted, Weston defied the house by granting a writ of habeas corpus to another of its targets, Thomas Sheridan. But the dissolution of the parliament delayed the impeachment proceedings. In August 1680 Weston presided over the trial of a nonconformist accused of assaulting an Anglican priest, during which he was accused by the defendant of being 'popishly affected' ('CSP dom.', 22.422). Controversial to the end, Weston died suddenly on 18 March 1681 at his home in Chancery Lane, London, and was buried three days later at Hackney. 


@@@@@


doc= 29130


Weston, Richard (bap. 1732, d. 1806), writer on agriculture, was baptized on 13 July 1732 at St Martin, Leicester, the son of Thomas and Elizabeth Weston. He started out in life as a thread-hosier in Leicester. He took a keen interest in agriculture and gardening, and promoted the planting of trees, particularly alongside turnpike roads as an investment for future generations. In 1773 he was living at Kensington Gore, then a rural district, within easy reach of the market gardens of Chelsea, Battersea, and Westminster. 
Weston's first important work was his 'Tracts on Practical Agriculture and Gardening' with an appended 'Catalogue on English authors who have wrote on husbandry, gardening, botany, and subjects relative thereto' (1769), which he dedicated to the Society of Arts. Weston's mind was of an orderly cast and ran to the making of useful lists and catalogues, among them his 'Botanicus universalis et hortulanus' (4 vols., 1770-77), and his 'Flora Anglicana, seu, Arborum fruticum, plantarum, et fructuum... catalogus' (2 vols., 1775-80). He contributed many articles to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and became secretary of the local agricultural society. 
From about 1800 Weston devoted himself to the local history and literature of Leicestershire. He collected materials and announced his intention of publishing similar lists and catalogues on this topic, but failed to do so before his death at Leicester on 20 October 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 29131


Weston, Robert (b. in or before 1522, d. 1573), lord chancellor of Ireland, was the third son of John Weston (died after 1525), of Weeford, Staffordshire, and his wife, Cecilia (died after 1525), sister of Ralph Neville, fourth earl of Westmorland (1498-1549). One brother, James Weston ('c'.1525-1589), was an MP. Robert Weston entered All Souls College, Oxford, where he devoted himself to the study of civil law. He was elected a fellow of the college in 1536 and attained the degrees of BCL on 17 February 1538 and DCL on 20 July 1556. From 1546 to 1549 he was principal of Broadgates Hall, acting during the same time as deputy reader in civil law under Dr John Story and holding the regius professorship in civil law for a few months in 1546. He was sole regius professor from 26 March 1550 to 29 September 1553. He had married Alice (died in or after 1573), daughter of Richard Jenyns of Great Barr, Staffordshire, by 1551/2. They had one son, John Weston (1551/2-1632), and three daughters, including Alice (died after 1585), who married as her second husband Geoffrey Fenton (c.1539-1608) in June 1585. 
Weston was vicar general of Exeter, Devon, under Miles Coverdale, bishop of Exeter, from 1551 to 1553 and was returned as MP for Exeter in March 1553 and for Lichfield, Staffordshire, in 1558, and again in 1559. On 12 January 1559 Weston was created dean of the arches and was a commissioner for administering the oaths prescribed to be taken by ecclesiastics according to the 'Act of Uniformity' (1559). He was consulted in regard to Elizabeth I's commission issued on 6 December confirming Matthew Parker as archbishop of Canterbury, and was included in a commission issued on 25 April 1564 and 8 November 1564 to inquire into complaints of piracy committed against the subjects of Philip II. His reputation for learning was deservedly high, and he was considered as a potential English representative at the general council which it was rumoured was to be summoned by Pius IV in 1560. 
In April 1566, at the request of the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir Henry Sidney, Weston was nominated as lord chancellor in the place of Hugh Curwen, archbishop of Dublin. More than a year elapsed before letters patent were issued appointing him on 10 June 1567, the queen expressing her confidence in her choice as 'our trusty, well-beloved Doctor Weston, dean of the arches here, a man for his learning and approved integrity thoroughly qualified to receive and possess the same'. To increase his income she also appointed him dean of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, 'in commendam', 'whereof the archbishop of Armagh [Adam Loftus] is now dean, and yet to leave it at our order, as we know he will'. He was advanced $133 6's'. 8died for the expenses of his journey, of which half was to be a gift and the other half to be deducted from his salary (E. P. Shirley, ed., 'Original Letters and Papers in Illustration of the History of the Church of Ireland', 299, 303). 
Weston arrived in Dublin in early August 1567 and was sworn into office on the 8th. Shortly afterwards Sidney departed for England, and Weston and Sir William Fitzwilliam, the vice-treasurer, were sworn as lords justices in Christ Church on 14 October. Weston was reluctant to assume the onerous duties of the office, pleaded his ecclesiastical duties as a reason for leaving the hard work to his colleague, and stressed his unworthiness 'wanting, as he does, the courage and skill in martial affairs of Sir H. Sidney' ('CSP Ire.', '1509-73', 343, 347). Although he became dean of St Patrick's in 1567 he soon discovered that there was a great difference between his nominal and actual salary. Early in 1568 he persuaded Elizabeth to make him an additional yearly grant of $100. In 1570 she conferred on him the deanery of Wells 'in commendam', which he was to hold, as with the deanery of St Patrick's, as a lay fee to increase his income. In June 1568 Weston was included in a commission to inquire into offences against the 'Acts of Uniformity and Supremacy' in Ireland. His duties as lord justice prevented him from paying as much attention to the chancery as he would have wished, and in August he asked that John Ball, student of civil law at Christ Church, Oxford, be sent over to assist him. His request appears to have been complied with. Nevertheless he established an excellent reputation as chancellor, proving himself, according to John Hooker: 'a man so bent to the execution of justice, and so severe therein, that he by no means would be seduced or averted from the same, and so much good in the end ensued from his upright, diligent, and dutiful service, as that the whole realm found themselves most happy and blessed to have him serve among them. (R. Holinshed and J. Hooker, 'Holinshed's Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland', 6 vols., 1807-8, 6.336)' Perhaps Hooker was biased by the favourable judgment by Weston in the matter of the claim of Sir Peter Carew to the barony of Idrone, co. Carlow. Fitzwilliam, lord deputy, nevertheless praised his integrity, writing to William Cecil, Baron Burghley, the lord treasurer, in 1572 that Weston 'is godly and cannot be corrupted by gifts' ('CSP Ire.', '1509-73', 464). Weston was a moderate protestant allied with Hugh Brady, bishop of Meath, and Thomas Lancaster, archbishop of Armagh, in favour of persuasion rather than coercive measures to advance his religion. He supported local reformers in securing the act of 1570 to establish diocesan free schools and supported the establishment of a university, although the latter did not come to fruition until 1592. 
In an age when most of his contemporaries actively sought sinecures Weston resisted these being imposed on him by others. Even before his appointment to the deanery of Wells, he expressed his doubts to Burghley as to the propriety of taking the fees of the deanery of St Patrick's and yet neglecting to serve in the post, and in 1572 wrote to him saying that 'even from the first I liked not very well spiritual livings for temporal service' ('CSP Ire.', '1571-5', 272). As to the Irish, who had known Christianity for a thousand years, he shared the general opinion of his compatriots that they remained barbarous and basically pagan in their habits, but he preferred peaceful conversion to military suppression. He recommended the sending to Ireland of protestant ministers to save 'many thousands of souls... that else would perish'. He believed that it 'would work a willing and more perfect obedience in all subjects than any fear of sword or punishment can do' (Canny, 128). Shortly after arriving in Ireland he developed gout, and both on the ground of health and of his moral scruples he pleaded to be recalled, which he continued to do throughout his life. Although he was not included again in the commission for government during the absence of the lord deputy his services were too useful to be dispensed with. Despite holding the deanery of Wells from 1570 his position was difficult, for, on 19 August 1571, Fitzwilliam informed Burghley that Weston had 'broken up his house through want' ('CSP Ire.', '1571-5', 104). His increasing illness and his conscientious doubts prevented him from enjoying the benefits of his ecclesiastical livings, and he begged Burghley on 17 June 1572 to obtain permission for him to resign and to return to England. 
In March 1573 Weston petitioned the queen herself to be relieved, but it was too late. He died in Dublin on 20 May 1573. His death is touchingly described by Holinshed. With the Irish privy council, friends, and household gathered round and all having taken communion, he exhorted the Irish privy council to be 'virtuous in God's true religion', to be mindful of their duty to Elizabeth and 'the great charge of the government laid upon them', and to be 'valiant, careful and studious' in its performance, 'to the glory of God, honour to the queen, and the benefit to the whole realm'. Having done this 'he bade them farewell, and not long after, he being fervent in his prayers, he died most godlie, virtuously, and Christian like' (O'Flanagan, 1.261-2). He was buried in St Patrick's beneath the altar, 'leaving behind him an excellent character for uprightness, judgment, learning, courtesy, and piety' (H. Cotton, 'Fasti ecclesiae Hibernicae', 5 vols., Dublin, 1845-78, 2.97). 
Weston's granddaughter Catherine (died 1630), the daughter of Weston's daughter Alice Fenton, married Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, on 25 July 1603. Cork's monument in St Patrick's is surmounted by an effigy of Robert Weston in a recumbent position and in his robes of state, under an arch which forms the upper part of the monument, with an inscription recording that he 'was so learned, judicious and upright in the course of judicature, as, in all the time of that employment, he never made order or decree that was questioned or reversed' (Mason, 167-71, appx, liv). There is also a bronze bust by Sir Henry Cheere in All Souls College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 29132


Weston, Stephen (1665-1742), bishop of Exeter, probably the son of Stephen Weston, a farmer, was born at Farnborough, Berkshire, on 25 December 1665. In 1679 he was admitted to Eton College, and in 1683 he matriculated as a scholar of King's College, Cambridge; he graduated BA in 1687 and proceeded MA in 1690, and BD and DD (Oxon) in 1711. Weston was elected a fellow of King's in 1686, and admitted to Gray's Inn on 20 December 1692. He became an assistant master at Eton in 1690, and lower master or usher in 1693. In 1707 he retired from teaching, apparently on grounds of ill health, and was elected a fellow of Eton. He was vice-provost from 1721 to 1725. Thomas Sherlock reckoned him an able classical scholar, and a hardworking and successful schoolmaster. At Eton his name became associated with the former stable yard because he lived in a house in the yard. 
Weston was ordained deacon on 29 September 1707, and priest on 5 October 1707 by the bishop of London. In 1710 he intended to stand for the provostship of King's in opposition to Dr John Adams. To qualify for this he needed to hold a DD degree. As it was suspected that this might be resisted by friends of Adams at Cambridge he incorporated at New College, Oxford, and proceeded BD and DD there. Hearne called Weston 'a good scholar and a good-natured man' ('Remarks', 3.277-8). Weston married Lucy, daughter of Dr Richard Sleech, assistant master and fellow of Eton, and sister of Dr Stephen Sleech, provost of Eton (1746-65). She died on 4 March 1742, and was buried with her husband. They had three sons and two daughters. Their second son was Edward Weston, civil servant and author. Weston was a canon of Ely from 1715, and vicar of Mapledurham, Oxfordshire, from 1716. In 1724, through the influence of Sir Robert Walpole, whom he had taught at Eton, he was appointed bishop of Exeter. The bishopric was poorly endowed, and to supplement his income he held 'in commendam' the rectories of Calstock in Cornwall and Shobrooke in Devon, the treasurership and a prebendal stall in Exeter Cathedral, and, from 1732, the archdeaconry of Exeter. He was unusual among eighteenth-century bishops in conducting all his ordinations in Exeter, occasionally, in his early years, in the cathedral, but mostly in the palace chapel. He seems to have spent most of his time in Exeter, rarely attending the House of Lords. He undertook an extensive visitation of Devon in 1726 and Cornwall in 1728, in the course of which he visited and confirmed in most of the main local centres in the diocese. An anonymous verse notes '
In Honour's Paths in Dubious Times he Trod 

Firm to his Prince, as faithful to his God, 

By Courts prefer'd yet not to Courts a Slave, 

(Good men approved of what grateful Walpole gave) 

Humane of Temper, Though his look Severe, 

Cautious of Speech, in Promise as Sincere. 
(Weston, 'Sermons', vol. 1, Exeter Cathedral Library copy, MS sheet initialled 'R.W.')' Weston was reputed to be rather too schoolmasterly towards his clergy, 'who were much dissatisfied with him upon that account, as also upon his rough and ill-hewn manner of behaviour' (Hollis, 119). Sherlock noted 'the best Greek and Roman Writers were so familiar to him, that it leads him frequently into their Manner of Construction and Expression, which will require, sometime the Attention of the English Reader' (Weston, 'Sermons', vii). 
During his final years at Exeter he was incapacitated by ill health, and unable to travel. He died at the bishop's palace, Exeter, on 8 January 1742, and was buried in the south aisle choir of Exeter Cathedral, where he is commemorated by a mural monument. 


@@@@@


doc= 29133


Weston, Stephen (1747-1830), antiquary and classical scholar, was born in Exeter, the eldest son of Stephen Weston (died 1750), registrar of Exeter diocese, and Elizabeth Oxenham of South Tawton, Devon. Stephen Weston (1665-1742), bishop of Exeter, was his grandfather. According to the cathedral register Stephen was baptized in private on 8 June 1747 and received into the church at Exeter Cathedral on 10 July. He attended Blundell's School, Tiverton, and in 1759 entered Eton College, where he remained until 1763. His tutor, Mr Stinton, said, 'after overhawling him, that He found him an admirable Scholar' ('Eglinton MSS', 406). Weston matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 7 June 1764 and lived in college from 4 July 1764 to 7 July 1768. He graduated BA on 29 January 1768, MA on 14 November 1770, and BD on 2 May 1782, and was a Devonshire fellow from 1768 to 1784. 
Weston accompanied Sir Charles Warwick Bampfylde of Devon as his tutor in a long tour of the continent. As a result of this tour he conceived a passion for travel and a particular love for France and, especially, for Paris. He was in Paris during the revolution of 1791 and 1792, but thought it expedient to leave the city rather than take unnecessary risks. His stay in Paris in 1791 and 1792 was marked by two anonymous publications, 'Letters from Paris during the Summer of 1791' (1792) and 'Letters from Paris during the Summer of 1792' (1793). He returned to Paris in 1802, and this visit too was celebrated by a publication, 'The Praise of Paris: a Sketch of the French Capital in 1802' (1803). He began by writing, 'Paris is derived from Par Isis as this city was built near the famous statue of that goddess near St. Germain des Pres', prompting a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' to write that although 'as an archaeologist he may have had something to learn, his little book is vividly written, and his descriptions as clean cut as a cameo' ('N&Q', 27). Not content with these, Weston wrote 'A Slight Sketch of Paris in its Improved State since 1802: by a Visitor', published in 1814, evidence of both another visit and a liking for familiar titles. Further indications of his love of the continent are other titles reflecting later visits to France, Belgium, Italy, Germany, and Switzerland. In 1824 he published 'The Englishman abroad, part i: Greece, Latium, Persia, and China; part ii: Russia, Germany, Italy, France, Spain, and Portugal', which was something of a hotchpotch of prose and verse and translations. 
On 29 March 1777, thanks to the nomination of Lord Lisburne, Weston was admitted to the rectory of Mamhead in Devon. Seven years later, on 17 January 1784, he obtained the rectory of Little Hempston in the same county, and he gave up his fellowship at Exeter College the same year, having married Penelope (died 1789/90), youngest daughter of James Tierney, a commissioner of accounts, of Cleeve Hill in Mangotsfield parish, Gloucestershire. She died of consumption aged thirty-one at Caen in Normandy late in 1789 or early in 1790 and was embalmed and returned to Bristol, where she was buried in the family vault. Weston's anonymous translation 'Turtle Dove', from the French of Claris de Florian, was published in Caen in 1789. Late in 1790 he gave up the living of Mamhead, but he kept the benefice of Little Hempston until 1823. He lived for some years in London and had a varied acquaintance. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 1 March 1792, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 18 December 1794. 
The first of some fifty published works by Weston, exclusive of those appearing in 'Archaeologia', in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and in the 'Classical Journal', was according to his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1830) 'Hermesianax, sive, Conjecturae in Athenaeum...' (1784). He is thought to be the anonymous author of 'Viaggiana: Remarks on the Buildings, &c, of Rome' (1776; with another edition in 1790), a work not listed as his in the 'British Library Catalogue of Printed Books'. The reviewer for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' concluded his remarks on 'Hermesianax' by writing, 'We need not add, that a writer like this may justly be added with the Toups and Marklands of the age' (1784). Among Weston's many other works, other than travel literature, are translations from Chinese, Persian, and other languages, classical emendations, poems, biography, theological treatises, philological studies, and pieces on antiquarian subjects. Many of his works are of short compass, making understandable the great number of them. Thus, the reviewer of his 'Conquest of the Miao-tse; an Imperial Poem...' in the 'Quarterly Review' could write: 'the appearance of the translation of another Chinese work; small, indeed, in point of bulk, and trifling in comparative importance, but more difficult in as much as poetry, in proportion as it becomes more concise and condensed, is more intricate and obscure than plain prose... we do not think that Mr. Weston has exercised much judgment in the choice of a subject for the employment of his talents; or that the results of his labours will prove eminently useful to the general cause of literature. ('QR', 361)' Taking into account his contributions to journals, there was virtually no year in the period of his life from 1783 until 1818 in which Weston did not have something published. 
Weston's contributions to 'Archaeologia' began in 1800 and were published almost yearly up to 1818, occasionally to the number of two or more in some years. So, too, with his letters to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', some twenty in number (there are three uncertain attributions), beginning in 1783 with a 'Query for explication of lines in 'Battle of Hastings'', signed 'S. W.' ('GM', 53/1, 1783, 123), and ending in 1813 with the anonymous 'The tears of the booksellers' ('GM', 1st ser., 83/1, 1813, 160). The 1783 'Query' was answered by Thomas Holt White. Weston's letters are on a variety of subjects, with most dealing with classical literature and most carrying his initials, although he also employed some pseudonyms. 
Weston was also a Shakespearian scholar, albeit a minor one. He contributed twenty-four notes on eighteen of Shakespeare's plays to the 1785 Shakespeare edition, edited by Isaac Reed. In the first sentence of his advertisement to his 'Short Notes on Shakespeare, by Way of Supplement to Johnson, Steevens, Malone, and Douce' (1808) Weston states, mistakenly, that he had contributed to Steevens's 1793 Shakespeare. He wrote: 'Mr. Steevens having done me the honour to give a few notes of mine a place under the signature of S. W. among the chosen band of commentators in his very correct edition of Shakespeare, 1793, which I consider the temple of his fame; I venture to add a few more for the purpose of showing, among other things, how the antients and our own poet have thought, and express themselves alike, without imitation on the part of Shakespeare, most certainly, for whom they were not translated, and who had no power of reading the originals.' On 7 July 1797 Steevens had successfully proposed Weston as a candidate for membership in The Club, and it may be that Weston wished, retrospectively, to link his name with Steevens's. There are sixty notes on many of the plays in the canon. Unlike many of his contemporaries, Weston was chary of emendations, both in the 1785 Shakespeare and in his 'Short Notes'. Among other matters, his notes reflect his extensive travel on the continent, his intimate knowledge of the classics, and his eye for detail. Although one modern editor of Shakespeare's plays thought Weston's 'Short Notes' of little value, they throw additional light on the extent of his widespread learning -- and on his need to associate himself with some of his better-known contemporaries. Most of Weston's library was sold by Robert Harding Evans of Pall Mall in 1827. Weston died in Edward Street, Portman Square, London, on 8 January 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 29134


Weston, Thomas (d. 1644x7), merchant and colonial adventurer, played a leading role in supporting and setting out the pilgrims who settled Plymouth plantation in New England during 1620. His earlier trading activities in the Netherlands were halted by the privy council, following complaints from the Merchant Adventurers that he was trading without licence. On 20 February 1620, through the influence of a business associate, John Peirce, he acquired a patent from the Virginia Company enabling him to establish a plantation in the colony. Later in the year he went to Leiden offering to support the leaders of the English congregation, with whom he was previously acquainted, who were then considering emigrating to America with Dutch support. With a group of associates, Weston was prepared to set out the pilgrims, promising that 'they should... neither fear want of shipping nor money' (Bradford, 37). Following the pilgrims' acceptance of Weston's proposals, he returned to London to organize their voyage to America. He hired the 'Mayflower' and acquired a group of additional settlers to accompany the original party of thirty-five from Leiden. 
Weston has been criticized for the rigorous conditions he imposed on the pilgrims, but his support for them was primarily commercial. He also had to take account of the interests of his partners: according to John Smith they numbered about seventy merchants, gentlemen, and artisans (Bradford, 37). When the pilgrims' leaders refused to accept a revised set of conditions presented to them in England, Weston was 'much offended and told them they must then look to stand on their own legs' (ibid., 49). After their safe arrival in New England, where they decided to stay instead of sailing on to Virginia, he set out the 'Fortune' with thirty-five new settlers, which arrived at Plymouth in November 1621 with a patent from the recently established Council for New England for the pilgrims' settlement. The ship was laden with a return cargo of clapboards and beaver skins valued at $500. By 1622, however, the London partnership had started to disintegrate. Weston sold his adventure and debts in the venture and advised William Bradford, now governor of Plymouth, to break away from the joint stock. 
Later in 1622 Weston set out a small colonizing expedition to establish a plantation near Plymouth, under the leadership of his brother Andrew and his brother-in-law Richard Greene. His aim seems to have been to combine fishing and trade along the coast of New England. Although the pilgrims assisted the fifty or sixty men who arrived at Plymouth in June 1622, they were an unwelcome, if not undesirable, presence in the colony. They went on to establish a small plantation at Wessagusset, but their disorderly behaviour, fed by rumours that one of the chief leaders in the settlement kept Native American women, alarmed Bradford, who later dismissed them as 'heathenish Christians' (Bradford, 375). Wessagusset, however, was also a potential rival for trade with the indigenous people, which the pilgrims were then developing. After a difficult winter, Weston's men apparently quarrelled with the Native Americans, and had to be rescued by an expedition from Plymouth. Most of the survivors subsequently returned to England. 
Shortly after the collapse of Wessagusset, Weston arrived at Plymouth, alone and without supplies, having sailed from England with some fishermen 'under another name', disguised as a blacksmith (Bradford, 119). With Bradford's assistance he began to trade along the coast. When Robert Gorges arrived in Plymouth in September 1623, with a commission from the Council for New England to act as governor of the entire region, Weston was summoned to answer charges concerning the illegal export of ordnance from England and the behaviour of his men at Wessagusset. The charges were not pursued, partly through Bradford's mediation, and Weston was allowed to resume his trading activities. Bradford later complained that Weston repaid his help with nothing more than 'reproaches and evil words' (ibid., 120). 
In 1624 Weston moved to Virginia where he acquired a plantation and sat in the house of burgesses in 1628. His career in the colony remains shadowy, though he was apparently in trouble with the colonial authorities on several occasions. In 1642 he moved on to neighbouring Maryland where he acquired a grant of 1200 acres for Westbury Manor, and became a freeman and member of the assembly. Thereafter he returned to England and died at Bristol some time between 1644 and 1647. He was survived by one daughter, Elizabeth, who married Roger Conant of Marblehead. 
Weston emerges from Bradford's 'History of Plymouth Plantation' as an enterprising, if unscrupulous, adventurer, whose religious sympathy for the pilgrims was tempered by commercial considerations. Modern authorities have treated him more leniently; at least one has argued that the history of the pilgrims might have taken a very different course but for his support in 1620 (Andrews, 1.331). 


@@@@@


doc= 29135


Weston, Thomas (1737-1776), actor, was the son of Thomas Weston, a cook to the court of George II. He obtained a position as turn-broach under his father but was dismissed for misbehaviour and sent to sea instead as a midshipman aboard the 'Warspite'. Life in the navy proved to be distasteful to him, though, and at the first opportunity he managed to get himself discharged and joined a group of strolling players near London. It is believed that about 1759 he was performing at Bartholomew fair in a booth owned by Shuter and Yates. He made his first appearance on a London stage on 28 September 1759, playing Sir Francis Gripe in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Busy Body' at the Haymarket. Shortly after this he married a milliner named Martha, whom he encouraged onto the stage. They parted by mutual consent two years later but were reunited in the 1770s. The marriage produced no children. 
Weston was not billed again in London until 28 June 1760, when he appeared at the Haymarket once more as Dick in Samuel Foote's 'The Minor', and in the interim he is likely to have returned to playing the provinces. By the winter he was at Henry Mossop's Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, where he appeared for the first time on 17 November 1760. In the summer of 1761 he was engaged by Arthur Murphy and Foote, who had rented the Drury Lane Theatre for twenty-three performances. Here he played Dick once more, and took on new roles such as Brush in Murphy's 'All in the Wrong' (on 15 June), Dapper in Murphy's 'The Citizen' (2 July), and the Doctor in Thomas Bentley's 'The Wishes' (27 July). Playing every night over the summer, he caught the attention of David Garrick, who offered him a contract at Drury Lane for the coming season. Here he added to his repertory Jeremy in William Congreve's 'Love for Love', Butler in Joseph Addison's 'The Drummer', Charino in Colley Cibber's 'Love Makes a Man', and Shallow in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. He also played Polonius to Garrick's Hamlet there on 14 October 1761. For the summer of 1762 he returned to the Haymarket to take on the roles of Papillon in Foote's 'The Lyar' and Mr Honeycombe in George Colman's 'Polly Honeycombe'. 
Weston's name is absent from playbills for the 1762-3 season, and he was probably once more playing in the provinces. He joined Foote again at the Haymarket for the summer season in 1763 to take on the part of the henpecked husband Jerry Sneak in 'The Mayor of Garratt', a role written for him by Foote and in which he enjoyed great success. It was also at this time that he first played Scrub in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', a part which became his most memorable. By now he had earned himself a respectable reputation as an actor, and he was able to consolidate this during the 1763-4 season at Drury Lane with strong performances as Foresight in 'Love for Love', Sharp in Garrick's 'The Lying Valet', and Abel Drugger in Ben Jonson's 'The Alchemist'. He then disappeared from all playbills for two years, perhaps as a result of a need to dodge creditors, and resurfaced in June 1766 once more at the Haymarket, playing three roles in 'The Minor'. He joined his wife at the King's Theatre in August and then returned to Drury Lane as the Sexton in 'Much Ado about Nothing' on 23 October. 
Between 1766 and 1769 Weston does not seem to have been cast quite so frequently and added relatively few characters to his portfolio. The parts he did take on were not always as significant as he might have wished, and this may have been due, to some degree, to the rivalry for attention he must have had to tolerate from the great comic actor Ned Shuter at both Drury Lane and the Haymarket. During this period Weston adopted the roles of Gripe in Thomas Otway's 'The Cheats of Scapin', Roderigo in 'Othello' (both in the summer of 1767), and Dr Last in Foote's comedy 'The Devil upon Two Sticks' (30 May 1768). Some of the Haymarket company, Weston included, transferred to a new Edinburgh theatre for the winter season 1770-71. Here he added Paris in Colman's 'The Jealous Wife', Sir Harry Sycamore in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Maid of the Mill', and Tom in Richard Steele's 'The Funeral' to his repertory. After a brief stint in York he returned to the Haymarket on 5 May 1771 for a heavy summer's schedule of more than sixty performances. He then alternated between Drury Lane and the Haymarket until his death in January 1776. 
There is uncertainty surrounding the precise date of Weston's demise. It was first announced in the 'Public Advertiser' of 3 January 1776 that he had died on 31 December 1775, but the 'Morning Post' of 13 January assigned his death to 12 January, at Newington Butts, London. The 'Public Advertiser' of 16 January then agreed with the 'Morning Post'. The funeral probably at St James's, Clerkenwell, however, did not take place until 21 January, suggesting an even later date for the death. The cause of death, though, is not disputed and is put down to Weston's excessive drinking. 
Drunkenness and illness marked his last years, and his death did not come unexpectedly. In a letter to his brother dated 7 November, Garrick stated that it was clear that 'Weston is dying, & with him goes a good Actor, & a very bad Man' ('Letters', 3.1046). By December it became clear to Weston that he was unlikely to climb onto the stage again, and though he made plans to spend time at the spa in Bath he was never to make the journey. 
A mock will, credited to Weston, the contents of which were as acrimonious as they were witty, was circulated shortly after his death and published in the third volume of 'Dramatic Table Talk'. In it Weston was purported to have left Garrick all his money, 'as there is nothing on earth he is so very fond of'; to Foote he bequeathed his consequence, to Reddish a grain of honesty, to Brereton a small portion of modesty, and to Jacobs his shoes 'for which he has long waited' (Holcroft, 2.122-3). This will was refuted by Martha Weston and Richard Hughes in the 'Morning Post' of 12 February 1776, where the contents of the genuine will were also printed. 
As an actor Weston was an accomplished comedian and excelled in the parts of fools and clowns. Among his contemporaries, only Ned Shuter (who had been bequeathed Weston's example in the mock will) offered him any significant rivalry. Thomas Holcroft, in his 'Theatrical Recorder', recalled his ability to assume a character completely and to perform 'with such a consistent and peculiar humour, it was so entirely distinct from anything we call acting, and so perfect a resemblance of the person whom the pencil of the poet had depicted' (Holcroft, 2.120). It was this skill that caused Davies to couple Weston with Benjamin Johnson as the only men who became 'so truly absorbed in character, that they never lost sight of it' (Davies, 2.106). He also placed his interpretation of Abel Drugger on a par with Garrick's who, though he himself excelled in the role, declared that Weston's work was one of the greatest pieces of comic acting he had ever witnessed. When the two men played opposite one another in 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Garrick, as Archer, could hardly keep a straight face against Weston as Scrub. Weston's friend Francis Gentleman held his acting in great esteem and, in his 'Dramatic Censor' (1770), praised his work in a number of roles. 


@@@@@


doc= 29136


Weston, Sir William (b. after 1469, d. 1540), prior of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England, was the second son of Sir Edmund Weston (died before 1509) of Boston, governor of Guernsey and esquire of the body to Henry VII, and Katharine (or Kathryn) Lempriere, 'nee' Camell, of Shapwick, Dorset. His elder brother was the courtier Sir Richard Weston. He was born in the Jersey manor of Rozel, his mother being the widow of its seigneur, Renaud Lempriere. On reaching adulthood William continued the remarkable family tradition of service to the order of St John. Two of his uncles and two of his great-uncles had been hospitallers, his great-uncle William Dawney and uncle John Weston both becoming turcopoliers (coastguard commanders) of Rhodes, and the latter prior of England between 1476 and 1489. Although William Weston perhaps joined the order in his uncle's lifetime, he does not appear in its records until 1498, when he attended a general chapter at Rhodes. By this time he was a preceptor, responsible for one of the order's houses, probably that of Ansty in Wiltshire. In 1504, while he was still in Rhodes, William was granted the Cambridgeshire estate of Sawston by the grand master, Emery d'Amboise. Two years later he was among those praised for providing hospitality to the party of Sir Richard Guildford on its way to the Holy Land. Soon after he was promoted to be preceptor of the Hampshire house of Baddesley, which he returned to England to administer in 1510. He remained there until summoned to attend the general chapter held in Rhodes in 1517, and was in the Aegean for the next five years. 
During the Turkish siege of Rhodes in 1522 Weston commanded the post of England, which was the scene of some of the heaviest fighting of the conflict, and lost a finger to an arquebusier's shot on 24 September. He may have been more seriously injured than this would suggest, as charge of the English post was then bestowed elsewhere. By the time of the order's departure from the island, on 1 January 1523, however, he was sufficiently recovered to be given command of the order's great ship, which he conducted to Crete. Elected turcopolier there in February, Weston was soon granted expectancy to the priorate of England and returned home. In the following year he was sent by Henry VIII to Italy to deliver 50,000 ecus to the duc de Bourbon. Having had some difficulty discharging this responsibility, he went on to the order's convent, then at Viterbo, and remained there until June 1527, when he was elected prior of England after the death of Sir Thomas Docwra. He returned home and managed to defuse Henry VIII's threats to confiscate the order's lands, or transfer its personnel to Calais, by a discreet bribe of $4000, following which the king ostentatiously granted a similar sum towards the recovery of Rhodes. 
During the first years of his priorate Weston was preoccupied with the recovery of Sir Thomas Docwra's effects from the latter's family and servants, and with the handover of the prioral estate of Sandford (Oxfordshire) to Cardinal College, Oxford. Once he had established himself the priory suffered heavily from the legislation of the Reformation Parliament, especially the 'Act of First Fruits and Tenths' (1534), which Weston opposed from the Lords. In non-financial matters, however, he obediently toed the line, signing the 'Act of Succession' of 1534, and agreeing to the letters patent which subjected all English members of the order to royal control in 1538. Despite this he was always regarded as a conservative by the crown, and was employed on less government business than his predecessor had been. In 1539 he suffered a major blow with the execution of his favoured nephew, Sir Thomas Dingley, for treason, and when the order was dissolved in 1540 he expired, at the priory of St John, Clerkenwell, Middlesex, on 7 May, the day the act passed through the Commons. He was buried in the old nunnery church of St Mary, Clerkenwell, later the church of St James. Although his elaborate marble tomb was largely destroyed during the rebuilding of the church in 1788, an exceptionally fine cadaver figure from it has survived, and is conserved in the hospital's former priory church, now in the hands of the order of St John. 


@@@@@


doc= 29137


Weston, William (1549/50-1615), Jesuit, was born in Maidstone, Kent. Nothing is known of his family. 
According to most sources, he was educated at Oxford, though there is no clear evidence for this in the university registers. He has been assumed to be the William Weston who was admitted to Christ Church in 1564 and obtained his BA on 17 February 1569. He may have been at Lincoln's Inn in 1570. He was already a Catholic when he moved to Paris in 1571 to continue his studies. At Paris he was invited to come to the newly founded English College at Douai. He went there in 1572 and received minor orders, together with other seminarists, at Brussels the next year. At Douai he crossed the path of Edmund Campion, who then left for Rome to become a Jesuit. In the summer of 1575 Weston made his pilgrimage on foot to Rome, and on 5 November, aged twenty-five, he entered the Jesuit noviciate at Sant' Andrea; Robert Persons and Henry Garnet had also joined that year. The next eight years Weston spent in Spain. He completed his noviciate in Montilla and studied philosophy and theology at Cordoba for three years. After having been ordained priest in 1579, he worked in San Lucar and Cadiz and taught Greek at the English College at Seville from 1582 to 1584. 
The first Jesuits, Campion and Persons, arrived in England in 1580 and began their efforts to organize the mission. In 1581, after the publication of 'Decem rationes', Campion was executed at Tyburn and Persons had to flee the country. Despite these early set-backs and the intensified persecution of Catholics in the 1580s, English priests continued to be sent to their home country from the seminaries. In 1583 Weston received a summons to go to Paris from his general, Claudio Acquaviva, but he could leave Seville only after the winter. In Paris in 1584 he learned from Persons that he was to be sent to England as a missionary (on Persons's recommendation). Weston was apprehensive when on 12 June he wrote to Acquaviva accepting his mission, fearing the cruelties of torture and execution. He assumed the alias of Edmunds out of respect for Campion. 
After spending about three months with Persons in Paris, Weston left the city on 26 August 1584. On 10 September he landed on the Norfolk coast, accompanied by Ralph Emerson, the Jesuit lay brother who had been Campion's companion. However, within two weeks Emerson was arrested for bringing over Catholic books and committed to the Poultry prison. He was to languish in English prisons for twenty years. Weston's first deeds in England were the conversion to Roman Catholicism of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, and a brave visit to the Tower to see the Jesuit priest Jasper Heywood, together with Heywood's sister Elizabeth and her son, the subsequently famous poet John Donne: 'So I accompanied her to the Tower, but with a feeling of great trepidation as I saw the vast battlements, and was led by the warder past the gates with their iron fastenings, which were closed behind me' ('Autobiography', 10-11). Heywood was exiled in 1585 and Weston succeeded him as superior of the Jesuits in England, facing the difficult task of organizing the mission. For some time no other Jesuit was at liberty in England. 
In 1585 the act against all priests was passed, making it treason for any priest to be in England and felony punishable by death for anyone who helped or harboured missionaries. Weston later commented: 'As far as I was concerned, I thought it would be well to retire myself to some place where I could judge from my own observation the way things were likely to go. I would be able then to see how Catholics thought and felt: whether they would retain their old loyalty to the faith, search out priests, ask them to their houses and maintain them; or whether they would keep them at a distance and agree to be abandoned by them in a time of such peril. Far better, I thought, that they should invite or summon me to them, than that I should thrust myself on them and have them risk their lives and property for my sake. ('Autobiography', 22-3)' In April he attended a conference of Catholic gentry and seminary priests at Hoxton, near London. It was decided that priests were to stay at inns, and a fund to support them was established by the gentry. 
During the years 1585-6 Weston and a group of secular priests were involved in the practice of exorcism. Though it was not popular among the priests of the Counter-Reformation, an interest in demonology was not unusual, and the priests concerned may have been influenced by public exorcisms practised in France. Weston was convinced of the power of God to cure demoniacs through the Catholic church and the priest-exorcist. He felt people wanted such public exorcisms and, as a proselytizer, thought it possible thus to confirm waverers in their faith. The exorcisms have been presented as a conversion campaign, based on the unreliable confessions of Anthony Tyrrell, a priest-exorcist turned informer, who spoke of a total of at least 500 conversions. Weston's exorcisms, however, all took place in recusants' private houses, mostly that of Sir George Peckham of Denham, Buckinghamshire, and were on a considerably smaller scale. 
At this time rumours were spread of a connection between the Denham exorcisms conducted by Weston, John Cornelius, Robert Dibdale, and possibly John Ballard, and the Babington plot, an intricate affair involving Walsingham's machinations against Mary, queen of Scots. Ballard (former companion of Tyrrell) was a main conspirator of a group plotting the assassination of Queen Elizabeth, a Spanish invasion, and the installation of Mary as queen of Britain. The affluent gentleman Anthony Babington and his romantic associates hoped to free their beloved queen from prison, at first without any idea of regicide. Babington possibly visited the Denham exorcisms, and his servant Nicholas Marwood was Weston's first demoniac. The government allowed the exorcisms to continue in the hope of implicating a wider circle of Catholics while waiting for the best moment to explode the manipulated plot and damage the reputation and the organization of English Catholicism. In June 1586 the house at Denham was raided and the prisons were prepared for the Babington arrests. 
After the Hoxton conference Weston had help from two new arrivals. The Jesuits Henry Garnet and Robert Southwell landed in England on 7 July 1586 and Weston met them in London on 13 July. On the same day or the next morning Babington sought Weston's advice on the difficult situation in which he had landed himself. Weston understood he needed to dissociate himself from the foolhardy Babington and took the newly arrived Jesuits to Harlesford, near Marlow, Buckinghamshire, the home of his friend Richard Bold. Here a conference crucial to the development and organization of the English mission took place from 14 to 23 July. From his first days in England Weston had worked to maintain and build on the network of Catholic gentry contacts, and he compiled a list of private hiding-places for the incoming priests. His work, together with the new instructions from Rome, formed the basis of the continued missionary effort. He spent happy days at Harlesford, where there was time for friendship, prayer and mass in the chapel, and musical performances by members of Bold's household. The composer William Byrd was also among the company. 
Soon after the Harlesford meeting, on 3 August 1586, Weston was arrested outside Bishopsgate and imprisoned in a private house near the Clink prison. He had been recognized by Walsingham's spy Nicholas Berden, but his arrest had not been planned. In fact this was the beginning of the round-up of the Babington plot. Ballard was arrested the next day and Weston was locked up in order to avoid alarming Babington, who was arrested on 14 August. Though Walsingham had spread rumours of Weston's complicity, at a later stage he appears to have instructed his agents not to associate influential priests with the plot. Yet the government perhaps hoped that Weston would become involved. After the trials and executions of the conspirators in September Weston was transferred to the Clink prison. His friends the priests John Lowe, John Adams, and Robert Dibdale were executed at Tyburn on 8 October. Weston was left to wonder why his trial was delayed, reflecting every day on his possibly imminent death. Shortly before the execution of Mary, queen of Scots, on 8 February 1587 Weston was interviewed by a clerk of the privy council, mostly about the exorcisms, but he was never brought to trial. 
In January 1588 Weston was moved to Wisbech Castle, the prison for notable Catholics in Cambridgeshire, where he was kept in isolation for the first four years. After this period conditions in the prison improved, and the priests could move about and receive visitors. Weston played a considerable part in organizing the priests' common life under the difficult circumstances in prison. Initially, a group of some eighteen secular priests set up rules for the confraternity and wished Weston, the only Jesuit, to be their leader. Garnet, who had succeeded Weston as superior in England, allowed Weston moral leadership but no authority over the priests. Tensions developed between Weston's group and another led by the secular priest Christopher Bagshaw. The situation deteriorated after the death of Cardinal Allen in 1594. A long series of disputes and attempts at reconciliation ensued, but the prison community remained divided. The Wisbech stirs, as these quarrels became known, had at their core an anti-Jesuit impetus which centred on the Jesuit Weston's alleged ambition to domineer over the seculars. They were no isolated event. During the 1580s Jesuit-secular friction had occurred in the English College at Rome and in Flanders. The idea took hold that the Jesuits, who were in charge of most of the seminaries, wanted absolute control over the English mission. Following the appointment of the first arch-priest George Blackwell (with jurisdiction over the secular clergy) next to the Jesuit superior Garnet in 1598 issues of the English mission, such as toleration of Catholics, political allegiance, and Jesuit presence in England, were debated in the bitter confrontations of the arch-priest controversy. The Wisbech stirs were a prelude to this serious disruption in English Catholic relations. 
In December 1598 Weston was taken to the Tower and locked in solitary confinement for five years. He suffered from insomnia, headaches, increasing blindness, loneliness, and quite possibly also mental illness. The reason for this move was not given, but the guards accompanying Weston to the Tower told him: 'that I had meddled in Spanish politics and favoured the Spanish party... They felt certain that unless I was put out of the way and had my mouth stopped, they would never be able to come to a decision on the matters which they had set in motion. Let that suffice for the affairs of Wisbech. ('Autobiography', 192-4)' In July 1598, before Weston's transfer, a manuscript compilation known as Weston's 'Book of miracles' was discovered. This work came into the hands of the bishop of London, Richard Bancroft, who, with his chaplain Samuel Harsnett, was involved in a campaign against the puritan exorcist John Darrell. Darrell was condemned as a fraud in 1599. As the appellants sought negotiations with the government, Bancroft and the privy council, aiming to divide the Catholics, collected their papers and supported the publications of the appellant polemicists, among them Bagshaw's 'True Relation of the Faction Begun at Wisbich' (1601), which incriminated Weston and the Jesuits. In 1602 Bancroft and Harsnett became interested in exposing the exorcisms at Denham as related in the 'Book of miracles', and an inquiry was started sixteen years after they had taken place. Thus Harsnett's satirical 'Declaration of Egregious Popish Impostures' (1603), while forming part of a series of attacks on Darrell's practices, cleared the bishop of the charge that he was concerned only with suppressing puritans and revealed not just its anti-Jesuitism, but also Bancroft's interest in manipulating the arch-priest controversy. Harsnett's work, as well as tracts of the arch-priest controversy, were used by Shakespeare, especially in 'King Lear', written in 1604-5, bringing the Denham devils Fliberdigibbet and Frateretto, among others, universal fame. 
After the accession of James I in 1603 Weston was given a choice between taking the oath of allegiance and exile on the continent. He chose exile and was released from the Tower on 13 May. He probably never saw Harsnett's 'Declaration' published that summer. Weston recovered his health somewhat at St Omer. He went to Rome in 1604 and worked for a few months at the English College of St Alban's at Valladolid as spiritual prefect. In 1605, a year before his friend Henry Garnet's execution after the Gunpowder Plot, Weston left for Seville, where he worked as spiritual director of the English College and resumed lecturing on theology, Hebrew, and Greek. Here he met Francisco de Peralta, the college superior and an old friend from his years in Cordoba, who was to write his biography. In 1611 Weston started his autobiography at the request of his general and related his experiences as a missionary in England. Written with restraint and containing interesting observations, it is a valuable firsthand account of Tudor England. The only complete copy was translated into English by Philip Caraman. 
Weston stayed at Seville until 1614, when he was made rector of the English College of St Alban's at Valladolid. Here he died after a brief illness between 14 and 19 April 1615. His reputation suffered considerably and unjustly from the appellant publications which long influenced writers on the Catholic controversies from Charles Dodd to T. G. Law. Testimony of friends, the autobiography, and the few extant letters by Weston naturally create a different, at times also too saintly, impression of the man. Modern commentators (though not always in agreement) have offered a fairer estimate of his character and activities. 


@@@@@


doc= 29138


Westphal, Sir George Augustus (1785-1875), naval officer, son of George Westphal, of Hanoverian descent, whose uncle was tutor to the duke of Kent, and his wife, 'nee' McGrigor, widow of Captain Bachop RN, was born on 26 July 1785; Admiral Philip Westphal was his brother. He entered the navy, under the auspices of the duke of Kent, in 1798 on the frigate 'Porcupine', on the North American station. He afterwards served on the home station and in the West Indies, and in March 1803 joined the 'Amphion', which carried Nelson out to the Mediterranean. Off Toulon he was moved into the 'Victory', and, continuing in her, was present at Trafalgar, where he was severely wounded. While Westphal was lying in the cockpit Nelson's coat, hastily rolled up, was put under his head for a pillow. Some of the bullions of one of the epaulettes got entangled with his hair and was stuck to it with dried blood, so that the coat and Westphal could be separated only by cutting off some four or five of the bullions, which Westphal long treasured as memorials of the hero. He afterwards served in the 'Ocean', flagship of Lord Collingwood, and in the 'Caledonia', flagship of Lord St Vincent, off Brest; and on 15 August 1806 was made lieutenant in the sloop 'Demerara' in the West Indies. In 1807 he had to be invalided, and was returning to England in a merchant ship when, after a gallant resistance, she was captured by a French privateer and taken to Guadeloupe. Westphal, who had been severely wounded, afterwards escaped, and was picked up at sea by an American schooner, from which he got on board an English privateer and was taken to Antigua, ultimately returning to England in the frigate 'Venus'. He was appointed to the 'Foudroyant', from which he was removed to the 'Neptune', and from her to the 'Belle-Isle' in the West Indies, and served on shore at the capture of Martinique. The 'Belle-Isle', under Commodore George Cockburn, then returned to England, and in July and August was employed in the Scheldt, Westphal being in command of a division of the gunboats. 
Westphal afterwards followed Cockburn to the 'Indefatigable', and in the expedition to Quiberon Bay in March 1810 had command of the boat which landed the agents of the king of Spain. Continuing in the 'Indefatigable', he took part in the defence of Cadiz and in escorting the Spanish ships to Havana. He was again with Cockburn in the 'Marlborough', both at Cadiz and afterwards in the Chesapeake, where, on several occasions, his gallant conduct was praised by Cockburn, and led to his promotion to commander on 8 July 1813. He then was appointed to the sloop 'Anaconda' and commanded her in the Gulf of Mexico and in the expedition against New Orleans, where he was landed with the naval brigade. In July 1815 the 'Anaconda' was condemned at Jamaica, and Westphal returned to England as a passenger. He married first, on 8 January 1817, Alicia (died 1847), daughter of Charles Stuart of Worcester and widow of William Chambers; in 1849 he married Mary Anne, daughter of John Racey of Quebec and widow of George Addenbrooke Gore of Barrowmount, Kilkenny: she survived him. On 12 August 1819 he was promoted captain. In May 1822 he was appointed to the 'Jupiter' (60 guns), in which he carried out Lord Amherst to India. On his return he was knighted on 7 April 1824 -- according to Peel, then home secretary, more for his gallant war service than for taking out the governor-general of Bengal. In 1832 he joined the 'Vernon' (50 guns), as flag captain to Sir George Cockburn on the North American station, but was compelled to invalid in the spring of 1834. 
Westphal had no further service, but was appointed naval aide-de-camp to the queen in November 1846, and was advanced to rear-admiral on 17 August 1851, vice-admiral on 10 September 1857, and admiral on 23 March 1863. For nearly forty years he lived in the same house, 2 Brunswick Square, Hove, Sussex, and died there on 11 January 1875. He was a magistrate of Brighton and Hove, but seldom sat. Westphal was a brave and resourceful junior commander, and continued selection by Cockburn demonstrated his great abilities as a sea officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 29139


Westphal, Philip (1782-1880), naval officer, was the elder son of George Westphal, of a noble Hanoverian family, whose uncle was tutor to the duke of Kent, and his wife, 'nee' McGrigor, widow of Captain Bachop RN; Sir George Augustus Westphal was his younger brother. He entered the navy in 1794 under the patronage of the duke of Kent, on the 'Oiseau' on the North American station. In 1796 he was successively in the 'Albatross' and the 'Shannon' on the home station, and from 1797 to 1800 in the 'Asia' on the coast of North America. In 1801 he was in the 'Blanche', one of the frigates with Nelson at Copenhagen on 2 April. For his share in this action Westphal was promoted on 5 April to lieutenant of the 'Defiance' (74 guns). In May 1802 he was appointed to the 'Amazon' (38 guns; Captain William Parker) with Nelson off Toulon, and in his cruise to the West Indies in the spring of 1805, and in 1806 with Sir John Borlase Warren, when the French frigate 'Belle Poule' surrendered to the 'Amazon'. The first lieutenant of the 'Amazon' having been killed in the action, Warren gave Westphal an acting order as captain of the 'Belle Poule', which he refitted and took to England. The Admiralty refused to confirm the acting order, and Westphal continued lieutenant of the 'Amazon' until she was paid off in 1812. 
Westphal was then appointed to the 'Junon', a 38-gun frigate, in which he had active service on the coast of North America. In January 1815 he was moved by Sir George Cockburn into his flagship, and on 13 June was at last promoted commander. In November 1828 he was appointed to the 'Warspite' (76 guns), again with Sir William Parker; but, as Parker was very shortly afterwards appointed to the royal yacht, Westphal was moved to the 'Kent' (78 guns), from which, on 22 July 1830, he was advanced to post rank. In 1847 he was retired on a Greenwich Hospital pension, becoming rear-admiral on 27 September 1855, vice-admiral on 4 October 1862, and admiral on 2 April 1866. He died, the oldest naval officer, on 16 March 1880 at Ryde, Isle of Wight, where he had settled in his retirement. 


@@@@@


doc= 29140


Westwood, John Obadiah (1805-1893), entomologist and palaeographer, was born on 22 December 1805 at Sheffield, the son of John Westwood (1774-1850), a medal designer and die-sinker, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Betts of Sheffield. Westwood was educated at the Society of Friends' school at Sheffield; in 1819 his family moved to Lichfield where he was educated at the grammar school; they later moved to Chelsea. 
Westwood was first apprenticed as an engraver, but in the autumn of 1821 he was articled to a firm of solicitors in London, where he was briefly a partner. Of his arrival in London, Westwood declared that 'instead of studying Coke upon Lyttleton, I greedily devoured all the information to be obtained from Samouelle's 'Compendium', Haworth's 'Lepidoptera Britannica', Shaw's 'Zoology', and other similar works' ('Entomologist's Monthly Magazine', 49). However, by the end of 1828 he had been enrolled as attorney of his majesty's court of king's bench at Westminster, attorney in common pleas, and solicitor in his majesty's high court of chancery. 
Westwood began collecting insects from all orders at an early age, acquiring both native and foreign specimens. In later life he toured across Europe and Russia visiting libraries and collections. Having small private means, he preferred to devote himself to entomology and antiquarian pursuits, augmenting his income by writing and drawing and, in time, he became one of the greatest living authorities on Anglo-Saxon and medieval manuscripts. His drawings of insects were masterpieces of correct delineation, and he excelled in reproducing old manuscripts, illuminations, and representations of old ivories and inscribed stones. 
In March 1824 Westwood first met the entomologist Frederick William Hope (1797-1862). Hope, the first president of the Entomological Society, became Westwood's patron, and in August 1834 he engaged Westwood for one day each week to arrange his insect specimens. In 1839 Westwood married Eliza Richardson (died 1882), who accompanied him on all his archaeological tours, and who assisted him in making sketches and rubbings of the inscribed stones for his 'Lapidarium Walliae' (1876-9). 
About 1849 Hope decided to give his collections to Oxford University by a deed of gift officially accepted by convocation in April 1850. Hope was also keen to establish a new chair of zoology at Oxford, and in 1860 the Hope professorship of zoology was endowed. Hope's collections were transferred from Hammersmith (where Westwood also resided) to Oxford, but by 1855 he was worried about their condition. Thus in 1857 Westwood was appointed conservator of Hope's collections and, on 31 July of the same year, Westwood's own insect collection (having been purchased by Hope) was added to the Hopeian Museum. In January 1861 Westwood was nominated by Hope for the post of first Hope professor of zoology and in due course was appointed. In 1858 he joined Magdalen College, becoming a fellow in 1880. 
Westwood was a prolific author. His antiquarian works included 'Palaeographia sacra pictoria' (1843-5), 'Illuminated Illustrations of the Bible' (1846), 'On the distinctive character of the... ornamentation employed by the early British Anglo-Saxon, and Irish artists' (1854), 'A Descriptive Catalogue of the Fictile Ivories in the South Kensington Museum' (1876), 'Lapidarium Walliae: the Early Inscribed and Sculptured Stones of Wales' (1876-9), and 'The Book of Kells: a Lecture' (1887). His most important entomological work was 'An Introduction to the Modern Classification of Insects' (2 vols., 1839-40). Other important works in this field included 'The Entomologist's Text Book' (1838), 'British Butterflies and their Transformations' (2 vols., 1841-55), 'The Butterflies of Great Britain' (1855; edn 1887), 'Catalogue of Orthopterous Insects in the Collection of the British Museum. Part I. Phasmidae' (1859), and 'Thesaurus entomologicus Oxoniensis, or, Illustrations of new, rare, and interesting insects, for the most part contained in the collections presented to the University of Oxford by the Rev. F. W. Hope' (1874). He also contributed to works by other naturalists and published more than 350 papers. 
Although Westwood received no formal training as an artist, he produced illustrations for J. F. Stephen's 'Illustrations of British Entomology' (1828-46), F. W. Hope's 'Coleopterist's Manual' (1837-40), and T. V. Wollaston's 'Insecta Maderensia' (1854). He produced new editions, and contributed notes to a number of works, including D. Drury's 'Illustrations of Exotic Entomology' (3 vols., 1837) and M. Harris's 'The Aurelian: a Natural History of English Moths' (1840). The name 'Westwoodia' was bestowed in his honour by Brulle in 1846 on a genus of Hymenoptera, and his name was similarly employed by C. S. Bate in 1857 for Crustacea, and by Kaufs in 1866 and Castelnau in 1873 for Coleoptera. 
In his time, Westwood's work 'forged a bridge between entomologists and gardeners' (Clark, 210). He was on the staff of the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' for nearly half a century as entomological referee, and in this journal, and the 'Agricultural Gazette', he published a series of articles around 1860, disputing Darwin's theories of evolution and natural selection. Moreover, Westwood, like many of his contemporaries, was unable to accept the doctrine of evolution and remained a staunch anti-Darwinist to the end, although he did live to see the subject taught at his university. 
Westwood was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 1 May 1827, and was on the honorary list of nearly every entomological society of his period. He had co-operated actively in founding the Entomological Society of London in 1833, and was honorary secretary from 1834 until 1847 (from 1836 to 1843 he also held the post of honorary curator). He was president of the society for three terms (1851-2, 1872-3, 1876-7), and edited the society's 'Transactions'. In 1883 he was elected honorary life president. His work 'An Introduction to the Modern Classification of Insects' (1838-40) gained him the Royal Society's gold medal in 1855, and although frequently urged to become a candidate for fellowship to the society he declined the offers. He was also made an honorary member of the London Vaccine Institution in 1833, and the emperor of Brazil, Pedro II, made Westwood a knight of the imperial order of the rose. 
About 1884, a bad fall caused damage to Westwood's left arm, and prevented the pursuit of his studies. By 1892 he was confined to a bath chair, and on 2 January 1893 he died at his residence, 141 Woodstock Road, Oxford. He was buried at St Sepulchre's cemetery, Jericho, Oxford. In 1893 a vestry was erected at St Andrew's Church, Sandford-on-Thames, in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 29141


Westwood, Thomas (1814-1888), poet and bibliographer of angling, was born on 26 November 1814 at Westwood Cottage, The Chase, Enfield, and was baptized at St Andrew's, Enfield, on 1 January 1815, the youngest son of Thomas Westwood of Enfield and his wife, Mary. Westwood senior was an unusual character with a hump and reportedly stood 4 feet and 'a nail high' ('Works of Charles and Mary Lamb', 833). He was vividly described by Charles Lamb in several letters to William Wordsworth between 1829 and 1830. The Lambs moved in next door to the Westwoods' cottage in September 1827, when Thomas Westwood senior was employed as an agent of the Phoenix Insurance Company. In October 1829 the Lambs were forced to give up their house and became lodgers with the Westwoods. This arrangement lasted until May 1833. Originally complimentary of Westwood senior's company and manners Lamb soon began to tire of his 'one anecdote' (ibid.) and miserly behaviour. 
As a youth Thomas Westwood made the acquaintance of Lamb and was deeply impressed by his illustrious neighbour, becoming a regular visitor, though he was not yet thirteen. Not surprisingly he was a shy youth and was somewhat in awe of Lamb but Lamb warmed to him and granted the teenager free access to his library, even flinging presentation copies over the fence into the Westwoods' garden for Thomas to pick up. Mary Lamb also influenced the youngster, teaching him Latin and giving him a taste for popular fiction. Many years later in 'Notes and Queries' Westwood contributed an interesting and personal article on Lamb giving a generous appraisal of his talents, stating that he was 'a seventeenth-century man mislaid' ('N&Q', 3rd ser., 10, 222). 
Westwood became acquainted with and was greatly influenced by Izaak Walton through reading Lamb's copy of the 'Compleat Angler'. Reading Hawkins's 1760 edition Westwood regarded it, in biblical allegory, as 'my chief treasure, pearl of price' (Lucas, 727). 
With the introduction to many of Lamb's literary friends, including the regular visits of William Wordsworth -- whom Westwood senior disliked for taking too much sugar in his tea -- Westwood developed an interest in writing. A small volume entitled 'Poems' was published in 1840. Critical reviews were favourable, and the reviewer for 'The Athenaeum' in 1841 commented that Westwood had 'a poetical eye, a poetical heart, and a musical ear'. In 1842 he began a literary correspondence with Elizabeth Barrett Browning that continued until 1854. He also published 'Beads from a Rosary' (1843) and 'Burden of the Bell and other Lyrics' (1850), after many of the poems had appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. His most ambitious work is 'The Quest of Sancgreall' (1868). Westwood produced many poems and published a number of collections but was conscious that they lacked something. In a humorous sonnet entitled 'Small Poets' he wrote 'Oh for a wizard's sleight to turn this swarm of mites into one mighty!'. However, W. S. Landor remarked that he would have liked to have written Westwood's 'Love in the Alpuxaras'. 
After working for Lamb's friend Ader the merchant in 1844, Westwood was posted to Belgium, where he became the Brussels director and secretary of the Tournai and Jurbise Railway. Most of his later life was spent in west Flanders. He married, about 1855, a Belgian woman, Rosa. Here he continued with his interest in angling, building up an impressive library on the subject (now partly in the New York Public Library). In 1861 he published, through 'The Field' office, 'A new bibliotheca piscatoria, or, General catalogue of angling and fishing literature, with bibliographical notes and data'. Westwood became the acknowledged authority on the subject and three years later issued his 'Chronicle of the Compleat Angler'. This book was an elaborate bibliography of Izaak Walton's work and was later printed as a supplement to Marston's 1888 edition of 'The Compleat Angler', with a new preface. 
The 'Bibliotheca piscatoria: a Catalogue of Books on Angling, the Fisheries and Fish-Culture' (1883) was a supplement to Westwood's 'magnum opus' of 1861 but was practically rewritten. With the collaboration of Thomas Satchell, Westwood produced a handsome quarto edition containing well over 5000 separate entries. In the same year, with his own expert introduction to accompany it, Westwood reprinted John Denny's 1613 'The Secrets of Angling'. 'Twelve Sonnets and an Epilogue (in Memoriam I. Walton)' appeared in 1884. Westwood died at boulevard Waterloo, Brussels, Belgium, on 13 March 1888. His widow contributed an introductory memoir to an edition of his letters to Florence, Lady Alwyne Compton. 


@@@@@


doc= 29142


Wetenhall, Edward (1636-1713), Church of Ireland bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh, was born at Lichfield on 7 October 1636. Educated at Westminster School under Richard Busby, he was admitted king's scholar in 1651, and went to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a foundation scholar in 1655. After graduating BA in 1658 he migrated (1660) to Lincoln College, Oxford, of which he became chaplain, was incorporated BA on 18 June, and graduated MA on 10 July 1661. He held the perpetual curacy of Combe, Oxfordshire, and the vicarage of St Stephen's, near St Albans, Hertfordshire; on 11 June 1667 he was collated to a prebend at Exeter, holding with it the mastership of the Blue-Coat School. He graduated BD at Oxford on 26 May 1669, and was incorporated BD at Cambridge in 1670. Michael Boyle the younger, then archbishop of Dublin, took him over to Dublin in 1672 as master of the Blue-Coat School. He was made DD at Trinity College (1674), became curate of St Werburgh's, and afterwards chantor of Christ Church. On the death (22 December 1678) of Edward Synge, bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross, the sees were separated, and Wetenhall was made (3 February 1679) bishop of Cork and Ross, being consecrated on 23 March 1679 in Christ Church, Dublin. 
Following the accession of James II, Wetenhall travelled through the diocese preaching on the duty of obedience. In 1686 he published six of these sermons under the title 'Hexapla Jacobaea: a Specimen of Loyalty to... James II'. He was one of only seven bishops who remained in Ireland during the crisis of 1688-91, and one of only four who attended James's Irish parliament. According to his own account his opposition to the proceedings there almost led to penalties for contempt, and he was subsequently a prisoner in Cork city during Marlborough's siege (23-8 September 1690). Nevertheless his perceived collaboration exposed him to accusations of Jacobite sympathies. These reportedly led to his being passed over when the vacant see of Cashel was filled in 1691 (James Bonnell to J. Strype, 21 Feb 1691, Strype correspondence, 1, fol. 87'v'). 'The case of the Irish protestants in relation to recognizing or swearing allegiance to and praying for King William and Queen Mary stated and resolved' (1691), published anonymously but widely recognized as Wetenhall's work, did not wholly rebut these charges. It defended protestant acquiescence in the Revolution, but conspicuously failed to repudiate passive obedience or to declare that James had ceased to be lawful king. Instead the argument was that James had made it impossible for protestants to maintain their vows of allegiance, combined with an appeal to providence: 'God has now put us under the power of the second William the Conqueror' ('The Case', 6). In 1699 Wetenhall was transferred to the diocese of Kilmore and Ardagh, although he appears to have had some qualms about thus taking the place of the ousted nonjuror William Sheridan. 
Wetenhall's attitude to protestant dissent has been characterized as 'moderately ecumenical' (Greaves, 378). 'The Protestant Peacemaker' (1682) praised the positive qualities of all protestant religious denominations, while arguing that dissenters were not justified in separating from the established church. The following year Wetenhall was one of those who opposed the government's campaign of repression against conventicles. After the revolution he opposed early calls for the extension to Ireland of the sacramental test, on the grounds that this was a profanation of the sacrament. His own theological orthodoxy was called into question when he intervened in the controversy on the doctrine of the Trinity raised by the publications of William Sherlock DD and John Wallis. His 'An Earnest and Compassionate Suit for Forbearance... by a Melancholy Stander-by' (1691) and 'The Antapology of the Melancholy Stander-by' (1693) led Archbishop King and others to conclude that his views on the Trinity were unsound. Having attended Thomas Emlyn's trial for heresy, he later visited him in prison. In 1698-9 an initially friendly meeting with William Penn led to an acrimonious exchange of pamphlets, commencing with Wetenhall's 'The testimony of the bishop of Cork as to a paper entitled 'Gospel truths'... by the people called Quakers' (1698) and continuing with his 'A brief and modest reply to Mr Penn's tedious, scurrilous and unchristian defence against the bishop of Cork' (1699). In 1710 he was a signatory to the memorial submitted to the lord lieutenant, the second duke of Ormond, in support of the attempts of John Richardson, a clergyman in Wetenhall's diocese, to promote missionary work through the Irish language among the Catholic population. 
Wetenhall seems generally to have been remembered as a conscientious bishop, who actively promoted pastoral work, courageously and energetically rallied his flock during the crisis years 1688-91, and contributed out of his own resources to the repair of the episcopal residences at Cork and Kilmore and the restoration of the cathedral of Ardagh. Archbishop King, however, reported in 1714 that Kilmore and Ardagh had generally been neglected owing to Wetenhall's absence and poor health. Moreover he had been influenced by others to discontinue the church-building programme commenced by his predecessor and to obstruct the disciplinary proceedings of the latter's chancellor. Later King listed him as one of those bishops who had despoiled their sees for personal gain, instancing the sale of a wood belonging to Kilmore. Wetenhall had a particular interest in religious instruction. His 'The Catechism of the Church of England, with Marginal Notes' was published in London in 1678 (apparently one of several pre-1696 editions) and in Dublin in 1696, with a revised version, 'A Tried Method of Catechising', in 1698 (Dublin edition, 1706). Bonnell, a relative by marriage, characterized him as 'a vigorous good man, and very useful to the church', not wholly successful in his printed works 'because he does not exhaust a subject', but excelling in extempore preaching and in 'practical casuisticalness' (Webster, 293-4). 
Wetenhall married twice; his second wife was Philippa (died 1717), sixth daughter of Sir William D'Oyly, bt, of Shotticham, Kent. His later years were spent in London, where he died on 12 November 1713; he was buried on 18 November in the south transept of Westminster Abbey, where there is an inscribed gravestone to his memory. In his will he affirmed the Church of England and Ireland to be 'the purest church in the world', though 'there are divers points which might be altered for the better' in 'articles, liturgy, and discipline, but especially in the conditions of clerical communion'. His eldest son with his first wife was Edward Wetenhall MD (buried on 29 August 1733, aged seventy). Another son, John ('c'.1669-1717), followed his father into the church and became archdeacon of Cork in 1697. 


@@@@@


doc= 29143


Sir Edward Robert Wetherall (1815-1869), army officer, entered the army on 27 June 1834, as ensign in his father's regiment, the 1st (Royals). He became lieutenant on 22 August 1837, and served in the Canadian uprising. He distinguished himself in the attack on St Eustache. Promoted captain on 19 December 1845, he transferred to the Scots Fusilier Guards on 15 July 1854. He served in the Crimea, as assistant quartermaster-general, until the fall of Sevastopol, and was the guide of the cavalry in the flank march to Balaklava. He was made brevet major on 12 December 1854 and brevet lieutenant-colonel on 17 July 1855. He was afterwards deputy quartermaster-general to the Turkish contingent at Kerch, and director-general of land transport (which he reorganized) in the Crimea. He received the medal with four clasps, CB, Legion d'honneur (fifth class), Mejidiye (third class), and Turkish medal. On 11 December 1855 he was made aide-de-camp to the queen, and colonel. 


@@@@@


doc= 29144


Wetherall, Sir Frederick Augustus (1754-1842), army officer, was the son of John Wetherall, a government official, of North Great George Street, Dublin. He obtained a commission as ensign in the 17th foot on 23 August 1775, embarked for Boston in September, and became lieutenant on 27 August 1776. During the American War of Independence he served with his regiment in the defence of Boston, and at the actions of Brooklyn, White Plains, Princeton, Brandywine, and Monmouth. In 1780 he was in command of a company serving as marines on HMS 'Alfred' and participated in the victories off capes Finisterre and St Vincent. In 1781 he married Elizabeth Mytton (died 1810). Their son was Sir George Augustus Wetherall. On 17 May of that same year he was made captain of an independent company which he had raised, and which was embodied in the 104th foot on 2 March 1782. 
Wetherall exchanged to the 11th foot on 16 April 1783, served six years with that regiment at Gibraltar, and accompanied the duke of Kent, as a member of his household, to Quebec in 1791. He was aide-de-camp and comptroller of the duke's household during the operations in the West Indies, and received two wounds at the taking of Martinique in March 1794. He had become major in the 11th on 1 March, and on 23 August, when the duke of Kent took command of the troops in Nova Scotia, he was appointed deputy adjutant-general there. On 20 May 1795 he obtained the lieutenant-colonelcy of Keppel's regiment, newly raised for service in the West Indies, and served with it in San Domingo. While on his way with dispatches to Barbados he was wounded and taken prisoner. He was kept in irons at Guadeloupe for nine months before he was exchanged, and suffered such privations that some men of the 32nd, who were also prisoners, raised a subscription for him. He returned to Halifax, Nova Scotia, as adjutant-general, but on 3 August 1796 he was transferred to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 82nd regiment, which was then in San Domingo. 
When the duke of Kent became commander-in-chief in North America in 1799, Wetherall again served on his staff as adjutant-general, but the duke resigned the following year. On 29 April 1802 Wetherall was made brevet colonel, and in 1803 he raised a regiment of Nova Scotia fencibles, and was appointed its colonel from 9 July. In May 1806 he was appointed brigadier in the Caribee Islands, and in October at the Cape of Good Hope. On 25 October 1809 he was promoted major-general and placed on the staff in India. Early in 1810, on his way to Calcutta, he was taken prisoner and held in Mauritius for two months until exchanged. The same year his wife died at the Cape. 
In November 1810 Wetherall was appointed second in command, under Sir Samuel Auchmuty, of the expedition to Java. He was thanked in general orders for his share in the battle of Cornelis, on 26 August 1811, and received the thanks of parliament and the gold medal for the conquest of Java. Later, in 1827-8, he made unsuccessful attempts to claim an extra $20,356 in prize money for the campaign, believing that the distribution made in 1815 was unjust. From Java he returned to India, and held command in Mysore until June 1815. He had become lieutenant-general on 4 June 1814, and was equerry, and afterwards executor, to the duke of Kent. In 1817 he married Elizabeth Ann Broad (1778/9-1846), the widow of Major Richard Broad and the daughter of W. Mair of Kensington. 
In February 1833 Wetherall received the grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order; he had petitioned unsuccessfully in 1816 to be created a knight commander of the Bath. On 10 January 1837 he relinquished the governorship of Blackness Castle, which he had held since 1830, when he became both a general and colonel of the 62nd foot. He was transferred to his old regiment, the 17th, on 17 February 1840. He died, aged eighty-eight, at his home in Castlebar Hill, Ealing, on 18 December 1842, and was buried on 24 December in St Mary's churchyard, Ealing, where he has a monument. 


@@@@@


doc= 29145


Wetherall, Sir George Augustus (1788-1868), army officer, was the son of General Sir Frederick Augustus Wetherall (1754-1842) and his first wife, Elizabeth Mytton (died 1810). He was educated at Hyde Abbey School, Winchester, and the Army College, Farnham, being already commissioned, aged seven, as lieutenant in the 7th (Royal Fusiliers) on 29 July 1795. In 1798 he was placed on half pay, but on 9 July 1803 began active service, joining the regiment of Nova Scotia fencibles formed by his father. Hitherto his name had been erroneously in the army list as F. Augustus, but the seniority given to him marks his identity. He became captain on 13 May 1805, and exchanged to the 1st (Royals) on 27 November 1806. 
Wetherall was brigade major under his father at the Cape in 1809, was taken prisoner with him while sailing to India in 1810 (they were released in an exchange of prisoners after two months), and served as his aide-de-camp in the conquest of Java in 1811. He was made brevet major on 12 August 1819, and regimental major on 30 December. He was military secretary to the commander-in-chief at Madras from 1822 to 1825, and deputy judge-advocate-general in 1826. On 11 December 1824 he was made brevet lieutenant-colonel, and on 7 August 1828 lieutenant-colonel of the Royals. He commanded the 2nd battalion of the regiment at Bangalore, in the Madras presidency, brought it home in 1831, and went with it to Canada in 1836. He was in command of the troops at Montreal when the insurrection broke out in the autumn of 1837. On 25 November, at the head of four companies of the Royals, a detachment of the 66th, and a troop of Montreal cavalry, with two six-pounders, he stormed a stockade held by Thomas Storrow Brown and other insurgents at St Charles who had refused to negotiate. His horse was shot and he lost twenty-one men. On 15 December, at the head of a brigade consisting of the Royals and some colonial troops, he and his son Edward ['see below'] took part in the action of St Eustache under Sir John Colborne. He had received the Hanoverian order (KH) in 1833, and was made CB on 13 June 1838, brevet colonel on 28 June, and aide-de-camp to the queen on 29 July 1842. 
Wetherall left the Royals on 14 July 1843, being appointed deputy adjutant-general at Montreal. In June 1850 he was given a post at the War Office in London. He was promoted major-general on 11 November 1851, and was appointed adjutant-general on 1 December 1854. From 1860 to 1865 he commanded the northern district of England, and on 21 August 1866 was appointed governor of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He had been given the colonelcy of the 84th foot on 15 June 1854, and had become lieutenant-general on 8 September 1857 and general on 23 October 1863. He was made KCB on 5 February 1856, and received the grand cross on 28 March 1865. 
Wetherall was an exceptional soldier and one of the few officers who served in North America to proceed to significant posts in the United Kingdom. 
He died at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, on 8 April 1868, aged eighty. In 1812 he had married Frances Diana, daughter of Captain Denton of the East India Company's service. Their only son, 
Wetherall was appointed deputy quartermaster-general to the forces in China in 1857, but was employed in India, owing to the outbreak of the mutiny. He was chief of the staff of the central India field force under Sir Hugh Henry Rose, and was present at the storming of Kunch and the battle of Gulauli, 22 May 1858, in which his horse was shot. He afterwards commanded a field force in south Oudh, as brigadier, and on 3 November stormed the fort of Rampur Kussia, taking twenty-three guns. He lost seventy-eight men, and Sir Colin Campbell was 'much put out' that he had not waited for Sir Hope Grant, as had been arranged. Even so, he received the medal and clasp, and was given an unattached lieutenant-colonelcy for his services in central India. 
Wetherall was appointed deputy quartermaster-general to the forces in Ireland on 28 January 1859, and was rewarded for distinguished service on 20 December 1861. On 28 April 1865 he was made deputy quartermaster-general at headquarters, and in 1868 he succeeded Sir Thomas Larcom as under-secretary in Ireland. He was made KCSI on 16 September 1867, and promoted major-general on 8 March 1869. On 26 January 1847 Wetherall married Katherine, daughter of John Durie of Astley Hall, Lancashire. He died suddenly at his home, Ashtown Lodge, Phoenix Park, Dublin, on 11 May 1869, having already won 'the cordial respect of all with whom he had official intercourse' ('The Times'). He was survived by his wife, three sons, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 29146


Wetherell, Sir Charles (1770-1846), politician and lawyer, was born in Oxford, the third son of Nathan Wetherell (died 1806), dean of Hereford and master of University College, Oxford, and his wife, Ricarda, daughter of Alexander Croke of Studley Priory, Oxfordshire. He went to St Paul's School in 1783, and University College, Oxford, in 1786. From 1788 to 1791 he held a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford. He graduated BA on 2 June 1790 and MA on 9 July 1793. In accordance with his father's wish he entered the Inner Temple on 15 April 1790 and was called to the bar on 4 July 1794. Under the patronage of Lord Eldon, a friend of his father, he developed an important equity practice, appearing in chancery, and before the privy council, the House of Lords, and parliamentary committees. He was appointed KC in 1816. He became bencher of his inn in 1816 and treasurer in 1825. Piqued that he had not received high legal office and determined to draw attention to his abilities, in 1817 he defended James Watson, charged with high treason after the Spa Fields riots. Wetherell presented an able and vigorous defence and, despite being a tory, denounced the methods used by the tory government in the affair. After Watson was found not guilty, charges against other defendants were dropped, and the episode did nothing to advance Wetherell's career. 
Wetherell was MP for Rye from 1812 to 1813, Shaftesbury from 1813 to 1818, Oxford from 1820 to 1826, Hastings in 1826, Plympton Erle in Devon from 1826 to 1830, and Boroughbridge in Yorkshire from 1830 to 1832. He was 'treated by both sides as a whimsical pedant rather than a formidable debater' ('GM', 428). He vehemently opposed almost every reform which came before the house, especially Roman Catholic emancipation and parliamentary, municipal, and university reform. He was knighted on 10 March 1824. He finally achieved high office, being appointed solicitor-general on 31 January 1824 and attorney-general in September 1826. He resigned while Canning was in office, but was reappointed in 1828 under the duke of Wellington until his intemperate opposition to Roman Catholic emancipation led to his dismissal. Thereafter he became a bitter opponent of the Wellington and whig administrations. 
It was Wetherell's appearance in Bristol which provoked the reform riots there in 1831. As recorder of Bristol he went there on 29 October 1831 to open the assizes, in spite of warnings to stay away. He had been jeered when he came to the city in March 1831 and the recently formed Bristol Political Union publicized his impending arrival in October. He was castigated for his personal opposition to reform and for misrepresenting local opinion, which, despite his assertions in the house, strongly favoured reform. Attempts in late October to enlist the support of Bristol sailors for Wetherell under cover of a declaration of loyalty to the king failed; the sailors declared for the king but resolved not to be 'the cat's paw of the Corporation or its agents' (Harrison, 83). Therein lay the heart of the problem: not only was Wetherell a hated opponent of parliamentary reform, but, as recorder, he was 'ex officio' alderman of the common council which was despised by virtually all Bristolians. Despite all this he refused to stay away, perhaps remembering that the corporation had tried unsuccessfully to prevent Bristolians who shared his anti-catholicism turning out to welcome him in April 1829. In 1831 Wetherell simply repeated the warnings to the home secretary and attempted to carry on as normal. On arrival he was jeered and stoned and, after seeking refuge in the mansion house, made an inglorious exit over the roof and in disguise fled the city. The ensuing riot in the city, the worst reform riot in the country, lasted three days and involved spectacular loss of life and destruction of property. In the sacking of the mansion house Wetherell's wig and robe were sought out for destruction and it was even suggested that the authorities burn an effigy of him to assuage the anger of the crowd. 
Compared with the treatment which the mayor, Charles Pinney, and the commander of the troops, Thomas Brereton, subsequently received, Wetherell escaped remarkably lightly. He continued as recorder until his death and returned to practice. Wetherell was twice married: first on 28 December 1826 to his cousin, Jane Sarah Elizabeth (died 1831), second daughter of Sir Alexander Croke of Studley Priory; and second on 27 November 1838 to Harriet Elizabeth, second daughter of Colonel Francis Warneford of Warneford Place, Wiltshire. Wetherell died on 17 August 1846 at Preston Hall, Kent, after being injured in a carriage accident on 10 August. He was buried in Temple Church on 25 August. He had no surviving children from either marriage. With the fortune he had inherited on his father's death in 1807 and that he acquired himself he left more than $200,000 personalty and a considerable amount of land. With fine irony given his role in the Bristol riot, a statue of him was erected at Clifton, Bristol, in 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 29147


Wetherell, Nathaniel Thomas (1800-1875), geologist, was born on 6 September 1800 at The Grove, Highgate, Middlesex, the seventh of the eight children of William Roundell Wetherell (1767/8-1821), surgeon, and Anne Maria Gibson. He was educated in private schools and at the Middlesex Hospital. He became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in 1824 and a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of London in 1828. 
Wetherell's spare time was given to the study of the geology of north London. He visited railway cuttings, road excavations, and well sections, at Camden Town, Chalk Farm, Hampstead, and Highgate, where the London Clay was temporarily exposed, and amassed an exceptionally fine collection of fossils. He was a founder of the Palaeontographical Society and many of his specimens were illustrated in its monographs. By 1836 he had noticed a vertical change of fauna within the London Clay and proposed lower, middle, and upper divisions of that formation; one of the first English manifestations of the idea that lithological units could be further subdivided by fossils. On 20 March 1837 he married Louisa Mary ('bap'. 1819, died 1900), daughter of William Robert Casson, at St Pancras Old Church. 
Wetherell also studied the glacial drift deposits around Finchley and Muswell Hill and formed a collection of interesting specimens, particularly banded flints. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1832, left in 1856, rejoined in 1863, but finally resigned in December 1869 owing to deafness. His main collection was bought for the British Museum (Natural History) through James Tennant, a dealer, in 1871. This was added to earlier donations making the total number of specimens received from him almost 5000. Other specimens were donated to the Geological Survey's museum and Geological Society. 
Wetherell was regarded by contemporaries as a caring, gentle, good, kind, modest, and unassuming Christian. He died, at his lifelong home, The Grove, Highgate, on 22 December 1875 owing to chronic enlargement of the prostate and exhaustion; he was buried on 29 December in the old burial-ground, Highgate. He was survived by his wife, the sole beneficiary of his will dated 3 August 1861, four sons, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 29148


Wetheringsett, Richard of (fl. c.1200-c.1230), churchman and theologian, is recorded as a student under William de Montibus at Lincoln in the years round 1200. The author of the 'summa' 'Qui bene presunt' about 1220, he is the earliest identifiable chancellor of Cambridge University (serving some time between 1215 and 1232); he is not to be confused with the later chancellor Richard Leicester, who served in 1349-50. 
Wetheringsett's 'summa' is a milestone in the history of Christian education in England. It is organized as a guide for preachers, who are first to learn about the most basic elements of 'faith and morals', and then go on to preach about them to the people. He identifies twelve topics for consideration, in a list that, with minor alterations, was to become normative for catechetical preaching during the following centuries. That list begins with the creed and the articles of faith, followed by the Lord's prayer, the gifts of the Holy Spirit, the virtues, the vices, the seven sacraments, the two evangelical precepts, the ten commandments, the rewards of heaven and pains of hell, the errors of the people, the things to be avoided, and the things to be done. Although none of these topics was new in the thirteenth century, their being assembled in a programmatic guide for preachers helped to shape the religious literature of England for centuries to come. Its influence can be seen, for instance, in the syllabus of things to be preached regularly by parish priests that Archbishop John Pecham (died 1292) published in his famous constitution 'Ignorantia sacerdotum' of 1281. Still unpublished, the 'summa' survives in some sixty manuscript copies. 
Much of what is known about Wetheringsett's life derives from his 'summa'. It reveals that the author studied under William de Montibus in the cathedral school at Lincoln, some time between 1180 and 1213. However, differences between manuscripts also serve both to obscure his identity and to raise intriguing possibilities about it, referring to him variously as Richard of Leicester, Richard of Wetheringsett, and Richard de Montibus (this last a confusion with Richard's frequently quoted master, William de Montibus). Some manuscripts describe him as rector of the church of Wetheringsett, some as chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and some as chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral (perhaps again a confusion with William de Montibus, also chancellor). One mid-thirteenth-century manuscript neatly reconciles his surnames by identifying him as 'Master Richard of Leicester, rector of the church of Wetheringsett' (Shrewsbury School, MS 7, fol. 109'v'). There is independent corroboration that the earliest known chancellor of Cambridge was named Richard of Leicester; and the wealthy prebend of Wetheringsett, Suffolk, which was in the gift of the bishop of Ely, who had oversight of Cambridge University, would have provided suitable emolument for the latter's chancellor. Richard is depicted lecturing in the initial 'Q' in one copy of 'Qui bene presunt', next to a note describing the text as the 'summa magistri R. Cancellarii de Kantebrug' (CUL, MS Additional 3471, fol. 125'r'). 
The evidence that Wetheringsett was also chancellor of Lincoln is less secure, owing to possible confusion with his mentor, William de Montibus. But there is nothing implausible in the notion that, as the author of a highly respected theological 'summa', Richard would have been invited to succeed his master as chancellor and head of the Lincoln Cathedral school. This possibility is perhaps strengthened by independent evidence that the chancellor of Lincoln from 1220 to 1228, Richard le Grant, was known by the cognomen de Wethershed, probably a variant of Wetheringsett. This evidence is far from secure, but it raises the possibility that Richard of Wetheringsett, the author of 'Qui bene presunt', who was rector of Wetheringsett church and an early chancellor of Cambridge University, is also to be identified with Richard Grant, chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral, and archbishop of Canterbury from 1229 until his premature death in 1231. 


@@@@@


doc= 29149


Wetwang, Sir Joseph (1622/3-1684), naval officer, was descended from an old freeholder family of Dunstan, Northumberland. Nothing is known of his early life prior to his marriage to Isabel Middleton ('b'. 1628) at All Saints' Church, Newcastle, on 23 December 1648. He was engaged in merchant shipping in Newcastle and the east coast at the time of the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652-4). The loss of his ship to the Dutch caused the mayor of Newcastle to petition the admiralty on his behalf for some employment, and in February 1653 he was appointed to command the 'Sparrow', a small Dutch prize then fitting out at Newcastle. Wetwang spent the rest of the war cruising against Dutch privateers on the east coast, and convoying trade from Newcastle to London and Hamburg. He continued in command of the 'Sparrow' after the war's end, plying off Scotland under the orders of General George Monck. His requests to be transferred to a bigger ship were unsuccessful, and he left the navy when the 'Sparrow' was withdrawn from service in September 1654. 
Wetwang probably returned to merchant service, not re-entering the navy until February 1665 when he was appointed to command the fifth-rate 'Norwich'. Wetwang was highly regarded by his superiors at this time, being described by the lord admiral's secretary, Sir William Coventry, as 'a very good man' (Coventry MS 99, fol. 91) and by Monck, now duke of Albemarle, as 'a diligent officer and a good seaman' (NMM, LBK/47). Wetwang moved to the 'Tiger' on 10 May 1666, taking part in Sir Robert Holmes's attack on Terschelling, and remained in command of her until November 1667, being regularly employed on convoy and cruising duties in his native waters. He commanded the 'Dunkirk' and the 'Edgar' briefly in 1668, returning to command the latter in January 1672 at the outbreak of the Third Anglo-Dutch War and fighting in the earl of Sandwich's division of the Blue squadron at the battle of Solebay (28 May 1672). Wetwang was captain of the 'Warspite' over the winter of 1672-3 and of the 'Henry' from March to June 1673, commanding the latter in Prince Rupert's division of the Red squadron at the two battles of Schooneveld (28 May and 4 June 1673) and earning high praise from Rupert for his conduct. On 1 July 1673 he became second captain of Rupert's flagship, the 'Sovereign', fighting at the battle of the Texel (11 August) and remaining aboard her until the end of October. He then commanded the 'Newcastle', chiefly in the Mediterranean, from November 1673 to February 1676, capturing a valuable Dutch East Indiaman at the very end of the Third Anglo-Dutch War. In the French war scare of 1678 Wetwang commanded the 'Monmouth' before serving as second captain of the 'Royal James', the flagship of Admiral Sir Thomas Allin, between March and August. He subsequently went to Flushing and Ostend to organize the re-embarkation of the army which had been sent to Flanders. Wetwang commanded the 'Northumberland' briefly in 1679 before taking his last naval command, the 'Woolwich', in which he served (again in the Mediterranean) from October 1679 to May 1681. He was knighted on 20 November 1680. 
Wetwang had always maintained his mercantile connections, part owning a number of merchant vessels, attempting in 1676 to get a patent for making all merchant bills in the port of London, and becoming in 1679 water bailiff for the rivers Humber and Trent and their tributaries, in reversion. The fact that by 1682 his half pay was three years in arrears seems to have persuaded him to seek employment outside the navy, and in 1682 he became captain of the new East India Company vessel, the 'Royal James', flagship of the force intended to re-establish trade with Bantam. He died on board his ship at Fort St George, Madras, soon after his arrival, on 12 July 1684. By his will, dated 18 October 1683, Wetwang made bequests to his wife, Isabel, and to his four sons, Robert ('b'. 1649), John ('b'. 1651), Samuel (1653-1685), and Joseph. All had held posts in the customs at Newcastle in the 1670s, but Joseph then entered the navy, being dismissed as lieutenant of the 'Happy Return' in 1684 for drunkenness and abusing his captain. He was saved from a court martial only by the kindness of Admiral Lord Dartmouth towards his father, but was in prison by 1687 for other 'grand misdemeanours'. Samuel was a factor at Madras at the time of his death on 1 February 1685. Another of Wetwang's sons succeeded him in command of the East Indiaman 'Royal James', dying in command of her in 1689. 


@@@@@


doc= 29150


Sarah Wewitzer (bap. 1756, d. 1820), actress and singer, baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 18 July 1756, was the sister of Ralph Wewitzer. She may already have appeared as a singer in London's pleasure gardens before making her theatrical debut at Covent Garden on 4 November 1772. Her voice and personality were ideally suited to the musical romances of Isaac Bickerstaff, and most of her early successes were in his work: 'Daphne and Amintor' (1772), 'The Maid of the Mill' (1773), and 'The Padlock' (1773). It was either she or an elder sister who sang with the operatic bass Frederick Reinhold at Marylebone Gardens in the summer of 1774, and it was certainly she who fluttered the hearts of young Dubliners by her appearances at the Smock Alley Theatre during the 1774-5 season. An attractively engraved portrait was featured in the 'Hibernian Magazine' of January 1775, capturing her as Rosetta in Bickerstaffe's 'Love in a Village' in the act of delivering the song 'Cease, gay deceivers', which she had made the rage of Dublin. Her reputation for virtue further piqued the interest of the city's bachelors -- and not only the bachelors. Sarah Wewitzer had made Dublin her home by the time she entered into an adulterous relationship with James Cuffe, member of parliament for co. Mayo. Cuffe's wife had been granted a legal separation not long after their marriage in 1778, and Wewitzer left the stage to set up home with him and bear his children. Cuffe was created Baron Tyrawley of Ballinrobe in 1797, and when his wife died in 1808 Wewitzer adopted the name of Lady Tyrawley. There is no record of a marriage and neither of their sons, James Cuffe, MP for co. Mayo, or Henry Cuffe, succeeded to the peerage. It may be that the couple had separated before Wewitzer's death, at Ballinrobe on 4 October 1820. According to the 'Journal of the Society for the Preservation of Memorials in Ireland' (vol. 7, p. 152), she was buried at Ballinrobe as Lady Tyrawley. 


@@@@@


doc= 29151


Wewitzer, Ralph (1748-1825), actor, was born in Salisbury Street, off the Strand, London, on 17 December 1748, probably the eldest of the five children of Peter and Ann Wewitzer known to have acted in London in the late eighteenth century. According to the 'Hibernian Magazine' (January 1775) their father was Norwegian, though alternative and likelier accounts suggest that he was Swiss. 
Russell claimed that Ralph Wewitzer was apprenticed to, and briefly practised as, a jeweller before making his theatrical debut at Covent Garden as Ralph in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Maid of the Mill' on 12 May 1773. The occasion was the benefit of his younger sister Sarah ['see below'], and his success was sufficient to determine his future career. It has been suggested, but cannot be confirmed, that he spent the 1773-4 season acting in Dublin, either to evade or to earn sufficient to pay off his creditors, but he was with the company at Covent Garden from 1774 to 1789 and a regular summer performer at the Haymarket after 1780. In terms of the theatrical categories of his age, Wewitzer was a low comedian who specialized in the roles of foreigners -- French, Jewish, Spanish, Dutch, or German. John O'Keeffe generously acknowledged his contribution to the success of his musical spectacular 'Omai' (Covent Garden, 1785), in which, as a South Sea warrior addressing Captain Cook, he: 'came out with a kind of grand extempore declaration, as if it was the original language of some of the islands: this had a sham English translation, which was printed in the book of the songs. Wewitzer did this piece of state harangue-pomposo wonderfully well. (O'Keeffe, 2.115)' It was in another piece by O'Keeffe, 'The Young Quaker' (1783), that Wewitzer created his most celebrated character, Shadrach the Jew, whose enduring popularity was matched only by his Doctor Caius in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. He was able to exploit the vogue for lampooning foreigners that was the theatrical reaction to Britain's burgeoning interests overseas, not least because he was himself a speaker and reader of French during the Napoleonic era. 
Wewitzer cherished entrepreneurial and literary ambitions almost throughout his long career on the stage, but may well have lost more money than he gained by them. His brief management in 1790 of the Royalty Theatre, Wellclose Square, was unsuccessful, and a scheme to set up business as a fishmonger came to nothing. Three forgotten pantomimes have been ascribed to him, as well as a genealogical 'Pedigree of King George III' (1812), a scantily researched reference work called 'A Theatrical Pocket Book' (1814), and two posthumously published volumes of anecdotal history, 'Green Room Gossip' ('c'.1826) and 'Dramatic Reminiscences' ('c'.1855). He may, for a while, have acted as financial adviser to the actress Harriet Mellon, by then the widowed duchess of St Albans, but, given her charitable history, it is unlikely, if his advice had been useful, that she would have done nothing to alleviate the poverty of his last years. James Boaden cites the plight of 'poor Wewitzer' in mounting an argument for the establishment of a retirement home for decayed actors (Boaden, 342-3). 
Although the details are obscure, Wewitzer seems to have married twice, first at St Peter's, Church Street, Liverpool, to Mary Daniels on 14 September 1776 (who is known to have been still alive in 1783 and with whom he had one daughter) and second to a Miss Brangin, also of Covent Garden Theatre, on 23 December 1787; but at the time of his death, on 1 January 1825, he was living alone, 'under circumstances of peculiar distress' (Russell, 212), in Wild Passage, off Drury Lane. He was buried in Finsbury. He had for several years been dependent on an annual stipend of $65 from the Theatrical Fund of Drury Lane, the theatre with which he had been predominantly associated since 1791. 




@@@@@


doc= 29152


Wey, William (1405/6-1476), author and pilgrim, originated in the diocese of Salisbury. First recorded in 1430 as a fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, he was ordained acolyte and subdeacon on 7 March 1433 to the title of his fellowship. By 1439 he had proceeded MA, and in the following year was admitted a fellow of Eton College, a position he retained until about 1467. Recorded intermittently as bursar of the college between 1445 and 1465, he also retained links with Exeter, to which he gave two books in 1457. He made a collection of Latin sermons, and gave a copy of it to the Bridgettine abbey of Syon, but is better known for his accounts of his pilgrimages, to Santiago de Compostela in 1456, and to Jerusalem in 1457-8 and again in 1462. 
Wey's writings on pilgrimages, which are preserved in Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 565, are divided into fifteen sections. Much of the collection is in Latin, but the first three sections are in English. The last of these, 'A Prevysyoun' giving advice in lacklustre verse to the would-be pilgrim to the Holy Land, is based upon the 'Provisio pro peregrinis' which occurs later in the collection, but contains additional material and doubtless reflects Wey's wish to instruct. He states of his account of his 1457-8 pilgrimage that he was asked by devout men to write it, and he took his didactic role seriously. His writings contain details of exchange rates of money, useful phrases in Greek and Hebrew, and much practical advice to travellers proposing to follow him to the Levant -- about distances, the need to take food and bedding, dealing with the authorities, and precautions against pickpockets and heat. They are also enlivened by much incidental detail; he describes the burial of one doge and the election of another at Venice in 1462, tells how when the pilgrims entered Jerusalem small boys threw stones at them, and in retailing rumours of the bloody exploits against the Turks of the Wallachian 'baro de Flake' was probably the first Englishman to note the existence of the man who would eventually be transmogrified into Dracula. 
Wey was not composing a travelogue, however, and his principal motive in writing was devotional. No doubt he expressed his faith in the sermons he records preaching at Jerusalem and Corunna. On the evidence of his writings it was a piety focused primarily upon relics and their associated indulgences. His response to Calvary, for instance, is that '
Ther ys more pardon in that hylle 

Than eny Crystyn man can telle. 
('Itineraries', 10)' It was in keeping with this outlook that Wey should himself have collected a number of relics, including stones from the holy sepulchre and the cave of the nativity at Bethlehem, and made exact measurements of some of the principal shrines. His motive for doing so is disclosed by his will. About 1467 he entered the house of the Bonshommes at Edington, Wiltshire, where he died on 30 November 1476, aged seventy, and was presumably buried. He bequeathed his relics to 'the chapel made to the lyknes of the sepulkur of oure Lorde at Jerusalem', a chapel that also contained replicas made in 'bordys' of the chapel at Calvary, the church at Bethlehem, and 'the Mounte of Olyvete and the vale of Josaphath' (ibid., xxviii-xxx). He also left a map of the Holy Land. This was once identified with the map preserved as Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 389, but the latter was clearly neither made by Wey nor owned by him. 
Wey's writings seem to have circulated in or shortly after his lifetime -- they were used by the author of the tract issued by Wynkyn de Worde in 1498 as 'Informacon for Pylgrymes unto the Holy Londe'. They were published in an excellent edition by George Williams for the Roxburghe Club in 1857, and have since been a rich source of information about late medieval pilgrims and travellers to Palestine. 


@@@@@


doc= 29153


Weyland, John (1774-1854), writer on the poor laws, was born in Westminster on 4 December 1774, the eldest of three sons and six daughters of John Weyland (1744-1825), of Woodrising, Norfolk, and Wood Eaton, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Joanna (died 1822), daughter and coheir of John Nourse of Wood Eaton. The family had made money in the City of London and acquired country estates; his father, 'a noted farmer', was high sheriff of Oxfordshire in 1777 ('VCH Oxfordshire', 5.312). Weyland matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, as a commoner in 1792, but migrated in 1794 to St Mary Hall (a move usually suggestive of some delinquency). He left the university, of which he later called himself 'an unworthy member' ('Principles of Population', 1816, vi), without a degree, but was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1800. On 12 March 1799 he married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Whitstead Keene MP, of Richmond. 
Weyland was a justice of the peace for the counties of Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Surrey, and Norfolk, served as an ordinary member of the board of agriculture, and was elected FRS. In 1811, dissatisfied that the two leading periodical reviews, the 'Edinburgh' and the 'Quarterly', lacked a definite religious tone, he founded the 'British Review' and appointed William Roberts, an evangelical barrister, as its editor. The journal, which took an evangelical, tory line, reviewed secular works 'in a Christian spirit', as Hannah More approvingly noted (Roberts, 65n), until its demise in 1822. In 1813 he urged the court of proprietors of the East India Company to endow an ecclesiastical establishment in India and to sanction missionary endeavour ('Letter to Sir Hugh Inglis Bart on the State of Religion in India', 1813). 
Weyland is now remembered as a critic of Malthusian population theory. He was concerned to uphold the existing social order in the countryside, and was an outspoken defender of the existing system of poor relief, for example in his 'A Short Enquiry into the Policy, Humanity and Effect of the Poor Laws' (1807). His major work, 'The principles of population and production, as they are affected by the progress of society; with a view to moral and political consequences' (1816; repr., 1994), attacked Malthus's argument on empirical grounds, disputing the belief that the population in England was outstripping the resources for subsistence, and reaffirming the benignity of the providential design. Weyland's principal object was to show that the poor laws were both beneficent and necessary, and were not a cause of pauperism, which he attributed to a lack of moral and religious instruction among the poor. Although his assertion that the population had reached a state of 'non-reproduction' was demonstrably absurd (despite the lack of issue from his own marriage), his advocacy of poor relief for large families where the wage-earner could not provide for all his children interested promoters of family allowances a century later. Malthus responded to Weyland in the fifth edition (1817) of his 'Essay on Population'. 
On 31 July 1830 Weyland was elected MP for the borough of Hindon, Wiltshire, whose scale of parochial relief for wage-earners had been held up for criticism by R. A. Slaney's 1828 parliamentary select committee on the poor laws. He continued his defence of the poor laws in parliament. He voted for the second reading of the parliamentary 'Reform Bill' (22 March 1831), which brought about the disfranchisement of Hindon, and the loss of his own seat, in December 1832. On the death of their father, Weyland's younger brother Richard Weyland (1780-1864) succeeded to the Wood Eaton estate, while John Weyland inherited Woodrising Hall, in Norfolk, where he died on 8 May 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 29154


Weyland, Sir Thomas (c.1230-1298), justice, was the third son of Herbert Weyland and his wife, Beatrice, one of six daughters and coheirs of Stephen of Witnesham, a minor landholder at Witnesham near Ipswich in Suffolk. His eldest brother, John, was a clerk of the common bench from 'c'.1244 until his death in 1259. A second older brother, William, pursued an administrative and judicial career in both Ireland and England from 1248 onwards which included service as the seneschal of the earl of Norfolk's Irish liberty of Ross, as an itinerant royal justice in Ireland in 1257-8, as escheator of England south of the Trent between 1261 and 1264, as seneschal of the liberty of Kildare (in 1269), and as an itinerant justice and justice of the common bench in England between 1271 and his death in 1274. His younger brother Richard followed an administrative career in East Anglia in the service of various magnates including the earl of Norfolk and John de Burgh and at least two religious houses (Ely Cathedral priory and the abbey of Bury St Edmunds) from 'c'.1265 until his death in 1296 or 1297. 
Thomas Weyland first appears in the records in 1251, as the attorney of his eldest brother for the making of final concord. In 1258 he was in a position to pay 100 marks to purchase the Suffolk manor of Chillesford, and in 1259 paid a further 300 marks to purchase a second Suffolk manor at Blaxhall, but it is unclear how he accumulated this money or what career he was then pursuing. There is no evidence that he was a professional lawyer, and it seems unlikely that he had followed his elder brother into clerical service in the courts. Later evidence suggests that he received a clerical tonsure at an early stage in his adult life, but had abandoned it by the time of his first marriage to Anne, the daughter of Richard de Coleville, in or before 1266. By 1270 he had also received knighthood. It is possible that his early career resembled that later followed by his younger brother Richard, but it is only during a brief period immediately preceding his first appointment as an itinerant royal justice at the very end of the reign of Henry III that evidence survives to place him in the service of Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk (died 1306), and in that of the earl's brother-in-law, John Fitzjohn (died 1275). 
Thomas Weyland became a justice of the common bench in Michaelmas term 1274, two terms after the death of his elder brother William. He served as a junior justice until Master Roger of Seaton (died 1279) retired as chief justice in the summer of 1278. He then held office as chief justice of the court for eleven years, until the end of Trinity term 1289. His period as chief justice is the first for which a substantial quantity of law reports survives. These indicate that Weyland played a major role in determining the litigation of the court, either on his own or with a single colleague, William of Brompton, and that he possessed a clear and sharp legal mind. A rather different light is shed on his period of office by the complaints of misconduct lodged against him and his colleagues after his removal from office. Not all were justified, but some evidently were. In the most egregious instance he can be shown to have corruptly altered his own plea roll in land litigation involving one of his relatives, and to have then been rewarded for his assistance by being granted an interest in the property in dispute. Weyland made substantial property acquisitions while chief justice: seven manors or substantial holdings in his home county of Suffolk, three manors or substantial holdings in Essex, and various other holdings elsewhere. He spent an average of about $150 a year on property acquisitions between 1278 and 1289. These may in part have been financed from the legitimate profits of judicial office. They may also in part have been paid for out of the income from the extensive land holdings in both England and Ireland, worth at least $150 a year, that he possessed when he became chief justice, of which around two-thirds had been inherited from his brother William. His second wife's dower lands also brought in a substantial income. But his evident lack of scruple may have meant that these acquisitions were partly financed out of the proceeds of judicial corruption as well. 
It was not, however, judicial misconduct that led to Weyland's removal from office. On 20 July 1289 two of his servants committed a murder at a fair. The victim was an Irish servant of the earl of Norfolk living in Suffolk, variously known as William Carwel, Carewel the Forester, and Carewel the Parker of Framlingham. The killing may have been the unpremeditated outcome of a drunken brawl. It is more likely, however, that it was connected with a bitter factional struggle between the followers of the earl of Norfolk which was taking place at this time. Weyland and his servants may have become involved in these because of Weyland's own close ties with the earl as one of his leading counsellors. There is no suggestion that Weyland had sent his servants to commit the murder, but he became an accessory after the fact when he failed to have them arrested when they returned to his Suffolk manor of Monewden, even though he knew of the murder. The earl's desire to have the killers punished led to the issuing of a special commission of inquiry on 4 September. The special justices had the killers arrested, and they were convicted and hanged at a gaol delivery session at Melton in Suffolk on 14 September. The jurors also indicted the chief justice for harbouring the killers, and orders were given for his capture. A clerk of the sheriff was sent to Witnesham to arrest Weyland, but after his arrest he escaped under cover of darkness and made his way to the Franciscan priory of Babwell, just outside Bury St Edmunds. Here he took the order's habit and resumed clerical tonsure. When his place of refuge became known, Edward I sent Robert Malet to supervise local arrangements for starving him out of the priory. By the middle of January 1290 Weyland had surrendered, probably in return for a safe conduct to the Tower of London. When he reached the Tower he was offered a choice between standing trial, perpetual imprisonment, and exile. He chose exile. At a special gaol delivery session held at the Tower on 20 February he took an oath of abjuration, promising to leave England and not return to it or any other of the king's territories (including Ireland, where until recently he had held lands) without the king's special permission. He was assigned Dover as his port of embarkation, and given nine days to reach it on foot. 
Thomas Weyland's family was fortunate. An abjuration normally meant not only the forfeiture of the abjuror's chattels but also the escheat of all of his lands. Edward I was merciful to Weyland's second wife, Margaret, whom he had married by 1276 and whose maiden name was probably Filliol; she was allowed to keep not only her clothes, jewels, and personal possessions but also the goods and chattels in the manors she held in dower from her first husband, John of Moze, even though in strict law these all belonged to her husband. Weyland had retained sole title to at least three of his manors and these did escheat. However, he had taken considerable care to make provision for each of his children and for his widow when he died. His lands were to be divided between the three children of his first marriage (John, William, and Alina) and three of the children of his second (Richard, Elena, and Margaret); the fourth (Thomas) entered the church, and his widow was to retain a life interest in part of the lands. One by-product of the way he had made these arrangements was that he was only the joint tenant for life of almost all his other lands, and thus they were not legally liable to escheat. Although his children and his widow were engaged in long litigation with the lords concerned, they ultimately made good their claim to almost all his lands with the exception of the Gloucestershire manor of Chipping Sodbury, which the earl of Gloucester managed to retain. 
By 1292 Thomas Weyland had taken up residence in Paris. When a representative of Edward I canvassed various Parisian experts on the Scottish succession question in that year, he brought back with him an opinion from the exiled chief justice. Eventually (probably in 1297) Edward I pardoned Thomas Weyland and allowed him to return home. It was at his wife's dower manor of Brundon in Essex (now in Suffolk) that he died in January 1298. He may have been buried in the priory church of Woodbridge in Suffolk, of which he had been a benefactor. 


@@@@@


doc= 29155


Waymouth, George (fl. 1587-1611), navigator, was the younger son of William Waymouth of Cockington, Devon. In 1587 George's grandfather, also William Waymouth, made his will: to his son he left a half-share of the ship 'Lyon', and to George the eventual possession of his chattels. The younger William Waymouth probably took part in the Newfoundland fishery in the 1570s, and from the 1580s was building ships, for which he received royal subsidies. From his father George Waymouth almost certainly learned the shipbuilder's trade and gained a knowledge of the north Atlantic. Then on 24 July 1601 he proposed to the East India Company a voyage to discover a north-west passage to the East. His proposal was accepted and on 2 May 1602, provisioned for eighteen months, bearing a letter from the queen to the emperor of China, and with the Revd John Cartwright, recently returned from Persia, as his mentor, he left London with the 'Discovery' of 70 tons and the 'Godspeed' of 60. 
On 28 June Waymouth was off the American coast, in all likelihood Resolution Island. Coasting along the eastern shore of Baffin Island, he reckoned that he was almost in latitude 69 degrees north when during the night of 19-20 July, their morale destroyed by days of fog and ice, the crews mutinied and, encouraged by Cartwright, persuaded Waymouth to turn back. On his way south he sailed 100 leagues into the Hudson Strait before bad weather drove him out again (26 July-5 August). By mid-September London knew of his return to Dartmouth; a month later (13 October) the ships were in the Thames. He was examined by the privy council, his examination being relayed to the company on 25 October. His optimism regarding the likelihood of finding a passage led the company to sanction a second voyage, but the project was soon allowed to lapse, and by 1609 his log book of the voyage was in Amsterdam, where Hudson saw it before sailing on his last voyage. 
In 1604 Waymouth twice presented the king with versions of his treatise 'The Jewell of Artes'. In five sections of unequal length, he emphasized the explorer-colonizer's need for a knowledge of navigational instruments, shipbuilding, machinery, gunnery, and fortification. This last incidentally assumed that colonists would live together in towns rather than scattered over the countryside. Doubtless the treatise was intended to justify Waymouth's employment on other voyages of exploration, and this goal it achieved. In 1605 he found sponsors from the worlds of commerce and colonization: Plymouth merchants interested in the cod fishery; Sir Thomas Arundell, who wished to establish an American colony for Roman Catholics; and possibly Arundell's brother-in-law the earl of Southampton. Waymouth's true destination was perhaps the region between Chesapeake Bay and Cape Cod, but, sailing from London in the 'Archangell', he took two months to reach the New England coast (5 March-14 May). Pushed further north by bad weather, he was off Monhegan Island four days later. For a month he reconnoitred the Maine coast, and traded with the Abenaki Indians, five of whom he brought back with him. The return to Dartmouth took only a month (16 June-18 July). 
Once again Waymouth intended a sequel that was not to occur. On 30 October 1605 Sir John Zouche appointed him his second-in-command on a (possibly crypto-Catholic) colonizing venture that was to sail within six months, but during 1606 the voyage was superseded by the much larger expedition to the Chesapeake commanded by Christopher Newport. Nevertheless, Waymouth was not entirely passed over: he was probably the Captain Waiman said in August 1607 to have been 'taken... shipping himself to Spaine with intent as is thought to have betrayed his friends and shewed the Spaniards a meanes how to defeat this Virginian attempt' (Quinn and Quinn, 61). If Waiman was indeed Waymouth, he is more likely to have been a double agent helping to expose Spanish espionage, for on 27 October 1607, pending his further advancement, he received a royal pension of 3's'. 4died a day, and in March 1609 he joined a commission inquiring into Phineas Pett's building of the 'Prince Royal'. 
Alone among the commissioners Waymouth was the object of Pett's animosity, Pett terming him, 'inter alia', 'a great braggadocio, a vain and idle fellow', and alleging on one occasion that Waymouth was 'between drunk and sober'. According to Pett, Waymouth had said that the 'Prince Royal' 'was unfit for any use but a dung boat, with many other such false opprobrious defamations, wherein he was better practised than in any other profession' ('Autobiography of Phineas Pett', 38, 40). Pett's unsupported allegations of incompetence are unlikely to be true. Waymouth had studied mathematics 'these twenty years' and 'during this time applied myself to know the several ways of building and the secrets of the best shipwrights in England and Christendom, and have likewise observed the several workings of ships in the sea in all the voyages I have been' (BL, Harleian MS 309, fol. 68). He has been considered the author of an anonymous manuscript entitled 'A most excellent briefe and easie treatize' (Perrin, 'Introduction', in 'Autobiography of Phineas Pett', lxxiv), but recent scholarship regards this identification as questionable (Lavery, 9). 
Those who respected Waymouth included court figures such as Sir Walter Cope, the earl of Northampton, Sir Edward Cecil, and even Prince Henry. In 1610 Waymouth accompanied Cecil to the siege of Julich, later that year writing for the prince 'A Journall relation... of the taking... of Gulicke... with a platt of the town and castle as it is againe to be fortified' (BL, Royal MS 13. B. xxxiii). In 1611 Sir James Bond, a London merchant, commissioned from him a vessel of 40 tons in which he was to make a year-long voyage with twenty men. Whether or not she was built is unclear, but she may be the vessel that Pett alleged Waymouth had built and sailed to Antwerp in such circumstances that orders for his arrest as a pirate were given. 
Waymouth's career is thus a mystery at its beginning and its end. There seems no reason to doubt that he was a knowledgeable mathematician, a skilled navigator, and a competent designer of ships and fortifications, but the stop-start nature of his career at sea suggests that he lacked necessary qualities of leadership. 


@@@@@


doc= 29156


Whaley, Thomas (1766-1800), politician and gambler, was born in Dublin on 15 December 1766, the eldest surviving son of the seven children of Richard Chapel Whaley ('c'.1700-1769) of Dublin and Whaley Abbey, co. Wicklow, and his second wife, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1741), daughter of the Revd Bernard Ward, who had married in 1759. Whaley's father, who owned considerable property in Ulster and who was MP for co. Wicklow from 1747 to 1760, was nicknamed Burn Chapel Whaley during his lifetime because of the number of Roman Catholic chapels he is said to have destroyed by fire. Whaley was only two years old when his father died and he inherited estates worth $7000 per annum, together with a lump sum of $60,000. He attended school until he was sixteen, after which his mother sent him to France, accompanied by an indifferent tutor, to complete his education. After a series of adventures, which included his losing $14,800 in one drunken gambling session and fathering an illegitimate child, he records that he returned to Dublin, escorted by his stepfather, John Richardson, and was 'treated like the prodigal son' ('Buck Whaley's Memoirs', 33). 
Whaley was elected MP for Newcastle, co. Dublin, in 1785 when he was only eighteen years old, and he represented that constituency until 1790. He made little impact on politics, and only came to notice when he moved an address to the lord lieutenant, the duke of Rutland, on the opening day of the session on 18 January 1787. Indeed, he admits that his early interest in politics soon waned, and that 'the dissipated life into which I afterwards plunged, soon put a period to this and every other serious and laudable application' ('Buck Whaley's Memoirs', 276). It was at this stage in his career that he accepted a bizarre wager while attending a dinner at the duke of Leinster's town house. Upon being asked by one of the guests what part of the world he meant to visit next, he replied 'Jerusalem'. Some of those present suggested that there was no such place then existing; others questioned the possibility of his getting there even if it were still in existence. Whaley then 'offered to bet any sum' that he would go to Jerusalem and return to Dublin within two years from his departure. He soon had about $15,000 depending on the outcome of the wager. On 20 September 1788 he set out for Deal, where his companion, Captain Wilson, joined him; they left that port on board the 'London' on 7 October 1788. Although ill health soon halted Wilson's progress on the journey, Whaley met another friend, Captain Hugh Moore, who joined the expedition at Gibraltar. They left Smyrna for Acre on 3 February 1789 on board the 'Heureuse Marie', and reached Jerusalem on 28 February. Both returned triumphantly to Dublin in July 1789 amid bonfire celebrations, whereupon Whaley produced to his friends clear proof that he had visited the Holy City, and successfully claimed his reward. His journey to Jerusalem cost him $8000 in expenses, leaving him a profit of $7000; 'the only instance', he records, 'in all my life before, in which any of my projects turned out to my advantage' ('Buck Whaley's Memoirs', 270). This globe-trotting adventure also earned him the title Jerusalem Whaley, and it was probably about this time that he acquired his alternative nickname, Buck. 
After his expedition Whaley spent most of his time gambling and indulging in various acts of bravado, which were distinctive traits of a class of the gentry called 'Bucks'. On one occasion, in Daly's Club, he successfully wagered that he would jump from the drawing-room windows of his mother's house in St Stephen's Green into the first barouche that passed, and kiss its occupant. He remained in Dublin for about two years, and during that time formed an acquaintance with a Miss Courtney (died 'c'.1799), with whom he had two sons, Thomas and Richard, and a daughter, Sophia Isabella. Whaley then resided briefly in London before moving on to Paris, where he witnessed many scenes of the revolution in 1791. However, his stay there was short-lived because the worsening political unrest curtailed his gambling pursuits. A restless inquisitiveness next led him to Switzerland, where he moved comfortably in high society circles meeting, among others, the novelist William Beckford, the historian Edward Gibbon, and the duchess of Devonshire. 
Following a short tour of Italy, Whaley returned to Paris to try to recover debts amounting to $25,000. However, he soon found himself nearly penniless as a result of gambling losses and was obliged to flee to Ostend in disguise following a dispute with Count Arthur Dillon. He then made his way to London, only to be imprisoned in a sponging house. However, he was rescued from this predicament by the Irish lord chancellor, John Fitzgibbon, first earl of Clare, who had married his eldest sister, Anne, on 1 July 1786. Desperate to avoid any further embarrassment, Whaley proceeded to Dublin, where he sold all of his remaining estates for the discharge of his personal debts. He was left with a surplus of about $5000, and he decided to gamble once more and either retrieve himself or complete his ruin. The outcome was disastrous, and he reflected: 'in the course of a few years I dissipated a fortune of near $400,000, and contracted debts... of $30,000 more... without ever purchasing or acquiring contentment or one hour's true happiness' ('Buck Whaley's Memoirs', 332). 
After this calamity Whaley moved to the Isle of Man, where he wrote his 'Memoirs' in a spirit of contrition. However, he soon took up gambling again and his winnings were so substantial that he was able to begin building a luxurious mansion near Douglas -- Fort Anne -- which was near to completion in 1798. In that year he made a return to politics, paying $4000 to secure his election for the borough of Enniscorthy, co. Wexford. Over the following two years he played his part in divisions concerning the parliamentary union with Great Britain. He supported the proposal for a union in 1799, no doubt influenced by his brother-in-law, Lord Clare, but in 1800 he was bribed by the opposition to oppose the measure. However, the opposition could not satisfy his rapacious demands, and he voted for a union once more. The government rewarded him with the office of escheator of Munster. His companion, Miss Courtney, died during his residence on the Isle of Man, and not long after he married Mary Catherine, daughter of Nicholas Lawless, first Baron Cloncurry (1733-1799), and Margaret Browne (1748-1795), in January 1800. However, his married life came to an abrupt end before the year was out. While on his way from Liverpool to London he caught a chill, which developed into rheumatic fever. He died, aged thirty-three, on 2 November 1800 at Knutsford in Cheshire, and was buried in Knutsford churchyard. His widow continued to live at Fort Anne, in charge of his three children, whom she brought up as her own. 


@@@@@


doc= 29157


Whalley, Edward, appointed Lord Whalley under the protectorate (d. 1674/5), regicide and major-general, was the second son of Richard Whalley, a landowner of Kirkton and Screveton, Nottinghamshire, and his second wife, Frances Cromwell, daughter of Sir Henry Cromwell of Hinchingbrooke in Huntingdonshire. He was thus a cousin of the future lord protector, Oliver Cromwell. Whalley was admitted a pensioner of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 2 July 1614, and graduated BA in 1617 or 1618. In 1619 he was apprenticed in London to Nathaniel Bushere, a member of the Merchant Taylors' Company, and he became a freeman of that company in 1627. He married twice, his first wife being Judith, daughter of John Duffell of Rochester in Kent, and his second Mary Middleton. One of these wives, probably Mary, was seriously ill in July 1656 following a miscarriage. His daughter by his first wife, Frances, married his army colleague and fellow major-general William Goffe. Whalley's younger brother, Henry, was a lawyer who shared his elder sibling's political and religious outlook and during the 1650s served as one of the judges of the Scottish admiralty court and advocate-general of the English army in Scotland. 
At the beginning of the first civil war Edward Whalley took up arms for parliament. He may initially have served as a cornet in the earl of Essex's army, but by 1643 he had been appointed a major in Oliver Cromwell's regiment of horse and he fought alongside his cousin for the remainder of the decade. After the battle of Gainsborough in 1643 Cromwell reported to parliament that Whalley had carried himself 'with all the gallantry becoming a gentleman and a Christian' ('Writings and Speeches', 1.246). The following year he was raised to the rank of lieutenant-colonel and fought at the battle of Marston Moor. When the New Model Army was formed in 1645 Whalley was given command of one of the two regiments of horse created out of Cromwell's original force. He was present at the battle of Naseby and the siege of Bristol and by the end of the year was active in the Oxford area. In the spring of 1646 he laid siege to Banbury, which surrendered to him in early May. He then commanded the forces laying siege to Worcester, but before the town surrendered in late July he had been replaced by Colonel Thomas Rainborowe. 
Whalley's friend Richard Baxter later claimed that he had been removed from the command at Worcester because he was considered too conservative in his religious outlook. Whalley was in fact probably already an Independent and was certainly a member of Thomas Goodwin's congregation in London a few years later in the early 1650s. He was, however, less hostile towards those who favoured a national church structure than most of his fellow separatists, and he had personally invited the presbyterian Baxter to act as chaplain to his New Model regiment. Baxter had found the religious opinions of many of Whalley's troopers far too radical for his taste and had subsequently resigned. 
Following the parliamentarian victory in the first civil war, Whalley's regiment, which contained a high proportion of religious and political radicals, was fully involved in the army's attempts to resist disbandment, and at the army council meeting at Saffron Walden in May 1647 Whalley requested that the rank and file soldiers be given more time to present their grievances to the high command. After Cornet George Joyce had seized Charles I at Holdenby in June 1647, Whalley and his regiment were given responsibility for guarding the king. They continued to hold him until his escape from army custody at Hampton Court. Throughout this time Whalley appears to have dealt with Charles with courtesy and fairness; for example, he refused to carry out orders from parliament to remove the king's chaplains without authorization from his commander, Thomas Fairfax. When Charles fled from Hampton Court in November 1647 he left Whalley a letter thanking him for the kindness he had shown him. Clarendon, however, claimed that in reality Whalley was 'a man of a rough and brutal temper who had offered great violence to his nature when he appeared to exercise any civility and good manners' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.262). 
During the second civil war Whalley fought at the battle of Maidstone. He was subsequently sent in pursuit of the earl of Norwich and was present at the siege of Colchester. He attended the debates of the army council at Whitehall in December 1648 and in January 1649 was appointed one of the commissioners for the trial of Charles I. He attended every session of the court except one and signed the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. In March 1649, he participated in the discussions of the army officers at Whitehall about how to proceed with the reconquest of Ireland. Adopting a more conciliatory stance towards the Irish than most of his army colleagues, he argued that 'noe ill termes bee impos'd uppon him [the enemy], as either to eradicate the Natives, or to divest them of their estates' (Firth, 'Clarke Papers', 2.208). In April 1649 around thirty of Whalley's cavalry troopers, including the prominent Leveller sympathizer Robert Lockyer, mutinied and seized control of The Bull inn in Bishopsgate, London. They refused to respond to Whalley's calls for their surrender, and only submitted on the arrival of Cromwell and Fairfax several days later. Lockyer was subsequently court martialled and shot for his part in the incident. A pro-Lockyer tract which appeared in April 1649 made reference to Whalley's flamboyant taste in dress, reporting that a soldier of his regiment had found him dressed 'in his sky colour satin waistcoat laced with silver and his pantophles [slippers] dawbed with silver lace' ('The Army's Martyr', 6). 
In 1650 Whalley, who had by now been raised to the rank of commissary-general, accompanied Cromwell to Scotland and was wounded at the battle of Dunbar. Later in the year he was stationed at Carlisle, and in early December he took part in the defeat of Ker at Hamilton. In May 1651 he argued with Sir Archibald Johnston of Wariston over the providential meaning to be ascribed to the English army's success: for Whalley it was a clear sign of divine approval. He rejoined Cromwell to pursue Charles Stuart into England and in September fought at the battle of Worcester. In August 1652 he presented the petition from the army which called on the Rump Parliament to proceed more quickly with a programme of constitutional and legal reforms, and after the Rumpers failed to respond he supported their suppression in April 1653 and the establishment of the protectorate at the end of that year. 
Whalley purchased a number of crown and royalist lands during the early 1650s. These included the manors of Sibthorpe in Nottinghamshire, bought from the trustees of the earl of Devonshire's estate, and of West Walton in Norfolk which had formerly been owned by Henrietta Maria. The Rump Parliament also made over to him lands in Scotland worth $500 per annum, and in October 1653 he purchased fenland in Cambridgeshire from a private owner. 
Whalley represented his native Nottinghamshire in the first protectorate parliament of 1654-5. In the autumn of 1655 he was appointed one of Cromwell's major-generals and given responsibility for an east midland association made up of the counties of Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, and Warwickshire. Writing to Cromwell in late January 1656 to thank him for appointing Whalley as their major-general, the Nottinghamshire commissioners for the securing of the peace of the Commonwealth described him as 'our native countryman, of an ancient and honourable family, and of singuler justice, abilitie and piety' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 34, fol. 767). 
Whalley was one of the first of the major-generals to be active, starting work in Nottinghamshire at the beginning of November 1655 and spending the remainder of that month touring his counties 'to set the wheeles agoing' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 32, fol. 177). Once he had completed the initial arrangements for the assessing and collection of the decimation tax within his association, he concentrated most of his energies on the attempt to bring about a moral reformation, an aspect of the major-generals' work which he considered to be of the utmost importance. As early as the end of November he informed Cromwell's secretary of state, John Thurloe, that the government's reform aspirations were foundering on the lack of commitment shown by the local magistracy. Complaining that 'what some justices in order to reformation doe, others undoe', he urged the government to place the major-generals into the commissions of the peace of their areas (ibid., fol. 806). He also made a particular effort to win the backing of the godly clergy of the east midlands for his reform efforts, and in Coventry he assisted the puritan mayor, Robert Beake, in his efforts to combat irreligion and ungodliness in the town. 
By early 1656 Whalley believed his efforts were beginning to achieve results. He told Thurloe in early January that he had been very busy ejecting suspect clergymen, arresting vagrants, and closing down unlicensed alehouses 'which were growne to incredible numbers' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 34, fol. 428). A few days later he added: 'You cannot imagine what an awe it hath strucke into the spirits of wicked men what incouragement it is to the godly' (ibid., fol. 563). By late April he was claiming that 'you may ride over all Nottinghamshire and not see a beggar or wandring rogue, and I hope suddenly to have it so in all the counties' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 37, fols. 570-73). He had arrested so many vagrants and beggars that the gaols of his association were full and he repeatedly requested permission from the government to proceed with their transportation. 
But if Whalley was fully committed to the goals of moral reformation, he also as major-general displayed the more conciliatory, eirenic side to his character. He allowed the annual horse-race for Lady Grantham's Cup to be run at Lincoln in the spring of 1656, and later told Cromwell that he had assured the earl of Exeter that 'it was not your highnes intention in the suppressing of horse races to abridge gentlemen of that sport' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 36, fol. 371). He also showed more interest than most of his fellow major-generals in social issues. In March 1656 he praised the assize judge Matthew Hale for the great concern he had shown for poor litigants while on circuit in the east midlands, and he subsequently wrote to Thurloe to urge the government to take action to prevent fraudulent practices in markets, profiteering by tradesmen and alehouse keepers, and enclosure which led to depopulation and unemployment. He even commissioned his own survey of the effects of enclosure in Leicestershire, and in December 1656 he tried unsuccessfully to introduce into parliament a bill to prevent further enclosure. 
Whalley also continued to display during the 1650s the same tolerant approach towards religious differences that he had shown in the mid-1640s. In December 1655 he expressed his firm support for the re-admission of the Jews into England, informing Thurloe: 'I am glad so godly and prudent a course is taken concerning the Jewes, yet cannot conceave the reason why so greate variety of opinion should be amongst men as I heare are called to consult about them'. He added that he believed there were both 'politique and divine reasons' for allowing them to return, the principal of these being the economic benefits to the state and the increased opportunity it would allow to bring about their conversion to Christianity (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 33, fols. 355-8). 
Whalley was returned to the second protectorate parliament for Nottinghamshire. During the debates on how to proceed against the Quaker James Nayler in December 1656 he declared that he believed Nayler to be guilty of horrid blasphemy but also attempted to cool the passions of his fellow members and to reconcile their different positions, commenting at one point: 'I would have this agreed upon in peace and charity; that those that are for a low punishment might not be censured for coldness, nor those for a higher punishment censured for a preposterous zeal' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.101-2). He himself favoured the death penalty for Nayler, but suggested that a reprieve should be offered him if he recanted after sentence. Along with his fellow major-generals, Whalley both supported Disbrowe's 'Militia Bill' in December 1656 and January 1657, and opposed the moves to make Cromwell king in the spring of 1657. In early April 1657 he was one of the tellers for the noes when the house voted to renew their offer of the crown after Cromwell's initial rejection. Some contemporaries, however, reported that by the time Cromwell finally rejected the offer of the crown in early May Whalley and two of his fellow major-generals, William Goffe and William Boteler, had become reconciled to a return of the monarchy. Later in 1657 Whalley was appointed to Cromwell's House of Lords. 
After Oliver Cromwell's death Whalley supported his son, Richard, in his political struggle against the army, but he failed to persuade his regiment to follow this line. Following the return of the Rump in 1659 Whalley was relieved of command of his regiment and refused another commission. In November 1659 he and his son-in-law William Goffe were part of a four-man delegation sent to Scotland to outline to Colonel Monck the reasons for the expulsion of the Rump, but their trip failed to bring about a reconciliation between Monck and the New Model regiments stationed in England. 
At the Restoration, Whalley and Goffe, who as regicides were both excluded from the 'Act of Indemnity', fled to New England, Whalley using the name Richardson. They arrived at Boston in July 1660 and lived initially in Cambridge. In 1661 they moved to New Haven, Connecticut, where tradition has it they lived in a cave in the woods outside the town for three years to avoid discovery by the agents sent from England to capture them. In 1664 they moved on to Hadley, Massachusetts, where they remained until their deaths. All efforts to arrest them proved fruitless as the colonists were generally sympathetic to the fugitive regicides and refused to reveal their whereabouts. A report in the Colonial State Papers declares that they were held in 'exceeding great esteem for their piety and parts' and that they 'held meetings where they preached and prayed, and were looked upon as men dropped down from heaven'. Another later report stated that they were feasted in every place they visited and provided with horses and guides ('CSP col.', 5.54, 345). Details are also in existence of the attempts by Charles II's agents to apprehend them (ibid., 45, 80, 81, 96, 160-2, 1103, 1300). 
By 1674 Whalley was in very poor health. Goffe wrote to his wife in August of that year that her father was 'scarce capable of any rational discourse, his understanding memory and speech doth so much fail him and [he] seems not to take much notice of anything that is either done or said, but patiently bears all things' ('DNB'). 'Your old Friend', Goffe wrote to Whalley's brother-in-law William Hooke, '... saith I desire nothing but to acquaint myselfe with Je: Chr: & that fullnesse that is in him for those that Beleeve and have interest in him. This sentence he uttered with some stopps, yet with more freedom and clearnesse than usuall' ('Letters and papers relating to the regicides', 155-6). Whalley died soon afterwards and was buried at Hadley in an unmarked grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 29158


Whalley, George Hammond (1813-1878), politician, was born on 23 January 1813, the eldest son of James Whalley, a merchant and banker of Gloucester, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Morse, of Gurshill, Blakeney, Gloucestershire. He was a descendant of Edward Whalley, the regicide. He was educated at University College, London, where he gained first prizes in rhetoric and metaphysics, and entered Gray's Inn in 1835, being called to the bar in 1839. From 1836 to 1847 he was an assistant tithe commissioner, writing weekly articles on tithe commutation in the 'Justice of the Peace' between 1838 and 1842. He published two treatises on the 'Tithe Acts' in 1838 and 1839, which were consolidated and enlarged as 'The Tithe Act and the Whole of the Tithe Amendment Acts' (1848, 6th edn 1896). 
On 25 January 1846, at Brighton, Whalley married Anne Wakeford, the daughter of Richard Attree of Selborne, Hampshire; they had a son and two daughters. During the Irish famine of 1847 he established fisheries on the west coast of Ireland, exploring in his yacht the location of fishery banks. Resident at Plas Madog, Ruabon, Denbighshire, he was high sheriff of Caernarvonshire in 1852, a deputy lieutenant of Denbighshire, and a captain of the Denbighshire yeomanry. 
Whalley's national significance lies in his parliamentary career and in his defence of protestantism. He unsuccessfully contested Leominster in 1845 and Montgomery in 1852, but was returned for Peterborough as a Liberal on 6 December 1852. He was unseated on petition in 1853, but was again returned on 30 April 1859 at the general election, and retained his seat until his death. A low-church Anglican, Whalley accepted in the spring of 1861 an invitation from prominent ultra-protestants to lead the parliamentary campaign against Roman Catholicism, taking up the burden left by the ailing Richard Spooner MP (1788-1864). His particular objective was to abolish the annual state grant to Maynooth College, the Catholic seminary in Ireland. Britain, he argued, was paying for the creation of ultramontane priests whose goal was to transform protestant Britain into a citadel of 'popery'. His motions in 1861, 1862, and 1863 for a committee to consider repeal of the grant were all defeated, and he experienced increasing difficulty in making his anti-Catholic tirades heard amid the vociferous opposition of Irish MPs. In 1866 he claimed to have evidence that Vatican machinations had caused the defeat of British troops in New Zealand, that Cardinal Cullen, the Irish primate, intended to place a Stuart pretender on the throne of England, and that the pope had taken control of the British artillery corps, the police, the telegraph office, and railway companies. In 1871 he feared that the prime minister, Gladstone, had joined the Church of Rome. He became a supporter of the Tichborne claimant, and as a result of a letter which he wrote to the newspapers on the case he was fined $250 by Lord Chief Justice Cockburn for contempt of court (23 January 1874) and imprisoned in Holloway gaol for refusing to pay. The fine was paid by Whalley's sister on the following day. 
Whalley died at Trevor Tower, Llangollen, Denbighshire on 8 October 1878. His son, George Hampden Whalley ('b'. 1851), was MP for Peterborough in 1880-83. A lecture delivered by Whalley at Peterborough about 1860, 'Early British History: Ecclesiastical and Secular', which drew an analogy between St Augustine's mission and the re-establishment in 1850 of the Catholic hierarchy in Britain, with Cardinal Wiseman at its head, was published at Hove in 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 29159


Whalley, John (1653-1724), astrologer and almanac writer, was born on 20 April 1653. He arrived in Dublin in 1682, where he settled and -- with one interruption -- remained for the rest of his life. His first address was at the Golden Last on the Upper Comb, and from there, beginning in 1685, he produced an annual astrological almanac, which brought him increasing fame and notoriety. His almanac for 1685 was entitled 'Vox Urani', and its author named as 'Iatromathematicus'; that for the following year 'Syderus nuncius'. These and future editions not only provided the usual information regarding the year's astronomical events and their astrological implications, but advertised Whalley's services in 'physick and mathematicks' -- that is, dispensing remedies for various ailments, analysing their course astrologically from the time of onset ('decumbitures'), and providing astrological advice in response to personal enquiries ('horaries'). He soon had a thriving business. 
Whalley was a lifelong whig polemicist, whose vitriol against 'popery' stands out even in an age much given to extreme political and religious rhetoric. Using his almanac for this purpose too, he recommended a price of $5 on the heads of priests, and described Catholics as 'God-eating monsters, cannibals true'. Such sentiments naturally made him highly unpopular with the Irish people, and he was attacked in a bitter satire, composed by Ferdaragh O'Daly, of twenty-one stanzas in Irish. The accession of James II left him in a dangerously exposed position, and he was publicly pilloried in Dublin in 1688, after which he retreated to England. While working as a coffee-house keeper, he managed to produce 'England's Mercury, or, An Ephemeris' for at least 1688 and 1690-92. In the dedication for the issue of 1690, he took care to emphasize his connections with Daniel Finch, the secretary of state. 
Some time about 1692, Whalley returned to Dublin and settled at the sign of the Blew Post, next door to the Wheel of Fortune, on the west side of St Stephen's Green. He recommenced his annual almanac, now entitled 'Mercurius Hibernicus', for this year. About 1698 he moved to Nicholas Street, next door to The Fleece tavern. 
In 1701 Whalley published 'Ptolemy's Quadripartite, or, Four Books Concerning the Influence of the Stars' (2nd edn, 1786), the first English translation of Ptolemy's work, which attracted some notice. In the same year also appeared 'An Appendix Concerning [the] Part of Fortune' and 'A Treatise of Eclipses'. In descending order of importance, these constitute Whalley's chief contribution to the astrological tradition. But here, too, there is a polemical element. His 'Quadripartite' was dedicated to the London astrologer John Partridge (along with a physician in Drogheda, Michael Cudmore), a radical whig and protestant like Whalley, and the acknowledged leader of a correspondingly radical movement in astrology -- a campaign to restore, in Whalley's words, the 'Truely Natural and Primitive Purity' of Ptolemaic astrology, with its Aristotelian naturalism and rationalism. Their enemies were the customary magico-divinatory astrology of the common people (exemplified by horary) on the one hand, and on the other the efforts to reform astrology along Baconian lines, led by Anglican and crypto-Catholic astrologers (usually also associated, however loosely, with the Royal Society) like John Gadbury, George Parker, and Henry Coley. In his preface to the 'Quadripartite' Whalley lashed the 'Adulterous Innovations [and] Scandalous Ridiculous Falsehoods' of the reformers. The source of Whalley's 'Appendix' was the monk and astrologer Placidus de Titis (1603-1668), who had attempted the same Aristotelian reform of astrology in Italy, led, as he wrote, only by 'Ptolemy and reason'. Partridge's and Whalley's efforts were later taken up by John Worsdale. 
In practice, of course, Whalley was often obliged to provide the divinatory services that he decried in theory; for one thing, the birth times required for drawing up a Ptolemaically proper nativity were often not known. One of his several Dublin competitors, John Coats, was quick to point out the hypocrisy of Whalley's claims to sole rectitude in this respect. 
In 1703 Whalley moved first to 1 Patrick Street, and then to Arundel Court, near St Nicholas's Gate (between St Nicholas Street and Patrick Street), at the sign of the Blue Ball. While continuing with his almanacs, he also produced, from 1714, a popular non-astrological broadsheet, 'Whalley's News-Letter'. Given his talent for scandal and satirical abuse, this too was a success, and inspired many imitators. 
Whalley's last almanac was for 1724. Having predicted 'a year of darkness' on account of an eclipse, he died in April. It is only from his will that the existence of his wife and family is known: he named his 'beloved wife Mary' as sole executor, and left to his eldest son his two volumes of 'Salmon's Anatomy' and his mathematical books, and to a cousin his three volumes of 'Bibliotheca medica chymigica'. His almanac was taken over by Isaac Butler, apparently his favourite apprentice, who continued to produce it until his own death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29160


Whalley, Peter (1722-1791), author and literary editor, was born at Rugby, Warwickshire, on 2 September 1722, the second of the seven children of Peter Whalley ('bap'. 1693, died 1772), attorney-at-law, and his first wife, Elizabeth White. His family had been associated with Northamptonshire for at least two centuries. He attended Merchant Taylors' School from 1731 to 1740. In July of that year he entered St John's College, Oxford, became a fellow in 1743, and graduated BA in 1744. He took a BCL in 1768. From 1748 to 1762 Whalley held the vicarage of St Sepulchre's in Northampton; from 1753 to 1766 that of Preston deanery and from 1762 to 1763 the rectory of Ecton, both in Northamptonshire. In 1752 he became master of Courteenhall grammar school in that county. From 1760 to 1776 he was upper grammar master of Christ's Hospital in London in succession to James Townley. In 1766 Whalley was appointed by the corporation of the City of London rector of the united parishes of St Margaret Pattens and St Gabriel Fenchurch. He was made vicar of Horley, Surrey, in 1768 and held both benefices until his death. From 1784 to 1789 he was headmaster of St Olave's Grammar School, Southwark, and a justice of the peace. 
Whalley's writings were firmly rooted in the Augustan tradition. His 'Essay on the Manner of Writing History' (1746), the first free-standing essay in the eighteenth century on that subject, developed the notion, derived from classical texts, that the purpose of historical writing was instruction and improvement and not literary effect. In 'On the Learning of Shakespeare' (1748) Whalley showed by detailed textual analysis that Shakespeare possessed extensive knowledge of classical authors and made considerable use of them, something hitherto unappreciated; at the same time he acknowledged the creative power of Shakespeare's imagination and so pointed the way forward to later developments in Shakespearian criticism. He also published a number of sermons. 
As an editor Whalley was responsible for the first critical edition of the works of Ben Jonson (7 vols., 1756). He was one of the last commentators in the eighteenth century to defend Jonson's reputation, remarking favourably on his learning, his skill in characterization, and his imaginative plots, as well as the lyricism of some of his poems. Whalley's textual notes attempted to explain the obscurities of Jonson's language, but his omissions attracted some unfavourable contemporary comment. Whalley prepared a second edition, but publication by Francis Waldron, which began in numbers in 1792, after Whalley's death, did not get beyond the second number. Whalley's edition remained the standard one until replaced by that of William Gifford in 1816. 
In 1757 Whalley was chosen by a committee of local gentlemen to continue the process of editing for publication the materials collected by John Bridges for a 'History of Northamptonshire', following the failure of Benjamin Buckler and Richard Gifford to carry out the task. He re-edited and improved that portion of the book which had been brought out by Samuel Jebb in 1739 and, with additions, the first volume of the finished work appeared in 1763. The first part of the second volume came out in 1769, but no further progress was made on the rest of the material for many years because of Whalley's other commitments, financial concerns, and the deaths of the members of the Northamptonshire committee. Whalley eventually completed the project, largely following Bridges' plan, and the book was finally published in the autumn of 1791, shortly after his death. In 1788 Whalley sought subscriptions for a book on the history of the royal hospitals in the City of London, but it never appeared. 
Whalley's first wife, Mary, died in 1767. On 16 January 1768 at St Antholin, Budge Row, London, he married Elizabeth (Betsy) Jacobs of List Lane, London, but her extravagance led him into financial difficulties and he was forced to hide in the house of his friend Francis Waldron. When his hiding place was discovered he fled to the Low Countries, and died at Ostend on 12 June 1791. His widow survived until 16 March 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 29161


Whalley, Richard (1498/9-1583), administrator, was born into a well-established Nottinghamshire gentry family, the only son of Thomas Whalley (died in or after 1549), landowner of Kirton, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Strelley of Woodborough. 
At an unknown date Whalley was sent to St John's College, Cambridge, essentially to round out an education hitherto based largely on martial exercise and etiquette. He did not take a degree, and subsequently completed his training in the household of Sir Thomas Lovell, probably thanks to his father, who had been an archer in Lovell's retinue in 1508. Richard Whalley was a gentleman of Lovell's household by 10 December 1522 and served until 25 May 1524. Thomas Cromwell employed a Richard Whalley to investigate Cardinal Wolsey's dissolved monasteries in 1527, but this was probably Richard Whalley (died 1560) of Dalby in Yorkshire, who was attorney to the council of the north from 1536. 
Before 1540 Richard Whalley of Kirton had married Laura, daughter of Thomas Brookman of Essex. They had five children, including Richard's heir, Thomas (died 1582). Whalley profited from his work for Cromwell. He advised his son Hugh, also one of Cromwell's servants, to buy former monastic land in Leicestershire in 1536 and himself began purchasing Nottinghamshire properties. These included the Newark and the Welbeck Abbey estates (the latter valued at $249 6's'. 3died p.a. when he bought it on 26 February 1539), as well as other lands, among them Hardwick, Osberton, and Worksop, in 1540. He petitioned John Gates unsuccessfully in 1542 to further his suit for other property near his estates worth $66 13's'. 4died p.a. Cromwell was probably behind his appointment as JP for the North Riding in 1538. By 1540 Laura Whalley was dead and her husband had remarried, his second wife being a woman named Ursula; they had thirteen children. Whalley quickly found a patron after Cromwell's fall and was controller of the household of Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland, from 1540 to 1541. An esquire by no later than May 1542, he also began accumulating profitable royal offices, including the receivership of the court of augmentations for Yorkshire from 1545. On 17 September that year he bought Worksop Priory, along with the advowson of the vicarage. He was named JP for Nottinghamshire in 1546, and was already one of the wealthiest gentlemen in the county when on 25 July he was granted the reversion of the college, wardenry, and chantry of St Mary of Sibthorpe. He took possession when its warden, Thomas Magnus, died on 28 August 1550. These acquisitions brought local responsibilities, including membership of important commissions in Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire. At court he was an esquire of the body by 1545. 
By 1 July 1547 Whalley had been appointed chamberlain of the household of his kinsman by marriage Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector. He received no salary, but instead enjoyed lucrative perquisites as one of the ducal council. Whalley was about the same age as Somerset, and like the lord protector he was a committed protestant. During Mary I's reign he entertained the prominent evangelical scholar William Ford at Welbeck Abbey, and he married sons to the daughters of a cousin and servant of Thomas Cranmer. Thomas Fisher, Somerset's secretary, noted that Whalley was a member of the duke's intimate circle by July 1548, though, unlike William Cecil and the principal secretary Sir Thomas Smith, he did not counsel Somerset about matters of state, his role being more practical but no less useful or valued. He was rewarded with more offices. In May 1547 Whalley was added to the quorum of the peace for the North Riding and was appointed JP for the East Riding. He was MP for Scarborough in 1547 and was probably returned to the final session of parliament in January 1552. Whalley disbursed royal money for Boulogne in summer 1549. In April 1549 Somerset procured Mortlake lodge and park for Cecil and wanted Wimbledon parsonage for Whalley. He had found both men invaluable supporters during the fall of his brother Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley and lord admiral. Initially, Cecil petitioned for Wimbledon but Somerset preferred to have him 'ney unto hyme' at Mortlake because it was closer to his own houses at Syon and Sheen (TNA: PRO, SP 10/6/36, M, fol. 82'r'). Whalley got Wimbledon instead. In August Cecil solicited Somerset's steward, Sir John Thynne, for an office on behalf of the receiver of the court of augmentations, John Aylworth. He worried that Whalley might, without the steward's assistance, 'ride before hym' (Longleat, Thynne MS 2, fol. 116'r'). Cecil believed that Whalley would succeed to one of Sir Anthony Denny's offices in the royal household but the October coup that toppled Somerset confounded any expectations that the chamberlain may have had. 
Whalley was active on Somerset's behalf during the October coup. He helped organize his master's defence against the London council by conveying coffers to his own house at Wimbledon on 7 October 1549 and may have sheltered his kinswoman the duchess of Somerset there. That Whalley was sent by Somerset to protect the duchess and 'to recomfort her' underlines his closeness to them (TNA: PRO, SP 10/9/42, M, fol. 82'r'). Not all of Somerset's people proved so loyal. On 10 October Sir William Paget, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, agreed to betray his patron by apprehending Somerset and his leading supporters, including Whalley. The following day most of them were placed under house arrest by Sir Anthony Wingfield, vice-chamberlain and captain of the guard, at Windsor Castle, but Whalley appears to have been still at large, probably at Beddington with the duchess. Eventually he was apprehended and sent to the Tower of London but on 25 January 1550 was among the first to be released, on a bond of $666 13's'. 4died A few days later he was ordered to pay the wages of the ducal household. 
In mid-1550 John Dudley, earl of Warwick, now the effective head of the government, began to forge ties with Cecil through Whalley. Relations within the Somerset household were strained during this time and John Raves, its clerk comptroller, complained that Whalley had embezzled $60 owed to him. Having lost his dignity as lord protector, Somerset felt vulnerable and had difficulty adapting to a new, more circumscribed role. His wife was pushing him to be more assertive, while servants and clients like Whalley solicited practical support by turning to disgruntled members of the privy council and nobility. It was against this background that Whalley wrote to Cecil on 26 June 1550, recounting a discussion with Warwick in which Somerset's arrogant behaviour was criticized sharply. This constituted a blunt warning to members of the ducal household that they should moderate their own counsel towards Somerset because they 'fondlie perswadyde' him to take dangerous courses. Whalley expressed his own loyalty to his patron, despite the difficulty of service in the present circumstances, and asked Cecil to be Somerset's good servant and good counsellor. Warwick acted as Whalley's 'veare [very] goode lorde' and assisted him a few days later in the purchase of crown lands worth $50 p.a., probably on favourable terms (TNA: PRO, SP 10/10/9, M, fols. 21'v'-22'r'). However, soliciting another patron was common and Whalley was still Somerset's man. Cecil too, remained close to the duke, despite becoming one of Warwick's intimates. 
Somerset sent his servants and clients to several leading noblemen and gentlemen to gain their support during late 1550 and early 1551, probably in order to reduce his sense of isolation rather than to seek restoration to the protectorate. This role suited Whalley's intense personality, being 'a busy headed man anxious to be set on work' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.595). On 16 February 1551 he was interrogated 'for perswading divers nobles of the Realme to make the duke of Somerset protectour at the next parleament'. He denied it but Henry Manners, second earl of Rutland, affirmed it 'manifestly' (BL, Cotton MS Nero C.x, fol. 29'v'). Whalley was sent to the Fleet prison, and on 18 February the privy council questioned Sir Francis Leke, Rutland's uncle, about his activities. It transpired that Whalley had been sent to talk with Rutland at Belvoir Castle, Leicestershire, and the earl told Leke, 'he [Whalley] hathe been here with me and pratled very muche, whiche I like not' ('APC', '1550-52', 217). Whalley was released on a bond of $1000 on 2 April. 
On 18 October 1551 Whalley was re-arrested and sent to the Tower, where he was examined several times and pressured into testifying against Somerset at the duke's trial at Westminster Hall on 1 December. He received occasional visits from his wife, who had 'accesse to hym at any convenient tyme, though the sayd Lieutenaunt [Sir John Markham] be not present', and from his half-brother Walter ('APC', '1552-4', 31). He remained in prison until 19 June 1552, when he relinquished his position as receiver of the court of augmentations and gave bonds. Edward VI recorded that Whalley confessed: 'how he lent my money upon gaine and lucre... how he bought myne owne land with my money, how in his accoumptes he had made many false suggestions, how at the time of the fall of money he borowed divers swomes of money and had allowance for it after, by wich he gained 500 pound at one crieng downe, the hole summe being 2000li and above. (BL, Cotton MS Nero C.x, fol. 65'v')' As a result Whalley was re-arrested and sent to the Tower on 20 September, before being moved to the Marshalsea prison; although his imprisonment was 'ostensibly for peculation, it was probably a political sanction' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.595). He had not handled large amounts of money, and although his accounts were in arrears there is little evidence of peculation. Probably he speculated on the foreign exchanges using the king's money, but this was commonplace. Interestingly, the privy council protected his estates during his imprisonment. In prison he encouraged Richard Eden's experiments in transmutation, while his financial problems mounted, especially because of complications over manors that he had mortgaged to Sir Maurice Denys, who claimed $3000 by default because Whalley overvalued them. 
Released on 6 August 1553 and rehabilitated by Mary, Whalley was restored as JP for Nottinghamshire in 1554, returned as MP for East Grinstead, Sussex, in April 1554 and, perhaps through the patronage of Rutland, with whom he was again on friendly terms, as knight of the shire for Nottinghamshire in November 1554 and 1555. However, on 19 February 1556 the privy council denied his petition for restoration to the office of receiver, perhaps because of the earlier accusations. He did attempt to recover his losses. In 1553 or 1554 he brought an action in the exchequer alleging that his goods to the value of $126 6's'. 4died had been seized when he was 'wrongly imprisoned' in the Tower 'through the cruelty and by the malicious commandment' of Warwick (Bryson, 'Cases Concerning Equity', 1.72). By 1559 debts amounting to about $4800, mainly due to fines, forced him to consider selling Welbeck Abbey, and he took up residence at Screveton, Nottinghamshire. Although he sold other manors he was able to retain Welbeck, probably through astute land management (he was a leading figure in providing the government with timber from 1559). 
Whalley's position improved after the accession of Elizabeth I, perhaps due to his protestantism and his old association with Cecil. He was added to the quorum of the peace for Nottinghamshire in 1558-9. On 14 July 1561 he was granted the Nottinghamshire manors of Whatton and Hawksworth and Towton in the West Riding, valued in total at $139 7's'. 8died p.a. Despite the political and financial vicissitudes of his long life, Whalley was able to provide for his many children in his will and left a third of his fortune to his third wife and executor, Barbara (died in or after 1590), the mother of his last seven children. He died on 23 November 1583, aged eighty-four, and was buried in Screveton church. Within a year his widow had raised a fine alabaster tomb to his memory, Italianate in style, with his recumbent effigy in full plate armour, and an epitaph reminiscent of the words Somerset composed on the night before his execution. His head rests on a whale -- a rebus which also appeared on his coat-of-arms. He was succeeded by his grandson, Richard Whalley ('c'.1558- 'c'.1632), the father of the regicide Edward Whalley. 


@@@@@


doc= 29162


Whalley, Thomas Sedgwick (1746-1828), poet and traveller, was born at Cambridge, the third son of John Whalley DD (died 1748), master of St Peter's College, Cambridge, regius professor of divinity in that university and one of the king's chaplains in ordinary, and his wife, Mary (1706/7-1803), only child of Francis Squire, canon and chancellor of Wells Cathedral. He was educated at Ilminster School, Somerset, and admitted on 27 April 1763 to St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1767 and MA in 1774. He was ordained about 1770. In March 1772 Edmund Keene, bishop of Ely, presented him to the rectory of Hagworthingham, near Spilsby in Lincolnshire, and, in consequence of its unhealthy situation in the fens, made it a condition that he should never enter into residence. This stipulation he readily complied with, and for the long period of more than fifty years the duties were discharged by a curate. About 1825 Whalley built a parsonage house for the benefice. He was appointed on 22 August 1777 to the prebendal stall of Combe (13) in Wells Cathedral, and retained it until 1826. 
On 6 January 1774 at St Marylebone, Middlesex, Whalley married Elizabeth (died 1801), only child of Edward Jones of Langford Court in Burrington parish, Somerset, and widow of John Withers Sherwood. The marriage brought Whalley a great fortune and the estate at Langford Court where he resided for many years. About 1776 he purchased the centre house in the Crescent at Bath, and entertained with great hospitality both there and at Langford. He was a conspicuous figure in Lady Miller's circle at Batheaston, and wrote verses for her literary salon. Frances Burney described him as 'immensely tall, thin and handsome, but affected, delicate, and sentimentally pathetic' ('Diary', 1.314). In the summer of 1783, under the spur of economy, he and his wife broke up their establishments in England and went to Europe. Langford Court was let for many years and eventually sold in 1804. Whalley spent the spring and winter for a long period in southern France, Italy, Switzerland, and Belgium, and kept journals of his continental experiences. 
As a rule Whalley spent the summer at Mendip Lodge, formerly called Langford Cottage, on the Mendip hills, where the grounds were remarkable for their grottoes and terrace walks. Mrs Siddons often visited him there, and Hannah More was a neighbour. Whalley supported Hannah More's action over the school at Blagdon in an anonymous pamphlet, 'Animadversions on the Curate of Blagdon's Three Publications' (1802). 
Whalley was created an honorary DD of Edinburgh University on 10 July 1808. Next winter he bought a house in Baker Street, London, and for some years lived there in great extravagance. His first wife had died on 8 December 1801, and in May 1803 he married a Miss Heathcote, a lady of good family and property in Wiltshire; she died at Southbroom, near Devizes, on 10 October 1805. On 3 October 1812 he married the widow of General Horneck (probably Charles Horneck who died at Bath on 8 April 1804). He soon discovered that she was heavily in debt, and they agreed to separate. She received from Whalley a comfortable settlement and a large house in Catharine Place, Bath, in which she gave grand parties. 
Two volumes of Whalley's 'Journals and Correspondence' were edited in 1863 by Revd Hill Wickham, rector of Horsington. Prefixed to the first volume is a print by Joseph Brown of Whalley's portrait by Reynolds. They contain many interesting letters from Hester Lynch Piozzi and Sarah Siddons, but are burdened with huge epistles from Anna Seward. Wilberforce described Whalley in 1813 as 'the true picture of a sensible, well-informed and educated, polished, old, well-beneficed, nobleman's and gentleman's house-frequenting, literary and chess-playing divine'. Whalley was a patron of painting; the celebrated picture of 'The Woodman' by Barker of Bath was painted for him, and, at his request, Sir Thomas Lawrence made an admirable crayon drawing of Cecilia Siddons, his goddaughter. 
Whalley's writings include: 'Edwy and Edilda' (1779), a poetic tale in five parts; 'The Castle of Montval' (1781), a tragedy in five acts which was performed at Drury Lane in 1799 and 'tolerably well received' (D. Baker, 'Biographica dramatica', rev. I. Reed and S. Jones, 3 vols., 1812, 2.87); 'The Fatal Kiss' (1781); and 'Mont Blanc' (1788). 
After the peace of 1814 Whalley went to Europe again. On his return in 1818 he purchased the centre house in Portland Place, Bath. In 1825 he bought the lease of a house at Clifton, and in 1828 he left England for the last time. A few weeks after his arrival at La Fleche, France, he died there of old age on 3 September 1828. Although in his will he requested to be buried with his first two wives in a vault in Burrington church, he was buried in a Roman Catholic church in La Fleche, a handsome sarcophagus of dark slate, with a Latin inscription, marking the spot. 


@@@@@


doc= 29163


Wharton, Anne (1659-1685), poet, was born at Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire, on 20 July 1659. Her father, Sir Henry Lee (1637?-1659), of Ditchley, had died four months earlier; the death within days of her mother, Anne Danvers (1636-1659), daughter of Sir John Danvers (1584/5-1655), the regicide, left her and her elder sister Eleanor (1657-1691) coparcenary heirs to the vast wealth of Henry Danvers, earl of Danby (1573-1644), which had been left to his sister by Danby's heir male, his nephew Henry Danvers (1633-1654). Both girls were placed by their mother's will under the guardianship of her mother-in-law, twice widowed Anne, countess of Rochester (1614-1696), mother by her second husband, Henry Wilmot, created earl of Rochester in 1652, of the poet Rochester. In her expert hands both motherless girls thrived, but there is little evidence of any formal education for either. When the countess was appointed groom of the stole to the duchess of York in recompense for her role in the complicated dealings that had left her old friend Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, in possession of the principal Danby estate of Cornbury Park, her wards receiving the confiscated estate of Sir John Danvers in exchange, the Lee girls appear to have accompanied their grandmother to the court of St James's. When in the country they lived with their guardian at the Wilmot house at Adderbury which, after having served as a billet for both sides in the civil war, had been left virtually ruinous before the countess had it rebuilt, and, with the benefit of the Lee girls' money, magnificently refurbished. 
A principal source for the biography of the poet is the correspondence of Sir Ralph Verney, who was one of her trustees, and John Cary of Woodstock, who acted as steward of Adderbury. In August 1672 thirteen-year-old Anne Lee spent three months at Bath being treated for a virulent sore throat; in September of the following year, against the wishes of the king, who was promoting a match with the heir of Sir John Arundel of Trerice, she was privately married to Thomas Wharton (1648-1715), who, contrary to the provisions of the will of his mother, Jane Goodwin, who stipulated that her considerable estate be shared with his brother Goodwin Wharton (1653-1704), was created for the purpose sole heir of his father, Philip, fourth Baron Wharton (1613-1696), leader of the country party in the House of Lords. According to the unreliable autobiography of Goodwin Wharton, besides being debauched when very young by Henry Mordaunt, second earl of Peterborough (1624?-1697), Anne had 'lain a long while by her uncle Rochester' (BL, Add. MS 26006, i, 308). Her elegy on the death of the poet in 1680 is evidence of her deep attachment to him; in it she claims that he taught her to write poetry. The sight of her elegy in manuscript prompted poetic responses from John Grubham Howe and Edmund Waller. In March 1681, after recurrent episodes of acute illness, she was escorted by her husband to Paris for medical treatment. Before it could be completed he required her to return to England; with her she brought her verse paraphrase of the 'Lamentations' of Jeremiah which she showed to the nonconformist divine Samuel Clark, who responded that it would 'afford more comfortable reflections at a dying hour, than conversing with what belongs only to, or is fit for the Theater' (Bodl. Oxf., Rawl. MS, letters 53, fols. 351-2), implying both that her verse play, 'Love's Martyr, or, Wit above Crowns' (BL, Add. MS 28693), was written before this date and that she was not expected to recover. 
In July 1682 Mrs Wharton began a correspondence with Gilbert Burnet, who showed her verse paraphrase of 'Isaiah' 53 to Edmund Waller who wrote his two cantos 'Of Divine Poesy' in response. After Burnet's flight to Holland, Mrs Wharton engaged in a poetic correspondence with William Atwood and became involved in the project to stage Rochester's 'rifacimento' of Fletcher's 'Valentinian' which was acted by the United Company at the Theatre Royal on 11 February 1684. In his preface to the printing of the play Robert Wolseley represents himself as acting upon instruction; an exchange of poems between Wolseley and Mrs Wharton reinforces the suspicion that the instruction came from her. By the summer of 1685 she was once more gravely ill and betook herself to Adderbury so that she could drink the waters at nearby Astrop. Her condition worsened; for weeks she lay racked with agonizing seizures. On 29 October she died, and on 12 November she was buried in the Wharton family vault under the chancel of the church of St Mary Magdalen at Winchendon, Buckinghamshire. At the reading of her will it was discovered that she had left her whole fortune, beyond some personal legacies to servants and $3000 to Rochester's daughter by Elizabeth Barry, to her notoriously neglectful and unfaithful husband. Though the countess of Rochester repeatedly besought the earl of Abingdon, since 1672 husband of Mrs Wharton's sister and coheir, and her grandson, Edward Henry Lee, earl of Lichfield, to bring an action to overturn the will, it was never contested. In February 1686 Master William Phillips entered a caveat in the Stationers' register preventing any member of the Stationers' Company from publishing 'a play called 'Love's Martyr'... and other poems written by the Honnoble Mrs Wharton'. Anne Wharton's surviving 'oeuvre' consists of twenty-four poems, all but five of which were printed in miscellanies in the years following her death, her play, seven letters to her husband, and one to Sir Ralph Verney. 


@@@@@


doc= 29164


Wharton, Edward Ross (1844-1896), philologist and genealogist, was born at Rhyl, Flintshire, on 4 August 1844, the second son of Henry James Wharton (1798-1859), vicar of Mitcham, whose ancestors had long been settled at Winfarthing in Norfolk. His mother was a daughter of Thomas Peregrine Courtenay. He was educated as a day boy at Charterhouse, where he was captain of the school, under the headmastership of Richard Elwyn, and elected to a scholarship at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1862, graduating BA in 1868 and MA in 1870. Though never robust in health, and suffering at this time from weak eyesight, he had a distinguished university career. In his second year he won the Ireland scholarship, though for the Hertford and Craven he came out only proxime. He was placed in the first class in classical moderations, and also in the final classical school. In 1868 he was elected to a fellowship at Jesus, which he was obliged to relinquish after his marriage in 1870 to Susanna Maria (died 1899), daughter of Samuel Hicks Withers of Willesden. He was connected almost continuously with the college until his death, as assistant tutor and Latin lecturer, and was re-elected to a fellowship after the change in statutes in 1882. He devoted himself to acquiring a thorough knowledge of both Latin and Greek, to which he added an understanding of the cognate languages. 
Wharton's first book was 'Etyma Graeca', an etymological lexicon of classical Greek (1882), which lists with minimal explanation the derivations of about five thousand common words. 'Etyma Latina' (1890) was similarly constructed, but included an appendix showing the changes that letters undergo in the cognate languages as well as in Latin. He also contributed several papers to the London Philological Society and to the French Societe Linguistique. His other published works were translations of Aristotle's 'Poetics' and book i of Horace's 'Satires'. 
Wharton was a keen walker, especially in the British Isles and the Alps. He met Karl Baedeker in Koblenz, and made numerous suggestions for early editions of his guides. During the last few years of his life much of his interest was transferred to genealogy. The results of his researches, largely among original documents, are contained in six manuscript volumes, which he bequeathed to the Bodleian Library, dealing with all who had borne the name of Wharton or Warton. A short sketch of the baronial family of Wharton of Wharton Hall in Westmorland, which he had finished just before his death, was printed by his widow as a memorial volume. He died at 3 South Parks Road, Oxford, on 4 June 1896, and his remains were cremated at Woking. He had no children. 
A younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 29165


Wharton, Sir George, first baronet (1617-1681), astrologer and royalist, was born on 4 April 1617 at Strickland, near Kirkby Kendal in Westmorland, the son of George Wharton, a blacksmith and small farmer. He was descended, as Anthony Wood notes, 'from an antient and genteel family' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4, col. 6), probably the Whartons of Kirkby Thore. His father died while Wharton was still a small child and he inherited an estate of about $50 a year; he was brought up by two uncles, William and Cuthbert Wharton. He spent some time at Oxford in 1633 studying mathematics and astronomy, but finding logic and philosophy of little appeal returned home without matriculating. By 1641 he had moved to Bishop Auckland, near Durham, where he appears to have had relatives. He published his first almanac for that year, with help from William Milbourne, curate of nearby Brancepeth, and perhaps also from the parson-astrologer John Vaux of St Helen Auckland. It appeared under the pseudonym Naworth, which he adopted to prevent the common people accounting him a conjuror. 
Wharton's first two almanacs were bland productions, partly because the censors suppressed his prophecies about the Scots. On the outbreak of the civil war he moved to Oxford, where he was appointed a gentleman clerk of the ordnance office. In this capacity he saw action at the battles of Edgehill and Brainford in 1642. In his spare time he pursued his mathematical studies at Queen's College, and according to Wood might have been made MA had he not neglected the opportunity. In 1645 he made the acquaintance of Elias Ashmole, recently appointed to the ordnance office, who was to become a close friend and protector. Other friends included the natural philosopher Richard Rawlinson, fellow of Queen's, the physician Charles Scarburgh, and Edward Sherburne of the ordnance office, and he was clearly on the fringe of the scientific circle then flourishing in Oxford. It may also have been during these years that he married Anne Butler, with whom he had four sons and three daughters. 
Wharton quickly emerged as the foremost royalist astrologer, producing polemical almanacs at Oxford with the king's blessing. These drew him into fierce battles with his parliamentarian rivals, John Booker and William Lilly. In the edition for 1644, composed in October 1643, he denied that the recent conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter heralded the overthrow of monarchy and damned Booker for hinting at the fall of the 'man of three letters', which some had interpreted as 'rex', or King Charles. Wharton retorted that 'Pym' fitted equally well, and predicted the parliamentary leader John Pym's speedy death -- a prophecy fulfilled even before the almanac appeared in print. Booker replied in 'Mercurius Coelicus' (1644), dismissing 'No-worth' as a 'court parasite' with sinister popish and Irish connections. Wharton penned an abusive reply, 'Mercurio-Coelico mastix', within six hours of reading Booker's squib, and published it with an annotated reprint of 'Mercurius Coelicus'. For the following year, 1645, he issued two almanacs, one as Naworth, the other under his own name with a fierce assault on the 'impudent and senseless' writings of Lilly, which Lilly later admitted hurt him deeply. In May 1645 Wharton published 'An Astrologicall Judgement on his Majesties Present March', predicting that Charles would be victorious in his new military campaign. Lilly's 'Starry Messenger' (1645) gave a diametrically opposite reading and contained a 'Postscript' rebutting Wharton's prediction. Naseby gave the victory to Lilly. 
On 8 March 1645 Wharton was commissioned a captain of horse, raising his troop by selling his estate in Westmorland. He fought in a number of actions before sharing in the crushing defeat under Sir Jacob Astley at Stow in March 1646, where he was wounded. There was no almanac for 1646, probably because he was too busy fighting. His credibility had also suffered, and one pamphleteer later claimed he had been driven out of Oxford before its surrender in July 1646. There does seem a personal edge to Wharton's bitter remark in 1647 that every honourable man at court had found himself 'despised... by the Parasiticall Faction' ('No Merline, nor Mercurie but a New Almanacke', sig. B3). After the fall of Oxford he found refuge with a royalist squire in Yorkshire, before making his way to London later in the year. There he published on his own account a defiant almanac for 1647. It contained an entire section devoted to vitriolic abuse of Lilly, whom he challenged to submit their differences for adjudication by Charles Scarburgh, Jonas Moore, and Vincent Wing. He renewed the attack in 'Merlini Anglici errata' (1647), a medley of astrological, political, and personal abuse. Wharton's belligerent royalism was unshaken by the king's defeat. He mocked Booker's 'Bloody Irish Almanack' (1646), which predicted the impending devastation of Ireland, by celebrating the Irish Catholics' continuing success. In his remarkable 'Bellum Hybernicale', published in December 1646, he openly justified the rebellion of 1641 on the grounds of the Irish people's long history of repression, and suggested that the English and Scots were at least equally to blame for the massacres. This pamphlet, with his almanac for 1648, prompted the House of Commons on 25 September 1647 to order his arrest, though he evaded capture for a further six months. 
Following the civil war Wharton lived on the meagre earnings from his pamphleteering and help from Ashmole and other friends. In the late summer of 1647 he was struck down by plague, and, though he survived, a pseudonymous pamphleteer described finding him poverty-stricken and unkempt, 'all greasy and beastly' (Col. Th. --, 12). On regaining his health he embarked on a precarious new career editing royalist newspapers. 'Mercurius Elencticus', a weekly launched on 5 November 1647, combined cavalier propaganda with attacks on old astrological rivals, and developed to become one of the leading cavalier titles. Wharton used it to attack Independents and levellers, and on the execution of the king he boldly proclaimed his son as Charles II. It survived until November 1649 before falling victim to the fierce new censorship law. During this period Wharton also continued to publish his almanacs. Rather optimistically he agreed to write an uncontroversial almanac for 1648 for the Company of Stationers. Some of them passed a draft to Booker, however, who as licenser decided to suppress it. Wharton, furious, responded by publishing an unauthorized edition in which he abused the company, predicted the king's recovery, and proclaimed Laud a martyr. After months on the run he was at last betrayed, and arrested in bed on 13 March 1648. His books and papers were confiscated, and after being grilled by a parliamentary committee he was left to rot in Newgate, where he remained until contriving an escape on 26 August. Remarkably, he was able to publish a new almanac for 1649, drafted in prison and completed four days after his escape, which he dedicated defiantly to Charles I. 
Wharton was deeply shocked by the king's execution in January 1649. He gave an emotional account in his newspaper, while his almanac for 1650 lashed out at the parliamentary leaders as 'the most prodigious Monsters that ever the Earth groaned under' ('Hemeroscopeion', 1650, 19), and threatened them with execution and hell-fire. This attack led to his rearrest in November 1649. Examined before the council of state on suspicion of treason and committed to the Gatehouse, he expected to be hanged, the fate that John Bradshaw, head of the court established to try leading royalists, apparently intended for him. He owed his life, unexpectedly, to his old enemy Lilly, who at Ashmole's request interceded with the council of state through his friend Sir Bulstrode Whitelocke and secured Wharton's release on 2 February 1650, on Wharton's promise to write no more against the state. His release prompted rumours that he had betrayed his cavalier friends, a charge he vigorously denied. His almanac for 1651, published by the Company of Stationers, supplied his own version of events and acknowledged Lilly's help. 
Free but destitute, Wharton was saved when Ashmole generously offered him the use of his house at Bradfield in Berkshire. Wharton helped with estate matters, but spent most of his time pursuing his studies. At Ashmole's suggestion he translated and published a work on chiromancy by Johannes Rothman, claiming it as the first such work ever to appear in England. He embarked too on a translation of Ptolemy's astrological writings, though this was never completed. He continued to publish almanacs, often sailing very close to the wind. He was arrested again briefly in September 1651, when Ashmole stood bail for him. In his almanac for 1653 (published in the autumn of 1652) he boldly predicted that the new republic was sick and about to die. The council of state responded on 1 November 1652 by ordering his arrest once more. Thereafter he dropped political predictions, though he still found other ways to signal his political views. 
Wharton's almanac for 1654 caused different problems. He had quarrelled with the Company of Stationers over its refusal to pay a $20 fee still due for his 1653 almanac, so he sold his copy for the 1654 edition privately, flouting the company's monopoly. On 20 September 1653 the company secured a warrant to seize and destroy the whole impression as seditious; it seized 5000 copies and produced its own counterfeit edition. Wharton thereupon sued in the Guildhall for his unpaid fee. His suit was checked when he refused to take the engagement, but on resuming it the company hastily settled out of court. Wharton produced another independent almanac for 1655 and returned to the quarrel in 'Apotelesma' (1655), which denounced the greedy 'Monopolizing Stationers'. The later 1650s saw an uneasy truce between Wharton and the company, whose name did not appear on his title-pages. In 'Apotelesma' he also hit out at the government once more, predicting the imminent downfall of those 'ruling by Tyranny and Oppression, new Conquerors and Usurpers' ('Apotelesma', 26). Not surprisingly, he was among the cavaliers rounded up in 1655. Arrested at Bradfield on 16 June he was sent prisoner to Windsor Castle, where he remained until the following spring. He compiled his almanac for 1656 in prison, dubbing it his 'Windsor Recreations'. Wharton continued to smear the regime by innuendo. Sheltering behind the proposal to make Cromwell king he felt free to commend monarchy, using carefully drafted verses undoubtedly meant as Stuart propaganda. He came under suspicion once more over the royalist assassination plot for which Dr John Hewitt was executed in June 1658. After the fall of the protectorate he at once ridiculed the Cromwellians, and he attempted to annex the phrase the 'Good Old Cause' for the cavaliers. 
From the early 1650s Wharton gave less prominence to predictions, offering instead essays on historical computation, the nature of comets, and astrological methodology. The 'Chronology' or table of events, always a key feature of his titles, he used to provide a partisan record of events since 1640. From 1657 it became a separate section as 'Gesta Britannorum', extended back to 1600 and explicitly designed to recall the miseries and follies of recent times. Wharton always insisted that he wrote only for educated and loyal readers. In the 1650s many of his almanacs, unusually, carried dedications to friends and patrons, among them John Robinson, later lord mayor and lieutenant of the Tower, his kinsman Thomas Wharton, physician and anatomist, and William Backhouse, both friends of Ashmole with astrological and alchemical interests. Wharton showed his own interest in the occult sciences by transcribing the fifteenth-century alchemist George Ripley's 'Cantalena', at Ashmole's request, and by his preface to Richard Saunders's work on physiognomy and chiromancy, his notes on Hermes Trismegistus, and an exposition of the 'Cabal of the Twelve Houses Astrologicall', printed in his almanac for 1659 with an admiring comment from William Oughtred. Noah Bridges, an authority on cipher and shorthand, was another friend. 
Wharton continued to write almanacs after the Restoration, dedicating his edition for 1661 to the new king. In September 1660 he was also made licenser for almanacs, turning the tables on his former rivals, though the post lapsed under the 'Licensing Act' of 1662. In 1661 his almanac verses were reprinted as 'Select and Choice Poems'. His almanacs did not offer astrological predictions, except of the weather, and the 'Gesta' replaced the traditional 'Prognostication'. They remained highly partisan, however, and the final edition (for 1666) contained a jingoistic diatribe against the Dutch. 
Wharton's life after the Restoration gradually led him away from journalism. In 1660 he was reappointed as gentleman clerk in the ordnance office, with lodgings in the Tower, and he appears to have been an effective public servant. On the death of William Legg, lieutenant of the ordnance, he was appointed in November 1670 to a newly created post as treasurer and paymaster of the ordnance, with a salary of $400 and funds of $200,000 to cover the ordnance needs of the army and navy. The office brought him considerable wealth. As a reward for his services and sufferings under two kings Wharton was created a baronet on 19 December 1677, an honour first mooted as early as 1663. 
Though he published nothing in his later years, Wharton continued to pursue a variety of mathematical interests. His circle included Jonas Moore, Edward Sherburne, Robert Hooke, Richard Towneley, and Lord Brouncker. In 1675 his son and heir, Polycarpus, married Sherburne's niece. In 1680 the tory astrologer John Gadbury, an old acquaintance, begged his help when facing trial for complicity in the Popish Plot and Wharton, though ailing and crippled by gout, promptly wrote to the king on his behalf. Wharton died on 12 August 1681 at his house in Enfield, Middlesex, his family residence since at least the late 1660s. He was buried in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula, in the Tower, on 25 August. Many of his publications, including sections from the almanacs, were reissued by Gadbury in 'The Works of that most Excellent Philosopher and Astronomer, Sir George Wharton', in 1683. All the evidence confirms Wood's portrait of him as a staunch cavalier, 'a boon companion, a witty droll and waggish poet' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4, col. 6). 


@@@@@


doc= 29166


George Wharton (1688-1739), physician, was the eldest son of Thomas Wharton (1652-1714), who followed his own father, Thomas, to Pembroke College and practised medicine; he was buried at Durham in 1714. George's mother was Mary, daughter of John Hall, an alderman of Durham. He was born at Old Park, Durham, on 25 December 1688, and matriculated from Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 6 July 1706, proceeding MB in 1712 and MD in 1719. He was elected a fellow at the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1720, and was censor in 1725, 1729, 1732, and 1734. He was treasurer from 1727 until his death. Wharton married Anna Maria, daughter of William Petty. In 1729 George Wharton presented a portrait of his father to the Royal College of Physicians. He died from 'mortification of the bowels' at his home in Fenchurch Street, London, on 21 March 1739. As he died childless, the Old Park estate passed to his younger brother, Robert, mayor of Durham. A number of later descendants, including Christopher Wharton (died 1990), were physicians and fellows of the Royal College. 


@@@@@


doc= 29167


Wharton, Henry (1664-1695), Church of England clergyman and historian, was born on 9 November 1664 at Worstead, Norfolk, and baptized, probably in the parish, on 20 November, the eldest son of Edmund Wharton ('bap'. 1635, died 1717), vicar of Worstead, rector of adjacent Sloley and later of Saxlingham in the same county, and his wife, Susanna, daughter of John Burr, a wealthy clothier of Dedham, Essex. Henry had a younger brother, Edmund, and a sister, Susan. He was born with two tongues, both of the same size and shape. As an infant, he was examined by natural philosophers. The lower tongue gradually receded until it was no longer an impediment. 
When he was six Wharton attended school at North Walsham, Norfolk, for a year; thereafter he was taught at home by his father. The surviving extracts from his autobiography record his teenage achievements in Latin and Greek composition and, according to the posthumous biography of him by his near-contemporary Thomas Green, his father's thorough teaching, especially in the classical languages, ensured that 'at his entrance into the university he had the reputation of an extraordinary young man' (Green, sig. A3'r'). He was admitted pensioner at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 17 February 1680, matriculated the same year, and was elected scholar of his college in November. He graduated BA in 1684. Wharton was a brilliant student, excelling in classics, philosophy, French and Italian, and mathematics: in the last he was one of 'a select Company' taught by Isaac Newton 'in his private Chamber' (ibid., sig. A4'r'). At Cambridge, his biographer observed, Wharton was 'in all his Conversation exemplary for Sobriety and good Government of himself, and innocent and obliging in his Behaviour, duly observant of College Orders, and constant in frequenting the Prayers and Sacraments in the Chapel' (ibid., sig. A4'v'). 
However, Wharton was unable to obtain a fellowship, and upon the recommendation of a senior fellow of his college he became the assistant to the church historian William Cave, a position he held from 1686 to 1687. Cave allowed him a salary of $10 a year and access to his library, while Caius allowed him to keep his scholarship until Michaelmas 1687. Wharton collaborated with Cave on his 'Scriptorum ecclesiasticorum historia literaria' (1688), an account of European writers from ancient times to the Reformation. Wharton wrote most of the section that dealt with the period after 1300, and felt that his contributions were not properly acknowledged. On 27 February 1687 he was ordained deacon by Thomas White, bishop of Peterborough, and in July proceeded MA, the degree being conferred on him by proxy as at the time he was sick with smallpox. 
Wharton worked on medieval manuscripts at Cambridge University and in the royal library at St James's during 1687 and 1688. In the latter year he wrote or edited four books which assailed Roman Catholic doctrines for their lack of scriptural and historical foundation. His patron for these works, which included 'A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Church' and 'A Treatise Proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith' (both published in 1688) was Thomas Tenison, vicar of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and future archbishop of Canterbury. In 'The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome Demonstrated' (1688) Wharton argued that the 'extraordinary Illuminations' of Catholic saints like Loyola testified to the irrationalism and fanaticism of the Roman church, as opposed to the 'rational piety' of Anglicanism ('Enthusiasm', 15). 
William Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, became Wharton's patron in 1688. Much impressed by Sancroft's piety and support of learning, Wharton wrote that he could not 'be otherwise than diligent' in his scholarship (Douglas, 143). He was made one of Sancroft's chaplains, ordained priest by him on 9 November 1688, and was licensed to preach throughout Canterbury. Wharton was nominated by him to the rectory of Minster, Kent, in October 1688 and to the rectory of Chartham in the same county in September 1689, positions which he held for the rest of his life. Many of Wharton's clerical duties were performed by curates, thus allowing him time for his scholarly pursuits. He befriended two of Sancroft's domestic chaplains, John Battely, archdeacon of Canterbury, and Henry Maurice, both of whom were scholars of church history. 
Wharton was an amazingly productive scholar. He added to the manuscripts in Lambeth Palace, transcribed the treatises in them, and catalogued the collection, sixteen volumes in all; this catalogue forms the basis of the printed catalogue of Lambeth manuscripts and is thus a valuable resource for scholars. He also edited a new edition of Archbishop James Ussher's 'Historia dogmatica' (1689) and wrote 'A defence of pluralities or holding two benefices with cure of souls as now practised in the Church of England' (1692). In all his works, Wharton wrote as a champion of the church and defender of its doctrines. 
Relations between Wharton and his patron became strained when in 1689 Wharton took the oath of allegiance to William and Mary and publicly prayed in Lambeth chapel for the new sovereigns. Sancroft refused to swear allegiance, and told Wharton not to mention the new sovereigns again in the public prayers. The archbishop was deprived of church office and became the leading nonjuror. He personally scolded Wharton for his breach of faith. During his final illness Sancroft wanted only nonjurors in his company, and Wharton was thus excluded. Nevertheless Wharton remained on friendly terms with Sancroft and with other nonjurors, including George Hickes -- sharing their high-church views. In his last days Sancroft turned over to him the diary and manuscripts of the high-church martyr William Laud, which Wharton edited and published in 1695 as 'The History of the Troubles and Tryal of... Dr. William Laud'. Wharton called Laud a 'Blessed Martyr' who strove to re-establish 'the Beauty, the Honour, and the Force of religion' (unpaginated preface). 
Wharton's association with Sancroft hindered his advancement in the post-revolution church. His prospects for preferment were not helped by a literary attack he launched in 1693 against Bishop Gilbert Burnet, who was well connected in church and state. Wharton, employing the pseudonym Anthony Harmer and a sarcastic tone, wrote 'A Specimen of Some Errors and Defects in the History of the Reformation... by Gilbert Burnet' (1693), in which he suggested that as a 'foreigner' the Scottish Burnet was not up to the task of writing about the English Reformation (Wharton, pt 4, 161). This provoked a spirited rejoinder from the bishop who, among other things, accused Wharton of aiding and abetting popery in his 'Specimen'. 
Relations between Wharton and Burnet were strained even before Wharton's critique. The whiggish Burnet was an adversary of Sancroft and rebuffed Wharton when he approached him after the revolution in hopes of winning his favour. Wharton believed that Burnet blocked his attempt to become one of Queen Mary's chaplains. Burnet, who had criticized Wharton's 'Anglia sacra' (discussed below) in 1691, believed it was revenge which motivated Wharton to write the 'Specimen'. He complained of the incivility and 'sourness' which Wharton had displayed in the 'Specimen' (Burnet, 28). 
Not all of Wharton's relations with whig eminences were so contentious. His connection to Thomas Tenison has already been noted. Tenison's predecessor as archbishop, John Tillotson, allowed Wharton continued access to the Lambeth manuscripts. While he was Sancroft's chaplain, Wharton befriended William Lloyd, bishop of St Asaph (1680-89) and of Lichfield and Coventry (1692-9). Lloyd had urged Burnet to write his 'History of the Reformation' and offered him valuable assistance on the project. Indeed Burnet's retort to Wharton's 'Specimen' was his 'Letter... to the Ld Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield' (1693). 
Wharton wrote or edited over twenty books during his short life. His most important work was 'Anglia sacra' (1691), written in Latin and published in two folio volumes of over 1500 pages. 'Anglia sacra' was a collection of medieval manuscripts that chronicled the history of the English church. The first volume consisted of histories, written by monks, of the monastic cathedrals -- Canterbury, Winchester, Rochester, Norwich, Coventry and Lichfield, Bath and Wells, Durham, and Ely. The second volume contained the lives of bishops and the history of their sees. Wharton wrote the concluding sections of the narratives, which continued the chronicles to the Reformation. A letter in 1689 described his research: 'Considering that the history of our church before the Reformation was little known, and that great numbers of the civil antient histories were already published... I resolved to make a collection of histories purely ecclesiastical, and publish them together... When I had gained many of these histories and caused them to be transcribed out of several libraries, I found that they were all particular of some one church, relating almost wholly to the affairs of that church of which the writer was a monk or canon. Hence I immediately conceived, that if such histories could be found of every episcopal see, a perfect history of our bishops would then arise... I have turned over innumerable registers, histories etc., and procured much from other persons. (Douglas, 145-6)' Wharton did not completely realize his vision. He finished his history of the monastic sees, but not of those served by secular canons. 

'Anglia sacra' made a major contribution to the sources of medieval English history. It enabled scholars to canvass and compare a wealth of medieval chronicles. The lives of many English prelates appeared in print for the first time, including John of Salisbury's life of St Anselm, William of Malmesbury's life of Wulfstan, and Eadmer's lives of Bregwim and St Oswald. 'Anglia sacra' was used extensively by later scholars. John Lingard and William Stubbs were among the nineteenth-century historians who drew upon it. 

'Anglia sacra' ran counter to the conventional wisdom of Wharton's time which held that the pre-Reformation church, mired in superstition and popery, was not a subject that merited extensive scholarly research. Similarly, his pseudonymous 'Specimen of Some Errors', though far less influential than 'Anglia sacra', was an original work of scholarship. In this 200-page book Wharton anticipated modern historians by arguing that the late medieval church showed many signs of spirituality and vitality, and challenged the commonplace view, expressed by Bishop Burnet, that the pre-Reformation church was corrupt and oppressive. Where Burnet saw only ignorance and sloth in the monastaries, Wharton found learning and piety. 
Burnet was wrong when he said that suffragan bishops had been abolished in the late medieval church and were only revived with the Reformation. 'If the Historian', wrote Wharton, 'had pleased to acquaint himself with the State of the Church of England before the Reformation, he could not have been Ignorant, that for about 200 years before the Reformation, Suffragan Bishops had been frequent in England' (Jones, 123). And Wharton objected to the anti-clerical, Erastian bias of Burnet's 'History'. He took issue with Burnet's view that papal interference increased during the late middle ages. Kings frequently had their way in the appointment of bishops, no more so than in the sixty years before the Reformation. 
Wharton disputes Burnet's view that the papacy imposed 'cruel exactions' over kings and parliaments right up to the Reformation. 'Our Ancestors', he wrote, correctly, 'had before the Reformation got the better of the Court of Rome in many points converted between them' (Wharton, 8). He argues, against Burnet, that the 'Statutes of Provisors' and 'Praemunire' were effective in limiting papal interference. Throughout the 'Specimen' Wharton compared Burnet's transcription of documents with the originals and found them to be faulty: he submitted that 'the Reformation of our Church was begun and carried out with so much piety, wisdom, and fulness of due Authority that a faithful and exact Account is the best Vindication and defence of it' (Wharton, 160). 
There is no contradiction between the anti-Catholic works which Wharton undertook for Thomas Tenison and the balanced portrayal of the pre-Reformation church displayed in the 'Specimen of Some Errors' and 'Anglia sacra'. The latter was a major work of scholarship, but its empathetic portrayal of the medieval church also reflected the Laudian, high-church view that the pre-Reformation church, though marked by abuses, was a true Christian church, meriting close study. Wharton's anti-Catholic works were written under the direction of a whig churchman who was campaigning against the widely perceived threat of popery in the reign of James II. The paradox was that many Restoration clerics, like Wharton, decried the errors of Rome, but did not view Roman Catholicism as idolatrous. 
Wharton was of middle height, handsome, strong, with a dark complexion. Devoting his life to scholarship, he never married. In his autobiography he recounted how he resisted the temptations of vice and preserved his virginity. He was very serious, self-assured, and energetic. He worked tirelessly on his scholarship, more than twelve hours a day, standing up as he wrote. He ignored cold weather, writing until his hands and feet were numb. This disregard for his health may have contributed to his early death. He continued to live at Canterbury until 1694, when he moved to his rectory in Chartham. In his final months he was burdened with clerical duties and regretted that his scholarly activity languished. He fell ill during the summer of 1694 and travelled to Bath, Somerset, in hopes that the mineral waters there would cure him. But he died in Chartham on 5 March 1695, probably of tuberculosis, at the age of thirty. 
Wharton was buried in Westminster Abbey on 8 March. His funeral was performed by Thomas Sprat, bishop of Rochester and dean of Westminster, and there were many bishops (including Tenison and Lloyd, who had both visited him during his last illness) in attendance, as well as the abbey's prebendaries and the king's scholars. Anthems were written specifically for the occasion by Henry Purcell. The pomp and ceremony of Wharton's funeral indicate that his scholarly achievements were not unrecognized during his lifetime. Posthumous publications included a two-volume collection of the sermons that he had preached at Lambeth prefaced by Green's biography, which went through three editions (1697-8, 1700, and 1728). His autobiography in Latin apparently no longer survives. However, extensive extracts from it were copied by Thomas Birch and were eventually published in 1821 as an appendix to George D'Oyly's biography of Archbishop Sancroft. 


@@@@@


doc= 29168


Henry Thornton Wharton (1846-1895), born at Mitcham, was educated at Charterhouse and at Wadham College, Oxford, where he graduated with honours in natural science in 1871. He was best known for a book on Sappho -- memoir, text, selected renderings, and a literal translation (1885) -- which passed through four editions. He was also one of the joint compilers of the official list of British birds issued by the British Ornithologists' Union (1883), his special task being to supervise and elucidate the Latin nomenclature; and he contributed a chapter on the local flora to a work entitled 'Hampstead Hill' (1889). He died on 22 August 1895 at his home, Madresfield, 2 Acol Road, Hampstead, where he had practised for some years as a surgeon (MRCS, 1874). He left a widow, Caroline Wharton, and was buried in the neighbouring Hampstead cemetery in Fortune Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 29169


Wharton, John (fl. 1575-1578), religious writer and schoolmaster, appears to have lived in London. He signed the preface to 'A misticall devise of the spiritual and godly love betwene Christ the spouse, and the church or congregation' (1575), attributed on the title-page to Jud Smith. In Wharton's opinion, the work, in verse and adapted from the 'Song of Solomon', was far more edifying than 'olde bables, as I may terme them, or stale tales of Chaucer' ('To the Christian reader'). Henry Hickman was licensed in 1576 to print Wharton's 'novels', while on 26 July the same year his ballad 'Whartons follie' was licensed to John Hunter. Wharton also issued 'Whartons dreame: conteyninge an invective agaynst certaine abhominable caterpillers as userers, extorcioners, leasmongers and such others' (1578), describing himself on the title-page as a schoolmaster. He claimed that the work had been 'Perused and thought well of for the correcting of vice and terrifying of the wicked: by these following. John Fox, Robert Crowley, William Wager, Thomas Buckmaister, and others' (title-page verso). In a preface to Alexander Nowell, the dean of St Paul's, Wharton presented 'the little talent of my exile and slender learning' and apologized for 'my rusticall and rude sentences'. 'To the Christian reader' complains of the city of London that 'there was never such avarice in Sodom, never such riotousness in Gomorrah, never such pride in Tyre' and predicts 'a day of correction which will be most sharp and horrible'; there then follow verses upon 'Wharton's dream' by Buckmaister, William Vallans, Thomas Smith, and George Rogers. Nothing further is known of Wharton. 


@@@@@


doc= 29170


Wharton, Philip, fourth Baron Wharton (1613-1696), politician, son of Sir Thomas Wharton ('c'.1588-1622) of Easby, Yorkshire, and his wife, Philadelphia (died 1654/5), daughter of Robert Carey, first earl of Monmouth, was born on 8 April 1613. 
In 1624 Wharton went to Eton College for a year. His father having died in 1622, on 25 March 1625 Philip succeeded to the barony of his grandfather, also Philip. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 3 March 1626. In 1629 he and his brother, Sir Thomas, had licence to travel abroad for three years, and Wharton is said to have served for a time as a volunteer in the army of the prince of Orange. Reputedly he combined militancy in the cause of international protestantism with a love of dancing and a connoisseur's taste in art. His collection of works by Anthony Van Dyck, for whom he sat himself, had found its way to the Hermitage in St Petersburg by 1914. On 23 September 1632 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Rowland Wandesford of Pickhill, Yorkshire. On coming of age in 1634 he inherited an estate estimated to have brought him an annual income of $8000. His wife, Elizabeth, having died, on 7 September 1637 he married Jane ('bap'. 1618, died 1658), daughter and heir of Arthur Goodwin of Winchendon and Wooburn, Buckinghamshire, MP for Buckinghamshire in the Long Parliament. They had six sons of whom three survived and four daughters. In 1638 Wharton was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on the interest of William Lenthall, future speaker of the same assembly. 
During the first bishops' war of 1639 Wharton compounded for his attendance on the king at York, paying $500 rather than repair, as ordered, to his northern estates and wait there in arms. He sat in the Short Parliament of May 1640 and voted against the precedence of supply over redress of grievances. The following summer he helped to organize the Yorkshire petitions protesting against the military burdens placed on the county by the preparations to fight the Scots, and other grievances. The king personally rebuked him and Burnet claimed that the earl of Strafford went so far as to threaten to have Wharton shot at the head of the army as a seditious incendiary. It has been plausibly suggested that there was an intimate connection between the Yorkshire petitions and the efforts of those opposition peers colluding at this time with the Scottish covenanters in order to pressurize the king into summoning a new parliament. Wharton was entirely in sympathy with the petition of the twelve peers calling on the king to do just that, presented to Charles at York on 2 September 1640, although his name does not appear on the original, only on subsequent versions. Wharton was one of the peers chosen to negotiate with the Scots at Ripon in September and again at London in November 1640. Robert Baillie remarked on his friendly disposition towards the Scots, and the king evidently distrusted him, including him in the list of witnesses he intended to call in prosecution of the six members in January 1642. Sympathy for the covenanters' cause reflected Wharton's own religious outlook, which was strongly anti-Laudian. In September 1641 he protested when by a slender majority the House of Lords voted to uphold the form of public worship then established in law, rather than countenance the House of Commons' forthright condemnation of religious innovations. 
Wharton was immediately to the fore on the parliamentary side at the outbreak of the civil war. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Lancashire by the Long Parliament on 28 February, and of Buckinghamshire on 24 June 1642. That summer he was also appointed to command an army, which in the event never materialized, intended to quell the Catholic rebellion in Ireland. On 30 July Wharton accepted a commission instead to command a regiment of foot in the army of the earl of Essex, to which he recruited men from the Wharton fief of Kirkby Stephen in Westmorland. The honour of his service in the field at Edgehill was disputed. For his part, Lord General Essex did not scruple to dispatch Wharton to Westminster to give parliament an account of the engagement. In a speech given at the Guildhall almost immediately afterwards Wharton did nothing to deny the ignominy of his regiment's flight without a fight, but neither did he say anything which could possibly be construed as confirming the rumour, apparently only current many years later, that he himself had run away and hid in a saw-pit. Wharton did not, however, venture forth in arms again. He was one of the most active parliamentarian peers during the civil wars, serving as speaker of the upper house on numerous occasions, and was appointed to many of the most important executive committees. 
Their estates in the north of England having been overrun by the earl of Newcastle's royalist army, Wharton and Lord Howard of Escrick had held preliminary talks with the Scots in spring 1643 which eventually produced the alliance with the covenanters. Wharton was a founding member of the committee of both kingdoms, and also an energetic lay member of the Westminster assembly. But his faith in the Scottish alliance was almost entirely a matter of military convenience. Although he promoted the assembly's directory in the north, at least as a preferable alternative to prayer book worship, Wharton was probably closer to the religious Independents. Certainly his support for the assembly evaporated once he and his war party associates revolted from their pro-Scottish allegiance, and he eventually advocated its dissolution. By the close of 1644, increasingly concerned by the new threat which the Scottish army posed to his northern estates, Wharton was aligning himself with the political Independent cause of English self-sufficiency in arms and the repudiation of Scottish influence over English affairs. Eager to oust the earl of Essex from his command of the parliamentarian forces, Wharton was one of the keenest supporters in the House of Lords of the self-denying ordinance and the foundation of the New Model Army. 
Once the new military arrangements were successfully established in the field Wharton energetically sought ways of terminating the Scottish alliance. His patronage secured the election of Henry Ireton, commissary general of the new army, for the borough of Appleby in Westmorland. Uncharacteristically, and perhaps deceptively, he appears to have played no part in the clash between parliament and army in 1647. His behaviour the following year is equally difficult to interpret. He was identified as one of a cabinet junto of grandees at Derby House undermining the terms of the vote of no addresses by seeking to negotiate a settlement with Charles I in private. Yet in June 1648 he was also accused of concealing a plot to assassinate the king on the Isle of Wight, of which imputation he was cleared by the House of Lords. The following month it was rumoured that he, Lord Saye and Sele, and Oliver Cromwell had met to consider using the army to crush support for a personal treaty with the king in the City. However, in a show of journalistic humility rare for the age, the story was subsequently retracted, and on balance it seems entirely likely that Wharton supported the negotiations with the king conducted in the autumn at Newport on the Isle of Wight. He later claimed to have protested publicly at the purge of the Commons. Certainly he did not sit in the Lords after 7 December 1648, and ignored a summons to attend, so was not present in the upper house on 2 January 1649 when the peers rejected the Commons' ordinance for the trial of the king. Almost certainly he did not agree with the proceedings which ensued and he certainly did not accept their outcome, despite the frequent urgings of his intimate acquaintance, Oliver Cromwell, who implored him that he accept the harsh dealing with the king, and wrote 'be not offended at the manner... perhaps no other way was left' (Firth, 231-2). Vainly Cromwell summoned to mind Wharton's years of personal sacrifice during the civil wars: 'You were with us in the form of things: why not in the power?' (ibid.). 
Although Wharton kept aloof from the regimes which governed England in the years that followed, Cromwell evidently flattered himself to think they remained on sufficiently good terms that a match could be pursued in 1652 between his son Henry and one of Wharton's daughters. It was not just the reluctance of the lady in question which prevented the union, but also the misgivings of her father, which Cromwell frankly acknowledged 'may make the business uneasy' ('Writings and Speeches', 2.561). In December 1653 Wharton was given to understand that Cromwell had it in mind to have him sit on his council, but evidently nothing came of it. In 1654 Wharton attempted to use what personal influence he still had with Cromwell on behalf of his kinsman Lord Claneboye, an Ulster protestant whose claim to the benefit of articles granted at the surrender of Ormond in April 1650 had been slighted by the commissioners for the government of Ireland. An ordinance indemnifying Claneboye's estate was drawn up, but at the last seems to have come unstuck. Wharton was one of several peers summoned to sit in Cromwell's House of Lords in 1657. Although he 'thought of accepting' (Firth, 250), a robust letter from Lord Saye and Sele, who swore never to divest the nobility of England of their birthright by falling into the tyrant's embrace, emboldened Wharton to refuse. 
In spring 1660 Wharton's home was said to have been one of the venues for meetings of the presbyterian junto at Westminster which wanted Charles II seated on his throne conditionally on his acceptance of the terms agreed with his father at the treaty of Newport in 1648, although it was also claimed that Wharton himself favoured unconditional restoration. He was probably one of those former parliamentarians growing increasingly alarmed in the later 1650s at the rise of the most astounding religious heterodoxy. His appointee to the parish of Kirkby Stephen, Francis Higginson, was in the front line of the confrontation with spiritual enthusiasm when it arose in the region in the early 1650s in the persons of George Fox, James Naylor, and others whom Higginson referred to as 'Satan's Seeds-men' (Breay, 167). After taking their seats in the Convention in April 1660 Wharton and his fellow presbyterian peers were instrumental in bringing about the Stuart Restoration, although many of them saw in it little more than a defence against the imminent immolation, as they imagined, of civil society. 
Wharton ostentatiously welcomed Charles II on his return to England, although he did so dressed in black for a wife who had died two years earlier. There was some danger of his exemption from the 'Act of Indemnity' in connection with the allegations surrounding the supposed assassination plot of 1648, but it was supposedly averted by the intercession of his son-in-law, Lord Willoughby of Eresby, future earl of Lindsey, and Wharton suffered relatively slightly in his estate, losing lands in Ireland. The duke of York himself was also said to have deflected criticism of Wharton, an indication of the Stuarts' willingness to court their old enemies in order to balance the ardour of their most loyal friends. In 1660 it had seemed likely that Wharton might be persuaded to accept a modified episcopacy, and he chaired the committee of the convention which produced the broadly conciliatory act for confirming and restoring ministers. But the creeping Anglicanism of the Restoration church settlement meant that he found his religious allegiances cast him further and further out into nonconformity. He was to the fore in the organization of the 'presbyterian' caucus in the Cavalier parliament which worked to curb the potentially devastating impact of the church settlement on law-abiding protestants who scrupled to conform, opposing for example, the episcopal reordination of ministers who owed their position to presbyterian examination. On 24 or 26 August 1661 he married Anne (died 1692), widow of Edward Popham and daughter of William Carr. They had one son. 
Initially, far from being an opponent of the new regime, Wharton probably ought to be seen as acting in the capacity of a manager of the court interest, but the failure to secure any real comprehension for nonconformist protestants seems to have sapped his loyalty, and he began instead to attack the court. He was suspected of involvement in the 1663 armed uprising of political and religious radicals in Yorkshire and Westmorland, and in July supported the earl of Bristol's attempted impeachment of Clarendon (although he remained neutral four years later in the debate on whether to commit the impeached lord chancellor to the Tower). In 1663-5 Wharton attacked the 'Conventicle and Five Mile Acts', renewing his opposition to the former at the debates on its renewal in 1670. From the mid-1670s Wharton was one of the acknowledged leaders of the country party in the House of Lords. He was prominent in his opposition to Danby's 'Test Act' in 1675, and was arrested the same year while worshipping in the congregation of the dissenting minister Dr Thomas Manton. He was sent to the Tower in 1677 for arguing that the Cavalier Parliament was dissolved by the fifteen-month prorogation. He took little part in the politics of the Popish Plot and subsequent exclusion crisis, his sons Thomas Wharton, later first marquess of Wharton, and Goodwin Wharton taking more of a lead in the harrying of Catholics in general and the duke of York in particular. 
Wharton left the country on the accession of James II, and was an enthusiastic advocate of the revolution of 1688. In the council of peers held after the king's flight, when Clarendon urged consideration of the rights of the prince of Wales, Wharton answered 'I did not expect at this time of day to hear anybody mention that child... and I hope we shall hear no more of him' ('DNB'). Wharton became a privy councillor to William and Mary in February 1689. His last action on the political stage was, however, to oppose the 1690 bill for an oath abjuring James II. He died on 4 or 5 February 1696 at Hampstead and was buried at Wooburn on the 12th. He was succeeded by his son Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 29171


Wharton, Philip James, duke of Wharton and Jacobite duke of Northumberland (1698-1731), rake and politician, was born Philip Wharton at either Adderbury or Ditchley, Oxfordshire, probably on 21 December 1698, the only son and heir of Thomas Wharton, fifth Baron Wharton and later first marquess of Wharton and Malmesbury and first marquess of Catherlough (1648-1715), and his second wife, Lucy, 'nee' Loftus (died 1716). His godparents included William III and the future Queen Anne. 
Educated privately under his domineering father's supervision, Wharton (known as Viscount Winchendon from 1706 to 1715) was groomed to perpetuate his father's political principles and cultivate similar oratorical prowess. Yet his propensity for disobedience was demonstrated in 1715 when he eloped with Martha Holmes ('c'.1700-1726), the virtuous but relatively impoverished daughter of Major-General Richard Holmes. Their clandestine marriage on 2 March infuriated and embarrassed Wharton's father. Following the old marquess's death on 12 April 1715, Wharton's substantial estates were placed under the control of his mother and several of his father's whig associates. He then went to France and Switzerland to finish his education, supervised by an austere Swiss Calvinist tutor. 
Stifled by his teacher's moralizing, Wharton abandoned him and visited James Francis Edward, the Stuart pretender to the British throne, in Avignon in August 1716, thus initiating a longstanding flirtation with the creed that had been anathema to his father. James created his impressionable visitor duke of Northumberland on 22 December 1716. By 5 December Wharton had returned to England, then proceeding to Ireland where, despite his conduct, he took his seat in the House of Lords as marquess of Catherlough on 27 August 1717, and was sworn of the privy council on 20 September 1717. His speeches and enthusiasm there sparked popular acclaim. He was created duke of Wharton in the British peerage on 28 January 1718, nearly two years shy of his majority, the youngest recipient of a dukedom, excepting close relatives of the monarch, since the fifteenth century. While it is tempting to surmise that the honour had been intended for Wharton's father, the circumstances and the peerage preamble suggest it was actually in recognition of his own merits and a desire to cement his allegiance to George I. He was introduced into the British House of Lords on his majority, 21 December 1719. 
Hopes that Wharton would settle down as a member of the whig elite were to be dashed; his reckless behaviour led to financial and personal crises. Prior to 1718 Wharton hardly cohabited with his wife. Following a brief reconciliation his only child, Thomas, was born in 1719, an event which brought him great joy. The child's baptism was attended by George I. Wharton's admonitions that his wife avoid London during a smallpox epidemic were ignored, and Thomas's death from the disease on 1 March 1720 precipitated additional indifference between them. Moreover, a profligacy perhaps unparalleled in Augustan England now began to demonstrate its effects. Wharton had evidently acquired loans from Jacobite bankers as early as 1718. After having sold off a sizeable portion of his Irish estates he returned from Ireland in 1720 with cash to invest in the South Sea Company. He suffered catastrophic losses of over $120,000 in the subsequent crisis, partly prompting his famous diatribe against the ministry on 4 February 1721 which so infuriated James, Earl Stanhope, that it hastened Stanhope's death by stroke. 
Wharton's social life seemed driven by a desire to take indulgence to extremes. From 1719 to 1723 he was the recognized founder and chairman of the notorious Hellfire Club, a secret organization open to members of both sexes that scandalized contemporaries with its reputed satanic rituals. Sometimes confused with a similar club later associated with Sir Francis Dashwood, Wharton's group seems to have been primarily concerned with promoting dissolute behaviour and sarcastic parodies of established religion. Wharton also served as grand master of the freemasons in 1722, sparking controversy by singing a strongly pro-Stuart ballad at a ceremony. 
Wharton's opposition political activities and the origins and extent of his Jacobitism have long been controversial. He lent significant support to a small, determined opposition group in parliament which actively lodged protests from 1720 to 1723, and was reckoned among the group's more effective orators. He was mentored by its leader, the disgruntled whig and former lord chancellor William Cowper, first Earl Cowper. Yet Wharton's support for the opposition was, at best, fickle and inconsistent. In December 1721 he deserted his opposition friends for a bribe, and he supported the ministry in debates over the habeas corpus suspension in late 1722. His return to opposition was confirmed on 15 May 1723 by his remarkable speech defending the Jacobite conspirator Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester. Wharton delineated distinguishing features of each side's arguments with remarkable skill. The speech was so persuasive that it permanently established Wharton's oratorical reputation, and was printed and later included among his posthumously published writings. Less well known was Wharton's visit to Walpole the night before his speech, a visit undertaken on the pretext of seeking an overview of evidence suggesting Atterbury's guilt, so that he could speak the next day in support of the ministry's position. Wharton personally accompanied Atterbury to the ship that carried him into exile. His defence of Atterbury was followed by his publication of the 'True Briton'. Printed by Samuel Richardson, who later supposedly modelled Loveless, his archetypal villainous rake, after Wharton, the 'True Briton' was an influential anti-Walpole political journal published twice weekly until early 1724. Wharton composed many of its more notable essays, and the authorities lamented his public appearance as a leader of the Jacobites in the City of London, and his slanderous attacks on the government. 
Wharton's mercurial nature and escalating indebtedness render assessments of the genuine extent of his Jacobitism quite problematic. Several studies argue that his Stuart adherence fluctuated until after 1723, while other historians see Wharton as a committed Jacobite from perhaps 1716 onwards. Whether intermittent professions of old whiggism along his father's lines were intended to sustain political influence and allow for the surreptitious provision of intelligence to the Jacobites, or merely exemplify erratic actions fogged by frequent revelries, remains uncertain. His behaviour after 1725 implies the latter, but Wharton exhibited scant inclination towards adherence to any firm principles. His most exhaustive and sympathetic biographer concludes that Wharton was largely indifferent towards Jacobitism after 1723, and engaged in its doctrines and undertook a Jacobite mission abroad merely because this was a convenient way to avoid creditors while remaining in the international limelight. 
By 1725 Wharton was closely associated with Charles Boyle, fourth earl of Orrery, the 'de facto' English Jacobite leader following Atterbury's banishment. Wharton and several other diehard ministerial opponents joined Orrery in vain attempts to maintain opposition activities from 1723-5. Wharton verbally attacked the court in 1724, and protested against measures regulating City of London elections the following year. His interest in City politics reflected extensive personal influence and involvement, which was viewed as potentially valuable in a Stuart restoration, since few Jacobite politicians successfully encouraged disgruntled City politicians to oppose Walpole's ministry. Wharton also evinced sincere interest -- as his finances allowed -- in borough and county elections in areas such as Buckinghamshire and Cumberland where he possessed estates, even while abroad, but the disastrous condition of his personal affairs restricted his influence. He calculated his total debts in 1725 to exceed $70,000. Anxious to flee his unhappy marriage and mounting debts, he therefore eagerly accepted appointment as Stuart plenipotentiary to the imperial court at Vienna in August 1725. Orrery, forced to lend Wharton $500 to enable his departure, was named a trustee of his estates and supervised his affairs, endeavouring to sell off or mortgage estates to stave off his flamboyant friend's bankruptcy. 
Wharton left for the Netherlands 'en route' for Vienna in 1725. War in Europe appeared imminent. Although he was confident of success in procuring Habsburg assistance for a Jacobite invasion, his prospects were diminished by British government intelligence and his own personal habits. Prone to over-indulgence and lacking any diplomatic experience whatsoever, he publicly drank the Pretender's health before departing, and his indiscretion prompted Jacobites to fear their incrimination. Walpole's ministry rightly suspected a connection with Orrery's simultaneous trip to Paris, and soon verified the reasons for Wharton's journey. Wharton was advised by the Jacobite agent in Vienna, and eventually secured audiences with Austrian ministers and Austria's military commander, Prince Eugene of Savoy. Initial indications of co-operation in a landing of 4000 Austrian troops in England and James's dispatch to Brussels to reside under imperial protection, however, proved premature. Austrian suspicion about the strength of Jacobite support in Britain, and Wharton's dissolute behaviour, convinced the imperial council to reject his proposals outright in February 1726. Furthermore, the expulsion to Spain of Count Ripperda, an untrustworthy Austrian minister with whom Wharton had negotiated, and continuing negative publicity over the estrangement of James and his wife, hindered efforts abroad. Thus Wharton left Austria, stopping off briefly in Rome, where he received the Order of the Garter from James. He then proceeded to Madrid to confer further with Ripperda about the royal separation. There he was invested with his Jacobite KG by James Butler, second duke of Ormond, and proceeded pompously to display the order publicly. 
In 1725 Wharton's own much maligned wife became desperately ill following a miscarriage. Languishing for months, she never fully recovered, finally expiring on 14 April 1726 at her house in Gerrard Street, Soho. The same week Wharton was summoned by privy seal order to return to England; he contemptuously discarded the document into a Madrid gutter. Ripperda subsequently betrayed to British authorities Wharton's elaborate plans for an Austro-Russian alliance with Spain to enthrone the Pretender, and his betrayal effectively alienated Wharton from other leading Jacobites in Spain. By the time he learned of his wife's death Wharton was already in love with a Spanish maid of honour, Maria Theresa O'Neill O'Beirne (1706?-1777), daughter of a colonel in the Spanish service, Henry O'Beirne, and his wife, Henrietta O'Neill. Only after strenuous efforts could he persuade the Spanish queen to consent to their marriage; evidently a prerequisite was Wharton's conversion to Roman Catholicism. In the afternoon of 23 July 1726 NS, following a long examination by Spanish inquisitors, Wharton married the object of his affections in a simple ceremony that immediately provoked gossip. 
Wharton's conversion effectively ruined his remaining significance in Jacobite politics, yet it may have been designed to rally the support of Irish Jacobite exiles in Spain under his leadership. None the less sceptical observers generally interpreted his religious change as irrefutable proof of his untrustworthiness. It was thought that Wharton's conversion to acquire a wife meant he might 'exchange his Loyalty for the Means of Maintaining her for no body thinks that he has any fix'd Principles' (Stuart papers, 95/128). Jacobite leaders often concurred, infuriated by such conversions and anxious about resulting perceptions among British supporters. Although sympathetic, even Atterbury grimly concluded the conversion had irreversibly rendered Wharton a liability. Wharton vainly attempted to defend his conversion as a long contemplated step, but his actions and subsequent comments provide meagre evidence that religious precepts mattered greatly to him. When chided by Atterbury for his conversion Wharton responded that people might just as easily think he had mutated into a Turkish Muslim. Contemporaries believed he had intentionally scorned religion by engaging in clamorous Sabbath-day hunting on his estates. His lifestyle, and the fact that he frequently voiced aspirations such as serving as one of Satan's courtiers, hardly endeared him to religious leaders or popular opinion. He enjoyed flaunting his disdain for any form of authority or ideology; one Jacobite remarked that his 'slighting expressions of the Scriptures' proved that Wharton's politics were as 'unsettl'd as his Principles of Religion' (ibid.). 
After his marriage and conversion, opinions of Wharton deteriorated to new levels of ridicule. Astonished diplomats relayed how on his wedding night he had become 'drunk early' and had 'produced, in the midst of the Grave Dons and their dames, what (to use his own expression) he told his bride 'she was to have that night in her Gutts'' (TNA: PRO, State papers foreign, 78/184/230'v'), dispersing his wedding party in chaos. Jacobites who once esteemed Wharton their most influential adherent now lamented this 'wild, Giddy & unaccountable Man' (Stuart papers, 95/110). If his licentiousness was not sufficiently outrageous, his desperate poverty provoked both humour and disgust. Dishevelled and reclusive, reduced to stealing food from acquaintances, he was now an impoverished, aristocratic pariah rejected by Spaniards and fellow Britons. He and his wife retired to a village to survive frugally and avoid harassment by omnipresent creditors. In defiance, he tried to resign his British dukedom and sold it for a pittance, returning a deed repudiating the title to George I. In 1726 and 1727 Wharton repeatedly requested he be allowed to return to Rome. 
Increasingly ignored by his former master, Wharton was inspired by other Jacobite exiles and joined the Spanish army as it engaged the British in the war that erupted in 1727. Wharton was commissioned lieutenant-colonel in the Hainault regiment, composed of Irish exiles, and named aide to the Spanish commander of an expedition besieging Gibraltar. Here in May 1727 Wharton attempted to dispel his widely held reputation for cowardice. Emboldened by brandy, he approached British troops defending the fortress wall and taunted them with obscenities and huzzahs for the Pretender. In an ensuing bombardment a bursting shell partially shattered Wharton's foot. Although he recovered from the wound, he was unable to continue his active military career. More significantly, his actions in taking up arms against British forces prompted his indictment as a traitor, and on 3 April 1729 parliament passed an informal, though arguably not legally binding, resolution that was held to have outlawed him and made his estates and titles forfeit. Although he secured a brief clandestine interview with James at Parma, he was denied hope of further Jacobite employment. 
With his trustees now prohibited from dispatching any additional funds, Wharton abruptly sought to reconcile himself to the British government. He travelled to Paris in 1728 and approached the Hanoverian regime via Walpole's brother Horatio, the British resident in France. In several letters and a personal visit, Wharton asked for clemency, insisting he had resigned from the Pretender's service over a year earlier. In exchange, he assured authorities he would reveal detailed Jacobite intelligence, yet only 'as far as was consistent with his honour' (Coxe, 2.633-4). Consistent to his own nature, Wharton proceeded straight from the ambassador's house to dine with the attainted Atterbury. His haughty caveat hardly inspired government leniency. Since Walpole's spies already provided ample reports of Jacobite activities, including Wharton's, and he was judged so universally discredited as to nullify his political influence, the offer was curtly rejected by George II and his secretary of state, the duke of Newcastle. 
Ensconced in modest lodgings in Rouen, growing ever more desperate, Wharton was now such an embarrassment to the Jacobites that he was firmly admonished not to journey to Rome. James enforced these warnings with a series of small bribes. By 1729 Wharton and his wife had returned to Spain, forced to subsist off his small regimental salary. In the following year his wife's mother's death terminated a pension from the Spanish court shared with her daughter and wayward son-in-law. At a formal ball he was insulted by the valet of the governor of Barcelona. After administering a fierce caning to the valet, he was briefly imprisoned and then banished from the city. He publicly renounced the Pretender and unsuccessfully requested another pardon in 1730. Years of drunkenness and subsisting largely on brandy rendered him exhausted and malnourished. After a brief recovery he was driven to seek relief at a Franciscan monastery near Poblet, where he died alone among strangers on 31 May 1731, and was buried the following day. He signed his will Philip James, the second forename presumably assumed to indicate his Jacobitism. Wharton's passing nearly went unnoticed among leading Jacobites. Perhaps secretly relieved, James lamented his widow's destitution, supplied her with a small pension, and employed Orrery to help secure her jointure, which was achieved with the proving of Wharton's will in 1736. Maria Theresa settled in London, where she enjoyed a long, modestly comfortable, secluded life until her death in Golden Square, Westminster, on 13 February 1777. She was buried in St Pancras old churchyard. After Wharton's death his titles almost certainly all became extinct, but despite this the barony of Wharton was successfully claimed by a descendant of one of his aunts in 1915. In 1733 Wharton's forfeited estates were settled on trustees for the payment of his debts, the surplus to benefit his sisters, Jane (died 1761) and Lucy (died 1739). 
Wharton was intermittently involved in various types of literary and journalistic activities. In addition to the 'True Briton' he briefly assisted Nathaniel Mist in composing anti-Walpole rhetoric from Rouen in 1728 that proved so effective that Walpole offered Wharton a complete pardon, preservation of his estates, and retention of all his titles, if only he agreed to abstain from such public attacks. Pride, arrogance, and stubbornness prevented his acceptance. After his death Wharton's writings were collected and released in several forms. 'Select and Authentick Pieces' was published in France in 1731 and included his speech defending Atterbury and the 1728 attack on Walpole. A somewhat unconvincing argument for Wharton's actions, hinging upon his adoption of Jacobitism in the spirit of liberty and genuine pre-1714 whiggism, was contained in his 1728 essay 'Reasons for Leaving his Native Country', which was also the centrepiece of 'The Life and Writings of Philip, Late Duke of Wharton', published in 1732. A number of brief miscellaneous poems and parodies are also attributed to Wharton. Before his flight from England in 1725 Wharton was the object of numerous play dedications. Supposedly fluent in at least five languages, Wharton's Latin expertise was obtained through an intense friendship with Dr Edward Young, whose character Lorenzo in Young's 'Night Thoughts' is thought to be modelled on Wharton, and whose intercession supposedly secured an unpaid $250 bequest to All Souls, Oxford, for which Wharton was promised an inscription and honorary doctorate. 
Accounts of Wharton's life generally take one of two approaches. Sympathetic writers strenuously attempt to explain away his groundless beliefs and apparent lack of moral and political principles, insisting that in his case 'strict logic... leads to the most hopeless confusion' ('Life and Writings', ed. Melville, 142). Others have adopted a more condemnatory tone. Unpredictable and unreliable, Wharton's juvenile outbursts of spiteful behaviour, his tendency toward inebriated self-denial and incessant protestations of unaccountability for his actions, his cowardice, and his profound deviation from his father's politics, coupled with an excessive perception of self-importance and arrogance, and strong ambition to be a party leader, ultimately cast him as an aristocratic master dissembler, shunned by friend and foe alike. His personality was characterized by audacity and eccentricity, and brief, fleeting glimmers of brilliance and wit, and contemporaries often chastised his fondness for prankish behaviour viewed as beneath his station. Indeed, most of his life lends itself to anecdotal narration, such as his hiring of musicians and a funeral hearse for processions commemorating the death of the South Sea Company. 
Although much new information has emerged in the last century about specific aspects of Wharton's various activities, the salient features of his life remain those noticed by earlier biographers: reckless abandon seemingly driven by an utter inability for self-control and contemporary decorum, and a squandering of an undeniable stock of personal talent and an enormous fortune. Erratic political allegiances and intermittent Jacobite support inevitably raise questions of his sincerity for any creed or principles. Pope's 'Epistle to Sir Richard Temple' portrayed Wharton as 'the scorn and wonder of our days', a gifted individual destined for greatness but who, 'wanting nothing but an honest heart', was 'Too rash for thought, for action too refined'. Despite possible mitigating factors for his actions and his personality with its inherent flaws, it is extremely difficult not to conclude as did one Jacobite contemporary, that there were few examples 'of a Man who had so fair a Game in his hands & that play'd it so ill' (Stuart papers, 96/8). 


@@@@@


doc= 29172


Wharton, Thomas, first Baron Wharton (c.1495-1568), soldier and administrator, was born at Wharton in Westmorland, the eldest son and heir of Thomas Wharton (died after 1515) of Wharton and Nateby, Lancashire, landowner, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Reginald Warcop of Smardale, Westmorland, and his wife. The Whartons were a long-established gentry family in Westmorland and Cumberland with a service connection to the Clifford family. Thomas Wharton's great-grandfather was MP for the borough of Appleby, Westmorland, 1436-7, a seat controlled by Thomas Clifford, eighth Lord Clifford, and his family held the manor of Wharton from the Cliffords throughout the fifteenth century. His father, as well as serving the Cliffords, also served the crown, particularly in the Scottish campaign of 1513 under Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey. When his father died, some time after 1515 when he finished his term as escheator in Cumberland and Westmorland, his wardship was given to Henry Clifford, tenth Lord Clifford, who sold it for 200 marks. 
Little is known of Wharton's early life. By 4 July 1518 he had married Eleanor (died 1547x61), third daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton of Wighill, Yorkshire, and his wife, Joan. They had two sons, Thomas Wharton, second Baron Wharton (1520-1572), and Sir Henry Wharton (died 1550), and two daughters, Joanna and Agnes. More significantly, marriage into the Stapleton family brought him into the affinity of the Percy earls of Northumberland. In April 1522 Wharton served under the captain of Berwick, Sir Anthony Ughtred, on a raid into Scotland accompanied by Sir Thomas and Sir Ingram Percy, two sons of Henry Percy, fifth earl of Northumberland. Two years later he was appointed JP for Westmorland, perhaps evidence of his rising status with the Percy family and continuing ties with the Clifford family. He was knighted between 1527 and 1530. In 1529 Wharton was returned to the Reformation Parliament for Appleby and this was immediately followed by his being chosen as sheriff of Cumberland (1529-30). Wharton's involvement with parliament continued throughout his career despite his increasing commitments in the north: he may have been chosen for Appleby again in 1536 and 1539 and almost certainly, along with his son Thomas, was returned as knight of the shire for Cumberland in 1542. After his elevation to the peerage in 1544 he was a regular attendee in the House of Lords. 
Wharton epitomized the successful servant of a great nobleman, who was then recruited into royal service as a result of his conspicuous abilities. He entered the household of Henry Percy, sixth earl of Northumberland, between 1522 and 1528. In May 1528 he was made comptroller of the earl's household and steward of the lordships of Tadcaster and Healaugh in the West Riding of Yorkshire, as well as receiving an annuity of $20 for life. In October 1530 a series of grants transformed him into the holder of 'traditional Percy authority in Cumberland' (Hoyle, 'The fall of the house of Percy', 189). These appointments were the lieutenancy of the honour of Cockermouth to be held by him and his heirs in perpetuity; the stewardship of the lordships of Eskdale and Wasdale and the constableship of Egremont Castle; the herbage of the park of Cockermouth, and a grant of mills, mines, and six manors in Cumberland at a below market-level rent of $72 to be held by him and his heirs male; and an annuity of $100 payable from the issues of those manors, in effect in lieu of rent. Wharton's place within the earl's affinity was strengthened by the close friendship with other Percy servants such as Sir Raynold Carnaby, gentleman of the chamber, and further favours from the ailing and incompetent earl. In 1534, on the disgrace of William Dacre, third Lord Dacre of Gilsland, Northumberland recommended Wharton for the captainship of Carlisle. This favour, and his continued service to Henry Clifford, fifteenth Lord Clifford and first earl of Cumberland, led to royal grants that reinforced his position within border society: he was appointed JP for Northumberland and the East Riding in 1532. He reinforced his local consequence through a series of marriage negotiations with leading members of the northern gentry; his daughter Agnes married Sir Richard Musgrave in 1534 and his best friend, Sir Thomas Curwen (c.1493-1543) ['see under 'Curwen family], married his sister Florence by 1538. 
The reasons for Northumberland's favouring Wharton seem straightforward. It was not, as M. E. James supposed, to bolster the failing Percy influence in Cumberland in the face of hostility by the crown and the Cliffords. Rather, as Richard Hoyle has shown, Wharton's rise to prominence was in large part due to Northumberland's ill health and inherited indebtedness, which forced him to rely more and more heavily on men like Wharton and Carnaby. Moreover, Wharton's military prowess made him the ideal candidate for leading the Percy affinity in the defence of the borders. The earl drew attention to Wharton's service against the Scots and his talents were predominantly military. 
Wharton's standing was transformed by the outbreak of the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536 and Northumberland's death in 1537. During the early stages of the pilgrimage he remained inactive and perhaps even went into hiding but, possibly because of his poor relationship with Dacre or even his reputation as a harsh landlord, he found himself a target of the rebels' hostility. He aided Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, in the suppression of the rebellion and was well placed to benefit from the redistribution of power in the north in its aftermath. Wharton was recommended as warden of the west marches but Norfolk advised against appointing a gentleman rather than a nobleman to the office. Norfolk's point was that he felt only an established nobleman with a long-standing affinity had the necessary stature to carry out the office. Therefore, on 28 June 1537, Wharton was made deputy warden under the discredited Cumberland but effectively carried out the office. He was promoted to full warden on Cumberland's death in 1542. Between 1537 and 1544 Wharton continued to carve a military career for himself. He was appointed captain of Carlisle in October 1541, and in 1542 he presented an audacious plan to raid Scotland and capture James V at Lochmaben, Dumfriesshire. This plan was rejected and he consoled himself with raids north of the border in October and November of that year. On 24 November Wharton achieved the pinnacle of his career: victory over a Scottish army of some 18,000 men with just 3000 borderers at the battle of Solway Moss. He was aided by his kinsmen Sir William Musgrave and Walter Strickland in this, and his outstanding military success calls into question Michael Bush's assertion that Henry VIII's attempt to defend the marches without resort to noble power was a failure. As a result, Wharton was created first Baron Wharton by patent on 18 March 1544, with grants of land in co. Durham, Yorkshire, and Westmorland. 
Wharton was reappointed warden of the west marches on 1 February 1544 and held the office until 17 April 1549, when he was replaced by his rival, Dacre, in the shake-up of offices following the fall of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector to Edward VI. He was a member of the king's council in the north from about 1545. He was added to the quorum of the commission of the peace for Westmorland in 1547 and his heir was made JP for Westmorland and Cumberland at the same time. Wharton saw to it that his son was sheriff of Cumberland in 1547-8. His reports on a border raid by the Scots of March 1547 were essential as a pretext for Somerset's invasion. With Matthew Stewart, earl of Lennox, he provided a diversionary raid during the Pinkie campaign by entering south-western Scotland and capturing a series of castles between 9 and 14 September. Wharton frequently dealt with the Assured Scots, including disseminating English propaganda to them, and had quite an effective network of spies in Scotland. He led frequent raids and had the difficult task of keeping the English garrisons in Scotland supplied during the campaign between 1547 and 1550. Serving the crown, despite conflict with neighbours, brought satisfaction and pride as well as local power and financial reward; Wharton told Somerset 'I have had great comfort many years from the good acceptance of my poor services to the King' ('CSP dom.', '1601-9', 'addenda', '1547-65', 376). He was appointed deputy warden of the three marches on 31 July 1552 under John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, but was replaced in the west march by Sir Thomas Dacre in November. 
After Mary I's accession Dacre became again warden of the west march and Wharton was appointed between July and December 1555 as, among other things, warden of the east and middle marches, captain of Berwick, constable of Alnwick Castle (where he appears to have resided), and steward of Rothbury, Northumberland. He was JP for all three ridings from 1554. In August 1557, upon the restoration of Thomas Percy as seventh earl of Northumberland, Wharton was named as joint warden with him. During Elizabeth I's reign he served as a counsellor assistant to Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, the lieutenant-general of the north, but the latter's recommendation that he be reappointed captain of Berwick in June 1560 was not followed. Wharton married Anne (died 1585), second daughter of Francis Talbot, fifth earl of Shrewsbury, and his first wife, Mary, and widow of John Bray, second Baron Bray, on 18 November 1561. They had no children. 
Wharton's position in northern society was secured, above all, by service to the crown. His income from the family lands was probably less than $100 a year but his fees from crown office were already 200 marks a year by 1537. By July 1552, as deputy warden under the duke of Northumberland, his annual income from fees was 1000 marks. Moreover, Wharton profited greatly from the dissolution of the monasteries. By March 1545, for example, he was steward of the former lands of Furness Abbey, Lancashire, and M. E. James has estimated that at its height his annual income from fees and wages was some $700. He also received grants of lands to bolster his position. These included former monastic land but also parcels of the lands of the attainted Sir Francis Bigod in 1537. Further acquisitions in the West and North ridings and Cumberland made Wharton an important regional figure. No complete rental for these new lands exists but James has estimated that his annual rental income must have been in the order of $750, some eight times that which he had inherited from his father. 
Wharton was clearly a difficult and unpopular man. His unpopularity stems not from the fact that he was a 'new man', erected by Henry as part of a concerted effort to attack the regional power of the northern nobility, but, it appears, from his character itself. In the 1540s and 1550s, despite his family's long association with the Cliffords, he quarrelled openly with Cumberland, causing the intervention of the privy council. Similarly, Wharton had a long-standing feud with the Dacres. In 1551 and 1554 the privy council forced them into public displays of conciliation. This animosity does not seem to have stemmed primarily from their dislike of Wharton as a 'new man'. In 1549 Somerset prevented Henry Wharton from fighting a duel with William Grey, thirteenth Lord Grey of Wilton, warden of the east march, and their lack of co-operation probably foiled a joint invasion of Scotland in February 1548, although betrayal by certain Assured Scots and bad strategic planning were also major factors. The skills that served Wharton so well as a soldier did not endear him to others. His ongoing feud with Robert Maxwell, sixth Lord Maxwell, which originated when Wharton hanged the latter's pledges in February 1548, was instrumental in his not being appointed warden of the west march in 1560. At Carlisle he was constantly at loggerheads with his subordinate officials and feuded with other local gentry, such as the Lampleughs and Musgraves. He was also an unpopular landlord: he was the focus of tenant discontent during the Pilgrimage of Grace and according to the Wharton family history his decision to empark Ravenstonedale in Westmorland led to such hatred towards him among his tenants that he abandoned living on his Westmorland estates for Healaugh in Yorkshire. However, this story seems to be apocryphal because he was being assessed for the subsidy in Cumberland during the 1540s. He maintained a house in Cannon Row, London, too. His unpopularity and the difficulties the Tudors experienced in governing the north of England in the years after 1536 stemmed not so much from the folly of a royal policy aimed at extinguishing the ancient northern nobility but from the failure of the Percy, Clifford, and Dacre families to produce adequate men for the job and the character of the monarch's chosen successors, men like Wharton. 
That Wharton was no radical, planted by the Tudors to upset the traditional social and political order of the northern shires, is confirmed by his own traditional piety. Wharton's religious beliefs seem to have been governed by that Tudor ideology, obedience to the crown. Despite his involvement in the dissolution of the monasteries and the chantries, in parliament he voted against the acts of 1549 authorizing priests to marry and against images. He was appointed to inquire into offences against the 'Acts of Uniformity and Supremacy' in 1561. The preamble to his will followed a Catholic formula. His grammar school, established at Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland, by the terms of this will, remained doctrinally traditional despite embracing some of the newer, humanist disciplines. 
Wharton was less active for the remainder of his life and did not attend parliament in 1559, 1563, or 1566. His heir's behaviour drew suspicion on the family. Wharton made his will on 18 July 1568 and died on 23 August at Healaugh, where he was buried on 22 September; a funeral monument was erected there showing him alongside his two wives. There is also a funeral monument to him at Kirkby Stephen. 


@@@@@


doc= 29173


Wharton, Thomas, second Baron Wharton (1520-1572), soldier and administrator, was probably born at Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland, the elder of the two sons of Thomas Wharton, first Baron Wharton (c.1495-1568), soldier and administrator, and his first wife, Eleanor (died in or after 1547), third daughter of Sir Brian Stapleton of Wighill, Yorkshire, and his wife, Joan. Like his father, Wharton followed a military and administrative career on the Scottish marches. On 17 October 1536 he was captured during the Pilgrimage of Grace by the rebels who had gone to Kirkby Stephen in search of his father. Evidently, however, he did not suffer at their hands or by any association with them. By 8 November 1542 he had entered the service of the master of the horse, Sir Anthony Browne. Over the following three years Wharton carved out a reputation serving in Browne's company during the Scottish wars. He was probably present at the battle of Solway Moss on 24 November 1542, and was prominent in border raids and served his father, who was either deputy warden or warden of the west, middle, or east marches for most of the period 1537 to 1557. Having taken part in the successful expedition into Scotland between 8 and 23 September 1545 of Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, Wharton was knighted by him on 23 September at Norham Castle, Northumberland. 
During Edward VI's reign Wharton's administrative duties also burgeoned. He was appointed JP for Cumberland, Westmorland, and the West Riding of Yorkshire from 26 May 1547 (added to the quorum for Cumberland and Westmorland in 1554); pricked sheriff of Cumberland in November; and was returned as MP for Cumberland in November (having already sat in parliament in 1544 and possibly 1542). His role as an MP saw him acting as a link between the privy council and the administration on the marches. Throughout the late 1540s Wharton also continued his military exploits: in mid-March 1548, for instance, he raided into Annandale and Nithsdale. In May 1547 he married Anne (died 1561), daughter of Robert Radcliffe, first earl of Sussex, and his second wife, Margaret. The couple had two sons, including Philip Wharton, third Baron Wharton (1555-1625), and two daughters. 
Mary I's accession in July 1553 brought a rapid rise in Wharton's fortunes. He declared for her on 12 July, among the first to do so, and attended upon her at Kenninghall, Norfolk, and Framlingham, Suffolk. It is possible that he was already a member of her household. His continued attachment to Mary was partly religious (he remained a committed Catholic) and partly due to his marital connection: his brother-in-law, Henry Radcliffe, second earl of Sussex (c.1507-1557) ['see under 'Radcliffe, Robert, first earl of Sussex (1482/-1542)], magnate, was one of the queen's strongest supporters. Wharton was made a privy councillor on or before 21 August and a member of the queen's council of the north in September. He attended the privy council regularly. He also received lands and offices in Yorkshire, including the position of chief steward of the East Riding and steward of Beverley from 20 October. He was appointed master of the queen's henchmen on 26 October. Wharton sat in the parliaments of October 1553 (Cumberland), April (Hedon) and November (Yorkshire) 1554, 1555 (Northumberland), and 1558 (Northumberland or Yorkshire). On 20 July 1554 he was present at Southampton when Philip of Spain was invested with the Order of the Garter and the king acted as godfather to Wharton's son the following year. He was described by a Spanish envoy as 'a good man, harmless; he is retiring' ('CSP Spain', 'July 1554 - November 1558', 374, 455). 
The renewal of war with Scotland in 1557 saw Wharton again serving on the borders. In July he took command of 1000 men for the defence of the east and middle marches and was with Thomas Percy, seventh earl of Northumberland, at Berwick in August. He continued to receive lands in the north from Mary, probably to bolster his military resources and to prepare him to succeed to his father's offices, and remained a key figure in the Marian administration, acting as witness to the queen's will on 30 March 1558 and serving at her funeral on 14 December. 
Under Elizabeth I, however, his religious sensibilities meant that Wharton soon fell from favour. He was not appointed to her privy council and was removed as master of the henchmen. He was, however, reappointed to the council of the north in December 1558. It is probable that Wharton was less interested in northern society than his father and may even have tried to concentrate his estates in the south. He sold his stewardship of Beverley in 1561. On 3 June 1561, with his wife and other leading former Marians, he was indicted for hearing mass. Found guilty, Wharton and his wife were committed to the Tower of London. He submitted on 16 July and was pardoned but continued to be, in the words of John Best, bishop of Carlisle, 'evil of religion' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.601). During the northern rising of 1569 Wharton did nothing to check the rebels' progress but was probably saved from suffering their fate when he fell from his horse in early December, an accident that almost claimed his life. Having succeeded his father on 23 or 24 August 1568, Wharton, once recovered from his riding accident, took his seat in the House of Lords on 2 April 1571. He died intestate on 14 June 1572 at his house on Cannon Row, Westminster. The administration of his estate was given to his son and heir, Philip Wharton, on 28 February 1579. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 29174


Wharton, Thomas (1614-1673), physician, only son of John Wharton (died 1629), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1646), daughter of Roger Hodson of Fountains Abbey, Yorkshire, was born at Winston, co. Durham, in 1614 probably in August, and was baptized there on 31 August of that year. Little is known of Wharton's childhood and youth other than that he experienced a self-described 'pestilential fever' in 1633. He matriculated as a sizar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1637. Wharton then migrated to Trinity College, Oxford, where he may have been influenced by followers of William Harvey, some of whom were then members of Trinity. At Trinity he tutored John Scrope, natural son of Emanuel, Lord Scrope of Bolton. From 1642 to 1645 Wharton spent much time with John Scrope at Bolton Castle in the North Riding of Yorkshire, studying chemistry and medicine. In December 1644 Wharton accompanied Mr and Mrs Elias Ashmole to the South Lambeth house of John Tradescant the younger: he subsequently participated in cataloguing part of the Tradescants' collection of scientific curiosities, which was later acquired by Ashmole and became the nucleus of the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford. At Bolton, Wharton also served as a member of the royalist garrison from 1642 to 1645. Subsequently he moved to London to study medicine with the physician John Bathurst, who had Yorkshire connections, and assisted him with his practice. 
When John Scrope died in 1646 Wharton returned to Oxford, where he was created DM on 7 May 1647. A candidate of the College of Physicians, London, in 1648, he became a fellow in 1650, incorporated at Cambridge on his doctor's degree in 1652, and served as a censor of the college in 1658, 1661, 1666, 1667, 1668, and 1673. From 1648 he practised medicine in London, and his patients included the Ashmoles, the artist William Faithorne, and the countess of Northampton. On 25 June 1653 he married Jane (died 1669), daughter of William Ashbridge, of London. They had three sons, Thomas, Charles, and William; the latter two died young. In 1657 Wharton was appointed physician to St Thomas's Hospital, London, a post he held for the rest of his life. During the London plague of 1665 he was one of the few college physicians who remained in the capital, where he treated plague sufferers at St Thomas's Hospital. As a reward he was promised the next available appointment as physician to the king, but the post was given to another, and Wharton received only an augmentation of his paternal coat of arms. 
In 1652 or 1653 Wharton delivered the Goulstonian lectures at the College of Physicians on the subject of the glands, a topic assigned to him by the college president, Sir Francis Prujean (1593-1666). These six lectures formed the basis of his only anatomical work, the 287 page Latin text 'Adenographia, sive, Glandularum totius corporis descriptio', first published in London in 1656. Other editions include those published at Amsterdam (1659); Oberwesel (1664, 1671, 1675); and Dusseldorf (1730). Portions of 'Adenographia' also appear in LeClerc and Mangot's 'Bibliotheca anatomica' (Geneva, 1699, 1.200-03; 2.755-73). An English translation by Stephen Freer, with a historical introduction by Andrew Cunningham and a facsimile of the 1656 edition, was published in 1996. 

'Adenographia' is the first European text devoted entirely to the glands. Previously, anatomists had not considered glands important in understanding the functioning of the body. For example, both Galen and Vesalius noted various glands, but they did not consider them as a separate topic, and their treatment was cursory. A 1559 text by the Italian Realdo Columbus, 'De re anatomica', devoted one of its fifteen books to the glands, but the book consists of just two pages. Wharton's extended presentation of glands as classes of related natural objects changed this; consequently, for several decades after its initial publication, 'Adenographia' was considered a basic reference on the subject. In addition to discovering the duct of the submandibular (salivary) gland, Wharton named the thyroid gland (though he was not its discoverer). 
Wharton, a self-proclaimed Aristotelian, adopted scholastic modes of reasoning in 'Adenographia'. For him, as for his mentor Francis Glisson, various kinds of matter had specific qualities and affinities, not just the properties of mass, extension, and motion. For them, different bodily fluids ended up in the right places because of an attraction of like for like. Wharton did not use a microscope and disparaged the virtuosi among whom the microscope was popular. In contrast, contemporary mechanist anatomists, such as Marcello Malpighi, used the microscope to discover fine structures, which they then related to the behaviour of particles and substances. By the later seventeenth century mechanical analyses that emphasized structure-function relationships and denied the possibility of special properties were displacing scholastic accounts, and 'Adenographia' began to lose influence. 
Wharton wrote four English verses, entitled 'Arcanum, or, The grand secret of hermetic philosophy', prefixed to a translation by Elias Ashmole, and published in Ashmole's 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (1652). He was also a close friend of Izaak Walton, who acknowledged his integrity and anatomical assistance in 'The Compleat Angler'. 
The Royal College of Physicians holds five volumes of Wharton's manuscripts numbered SR 640-644. In letter no. 10 in MSS SR 640, which was written in 1673, the year Wharton died, he responded to the query of a Mrs Church as to whether her son should become a physician. Wharton compared unfavourably the professional situation of physicians with those of attorneys and clerics. He also derided the universities for abandoning the 'old and sound Aristotle learning' for 'new-fangled fripperies of Cartes [Descartes], Gassendus, Boyle, Hobbs, and Regius, etc'. 
Wharton's outburst against mechanist natural philosophers belies the impression contemporaries had of him as a leader in developing new medical knowledge. For example, in 1657 the prominent physician Walter Charleton, in his 'Immortality of the Human Soul, Demonstrated by the Light of Nature', portrayed the College of Physicians as a veritable 'Solomon's House' of intense collaborative investigation of the structure and function of animal bodies and noted Wharton among the 'Miners of Nature' for his investigations of glands. Wharton's collaborators included Francis Glisson, George Ent, Baldwin Hamey, and John Bathurst, all members of the College of Physicians. 
Wharton died in London on 15 November 1673 and was buried next to his wife at the church of St Michael Bassishaw, London, where a monument was erected. The church was demolished in 1897, and the monument moved to St Lawrence Jewry, where it was destroyed by enemy action during the Second World War. Wharton's grandson 


@@@@@


doc= 29175


Wharton, Thomas, first marquess of Wharton, first marquess of Malmesbury, and first marquess of Catherlough (1648-1715), politician, was born in late August 1648, the third but eldest surviving son of Philip Wharton, fourth Baron Wharton (1613-1696), politician, and his second wife, Jane ('bap'. 1618, died 1658), daughter and coheir of Arthur Goodwin. Young Thomas was born into English politics. His birth elicited a letter from Oliver Cromwell, who congratulated Lord Wharton and the 'dear little lady' on the new heir. Cromwell hoped that Lord Wharton would see the birth of 'the young baron' as a divine mercy and that it would draw him nearer to the despised but victorious saints (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. 49, fol. 25). 
A few months later, when Colonel Pride purged the House of Commons and Charles I was executed, Lord Wharton distanced himself both literally and figuratively from the new regime. He moved from his London house in Clerkenwell and retired to Upper Winchendon, one of his rich estates on the hills of northern Buckinghamshire. This decision meant that young Thomas (Tom to his family and eventually to political England) spent most of the first ten years of his life at Winchendon. He maintained his principal base of operations there even after he inherited many other manors, in Buckinghamshire, Yorkshire, Cumberland, and Westmorland. 
The Whartons were notably pious. Lord Wharton, a Calvinist himself, was a patron of presbyterian and Independent ministers. The Wharton children lived among men who took life, the 'Bible', and God's will very seriously. But if Lord Wharton was a precisian who had scruples against plays and Sunday travel and who feared that kissing the 'Bible' in taking oaths might constitute idolatry, he was also an English aristocrat with an eye for beauty and a feeling for the social graces. His scruples stopped short where music, dance, and poetry were concerned. The Wharton children were not merely permitted, but required, to take music and dancing lessons, and the youngest son, William, became a poet. Like his friend Andrew Marvell, Lord Wharton loved gardens. He also loved painting and his collection of Van Dycks rivalled that of Charles I. His son Tom inherited his tastes as well as his gardens and art collections. 
The year 1658 began the transformation of the Wharton world. On 21 April Lady Wharton died, leaving her children to be raised by servants; and on 3 September Oliver Cromwell died, leaving the puritan cause to disintegrate. Lord Wharton abandoned Winchendon for Wooburn, in southern Buckinghamshire, and leased a London town house at St Giles-in-the-Fields. the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the subsequent re-establishment of the Anglican church brought further changes. In the new order nonconformists were removed from the universities and from church livings. This meant, among many other things, that young Thomas would not be sent to Oxford or Cambridge and that his principal tutors would be unemployed dons. Another major change in the boy's world occurred in August 1661 when Lord Wharton married Anne, widow of Colonel Edward Popham and daughter of William Carr. 
Meanwhile Tom Wharton had been undergoing a rigorous course of study, including four hours a day of Greek and Latin, under tutors Abraham Clifford, Thomas Elford, and Philip Romerill. In June 1662 his education was taken over by the scholarly Theophilus Gale, an Independent and a former fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Gale, who had agreed to supervise Tom and his brother Goodwin Wharton during an educational sojourn in France and a tour of Europe, was favourably impressed by his student. The lad, he told Lord Wharton, had 'a quick and apprehensive' mind and was obviously 'fit to take in the more noble parts of humane literature'. He was perhaps 'a little intent' upon sports and somewhat difficult to arouse at five in the morning, but he seemed very tractable, and he would no doubt make great academic progress (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. 49, fols. 44, 48). Gale went to France in 1662 to select a place for the boys' education. Tom and Goodwin did not arrive in Caen, Gale's choice, until 25 June 1663. 
The young men stayed in Caen, a Huguenot stronghold, almost two years until April 1665. There Tom, in formal classes for the first time at the age of fifteen, impressed his French masters with his Latin oratory and rhetoric, achieving 'such perfection', according to Gale, that the regent published specimens of his art 'about the town' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawlinson 49, fol. 101). Outgoing and personable he was immediately popular with his French classmates. This popularity led in turn to his first recorded revolt. When Gale insisted upon screening the boys he brought home to the pension Tom disputed his authority and then went on to question other strict rules. Robert Bennett, deprived vicar at Winchendon, sent by Lord Wharton to investigate, agreed that Gale, a good man in the wrong place, should be recalled, and in October 1664 Abraham Clifford took over the boys' education in Caen. A puritan like Gale, but much more adroit at handling adolescent youngsters, Clifford had been a fellow at Pembroke College, Cambridge. He quickly noted the intelligence of the young Whartons -- their 'quick, lively, and pregnant parts' -- and their 'loving and ingenuous' natures (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawlinson 53, fol. 7), and he soon learned the limits of Tom's complaisance. Now sixteen the young man insisted upon choosing his own companions, and he bristled at the mere suggestion of leaving Caen. Too wise to provoke another battle Clifford let Tom bring his friends, both choice and questionable, to the pension where they could be supervised, and he waited for a direct order from Lord Wharton before setting out for Paris, which they reached on 24 April 1665. 
The planned grand tour, however, was disrupted by war and the plague and dwindled to a few weeks of sightseeing in the Spanish Netherlands. On 10 October the young men were back in their Paris lodgings. Before new instructions arrived from Lord Wharton disease and politics intervened again. On 21 November, the day after Lord Holles, the English ambassador, had taken the boys to see Louis XIV, Tom came down with a virulent attack of smallpox. While he was recovering it became clear that France would join the Dutch in their war against England, and Lord Wharton ordered the boys home. It was 1 June 1666 before the young men actually boarded ship at Dieppe and set out for England and Wooburn -- three years after they had left. 
Wharton's education in France had at least two significant effects upon his political career. From his puritan tutors he received a command of scriptures and religious controversy that, along with a mordant wit, would make him formidable in parliamentary debates on toleration, schism, and occasional conformity and that would help him defend men like Gale and Clifford against Anglicans who wished to silence them. Also important was the young man's saturation in the French language (the language of diplomacy, and sometimes of treason). 
Lord Wharton had made tentative passes at the problem of finding a rich and virtuous wife for his heir even before Tom had set out for France. In late 1671 began an intricate negotiation that lasted more than a year and sent Tom Wharton on four extended trips to Devon. The projected match involved a wealthy young lady named Elizabeth, daughter and heir of the late Richard Cabell, one-time sheriff of the county. In February and March 1673, however, Tom became involved in his first parliamentary election -- a disputed contest at Wendover against Alderman Edward Backwell. He had promised to return to Devon by 1 March, but he remained in London until 19 March, when the House of Commons decided the election in his favour. For Mrs Cabell this choice of politics over love confirmed her doubts as to his suitability. She broke off the match. After the repulse at Devon, Lord Wharton began negotiations for the hand of Anne Lee (1659-1685) ['see 'Wharton, Anne], coheir to the extensive properties of her father, Sir Henry Lee. Anne, who later achieved recognition as a poet, was born on 20 July 1659, four months after the death of her father and a few days before the death of her mother. Her guardian was her paternal grandmother, the dowager countess of Rochester. It was the countess and Sir Ralph Verney, a trustee of Anne's estate and a long-time neighbour of the Whartons, who arranged the match. The settlement gave Wharton $8000 in cash and an annual income of about $2000. 
Before the marriage itself took place -- at Adderbury on 16 September 1673 -- Wharton was challenged to a duel by a disappointed rival, John Arundell (son of Lord Arundell of Trerice). Ill with a fever and in danger enough 'if he had gone only to meet the cold air', as one of his friends said (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawlinson 53, fol. 27), Tom lost the duel. Arundell disarmed him and then in view of his courage granted him his life. (Wharton would win later, bloodless duels -- against Lord Haughton in 1687, Lord Cheyne in 1699, and young 'Mr. Dashwood' in 1703 -- disarming all three opponents.) 
For Wharton his marriage with Anne Lee meant independence. With money and property settled upon him, a country house at Winchendon and a town house at Chelsea, with stables and gardens at both places, he was free from his father's supervision and rich enough to pursue his interests in politics and horse-racing. 
While Wharton was learning his trade as a politician he was also beginning his career as an owner and, sometimes, rider of racehorses. Wharton's devotion to horses and racing became legendary. The tracks at Brackley, Woodstock, Campfield, Banstead Downs, Datchet, Quainton Meadows (Wharton's home course near Winchendon), and, above all, Newmarket were among Wharton's favourite haunts, and some of his horses -- Careless, Snail, Colchester, Chance, and Wharton's Gelding -- became famous in turf lore. 
One of Wharton's first recorded victories occurred at Woodstock on 2 September 1676, for a plate worth $50. Next day, however, he lost a match race and a $100 wager to Lord Lovelace. Wharton's most dramatic loss came at Banstead Downs on 15 May 1679, when he was thrown from his horse, knocked unconscious, and 'taken up for dead' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 5.102). One of his expensive losses, $500, came in a match race at Newmarket on 11 April 1698, when Careless, carrying too much additional weight, was beaten by King William's horse Stiff Dick. Perhaps Wharton's richest victory, also at Newmarket, came in April 1699 when Careless beat a horse backed by the duke of Devonshire for a wager of $1900. 
Wharton won his most prestigious race in France on 25 February 1683. On a racecourse near St Germain-en-Laye in an event sponsored by Louis XIV and witnessed by the king, the queen, and many French courtiers, Wharton's Gelding defeated a select field of horses from 'divers nations' and won the king's plate, valued at 1000 pistoles (roughly $850). 'Very much pleased' with the English horse, which had been entered by the duke of Monmouth, Louis offered to buy it for another 1000 pistoles. Wharton, however, declined the offer. He would give Louis the horse as a present, he said, but he would not sell it. Louis, in turn, refused to accept the gift (Oldmixon, 'Memoirs', 97). 
In the parliamentary sessions of 1675-8 Wharton was still primarily a back-bench observer, and he missed the last two months of the summer session of 1678 when he took his wife, Anne, to Wiltshire for her health. He emerged from the political shadows after the 'revelations' of Titus Oates and the furore surrounding the Popish Plot had deranged English politics. On 5 February 1679 he was elected at Aylesbury, along with young John Hampden, as knight of the shire for Buckinghamshire. Though the election was uncontested threats that the court would enter candidates and / or move the election to Buckingham made the Whartons and Hampdens assemble all their friends, including the duke of Buckingham. The entertainment at Aylesbury inns cost each candidate about $800. Wharton would eventually spend (according to 'Memoirs of the Life', 27) 'above $80,000' on elections. 
At the second general election of 1679 Wharton and Hampden again stood for the county. This time Thomas Edgerley, the high sheriff, did move the election from Aylesbury to Buckingham. The last-minute manoeuvre failed. The young whigs, again aided by the duke, led an army of supporters to the enemy town and achieved another victory. 
Meanwhile, as an exclusionist, Wharton opposed the duke of York both in and out of parliament. On 26 June 1680 he and a group of other whig notables, including Shaftesbury, met at Westminster Hall to submit to the Middlesex grand jury an information against the duke -- a list of reasons for believing what had never been officially admitted, that James was a Catholic. The jury, they hoped, would present James as a recusant before the judges of the king's bench. Even if he were acquitted, they reasoned, the propaganda value of a trial would be immense. The scheme was foiled, however, when the royal judges got wind of the plot and dismissed the grand jury for the term. The court did not try to unseat Wharton in the county election of 1681, when he stood with Richard Hampden. At the third Exclusion Parliament the king offered a regency plan; but the Commons, with an unassailable whig majority, insisted upon exclusion. Wharton was appointed to the committee that drew up the bill. On 28 March 1681, before the bill could be read a second time in the Commons, the king called the houses together and dissolved the parliament. 
Wharton was not named among the suspects in the Rye House Plot of 1683 -- an alleged conspiracy to assassinate the king and the duke of York -- and he took no part in the consults that doomed William, Lord Russell, the earl of Essex, and Algernon Sidney. Nevertheless the king's agents searched Winchendon for arms in the post plot investigations. They found enough weapons and armour to equip about eight cavalrymen, and they deposited the collection at the White Hart inn in Aylesbury. Wharton complained to the earl of Bridgewater, lord lieutenant of the county: 'I must leave it to your Lordship whether such a proportion be not convenient for me and necessary for the security of my family' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 81, fol. 726). To Bridgewater, a wealthy landowner like Wharton, the collection seemed unremarkable. 
One night in June 1682 Wharton and his brother Henry and two or three friends were entertained by a gentleman named Bray in the village of Great Barrington in Gloucestershire. After several hours of drinking the frolicsome group broke into St Mary's parish church. There they rang the bells, cut the bell ropes, broke the cover of the font and the desk of the pulpit, and ripped the church 'Bible'. Then, as the actions (to paraphrase Wharton's later apology) grew worse in the execution than they had been in the design, the revellers relieved themselves in the church. They might have contrived other enormities if the clangour of the bells had not brought out an unamused crowd of villagers, who chased them back to Bray House. Besides committing sacrilege Wharton had perpetrated an indelible political error (which the 'Memoirs of the Life' never mentions). He had made himself a permanent target for tory pamphleteers. In mid-August, before official action was taken, Wharton wisely threw himself upon the mercy of Robert Frampton, bishop of Gloucester. In a letter of 15 August he wrote an abject apology for his drunken escapade. Although he was confident that the faults were not so gross as they appeared in 'the prodigious story' that had grown up since the event he would not deny the truth of any particular allegation. His present concern was to confess how sensible he was of his faults and submit himself entirely to the bishop's judgment. The letter was carried to Frampton by the eminently respectable John Cary, who vouched for its sincerity. Wharton, he explained, was the son of the pious Lord Wharton and was himself 'a man of very great parts [abilities] and estates' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 35, fol. 73). 
On both Christian and prudential grounds Frampton decided that Tom Wharton should not be turned into 'a downright enemy' but allowed to redeem himself with a suitable penance. From the sinners he demanded a formal letter of apology, a public confession, a fine of 50 guineas in commutation of penance, and payment for the damages at Barrington. Wharton duly wrote the required letter, and the brothers appeared before the bishop at Stow on the Wold, where they paid their fine and begged pardon for their offence before three clergymen and three laymen. Pleased with their repentance (and their promptness in advancing money for the repairs at Barrington) Frampton returned to them 10 of the 50 guineas; the other 40 he gave 'in their presence' towards the renovation of Stow church (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 35, fol. 111). He dismissed the pair with 'wholesome admonitions' (ibid.). These he followed with a letter reminding Wharton of his sins, for which Wharton thanked him and again apologized. 
Officially the affair was closed after Archbishop Sancroft had reviewed and approved Frampton's follow-up reports of January and February 1683. Unofficially Wharton's punishment had only begun. The story grew more outrageous with retelling. In December 1705 Wharton (then Lord Wharton) was silenced by the story during a debate in the Lords. After baiting the tories on their politic fears that the church was in danger under a low-church government Wharton made the mistake of asking, rhetorically, just who they feared. The duke of Leeds (formerly Danby) gave a quick reply: 'If there were any that had pissed against a communion table or done his other occasions in the pulpit, he should not think himself safe in such hands' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.242). By January 1711 Jonathan Swift, writing for the tory 'Examiner', had moved the episode from Barrington to Gloucester Cathedral and raised the fine from 50 guineas to $1000. Wharton's friends, however, were inclined to ignore or shrug off the event. Sir Ralph Verney, for example, found Tom readily forgivable. In explaining why he supported Wharton in the 1685 election for knight of the shire he declared: 'I am confident that he will serve the King and the country faithfully, though he is wild enough in drink and I am troubled at it, but who lives without great faults' (BL, Verney MS M 636/39, 2 March 1685). 
While Wharton was scandalizing the social world he and Anne were also having difficulties. From 1680 Anne had been experiencing seizures and in March 1681 she went to France seeking better health. In April, fearing she would not recover, she wrote to Tom, 'Goodbye, my Dear, Best Dear. Pardon me that I say no more, for I am so very ill I can hardly hold the pen or know what I write' (Cumbria AS, Carlisle, Lonsdale MS D/Lons/L1/4, 20 April 1681). In June Wharton went to Paris, but their brief reunion brought an emotional crisis. Anne was conscious of a distance between them and, as she tried to explain later, she found it difficult to express herself. When Tom said at parting that he 'loved nothing so well' as her, she did not quite believe him, and she could not reply (ibid., 2 July 1681). 
When Anne returned from France the gulf between the couple widened temporarily because of what Goodwin called their 'mutual jealousies' (BL, Add. MS 20006, 308). Anne probably found herself facing a serious rival -- Wharton's mistress, Jane ('b'. 1661, died in or after 1689), daughter of Sir Edward Dering, second baronet; while Wharton found himself competing with his brother Goodwin and his friend John Grobham (Jack) Howe. In early December 1682 Gilbert Burnet, later Bishop Burnet (a friend and political ally of the Whartons), tried to intervene. His enquiries and lectures brought a sharp rebuke from Anne, who told him not to believe gossip and to mind his own business. After this crisis the damage to the Wharton marriage was, for a time, largely repaired. By May 1683 the pair were back at Winchendon, Anne was lending Sir Ralph Verney one of her she-asses to provide milk for his health, and on 21 May Anne and Tom dined with the Verneys at Middle Claydon. They soon moved from Chelsea to one of the residences in the new and fashionable Soho Square. 
In late June 1685 Anne became ill again. At first the malady did not seem dangerous -- merely another episode in what Sir Ralph Verney called 'the colic'. Attended by Dr Richard Lower and 'two or three doctors from Oxford', she seemed, in Sir Ralph's judgement, to be in more peril from the medicine than from the disease (BL, Verney MS M 636/40, 20 June 1685). About 12 August she went from Winchendon to Adderbury to stay with her grandmother and to drink Astrop waters. Wharton, meanwhile, had gone to Tunbridge Wells some time in July. There he was joined by his mistress, Jane Dering, and his brother Henry. Jane did not live openly as Wharton's mistress but the liaison between the pair was well known. On 16 August John Verney reported their presence at Tunbridge Wells to his father. 'Tom Wharton is here', he wrote, 'and so is Mrs. Dering, though I hear Mrs. Wharton is not yet well' (ibid.). 
When Wharton returned from Tunbridge Wells in time for the races at Quainton on 26 August Anne's condition still seemed hopeful, but then she took a sudden turn for the worse. On 2 September John Cary reported from Adderbury that Anne lay 'very weak and ill', attended 'most diligently' by the famous Dr John Radcliffe. On 6 September Sir Ralph wrote that he was much afraid for her: 'Yesterday she lay in great pains and convulsions' (BL, Verney MS M 636/40). Finally, on 29 October, Anne died. 
Wharton brought her body home for burial in the church at Winchendon. As a tribute to a beloved lady a great throng turned out for the funeral, held on the evening of 10 November. Anne was buried in silk rather than the woollen required by English law. For this last nicety Wharton paid a fine of 50's'., which was distributed among the poor of the parish. 
Meanwhile the general election of 1685 had gone badly for the whigs. Wharton's two brothers Henry and William were defeated in normally safe boroughs, and Wharton himself was obliged to stand with the moderate tory John Egerton, Viscount Brackley, rather than his former colleague Richard Hampden -- and to expend about $3000. Despite the election being moved to Newport Pagnell, Wharton's supporters turned out in overwhelming force and he was one of the few whigs who survived the tory landslide of that year. Wharton and the handful of other exclusionists in the new House of Commons were too few and too wise to oppose the torrent of court measures. 
Wharton was also too wise to take part in Monmouth's rebellion, apparently believing that after the long hysteria of plots and counterplots the nation was much readier for a breathing space than a civil war. In the words of 'Memoirs of the Life' (p. 28), 'He [Wharton] looked upon the Duke of Monmouth's attempt as chimerical, and he never had any thoughts of joining it on the foot of his rash invasion'. 
In the crucial parliamentary session of November 1685 (the last King James would meet) Wharton's position was drastically altered. Now a leader of the whigs by attrition he found himself in the strange position of supporting tories such as his old enemy Sir Edward Seymour, who opposed the king's attempts to retain the Catholic army officers he had employed and to maintain a sizeable standing army. Wharton agreed with the unspoken fear that a standing army officered by Catholics and perhaps helped by Louis XIV would be fatal to English protestantism. 
Wharton spoke three times in the early debates, once to recommend a bill for making the militia more useful and twice to urge drastic cuts in the government's proposals for supply. His most important speech came, however, after the Commons had asked the king, in a tactfully worded address, to dismiss his Catholic officers, whose appointment in defiance of the 'Test Act', they said, set a dangerous precedent. The address enraged James. He returned a blistering reply, citing his own reputation for uprightness and berating the Commons for their lack of trust. 'But however you may proceed on your part', he concluded, 'I will be steady in all my promises I have made to you and be very just to my word in every one of my speeches' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.1386). 
The king's reply stunned the house into silence for a time. Then Wharton, one of the first to recover, coolly 'moved that a day might be appointed to consider of his Majesty's answer to the address of this House, and named Friday next' (BL, Lansdowne MS 253, fol. 58). When the House of Lords took up the argument and appointed a day to examine the king's speech James prorogued parliament and commenced aggressive measures to implement his pro-Catholic policies. 
In 1688 the assembling of troops for summer exercises at Hounslow Heath made it relatively easy for Wharton and his brother Henry (then a lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards and a captain in the duke of Norfolk's regiment of foot) to help assemble a 'Treason Club' at the Rose tavern in Drury Lane -- a vital part of the army conspiracy against the king. Wharton's membership in this group and the plot to disintegrate the king's army during the revolution may be his greatest contribution to William's success -- even greater than his famous song 'Lilliburlero'. 
The song itself resulted from the king's appointment in 1687 of Richard Talbot, the Catholic earl of Tyrconnell, first as commander of the army in Ireland and then as lord deputy, replacing the Anglican Lord Clarendon. These appointments alarmed all Anglo-Irishmen; and the Whartons, who owned property in co. Carlow and co. Westmeath, had a special reason for concern. Confiscation might be just over the horizon. Thus Wharton was on the alert when the second appointment was announced, and he was inspired to some stanzas of doggerel verse that encapsulated the fears and scorn of the English. Composed from the point of view of an Irish peasant waiting anxiously for his hero, the song began: '
Ho brother Teague, doest hear the decree 

Lilliburlero bullen a-la 

That we shall have a new Debitie 

Lilliburlero bullen a-la 

' After several verses of comment upon Talbot and the new order, which would bring the Irish 'commissions gillore' and hang the English and their 'Magno Carto', the song ended triumphantly: '
Now, now de heretics all go down 

Lilliburlero bullen a-la 

By Chreish and St. Patrick the nation's our own 

Lilliburlero bullen a-la 

Lero, lero, lero, lero 

Lilliburlero bullen a-la 

Lero, lero, lero, lero 

Lilliburlero bullen a-la 
(Carswell, 354-5)' What the pseudo-Irish refrain lacked in sense it made up for in rhythm. English armies would march to it for years. For the time being, however, Wharton's verses merely smouldered. It was not until autumn 1688, after fears of Irish troops had risen several degrees, that 'Lilliburlero' swept the army and the country ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.336). It would help, as Wharton later boasted, to drive King James out of three kingdoms. 
Wharton was credited by White Kennett with having written the draft of the invitation to William of Orange, but this is highly unlikely. The conspirators, who included Bishop Compton, the earl of Danby, and the earl of Shrewsbury, needed no help in composing the letter, which is in Henry Sidney's handwriting. That Wharton was in close touch with Danby is very probable. He and his army friends were meeting at the Rose tavern during the period, and in early October he was conferring in Yorkshire with Danby and the earl of Devonshire, who would lead risings in the north. He was also receiving letters from the prince via one Joseph Flight. More important than communications, however, was the success of the Treason Club in persuading four of Colonel Langston's officers to join him in delivering their regiment to the prince of Orange. This operation, described years later by the Jacobite Colonel Ambrose Norton, was completed on 12 November 1688. It was the first major defection from the royal army, and although some of the troops returned it was the first of the shocks that eventually demoralized the king. 
Wharton himself and his friend Lord Colchester, accompanied by a number of gentlemen and several life guards of Colchester's troop, were the first aristocrats to join the prince of Orange after his landing at Torbay. After arriving in Exeter on 10 November 1688 they were followed, a few days later, by Sir Edward Seymour and the earl of Abingdon. Henry Wharton, now in Lord Lichfield's regiment, stayed with the royal army at Salisbury until 24 November, when he went over to William, along with Prince George and the duke of Ormond. Goodwin Wharton, delayed by ambiguous revelations, did not join the prince until the army reached Henley. 
In the Convention Parliament, Wharton insisted that the throne had become vacant when James fled to France. To the question of whether the king could be deposed Wharton answered that 'whether he may be deposed or deposes himself, he is not our King... for I believe not myself nor any Protestant in England safe if you admit him' (Grey, 9.11). After the Commons agreed that the throne was vacant Wharton went on the next day (29 January 1689) to nominate William and Mary as joint sovereigns -- a measure that after much debate in the Lords, who would have preferred a regency, was ultimately adopted by both houses. 
After William and Mary accepted the crown Wharton was made a privy councillor (21 February) and comptroller of the household, a post which gave him apartments in Whitehall and Hampton Court with fees and allowances amounting to about $1200. Lord Wharton was made a privy councillor and a groom of the stole. Henry, now knight of the shire for Westmorland, had been made colonel of his regiment when Lord Lichfield resigned, and Wharton was able to secure the post of cursitor baron in the court of exchequer for his lawyer brother-in-law William Carr. 
In spite of these prizes and Wharton's later appointments on treaty and army commissions (10 May and 13 May), the year 1689 was grim for the Whartons. On 26 May Anne Carr, Wharton's older sister, died; and only three weeks later, on 17 June, less than three months after his appointment to the bench, William Carr died also. Most devastating to Wharton was the loss of his brother Henry -- Harry to his family and friends -- who died of the fever in Ireland. Their sister Mary, who was in London when the bad news arrived, reported to her husband, 'My poor brother [Tom] Wharton stole out of town this morning so melancholy as I never saw anybody' (NL Wales, Kemeys-Tynte MSS, fol. 152). 
In December Wharton and his whig friends made difficulties by attacking the tory members of William's coalition government and by attempting to purge the tory MPs who had abetted Charles and James in attacking town charters. Moreover, on 25 December Wharton wrote a letter charging William with ingratitude towards the whigs, who had made him king. William's trimming policy, Wharton said, in effect, paralysed government and discouraged the king's real friends. This letter helps to explain some of Wharton's tactics through the next twenty-five years of partisan warfare. 
In William's reign Wharton's conviction that tory ministers should be replaced by whigs accounts for his attack on the earl of Nottingham after the Smyrna fleet disaster and his exploitation of the East India bribery scandal to remove Sir John Trevor as speaker of the House of Commons and to wound the duke of Leeds. The demand for a disciplined, one party ministry also led to the formation of the famous whig junto. When the whigs were in power, the junto, leaders of the court whigs, served as a virtual cabinet -- a committee on strategy and tactics. When whigs were out of power the junto became a shadow cabinet, regrouping its forces and waiting for its opponents to make serious mistakes. Wharton was particularly valuable as a notable electioneer, a devoted party man, and, perhaps above all, a tireless worker. The overall impression derived from following Wharton session by session through the journals of the Commons and Lords and the associated batches of documents is that he worked diligently on a great variety of problems -- an impression confirmed by Richard Steele, who praised Wharton in a letter of 11 April 1713 for his competence over 'the whole compass of business' ('Correspondence of Richard Steele', 48). This praise was repeated in a 'Spectator' dedicated to Wharton. 
During the 1690s two important events in Wharton's personal life expanded his political power. The first of these was his marriage, in July 1692, to the Hon. Lucy (1669/70-1717), daughter and sole heir of Adam Loftus, Viscount Lisburne in the Irish peerage. Lisburne, who had died in the Irish war, on 15 September 1691, left his daughter, then twenty-one, estates worth about $5000 per year. They included Rathfarnham Castle in Ireland. The match between Wharton and Lucy, described by one of Tom's army friends as 'the witty fair one' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 79, fol. 420), seems to have been romantic. Goodwin, who saw the couple dancing together at a ball in Kensington Palace on 6 January 1692, called Lucy Tom's 'new mistress' (BL, Add. MS 20007, fol. 161). Eventually Lucy would be a toast of the whig Kit-Cat Club and the target of tory scandalmongers. 
The other dramatic transformation in Wharton's life was the death, on 4 or 5 February 1696, of his father, at the age of eighty-two. Considering his precisianist convictions Lord Wharton had been indulgent with his free-living son. Wharton, in turn, admired his father. To the end of his life he would carry on Lord Wharton's campaign to expand and defend liberties for dissenters, though he later conformed to the Anglican church and explained to the House of Lords that he would 'live and die in the communion of it' (BL, Lansdowne MS 1024, fol. 168). 
Lord Wharton's death placed his son, now fifth Baron Wharton, in the House of Lords (on 24 February) and added considerably to his social prestige. 'Lord Wharton' was a great deal more dignified than Tom or Honest Tom (a name derived from Wharton's frequent description of whigs as the honest party, as opposed to the hypocritical tories). The promotion also placed Wharton in the house where the king's ministers ordinarily sat and where final decisions were made on vital measures. Finally, Lord Wharton's death raised his son's income to about $8000 a year, which, along with his new wife's patrimony, enabled him to expand his interest among the electors. In good years for whigs he could win about twenty seats, but in bad years he might be reduced to a handful. 
The year 1698 brought a marked shift in the political wind. Wharton was not made secretary of state nor a member of the commission for governing Ireland as he and his friends hoped he might be. William softened the blow by offering him the Spanish embassy, which Wharton declined, and he had to remain satisfied with his appointments (23 April 1697) as lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire and chief justice in eyre and warden of the royal forests south of the Trent. After nine years of war, moreover, the country was tired of taxes, large armies, and foreigners and in the 1698 elections court whigs lost control of the Commons. Wharton himself was able to win only about half of his elections. His candidates were even defeated in Oxfordshire, despite his lord lieutenantcy. Although Wharton retained his own appointments and continued to carry William's messages to the House of Lords, his junto friends were gradually replaced in government positions by tories and country whigs. 
On 24 December 1698 Wharton's family, if not his political, fortunes seemed to improve when Lucy had a son, whom they named Philip ['see 'Wharton, Philip] after his grandfather. They later had two daughters, Jane ('b'. 1706) and Lucy ('b'. 1710). King William and the duke of Shrewsbury were Philip's godfathers at the baptism on 5 January, and Princess Anne (later Queen Anne) was the boy's godmother. A month later Wharton's favourite sister, Mary Kemeys, saw her brother, her sister-in-law, and the baby in their new residence on Gerrard Street. The boy, Mary reported, was a 'very lusty child' and the lady 'very fond' of him, but, despite now having an heir, her brother, though 'extreme kind', seemed 'melancholy'. Before her visit, he said, he had not been up to the nursery for a week (NL Wales, Kemeys-Tynte MSS, fol. 325). Had Wharton been able to foresee the career of Philip (later the duke of Wharton) he would have suffered something more severe than melancholy. 
About this time John Macky, an agent for William, gave a thumbnail sketch of Wharton. At the age of fifty, Macky says, Lord Wharton is of 'middle stature' and 'fair complexion'. He is 'certainly one of the completest gentlemen in England, hath a very clear understanding, and manly expressions, with abundance of wit. He is brave in his person [and] much of a libertine'. King William, Macky wrote, thought him too popular, too much a republican, and too bold in censuring court measures to hold an administrative office ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 91-2). 
When Anne took the throne in March 1702 Wharton was dismissed from his post as comptroller, from his other offices, and even from the privy council. Anne, a devoted churchwoman, installed a tory government headed by Lord Treasurer Godolphin and supported by a tory House of Commons. Wharton and his whig friends, now on the defensive, supported the renewed war with France, but they were hard pressed to keep the tories from passing a bill against occasional conformity. With a large whig presence in the Lords and good organization Wharton's troops managed to defeat the measure twice -- once with an amendment and once with a quick vote of rejection. Wharton also involved the houses in a jurisdictional dispute in the famous case of 'Ashby v. White'. He financed the whig voter Ashby, who had been struck off the rolls by the tory officials of Aylesbury, to argue his case that an individual's right to vote was cognizable before the courts and ultimately the Lords, rather than before the Commons, who claimed the sole right of judging elections. 
With his ally Lord Somers, Wharton played a major role in producing the 'Regency Bill', which set up the mechanism for installing the Hanoverian successor and which inspired a letter, in French, from Wharton to the future George I. Wharton also helped to formulate the legislation that led to the union with Scotland. The latter achievement earned him an honorary LLD from Cambridge (16 April 1705), an appointment as a commissioner for the union treaty (10 April 1706), reappointment to the post of chief justice in eyre (9 September 1706), and a promotion in the peerage. He became Viscount Winchendon and earl of Wharton on 23 December 1706. 
The election victories in 1705 (said by 'Memoirs of the Life' to have cost Wharton $12,000) and the unflagging support which junto whigs gave to the war on the continent convinced Wharton and his allies that they had earned major offices in the government. The process, aided by another election victory in 1708, was slow and tortuous, but eventually the earl of Sunderland became secretary of state, Lord Somers became lord president, and Wharton, on 4 December 1708, became lord lieutenant of Ireland. He appointed Joseph Addison as his secretary and found safe seats for him at Lostwithiel and later at Malmesbury. 
Wharton began his lieutenancy by calming churchmen, who feared he might try to repeal the Irish 'Test Act'. In a series of meetings with Irish MPs and lords he set about reducing tensions and animosities. When he opened the session he promised that the test would not be disturbed. He hoped, however, that the heavily outnumbered protestants could unite in the face of common dangers and that churchmen would find methods of relieving 'the uneasiness' of dissenters (JHC, 'Ireland', 21 vols., 1763-81, 3.566-7). Military supply bills were passed without difficulty. In the wake of the foiled attack on Scotland by James Francis Edward Stuart (the Pretender) the previous year, Anglo-Irishmen were happy to finance regiments and arsenals. As a further deterrent to the growth of popery, they also passed a bill providing that estates of Irish Catholics should descend to their protestant heirs. They also agreed with Wharton's proposal to settle in Ireland 500 families of protestant refugees from the Palatinate. 
Wharton was a hard-working lord lieutenant, as his correspondence with the English government shows. He was also assiduous in filling vacancies with whigs -- a policy that would bring heavy fire from the tories. For himself he acquired a regiment of dragoons. His greatest mistake in distributing favours was his failure to select Jonathan Swift, then a whig, as his chaplain. Instead he chose Dr Ralph Lambert, who was shortly appointed dean of Derry. Had Wharton fastened the great satirist to the whig establishment he might have deprived Robert Harley's government of its finest propagandist and saved himself many lashes. 
Wharton's greatest short-term mistake was his active part in the impeachment and trial of Dr Henry Sacheverell, whose attack upon Lord Treasurer Godolphin, toleration, occasional conformity, and (by implication) the revolution brought charges of seditious libel. The affair ended in a famous contest before the House of Lords. Frankly discarding the warming-pan theory, Wharton stoutly defended the whig version of the revolution, as a preservation of the constitution against invasions by arbitrary (and popish) royal power. Widely perceived as a whig attack on the Church of England the crisis brought out London mobs, who sacked meeting-houses and threatened Wharton's town house in Dover Street. In the election of September 1710 the whigs, in spite of Wharton's exertions, lost control of the Commons, helping Wharton's inveterate enemy, Robert Harley, strengthen his hold on the government. 
In October 1710 Wharton was removed as lord lieutenant, and on 11 January 1711 his regiment was disbanded. Meanwhile Swift began an assault on Wharton's character and his administration in Ireland. In the tory 'Examiner' of 30 November 1710 and in 'A Short Character of His Ex. T. E. of W.' (published anonymously and without imprint in December 1710) Swift pictured Wharton as a hardened, greedy politician, bawdy and profane, whose corrupt addiction to wealth and pleasure had cost Ireland dearly. On its title-page the 1711 edition of the 'Short Character' described itself as a forerunner of impeachment. 
Swift's anonymous attack brought him an oblique reprimand from Archbishop William King, who (without overtly accusing Swift of authorship) condemned the pamphlet as unchristian and unjust. The threat of impeachment also met opposition and soon evaporated. On 11 January 1711 Addison wrote that he heard 'no more of the impeachment'. He supposed that Swift's 'scurrilous little book' would never have been written if Harley's government had been able to proceed ('Letters', 253-4). Whatever profits Wharton made during his governorship (in addition to his salary of $12,000 and expense allowances of $3000) they fell within the then recognized rules of the political game. This was also found to be true in 1713 when Wharton was charged with having used his influence to get a place in the English customs for George Hutchinson, who paid him $1000. When the debates revealed that the money had been given to Wharton's needy sister Lady Lockhart and that the event had occurred before the general pardon of 1709 the charges were dropped. 
In autumn 1711 Wharton and his friends began a campaign against the government's peace proposals. In preparation for their counter-offensive the Kit-Cat Club planned a demonstration for Queen Elizabeth's birthday on 17 November -- a procession and pope-burning in the style of 1680. For the occasion they prepared elaborate effigies of the pope, the Pretender, and the devil. A nervous government forbade the demonstration and confiscated the effigies, triggering a memorable line from Wharton. When asked what had happened to the three bogeymen, he answered, 'merrily', 'Their Disciples came by night and stole them away' (Oldmixon, 'History', 478). 
To block the peace Wharton made an agreement with his old opponent the high tory earl of Nottingham. The junto whigs would support a bill against occasional conformity if Nottingham's friends in the Lords would vote against the peace. They would abandon their dissenting clients, at least temporarily, in order to prevent a potentially ruinous agreement with France. Both parties delivered on their promises, and on 8 December a majority of Lords agreed to a 'no peace without Spain' clause in an address to the queen ('JHL', 19.339). 
In a historic manoeuvre the queen thwarted the whig stratagem by creating twelve new peers, introduced in the house on 2 January 1712. The so-called tory dozen evoked another celebrated remark from Wharton, who asked one of the new members 'whether they voted by their foreman' (Boyer, 'History', 533). But Wharton's wit could not alter the new balance of power and in the end the whigs managed to defeat only the commercial clauses of the peace treaty. In the general election of 1713 Wharton was hard pressed to find seats for some of the whig leaders in the Commons, and his candidates lost the county election at Aylesbury, traditionally his home grounds. He and Lady Wharton appeared there with wool in their hats, symbolizing whig devotion to the English wool trade; but Lord Cheyne's nominees, John Fleetwood and John Verney, Viscount Fermanagh, prevailed. 
Wharton then appears to have supported a whig proposal to dissolve the union in order to embarrass the government and win Scottish votes, although he was absent when the vote was taken and the measure was defeated. Wharton was defeated also, during the 1714 session, when he attacked the 'Schism Bill', a tory measure which closed the schools of the dissenters. His final speech, however, as he flayed Harley (now earl of Oxford), who had been raised and educated, like himself, as a dissenter, was perhaps the most incisive of his long career, and his closing reminder to the bishops of the gospel's 'do unto others' was brilliant (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 6.1351-2). 
During the 1714 session Wharton hammered away at the succession in danger theme. A formal motion, that the succession was not safe under the present government, was defeated in the Lords by only 12 votes, prompting Wharton to remark 'you carried it by your dozen' ('Wentworth Papers', 366). When Queen Anne died and the 'Regency Act' went into effect Wharton was not among the regents named by George I -- an omission perhaps designed to conciliate tories. He was singled out, however, for special attention when George arrived in Greenwich on 19 September 1714; and on 23 September he was appointed lord privy seal and made a member of the privy council. Of his many activities over the next few months by far the most important was his work on the elections of January and February. In Buckinghamshire Wharton and Lord Cheyne agreed to return one tory, Fleetwood, and one whig, John Hampden, in the county election, to save the expense of a contest; overall a solid whig majority was returned. On 15 February 1715 Wharton was created marquess of Wharton and of Malmesbury, and on 28 February he was granted a pension of $2000 a year. He was also made baron of Trim, earl of Rathfarnham, and marquess of Catherlough in the Irish peerage, but the patent for this title was not issued until 12 April, too late for Wharton to see. 
In early April Wharton became ill. His condition, according to Dr Hans Sloane, who attended him, 'proceeded in a great measure from the attendance he gave to a multiplicity of business he was engaged in' -- from 'fatigue' of body and mind (BL, Sloane MS 222, fol. 77). There was an additional complication. On 2 March Wharton's son Philip, then sixteen, had eloped with Martha, daughter of General Richard Holmes. Wharton tried vainly to have the marriage annulled, and his anger may have aggravated his illness. In any event he made his will on 8 April. On 12 April 1715, at his house on Dover Street, he died. On 22 April he was buried in the church at Winchendon. His widow, who died on 5 February 1717, was also buried there. 
On the day of Wharton's death the duchess of Marlborough, informed by Dr Samuel Garth that 'Lord Wharton is given over', wrote a short testimony to his political value: 'I should be very sorry for his death, having never in my whole life seen so useful a man as he was in the Parliament, and so constantly right in all things that concerned the true interests of England' ('Letters of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough', 1875, 117-18). This statement might be called the standard whig version of Wharton's career. As a leader in the 'glorious revolution', a zealous defender of toleration, and a promoter of the protestant succession, he was one of the 'patriots' who had helped save England from popery and arbitrary power and the established church from suicidal high-church doctrines. 
In view of Wharton's political rectitude whigs found it easy to ignore or excuse his lapses from strict moral virtue. His sexual adventures the 'Memoirs of the Life' (p. 21) could dismiss as 'youthful sallies' and they could be blamed upon the debauched court of Charles II, where Wharton had once been welcome. Tory charges of political lying and corruption were simply slander, the malice of a desperate party, and tributes to Wharton's effectiveness as a whig leader. 
Two days after Wharton's death Thomas Hearne delivered a tory verdict on his career, describing him as 'another great atheistical, knavish, republican, Whiggish Villain' ('Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne', ed. D. W. Rannie, 1901, 5.45). This view was echoed, with variations, by Ned Ward in 'The Lord Whiglove's Elegy' (1715) and by various tory wits. It received its final expression years later from Jonathan Swift, who dismissed his old enemy as 'the most universal villain I ever knew' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 92). 
Wharton never analysed his own career, and Swift asserted that he was totally indifferent to posthumous fame. It seems obvious, however, that Wharton had good reason to be satisfied. The party he had helped to construct and hold together, in good times and bad, had triumphed. The time, energy, and money he had devoted to the cause had been well spent. He had been damnably mauled by tory pamphleteers, of course, but that was a small price to pay for victory. 


@@@@@


doc= 29176


Whately, Richard (1787-1863), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin and philosopher, was born on 1 February 1787, at Cavendish Square, London, the youngest of nine children of the Revd Canon Joseph Whately (died 1797) of Nonsuch Park, Surrey, and his wife, Jane Plumer. It was a well-connected political and professional family of some distinction: his paternal uncle Thomas Whately (1726-1772) had been George Grenville's private secretary and subsequently secretary to the Treasury in Grenville's administration, attaching himself after Grenville's death to Lord North. Richard Whately's maternal uncle, William Plumer (1736-1822), the MP for Hertfordshire, in whose house he had been born, was a wealthy, dedicated Foxite, who had been preceded as a whig MP by his father, William Plumer (1687-1767). The gentlemanly professions were equally well represented in the family: another paternal uncle had been a banker, and Whately's brother William became a lawyer; his brother Thomas, the poor-law reformer, was an Anglican clergyman. 
Whately was six years younger than his nearest sibling, an isolated child, slight in build, timid, and retiring in manner. He had few companions, but compensated for this by learning to read and write very early and going on nature rambles. A prodigy at mental arithmetic, he lived in an imaginative world of his own construction: 'I was engaged either in calculation or castle-building' he later commented ('Life and Correspondence', 1.5). At the age of nine years he was sent to a private school near Bristol with strong West Indian connections run by a Mr Philips. Although he was there drawn out of himself, and grew up tall and strong (looking, it has been said, like a Yorkshire ostler), his school life was not particularly happy: he still went on solitary rambles, observing natural history, and continued his habit of 'visionary speculations' (ibid., 6.6). He became a first-rate shot and fisherman. However, he did lose both his passion and ability for mental arithmetic, which he now learned with difficulty and slowly. 
Whately entered Oriel College in 1805, graduating BA (double second class) in 1808 and proceeding MA in 1812. In 1810 he won the English essay prize and in 1811 was elected a fellow of the college. He then settled at Oxford as a private tutor, in which capacity he taught Nassau Senior, the economist, and Samuel Hinds, later bishop of Norwich, who had also attended Philips's school near Bristol. He became a dedicated, if unconventional, teacher (he taught lying on a sofa with one leg over the back), taking particular delight in encouraging diffident characters. He disregarded Oxford conventions: in the early morning he could be seen walking Christ Church meadows, not wearing a cap and gown as required, but a white hat and coat (he was known as the White Bear), accompanied by his white dog which he had trained to climb trees and from there jump into the water. However, his rough-and-ready manners (he once shocked Henry Bathurst, bishop of Norwich, by receiving him with his feet on the table) and eccentricities (he kept herrings in his college rooms to grill on his fire for breakfast) meant that he was never popular. His friendships, which he particularly cherished, were largely confined to the society of Oriel: in addition to Senior and Hinds, he cultivated Edward Hawkins, Thomas Arnold, and (until a few months before his death in 1860) Baden Powell. 
Whately had regarded his tutor at Oriel as 'utterly incompetent' ('Miscellaneous Remains', 149). The turning point in his intellectual career had been the lectures of Edward Copleston, whose intellectual disciple he became and whose views, in the early phase of his career, he was happy to represent and publicly acknowledge: two of his early works -- the 'Bampton Lectures' (1822) and 'Elements of Logic' (1826) -- were expressly dedicated to Copleston. Copleston became godfather to Whately's daughter and in later life Whately edited Copleston's 'Remains' (1854). 
Copleston was the founder of the Noetic school of Anglican apologetics at Oxford, a group of scholars who sought to provide a defence of Christianity on the ground of its reasonableness against the onslaught of deists and Unitarians. The Noetics also attempted to shore up Anglicanism by ensuring that the ancient universities were educationally capable of producing clergymen competent of defending the Church of England against such intellectual assaults. In the 1810s and early 1820s their approach was seen as a worthy bulwark of the Church of England, and not, as it was to be seen later, by the Tractarians in particular, as the first stage in the dilution of Anglicanism by secularism. 
In this sense Whately, spreading the Coplestonian message, operated, if not within the pale, then certainly as an intellectually acceptable ally, of the high-church tradition. Thus he shared with the 'high and dry' Henry John Rose a loathing of German theology and philosophy. He looked down upon the evangelicals of St Edmund Hall, while dismissing eighteenth-century latitudinarianism as 'spurious liberality of sentiment' (R. Whately, 'The Use and Abuse of Party Feeling', 1822, 220). With more irony than accuracy, he described himself as a 'divine right tory' ('Miscellaneous Remains', 64) on account of his belief in obedience to the secular state, so long as a legal order existed, and his rejection of social contract theory as the basis of politics. (In fact he was an uncontroversial supporter of the revolution of 1688.) Above all, in his early theology, which was praised by the high-church 'British Critic', he sought to demonstrate the truth of Christian evidences (as opposed to natural theology), and to do so not by dogmatic assertion but by the use of modern tools of academic discourse. 
Whately's first substantial essay, 'Historic Doubts Relative to Napoleon Buonaparte' (1819), was a characteristic production with regard to both intellectual purpose and author. It was a bold, ironic attack on Hume's essay on miracles, in which he sought to weigh the evidence for the existence and exploits of Napoleon in order to demonstrate that proof of the existence of the exceptional can only ever amount to a probability, relying as it does on testimony and not experience. But, he argued, if it were accepted that Napoleon existed, in the absence of any prejudice against religion, there was equally no reason to doubt that Christ had performed the miracles recorded in the 'Bible'. It was intended as a 'bouleversement' of the rationalist sceptic position, using Hume's method against himself. It was a popular success, demonstrating a capacity for satire (it included a history of Napoleon in parody of the 'Bible') which in later life he sought to curb. 

'Historic Doubts' owed something to William Paley and the eighteenth-century bishop of Durham Joseph Butler in its insistence that there was no improbability that testimony could not outweigh. But of the two, Whately's greater debt (as was the Noetics') was to Butler. In part 2 of his famous 'Analogy', Butler had indicated that the difficulties involved in written revelation were similar to those found in experience. Acknowledging this insight, the Noetics sought to develop an inductive theology to study the 'Bible', just as induction was the basis of the study of the natural world: in the same way that the world of nature was a world of facts, so revelation consisted of scriptural 'facts'. In this enterprise Whately was a leading participant, albeit that this participation was not systematic. Like his mentor, Copleston, Whately's writings tended to be occasional pieces, written for an ephemeral purpose, rather than learned monographs. 'A great work is a thing I have never undertaken', he once wrote ('Life and Correspondence', 2.173), attributing this on another occasion to a natural indolence which he attempted to overcome. He was partially successful: he was infinitely more prolific than Copleston, but never as academic as his friend and fellow Noetic Renn Dickson Hampden. 
The study of the 'Bible' as a collection of facts required that their nature be identified. Whately understood this to be limited. As he explained in his earliest theological essays (his 1921 edition of Archbishop William King's 'Discourse on Predestination' and the 'Essays on some of the Peculiarities of the Christian Religion', published in 1825, which for the main part was a collection of sermons delivered at Oxford in 1820), the purpose of the scriptures was to teach man the way to eternal happiness, and not to teach him the nature or essential qualities of things as they are in themselves. But therein also lay their superiority, for they taught lessons that were not discernible by the exercise of man's reason. They were the product of divine revelation. 
From this understanding of the 'Bible' four conclusions flowed. The first was that the 'Bible' did not seek to teach all truth: it was not intended as a substitute for natural philosophy. For example, the biblical account of creation was not a geological theory, but simply served the purpose of informing its readers that God created the world. This was scarcely a new approach to biblical study, even within the Anglican church. It had been advocated, for example, by John Hey, the Cambridge theologian, at the beginning of the century (Oriel College Library had purchased a new copy of Hey's Norrissian lectures in the early 1820s on Pusey's recommendation). Second, the 'Bible' taught by analogy. In describing divine qualities in human terms it did not ascribe human qualities to God. Indeed, one of the principal purposes in republishing King's 'Discourse' was to bring to public attention an earlier description of man's analogical understanding of God that had been praised by Copleston in his own 'Enquiry into the Doctrines of Necessity and Predestination' (1821). Third, the 'Bible' was written so as to produce practical results, and was thus couched in historically relative terms. It was therefore best understood by being acquainted with the historical circumstances, habitual modes of thought, and understanding of the persons who constituted its first audience. Fourth, because scriptural revelation consisted in the teaching of necessary facts, it was not possible to go beyond the realm of facts even where they appeared to be contradictory. That they appeared contradictory did not render them any less 'factual': as Butler taught, many apparently contradictory matters existed in nature and the same difficulties were to be expected in scripture as in nature, since both were collections of facts. 
This understanding of the limited, but factual, nature of the 'Bible' was used by Whately for orthodox ends: to attack sceptics, rationalist Unitarians, and Calvinist evangelicals. Thus natural theologians were dismissed on the ground of the superiority of the 'Bible'. According to Whately, 'the study of natural religion ought properly to 'follow', or at least to accompany, and not to precede, that of revelation' (R. Whately, 'Essays', 1825, x-xi). The doctrine of the immortality of the soul, for example, could be discovered only from the 'Bible'. Likewise St Paul was not a Calvinist, but an orthodox Anglican. Whately demonstrated this in his 'Essays on some of the Difficulties of the Writings of St Paul' (1828) in which, for example, in relation to the doctrine of election, he argued that its true meaning was to be ascertained by reference to the 'Old Testament's' notion of divine election from which it could be seen that election was conditional on being a faithful follower of the church. Thus he sought to ensure that St Paul's writings were regarded as 'a principal bulwark of the Gospel' (ibid., 46-7) and censured their comparative neglect. 
In 1820 Whately met Elizabeth Pope (died 1860), the cousin of his Oriel friend Sherlock Willis and the third daughter of William Pope of Hillingdon Hall, Uxbridge; on 18 July 1821 they were married at Cheltenham, 'for love', as he recorded in his commonplace book. They were to have four daughters and a son. The second of their daughters was the missionary and teacher Mary Louisa Whately. Marriage necessitated his leaving his Oriel fellowship, and in August 1822 his uncle presented him to the living of Halesworth in Suffolk. He was resident there for less than three years owing to his wife's illness. None the less, he founded an adult school and weekly lecture, and was active in his local poor-law union. He advocated the abolition of relief for the able-bodied poor unless they were employed by parish officers on work of a public nature. This was as much on account of the demoralization that idleness brings as the 'vice' of indolence. In so doing he also identified a 'benefits trap': a labourer had little incentive to seek employment if local wages were no more than the level of local relief. By taking themselves out of the pool of available labour, such persons also kept local wages artificially high in relation to supply. 
Whately was summoned back to Oxford in 1825 on his appointment by Lord Grenville, chancellor of Oxford University, as principal of St Alban Hall. This patronage had been secured by Copleston, as part of his design to elevate and improve Oxford teaching. St Alban was one of two halls of residence (the other being St Mary's) that Copleston wished Oriel to acquire: he was successful in neither objective, though Oriel did subsume St Mary Hall in 1902. However, he did succeed in bringing both under Noetic influence (Hampden became principal of St Mary's in 1833). Like St Mary's, St Alban Hall had a low academic reputation; it was known as the 'Botany Bay' of the university. Whately changed this, with the assistance, as vice-principal, first of John Henry Newman -- then a Noetic protege -- and from 1827 of his former pupil Hinds. 
Whately's concern for Christianity as a reasonable religion led him to ensure that Anglicans were versed in the right methods of reasoning not only through his teaching but also his publications. His most notable achievement in this regard was his textbook 'Elements of Logic', which had first appeared in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (1826). It was written at the suggestion of Copleston and with the assistance of Newman and Nassau Senior. Indeed, as early as 1822 Newman had constructed a rough draft of the article after copying out various Whately manuscripts on logic, and this formed the basis of the work. Its production was typical of the collaborative enterprises in which the Noetics indulged. It is most famous in retrospect as a work of meta-logic -- that is, for its distinction between induction as the process of collecting or investigating facts, which was not a process of reasoning, and induction as the right method of inference from the facts collected. This was the deductive method, its tool was the syllogism and its greatest exponent was Aristotle. But the 'Logic' was more than a textbook which dominated reading lists for twenty years until replaced by John Stuart Mill's 'System of Logic'. It was also intended as a polemic in two senses. First, it was to promote sound reasoning to counteract religious scepticism. 'The adversaries of our Faith', Whately wrote, 'would, I am convinced, have been... more satisfactorily answered... had a thorough acquaintance with logic been more common than it is' (R. Whately, 'Elements of Logic', 1827, xxviii). Second, it was to serve as an agent of university reform. Whately argued that logic should be made compulsory for candidates at Oxford for academical honours: to this end his preface was separately reprinted and circulated. In the same genre was Whately's less successful, but equally widely circulated, manual 'Elements of Rhetoric' (1828), the purpose of which was to describe 'the process of 'conveying truth' to others, by reasoning' (R. Whately, 'Elements of Rhetoric', 1828, 23). 
Although Whately's Christianity was a religion of reason resting on evidence (thus the fault of evangelicalism and Roman Catholicism was that they were anti-intellectual, the former believing sincerity was enough, the latter sacrificing independent judgement to tradition), it was not dry and rationalist. He was a firm advocate of zeal for the gospel, and he believed that creeds were a necessary component of a church: the laying aside of formularies would be tantamount to putting an end to the society. He was a supporter of foreign missionary work and established the first Irish branch of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. But he cautioned against partisan zealotry that distorted truth and led to heresy. Indeed, for Whately heresies were the product of false reasoning allied to distorting passions, the product of a common human nature rather than a quality peculiar to heretics. This was the burden of his 'Bampton Lectures' in 1822 and of his later work, dedicated to the former Catholic priest Joseph Blanco White, 'The Errors of Romanism Traced to their Origin in Human Nature' (1830). Whately held that Wesleyanism was the product of ambition, while Unitarianism was attributable to a love of novelty, and many Calvinists were motivated by an undue love of disputation. He advocated toleration of dissenting views on the ground that their true meaning might be misunderstood by orthodox protestants, or that they might be the product of a lack of education or the seeking of truths from the 'Bible' that it was incapable of supplying. But he valued the Church of England over other churches because it asserted the primacy of the scriptures, which contained God's full and final revelation. 
By the mid-1820s Whately had become the Noetics' leading light and it had become the dominant intellectual movement at Oxford. In 1830 a journalist on 'John Bull' could salute him as the intellectual leader of Oriel and could refer (wrongly) to Thomas Arnold as Whately's 'bottle holder'. Copleston had become increasingly involved in political affairs outside Oxford and in 1828 left Oxford altogether, having become bishop of Llandaff in 1827; his successor, Edward Hawkins, was never able to match Whately in intellectual verve or dominance. Meanwhile, a number of Whately's friends succeeded to various Oxford appointments and were thus physically within his sphere of influence: in 1825 Senior became the first Drummond professor of political economy; in 1827 Hinds returned to Oxford as Whately's vice-principal at St Alban Hall; and, in the same year, Baden Powell returned as Savilian professor of geometry. In 1826 Blanco White came to reside at Oxford and obtained common-room rights at Oriel, and in 1829 Whately's former pupil Hampden was appointed to the board of examiners and came to live at Oxford. This was also the year that the Noetics sought a metropolitan voice: Senior and Whately founded the 'London Review', with Blanco White as editor. It was intended as a (short-lived) protest against the sectarian temper of its rivals: the 'Quarterly', 'Edinburgh', and 'Westminster' reviews. It folded after only two issues, a premonition of what was to follow, partly because of its academic tone, partly because even the literate classes wanted sectarianism. 
The second half of the 1820s heralded a time of major political change. As the threat of the French Revolution receded, there was increasing clamour for national institutions to be reformed to reflect the growth of dissenting populations in the towns and the strength of the Catholic population in Ireland, which since 1801 had formed part of the Union. Such reform became increasingly likely when, in 1827, the liberal tory George Canning became prime minister. Thus in 1828 the 'Test and Corporation Acts' were repealed and in 1829 Catholic emancipation was achieved. Whately supported both measures. The reform of national political institutions prompted a reconsideration of the role of the Anglican church and Anglican institutions, including the ancient universities, and the emergence of church parties. Indeed, it was Catholic emancipation and the re-election of Sir Robert Peel as MP for Oxford University that precipitated the symbolic split of Newman from Whately. It is in this context that the second phase of Whately's career has to be understood. In the political context of the late 1820s and 1830s his stance on the political questions of the day became increasingly to be associated with whiggery. Although the substantive analysis changed little, and Whately remained loyal to Copleston's Noetic upbringing, the second-order reforms which he advocated placed him firmly on the side of political liberalism even if, by intellectual background, he stood outside the traditional whiggery of the Fox-Holland-Grey school. 
In his anonymously published 'Letters on the Church by an Episcopalian' (1826), Whately attacked the whig Warburtonian alliance between church and state on the ground that, since Christ's kingdom was not of this world, the interference of the secular power in religious affairs was at variance with Christ's teaching. Indeed, it imparted to the church a coercive power which created the impression that religion was simply a state contrivance for maintaining order. Whately was therefore opposed to the church carrying out secular administrative functions such as maintaining registers of births, marriages, and deaths, and was equally opposed to the royal appointment of bishops, their participation in the House of Lords, and parliament's ultimate control over the Church of England's articles and liturgy. The separation of church and state, however, would not result in the church losing the right to its property, since this was not the state's property but the church's. For example, tithes were not a tax levied by government. None the less, the state did have a right to take away property whenever the inutility or harmfulness of the institution rendered its abolition important to the public welfare. 
Whately argued that the church itself was not merely a voluntary organization of believers: it had as legitimate a claim to be acknowledged as of divine origin as did the Jewish theocracy. It had authority in matters of faith, including the authority to declare Christian doctrines and duties and to exclude members who did not conform. Thus, to disregard the authority of the church, in Whately's eyes, was to commit an offence against Christ himself. In this he followed the teaching of his fellow Noetic Hawkins. But this did not mean that what the church declared to be the faith was necessarily the true faith. Although the teaching of doctrine was an office that Christ had bestowed on the church, its lessons were subject to the higher authority of the 'Bible'. In a conflict between church teaching and the scriptures, the scriptures were superior. Moreover, he asserted in later works, because the scriptures consisted simply of facts and were not mathematical propositions from which 'true' equations could be deduced, creeds, liturgies, and catechisms (that is, the 'equations') were only the writings of able and pious men. This was the conclusion that his pupil Hampden was to illustrate with such controversy in the 1830s. 
Although this view of church-state relations influenced Newman, as he recorded in his 'Apologia pro vita sua', and thus the Tractarian high-church tradition, it was more than capable of a liberal interpretation. By contemplating the withdrawal of Anglicanism as a state church while allowing that, on limited public interest grounds, governments might interfere with the distribution of church property, Whately recognized the possibility of church reform. Whately never publicly supported disestablishment, but he did support measures which to his mind took the church out of politics. In particular, he became a lifelong advocate of the revival of convocation in exchange for parliament withdrawing its control over spiritual matters such as the prayer book. For a similar reason he advocated Jewish emancipation, since to grant Christians a monopoly of civil rights was a violation of the rule of 'rendering to Caesar the things that are Caesar's'. Likewise, he could contemplate and support payment of Catholic priests out of the consolidated fund because this was not a protestant source of finance, but revenues contributed by both Catholics and protestants, to which the former also had a right to an equitable share. He also supported the grant to the Catholic Maynooth College and advocated the removal of religious tests of entry to national institutions, notably the ancient universities, other than the church itself. He himself succeeded in 1837 in abolishing the religious oath which the members of the Order of St Patrick had to swear. 
In 1829 Whately succeeded his former pupil, Senior, as Drummond professor of political economy. This provided him with a further opportunity to Christianize secular teaching and ensure that this branch of knowledge remained in the hands of the advocates of 'social order'. He seized upon the 'Introductory Lectures' (1831) as a means of extending Paley's 'Natural Theology' to the 'body politic'. This willingness to engage with secularizing thought, unremarkable earlier in the century, now distinguished him from high-churchmen, who increasingly regarded such encounters as a form of contagion rather than inoculation. His strategy was twofold. His first objective was to limit the scope of the science of political economy in order to present it as a neutral professional discipline. Accordingly, his preferred name for the subject was the more technical 'catallactics', or the science of exchanges, since it was not a science of happiness: it could assist a statesman in the decisions he had to take, but was no substitute for them. For the same reason it did not trespass on scriptural territory: the 'Bible' taught religious and moral truths which political economy did not purport to teach, and thus the two areas of instruction were mutually exclusive. Secondly, he sought to show that the study of political economy provided further evidence of 'a wise Providence'. In his account, man emerged from a savage state characterized by indolence and want of forethought as a result of a miraculous revelation. The desire for wealth and emulation, combined with the division of labour (a principle derived from 'Genesis') and security of property, led to the advancement of civilization. As economic progress occurred, more would be released from mere mechanical toil and knowledge would advance. The division of labour need not lead to a debasement of the mind: it could be counteracted by education. The Malthusian evil of overpopulation, famine, and death would occur only in the absence of the exercise of human reason. In an age of 'dismal' economics, Whately was an optimist. 
This optimism was justified by Whately's scientific method, explained in his 'Introductory Lectures', which owed much to Dugald Stewart, the Scottish philosopher and heir to Adam Smith. According to Whately, a science required both a correct ascertainment of the data from which to reason and a correct process of deduction. Because sciences required induction, they were in principle not capable of the certainty that pure deductive reasoning brought; only mathematics was capable of such certainty. This was a further difference between scientific study and the study of the scriptures since scriptural fact was, by virtue of being revealed fact, necessarily true. No scientific fact, dependent on human and thus fallible observation, could possess that degree of certainty. However, political economy, unlike other sciences, depended on few facts and these were in the range of everyone's observation. This being so, assuming the correct deductive process was applied, the conclusions to be drawn from them were akin to mathematical propositions. 
Whately, however, was not merely concerned with ensuring that members of the ruling elite were not secularized by the new sciences. He also believed that educating the poor was a means of ensuring the continuity of the social order, and not -- as his more conservative contemporaries feared -- subverting it. In a sermon preached in aid of the national school at Halesworth in 1830, he argued that the desire for education among the poor was so great that it ought not to be left in the hands of anti-Christians. This accorded with the will of God in that as the 'Bible' was intended for the poor as much as the rich, the poor could become acquainted with it only by learning to read. Whately held that public worship and the teaching of the clergy were insufficient, and he became a prolific popularizing author, writing and compiling school textbooks. In this context his two most famous works were his 'Easy Lessons on Money Matters for the Use of Young People' (1833), a simplified version of his lectures on political economy, which was circulated by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, translated into many foreign languages (including Maori and Japanese), and was read by the young Stanley Jevons, and his 'Introductory Lessons on Christian Evidences' (1838), which, when circulated in Irish national schools, was to become a focus of controversy. 
In 1831 Earl Grey, the whig prime minister, offered Whately the archbishopric of Dublin, second in the Anglican hierarchy in Ireland to the archbishopric of Armagh (the former was lord primate of Ireland, whereas the latter was lord primate of all Ireland). It had first been offered to the whig bishop of Norwich, Henry Bathurst, who, at some eighty-seven years old, had declined it. Henry Brougham, the lord chancellor, then suggested either Thomas Arnold or Whately. Grey chose the latter, although he had never heard of him; it was rumoured that Grey had extracted a promise from Whately to support the government's proposed Irish national system of education, but this was not, in fact, the case. For his part Whately received the offer at breakfast while staying at Arnold's house at Rugby. He put it in his pocket without remark, walked the garden for an hour, and then told his family. Why he accepted it is a mystery. 
Copleston believed it was from a sense of duty, as Whately regarded it as 'a call to the helm of a crazy ship in a storm' ('Life and Correspondence', 1.110). It was a task for which he was unsuited: his brusque manner was capable of giving offence at a time when diplomacy was required; he had scarcely any pastoral experience; and he was not a partisan whig who could be relied upon to support the government in the Lords. Above all, doctrinally he was out of kilter with the Church of Ireland, then dominated by a high-church evangelicalism. As the author of a work advocating the separation of church and state and a leading exponent of the Noetic view that sabbatarianism rested not on scriptural authority but merely on the tradition of the church, Whately by 1831 had little in common with either high-churchmanship or evangelicalism. This was particularly unfortunate in Dublin, where his predecessor, William Magee, an evangelical, had been responsible for rekindling ecclesiastical conflict with the Catholics after a number of years of relative peace. Not surprisingly his appointment was greeted with dismay, and rumours circulated charging him with various heresies and secret membership of the Jesuits. 
The most pressing problem facing the Church of Ireland in the 1830s was the refusal of the peasantry to pay tithes, which were then the chief income of the ordinary clergy. However, the most pressing problem facing the government as regards the Irish church was its wealth in relation to its size, which prompted Catholic outrage. In 1834 the Anglican population in Ireland was less than that of the diocese of Durham, but it was governed by four archbishops and twenty-two bishops and had notional revenues of some $800,000, three-quarters of which came from tithes paid by more than 6 million Roman Catholics. Ending clergy distress and achieving church reform went hand in hand. Whately played his role in both, although he took the lead in neither. 
As regards tithes, Whately first favoured commutation, but by 1836 he favoured their abolition and replacement by a rent-charge to be collected by the landlords. But this was a second-best option. He would have liked the government to purchase tithes for a capital sum which would have been administered by the Irish ecclesiastical commissioners. (As early as 1831 he wanted all church revenues to be administered by an ecclesiastical board.) The government was against such a proposal and Whately had to settle for the imperfect 'Tithe Rent-Charge Act' of 1838. In the meantime, by way of alleviating the distress of the clergy, he worked closely with the parliamentary draftsmen on the 1833 'Million Act', which provided $1 million to be lent to the clergy in the absence of tithe payments; he himself gave the profits of several of his books to the relief of the clergy. Whately also took part in discussions with the government over the 'Irish Church Temporalities Act' of 1834, which suppressed eight Irish bishoprics and established the Irish ecclesiastical commission, although the lead was taken by Archbishop Beresford of Armagh. He was one of only two bishops to be loyal to the primate at the time of the bishops' revolt in March 1833, following the introduction of the bill in February, and he spoke, to the whig government's pleasure, in favour of it in the House of Lords. 
Whately's principal public role, however, was as the only Irish episcopal supporter of the whig government's national system of education, by which government-financed grants were given to schools offering combined (that is, non-denominational) moral and literary instruction and separate religious instruction. (By contrast the archbishops of Armagh and Tuam and fifteen other bishops in 1832 had signed a petition against the scheme.) Whately, in the absence of the titular head of the board of commissioners, the duke of Leinster, invariably took the chair, and on the board formed an alliance with his Roman Catholic counterpart, Archbishop Daniel Murray, that extended beyond the education system. He refused, for example, to join the Royal Dublin Society because Archbishop Murray had been blackballed. In 1838 the education commissioners published Whately's 'Lessons on the Truth of Christianity', a modified edition of his 'Introductory Lessons' published in England. 
Whately also played his part in the Irish administration, acting as 'ex officio' lord justice in the absence of the lord lieutenant. However, he was scathing about the Irish government: he wished to see the Irish Office abolished and the country run from London, since only London could guarantee meritocratic government and ensure that patronage was not abused. He was also in favour of the abolition of the lord lieutenancy: this personage, he held, had no duties 'but to preside at a mock court and make after-dinner speeches' ('Life and Correspondence', 2.393). Consequently, the office was a cheap source of disaffection. Instead he wished to see the queen reside in Dublin for an annual period. Whately was a strong unionist, but less because he saw Ireland as an outpost of a Greater Britain than because he feared that repeal would lead to civil war: there would be a struggle between Catholics and protestants as the former sought to establish their ascendancy, followed by a struggle between the rich and the poor as the poor realized they would not be made any richer by repeal. Anarchy and mutual slaughter would ensue. Likewise, he was sufficiently clear-sighted to view the Church of Ireland less as a native church than a colonial church, similar to the Anglican communion in India. 
The 1830s were the years of Whately's greatest political influence: he advised Lord Melbourne on ecclesiastical appointments and he was consulted by Lord Duncannon on Irish matters. In 1835 his threat to resign from the education board was instrumental in ensuring that its grant did not fluctuate with the fortunes of the Church of Ireland, but was paid out of the consolidated fund. However, his influence should not be exaggerated: following the controversy over the appointment in 1836 of Whately's friend Hampden to the regius chair of divinity at Oxford, Melbourne was deterred from appointing other of his nominees. Although he was appointed in 1833 to chair the royal commission on the Irish poor at the suggestion of his friend Senior, the government ditched its conclusions in support of substantial public works programmes to stimulate employment, opting instead for the (cheaper) introduction of the English workhouse system as recommended by George Nicholls, one of the English poor-law commissioners, after a brief visit to Ireland. This left Whately feeling somewhat bitter: he described Nicholls's consideration of the issues as no more than getting 'one bottle of water out of the Liffey and one out of the Shannon' (McDowell, 227). As a result, according to Lord Holland, he was averse to attending the House of Lords and was, 'some said a little lukewarm on any matter affecting the Ministry' (Kriegel, 359). 
Whately remained equally singular in other matters. He did not court Irish popularity. He favoured the promotion of theological learning over evangelical enthusiasm: 'true Christianity is a very quiet and deliberate religion' he wrote ('Life and Correspondence', 2.379). He revived the rite of confirmation which had not been administered in his diocese for many years. He personally examined ordinands, not leaving the task to his chaplains. He sought to found a separate theological college for clerical education, a scheme which was finally blocked by the whig government in 1839. Although he was one of the founders of the Society for Protecting the Rights of Conscience in Ireland (1850), which provided financial support for former Catholics, he insisted he did not do so in order to encourage protestant converts but to give protection to those excluded from employment on religious grounds. Indeed, he controversially prevented the militant protestant evangelical Revd Tresham Gregg from preaching in Dublin in 1842. He preached against the evangelical beliefs that the cholera epidemic of 1832 and the Irish famine were divine judgments. This did not prevent him from opposing outdoor relief, though, whatever his public views, in private he gave about $8000 in 1846-9 for relief of the poor. His principal solution, however, was a well-organized and vigorous system of emigration and colonization: for him the Irish problem was excess population. 
In intellectual matters Whately maintained his enthusiasms, but did not develop them: if new causes were espoused, this was principally because they reflected old concerns. He supported the (in his case gradual) abolition of the slave trade. In 1832 he founded the chair of political economy at Trinity College, Dublin; he was also a founder of the Dublin Statistical Society in 1847 and a decade later presided over the statistical section at the Dublin meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. His agitation against transportation (his influential 1832 pamphlet 'Thoughts on Secondary Punishments' led in part to the House of Commons select committee inquiry) was founded on his belief that punishment and effective colonization were contradictory aims. Indeed he was an ardent penal reformer: although favouring the abolition of the death penalty, he also believed that prisoners should know the real meaning of their sentences and was thus a supporter of certain sentences being irremissible. He became an enthusiastic phrenologist: he had a cast of his head made at Oxford in 1831 and submitted it to three phrenologists in all. This was no doubt because he sympathized with, if he did not entirely endorse, George Combe's view of phrenology as the philosophy of the 'New Testament'. It was another example of the compatibility of Christianity with the new sciences, and in particular a 'scientific' demonstration of man's moral faculty, the existence of which Whately asserted in opposition to Paley's moral utilitarianism. 
As he himself would have been the first to admit, Whately's was not a profound mind: 'I know nothing thoroughly', he remarked in 1818 ('Miscellaneous Remains', 54). His intellectual skill was in explaining the theoretical principles of subjects: logic, political economy, rhetoric, theology. 'Elementary studies are most to my taste', he declared, 'I resemble one whose trade is to make instruments for others to work with' (ibid., 55). He had little visual sense. If he did not read widely (though he much exaggerated his own lack of reading), neither did he read deeply. As his opportunities for reading declined outside Oxford, so did his appetite for it. He increasingly stuck to what he knew, tending to be dismissive of new developments. Of Chambers's 'Vestiges of Creation' (1844), he wrote that he 'certainly thought it could be improved by being mended' ('Life and Correspondence', 2.275). He could not, and did not, read the philosopher of science William Whewell. By the mid-1840s he was, in George Combe's description, 'an old man, tall and thin, and is afflicted with some irritability of nervous fibre... it [is] impossible for him to sit still' (Gibbon, 1.271). Increasingly he spent his time at Redesdale, the house which he took outside Dublin, surrounded by his books and gardening (he was a keen experimenter in propagating new species). If he did not lose his sense of fun in private (one of his favourite pastimes was using a boomerang), in public he increasingly saw his task, as he noted in 1849, as combating the prevailing tendencies of the age. 
The first of these was Tractarianism. When he left Oxford in 1831 Whately was still a supporter of Newman: he suggested him as his second choice to take over St Alban Hall. But the controversy over the 'Irish Church Temporalities Act' of 1834, the admission of dissenters to Oxford (Whately was in favour of their admission to the university, but not to colleges that administered religious tests), and over the appointment of Hampden in 1836 to the regius chair of divinity increasingly isolated him from his former university. In 1838 he paid his last visit of any length. And he turned controversialist, publishing in 1841 'The Kingdom of Christ'. This contained an attack on apostolic tradition as the true foundation of the church, as opposed to the scriptures. Whately asserted that the reformers had been scrupulous to distinguish, and not to blend, scripture and tradition. Those who advocated a notion of authoritative tradition erected a double barrier to the pursuit of religious truth. They demanded that a Christian should not only believe the truths found in the 'Bible', but also a particular account of them. This doctrine Whately named the doctrine of double-reserve, and he accused its supporters of impiety since it created a barrier between man and God. In private he was less temperate: Tractarians were a 'pestilence' and 'unthinking bigots' ('Life and Correspondence', 1.460; 2.21). He denied Pusey permission to preach in his archdiocese and in later years declined to receive Newman. 
Whately also became increasingly out of sorts in Dublin: the 1850s saw the end of the Anglican-Catholic period of relative harmony that Whately had sought to establish with his Catholic counterpart Archbishop Murray. On the one hand, ultramontanism became increasingly dominant in the Irish Catholic church. This became particularly significant in 1852 when, following the death of Archbishop Murray, the leading ultramontanist Paul Cullen was appointed in his place. On the other, popular protestantism, partly in reaction to ultramontanism, intensified. In England it was epitomized by Lord John Russell's 'Letter to the Bishop of Durham' of 1850 attacking the pope's establishment of a Catholic hierarchy in England, a letter which Whately considered 'most absurd' ('Life and Correspondence', 2.194); in Ireland it was represented by a series of protestant missions. 
Whately was caught in this crossfire when in 1852 he sought to ensure that his 'Scripture Lessons' and 'Lessons on the Truth of Christianity', which were on the Irish education board's list of approved books, were used in all of its model schools as he had believed them to be: he had visited Clonmel model school and found both to be absent. Archbishop Cullen openly attacked both books, in particular the latter as having been compiled for the purpose of giving a united religious instruction. The board gave way to such pressure: the 'Lessons on the Truth of Christianity' was removed from the board's list of approved works and it ruled in relation to 'Scripture Lessons' that it was not to be used in ordinary school business where any parent objected. Whately resigned from the board, which thus lost the last leading advocate of the Irish mixed system. The incident revealed him to be both dogmatic and out of touch. He had believed that the use of scripture extracts in mixed lessons was important not because they were a substitute for dogmatic religious instruction, but because they were a rational means of leading Catholics to rational religion (in other words, Anglicanism). However, by the 1850s the national system was in effect a denominational system (less than 5 per cent of its schools were under mixed management and three-quarters were under clerical managers, the vast majority of whom were Catholic). 
Whately also became alienated from developments in liberal theology. He departed from his liberal friends when they departed, as they increasingly did, from an evidential defence of Christianity, and particularly of Christ's miracles. In the 1830s he had separated from Blanco White, whom he had taken to Dublin as private tutor to his children, when Blanco White embraced transcendental Unitarianism (he did, however, contribute to his pension). A more significant departure was his 1859 attack in the 'Quarterly Review' on the former Noetic Baden Powell's 'Order of Nature' (1859). (Until her death in 1844, Baden Powell had been married to Whately's wife's sister.) In this work Powell had argued that miracles were facts of faith, but impossibilities of science. Whately accused Powell of having joined the infidel party. Baden Powell returned to the same theme in his contribution to 'Essays and Reviews' (1860), which was published between the death of Whately's youngest daughter in March and that of his wife in April. (Powell himself died less than three months after publication.) There he explicitly attacked Whately's 'Historic Doubts' as both anachronistic and wrong. Whately's response was simply to repeat his old argument: 'there are some who seem quite unfit to appreciate the 'combined' force of several distinct probabilities' ('Miscellaneous Remains', 201). 
It is difficult to escape the conclusion that by the 1850s Whately was increasingly ill at ease in Victorian intellectual life. As he wistfully noted in his last charge in 1863, in preceding generations those who had denied the truth of the scriptures had also been adverse to Christianity, but in the present generation a large proportion of those who professed themselves Christians 'were far more remote from what is commonly understood by the word than the religion of the Jews or of the Mahometans'. This intellectual displacement was accompanied by physical ill health: in 1856 he suffered creeping paralysis of his left arm and leg and his left hand began to shake. By 1860 he was becoming very infirm and by 1861 the palsy had extended to his right hand; in 1863 he developed an ulcer in his right leg. His devotion to homoeopathy led him to refuse to consult the leading Dublin surgeons: in 1862 the Royal College of Surgeons had prohibited its members from applying homoeopathic cures. The disease made rapid progress and he died at Roebuck Hall, his country house outside Dublin, to which he had moved from Redesdale following his wife's death, at 11 a.m. on 8 October 1863. He was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral and Mozart's 'Requiem' was performed at the service; his devoted black dog, Jet, followed him under the hearse to the cathedral. 
Whately did not found a school. Unlike his contemporaries Newman and Arnold he did not have a deep emotional influence on his pupils. Although as archbishop of Dublin it was often alleged that he surrounded himself with a party of like-minded persons, they were not, in fact, promoted as a party. If two of his chaplains became Irish bishops, neither his clergyman son nor son-in-law obtained high ecclesiastical office. Nor did Whately achieve any influence with the Irish protestant upper classes: as Senior remarked, they hated his politics, disliked his political economy, were not favourably impressed by the total absence of pomp, and dreaded his jokes. To the Tractarians, his tactical concessions to liberal church reformers were a betrayal; of his episcopate, the high-church Thomas Mozley caustically remarked that he aimed at nothing and hit it. To the liberals, his Anglican apologetics became indefensible in the light of the development of scientific knowledge. Consequently Whately has best been remembered as a teacher, principally through his writings, of an eclectic collection of major Victorian thinkers: of Newman and his anti-Erastianism, of John Stuart Mill and his 'System of Logic', of Henry Mansel and his Christian agnosticism, and of Senior and his political economy. 
That his memory was kept alive at all was due in no small part to the devotions of his daughter (Elizabeth) Jane Whately (1822-1893). During his life she was his assistant, notwithstanding that she was determinedly more evangelical in outlook than he was; after his death she was his memorialist. In 1864 she published his 'Miscellaneous Remains', and in the 1870s she edited abridged versions of his anti-Tractarian 'The Kingdom of Christ' and his 'Errors of Romanism' from 1830. Above all, with the assistance of Herman Merivale, one of Whately's successors as Drummond professor of political economy, she was his biographer. The 'Life and Correspondence of Richard Whately, DD', first published in 1866 with subsequent editions in 1868 and 1875, is still the best account of Whately. Although it observes Victorian pieties in omitting controversy (it does not acknowledge the anonymous 'Letters on the Church by an Episcopalian', 1826), and at times it reads defensively, it is not blind to Whately's defects and idiosyncrasies. 
More than a century after his death Whately has come to be appreciated as a major intellectual figure in his own right: historians have increasingly turned their back on the search for the origins of the great mid-Victorian conflicts between science and religion and of the secular social sciences in order to map out an earlier age when it was believed that it was possible to marshall the sciences as auxiliaries in the greater conflict between Christianity and atheism. Whately is now seen as a major exponent of this earlier position: as a consequence his eclectic teachings can be better appreciated as forming a unity. If the turning of the intellectual tide that he hoped to see in 1863 never happened, leaving him socially successful but intellectually anachronistic, it is at least possible to view him in an earlier age when he was both socially successful and intellectually inventive. 


@@@@@


doc= 29177


Whately, Thomas (1726-1772), politician and author, was born in December 1726 near Epsom, Surrey, the eldest son of Thomas Whately ('c'.1685-1765), a merchant and director of the Bank of England, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Joseph Thompson, a wealthy merchant of Hackney, Middlesex. He was the elder brother of the Revd Joseph Whately of Nonsuch Park, Surrey, and William Whately, a banker of Lombard Street, London. A member of the Church of England, he was the uncle of Richard Whately (1787-1863), archbishop of Dublin. Through his mother, Whately was a descendant of Major Robert Thompson, one of four puritan brothers from Hertfordshire who rose to great wealth and importance during the Commonwealth. Prominent in the settlement of New England, the family became well connected. Whately's grandfather was a cousin of Lord Haversham, while his mother's brother, also named Joseph Thompson, was a lawyer and a dissenter of substantial wealth. Unmarried, the uncle took a great interest in his nephews and left his estate to them. Through the Thompson connection the Whately family also inherited extensive, if disputed, colonial land claims in Pennsylvania and Massachusetts. Their claims helped to generate a family correspondence with Andrew Oliver of Massachusetts, a distant cousin, and Thomas Hutchinson, Oliver's brother-in-law. 
After his graduation from Clare College, Cambridge, in 1745, Whately studied at the Middle Temple, London, and was called to the bar in June 1751. Through a family connection, Sir Peter Thompson, he succeeded James West as the recorder of St Albans in 1760. Sir Peter, with West, had represented St Albans in the Commons, and West, a more prominent politician, who had served as secretary to the Treasury from 1746 to 1756, introduced Whately to Lord Bute. Considered an able and rising young man, Whately was brought into the Commons during the election of 1761 for Ludgershall, Wiltshire, which he represented until 1768. His preferment proved rapid. In May 1762 he became George Grenville's private secretary, and, after Grenville was made first lord of the Treasury in April 1763, in October 1763 was appointed a secretary to the Treasury, a position he shared with Charles Jenkinson. 
Whately was charged with the administration's developing colonial policy, and he played a dominant role in the final framing of the 'American Revenue Act' of 1764 and the controversial 'American Stamp Act' of 1765. He ably defended the administration in two publications, 'Remarks on the Budget' and the more important 'The Regulations Lately Made Concerning the Colonies', both published in January 1765. He never deviated from his declared opinions, and consequently many Americans in London came to see him as their arch-foe. 
When Grenville was dismissed in July 1765, Whately joined him in opposition. From 1765 to 1770 he acted as Grenville's party manager in the Commons, and the extensive correspondence between the two men illustrates well his devotion to Grenville's interest. He was prominent in the opposition to the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in March 1766, and in October 1766 published a well-received defence of Grenville's motives and policies, 'Considerations on the Trade and Finance of the Kingdom', which was considered so important by the 'Gentleman's Magazine' that it was serialized between October and December 1766. Whately's organizational skills were crucial to the Grenvillite party during these years, but following Grenville's unexpected death in November 1770 he gravitated towards the North administration. Attacked by Junius for possessing all the dubious talents of an attorney, he was clearly influenced by Grenville's close friend Lord Suffolk, in whose interest he had represented Castle Rising, Norfolk, since the election of 1768. 
Having been appointed a lord of trade in January 1771, Whately exchanged this position for the sinecure of keeper of the king's roads in June 1771, when Lord Suffolk appointed him his under-secretary of state in the northern department. He did not enjoy his return to office for long, for he died unexpectedly, unmarried and intestate, on 26 May 1772. His younger brother William administered his effects, a duty which led him to fight a duel with John Temple, a distant relative of Grenville, over his brother's stolen correspondence with Oliver and Hutchinson. The letters had been given to Benjamin Franklin, who sent them to Massachusetts for publication, an action which discredited Franklin in London and which clouded Whately's own reputation. 
Little can be said regarding Whately himself as the vast majority of his existing correspondence concerns political affairs. He was well known in London literary circles, and left unfinished a study of 'Macbeth' and 'Richard III', which his brother Joseph Whately published in 1785 as 'Remarks on some of the Characters of Shakespeare'. Considered by some as an important influence on the concept of modern gardening, he had published before his death 'Observations on Modern Gardening' (1770). Although some disagreed with his taste, the book went through six editions and was translated into French. Thomas Jefferson purchased a copy, was impressed by it, and consulted it while laying out the grounds of Monticello. Whately's lasting monument in the United States remains, however, in Massachusetts. In 1771 his friend Thomas Hutchinson, then governor, named a new township Whately in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 29178


Whately, William (1583-1639), Church of England clergyman and puritan preacher, was born at Banbury, Oxfordshire, on 21 May 1583, the son of Thomas Whately (1550-1637), mercer, alderman, and twice mayor of the town, and his wife, Joyce Knight (died 1612). He matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1598 and graduated BA in 1601. While at Cambridge he frequented the sermons of two of the most renowned puritan preachers at the university, Laurence Chaderton and William Perkins. On 16 November 1602 he married Martha (died 1641), the daughter of George Hunt, rector of Collingbourne Ducis, Wiltshire, and granddaughter of John Hunt, who had narrowly escaped martyrdom in Mary's reign. Whately was influenced by his father-in-law to pursue a clerical career and with this intention he was incorporated at Oxford at St Edmund Hall in 1602 and proceeded MA in 1604. In 1605 he was appointed curate and lecturer at Banbury and was instituted as vicar in 1610. 
Whately's employment at Banbury allowed him to transmit the moderate scholarly puritanism that he had imbibed at Cambridge to an urban parish, which had already acquired a reputation as a puritan enclave. Members of Whately's immediate family had been actively involved in fostering puritanism in Banbury in their capacities as town governors. Thomas Whately and his brother Richard had been instrumental in getting the town's market cross removed in 1600 and Richard Whately had instigated an earlier campaign against maypoles in the parish. William Whately initially encountered some opposition at Banbury and was presented by a fellow curate in 1607 for administering communion to those who refused to kneel, for preaching against ceremonies, for not praying for the bishops, and not reading divine service or administering the sacrament of baptism. He was, however, supported in his ministry by his two brothers-in-law, Robert Harris (1580/81-1658), rector of Hanwell, and Henry Scudder (d. 1652), minister at Drayton, who at this stage in their careers met him on a weekly basis to translate and analyse chapters of the 'Bible'. 
Whately soon acquired a widespread reputation as a persuasive preacher and he was renowned for his eloquence and scriptural learning. He was involved in a number of local lectures by combination including that at Stratford upon Avon. Under Whately's aegis Banbury became so strongly associated with puritanism that Ben Jonson satirized the Banbury godly in the hypocritical character of Zeal-of-the-Land Busy in 'Bartholomew Fair', first performed in 1614 and published in 1631. After Whately's death Henry Scudder described him in the pulpit as 'both a terrible 'Boanerges', a sonne of Thunder, and also a 'Barnabas', a sonne of sweet consolation' (H. Scudder, 'The life and death of M. Whately', Whately, 'Prototypes', A2'v'-A3'r'). Many of the sermons which Whately preached were published and his works on salvation were eagerly received by his contemporaries. 'The Redemption of Time' (1606) was printed six times during Whately's lifetime and 'The New-Birth, or, A Treatise of Regeneration' (1618) seven times. The famed dissenter Richard Baxter later recalled that in his youth Whately's works were 'very savoury to me: especially his 'New Birth', his 'Care-Cloth' and his sermon of 'Redeeming Time'' (Whately, 'The Redemption of Time', 1673, introduction by Baxter, A2'v'). Whately's sermons demonstrate that he espoused the Calvinist belief in predestination and regarded preaching as the 'chief and principal instrument' to guide the elect into the necessary state of godliness (Whately, 'New-Birth', 130). 
Whately was also the author of two popular treatises on marriage, 'A Bride-Bush' (1617) and 'A Care-Cloth' (1624), which offer insights into early modern clerical assumptions about marriage and gender relations. Whately repudiated the first edition of 'A Bride-Bush' of 1617 because it was published from notes without his permission. The second edition, which was printed in 1619, was much expanded and may be regarded as the definitive version of this work. It contradicted the first edition by arguing that it was lawful for a man to beat his wife if she had repeatedly and wilfully disobeyed him, an opinion which was at variance with the majority of English clerical authorities at the time. Whately also argued in both editions that divorce and remarriage were allowable for the innocent party on the grounds of adultery or desertion. This accorded with continental reformed practice, but was not accepted in England, and Whately was forced to recant his views on divorce by the high commission in 1621. The final edition of 'A Bride-Bush' (1623) includes Whately's two-page disclaimer, although the offending passages had not been removed, according to Whately because of the carelessness of the printer. 
Whately's willingness to recant his opinions illustrates his moderate approach to the theological debates of the time and in general he was careful to avoid controversy in his printed works. Whately was able to avoid direct confrontation with church authorities because Banbury was a peculiar jurisdiction and was exempt from episcopal visitation. Meetings of the peculiar court were held in Banbury and Whately himself sometimes acted as the presiding official. 
Whately died at Banbury on 10 May 1639 and was buried four days later. His will included bequests to his wife, Martha, who was named as his executor and their three sons, William, an apothecary, Thomas, a clergyman, and George. Whately's links with other puritan clergy were marked by bequests to Robert Harris and Henry Scudder, and by the gift of his own ring to the aged John Dod, vicar of Fawsley, who had been deprived of his living at Hanwell some thirty years earlier and had helped to smooth the acceptance of both Whately and Harris by their parishioners. Whately's death was widely mourned by the godly, and Brilliana, Lady Harley, was among those who hoped for his recovery during his final illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 29179


Whatton, William Robert (1790-1835), surgeon and antiquary, born at Loughborough, Leicestershire, on 17 February 1790, was the son of Henry Whatton and Elizabeth ('nee' Watkinson). Whatton was very proud to belong to a family which could trace its descent back more than 900 years. In 1804 he was apprenticed to a surgeon and apothecary, Bernard Maddock of Nottingham. Soon after qualifying as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, in London, in March 1810, he left for Portugal, where he served as a surgeon in the Peninsular War. He gained wide experience of the treatment of wounds working at the De Graca Hospital, Lisbon. 
Following the end of hostilities in 1815 Whatton moved to Manchester, where he was appointed resident surgeon to the Manchester poorhouse. He resigned in 1817 and entered private practice. Whatton was moderately successful and was remembered by one of his pupils as a well-mannered, rather stout gentleman with a dignified military bearing. In 1822 he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. Whatton was interested in local history and published in 1828 'The History of the Manchester Grammar School'. His 'History of Chetham's Hospital and Library' appeared in 1833. Together these formed the third volume of S. Hibbert-Ware's series, 'Foundations in Manchester'. In 1829 Whatton published two pamphlets suggesting that a university should be established in Manchester as part of the Royal Institution, which had been founded in 1816. Nothing came of the proposal, though a similar scheme was again put forward in 1836 by Henry Longueville Jones. 
Whatton married Harriet Sophia Seddon of Eccles in 1822. Their son, Arundel Blount Whatton (1827-1862), became a clergyman. They also had a daughter. Whatton is best remembered as one of the surgeons who attended the politician William Huskisson after an accident at the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway on 15 September 1830. Huskisson was knocked over by a train near Newton-le-Willows, seriously injuring his leg. While on the journey back to Manchester, his condition worsened and his companions stopped the train at Eccles and sent for Whatton and John Ransome, honorary surgeon to the Manchester Infirmary. Had Huskisson been a younger and more robust patient, the surgeons would have undoubtedly amputated the leg. However, they decided that the 60-year-old politician was too weak to undergo such trauma and, later that evening, Huskisson died. Whatton and Ransome were subsequently criticized for not taking more decisive action to save their patient. Both surgeons defended themselves vigorously. Huskisson's wife, Emily, was entirely satisfied that her husband had received the best possible care; she thanked Whatton warmly and presented him with an engraved gold snuff-box. 
Three years later Whatton himself was elected honorary surgeon to the infirmary ahead of Joseph Jordan, one of Manchester's leading medical teachers. While on the infirmary staff he published the papers 'Spinal and Spino-Ganglial Irritation', and 'An Address to the Pupils of the Manchester Royal Infirmary', offering advice on a successful career. He performed a number of operations, including a partial amputation of the foot, which he described to the anatomy section of the British Association. 
Whatton died suddenly in Manchester on 5 December 1835, aged forty-five, after contracting meningitis. His colleagues were shocked at losing a surgeon of talent at a relatively early stage in his career. 


@@@@@


doc= 29180


Wheare, Diagory (1573-1647), historian, was born in Berry Court, Jacobstow, Cornwall. Little is known of his family. In his youth he frequented the Cornish puritan circle of Sir Anthony Rous of Halton St Dominick, with whose fourth son, Francis Rous, he formed a lifelong friendship. After his father's death in 1585, the one-year-old John Pym joined the Rous establishment when his mother became Sir Anthony's second wife. Wheare matriculated with Francis Rous at Broadgates Hall, Oxford (later Pembroke College), on 6 July 1593, graduated BA in 1597 and proceeded MA in 1600. In 1599 Pym became a student at Broadgates, and Wheare acted as his tutor. They remained in close touch, as shown by their correspondence and Wheare's signature on a 1614 deed placing Pym's estates in trust. 
From 1602 to 1608 Wheare was a fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, resigning to become travelling companion to Grey Brydges, fifth Baron Chandos, a favourite of James I. After returning with Brydges from the Netherlands in 1610 he remained in Chandos's household at Sudeley Castle until the baron's death in 1621. He then took up residence in Gloucester Hall, Oxford (later incorporated in Worcester College), where he became principal in 1626. The hall flourished under his firm administration, and the students were urged to apply themselves to useful knowledge befitting a gentleman. 
Throughout his life at Oxford Wheare was an indefatigable contributor of Latin poems to collections issued by the university to mark special occasions such as the accession of James I in 1603, the return of the future Charles I from Spain in 1623, the birth of the future James II in 1633, and Charles I's return from Scotland in 1641. He published tributes to his patron, the celebrated antiquary William Camden, in 'Pietas erga benefactores' (1628) and 'Parentatio historica' and an account of Gloucester Hall in 1630. 
On 19 November 1621 Wheare's friend at Gloucester Hall, the mathematician Thomas Allen, recommended him to Camden when the latter was in the process of endowing the first chair in history at Oxford. He described Wheare as 'a man who, besides his abilities of learning sufficient for such a place, is known to be of good experience (having sometimes travelled), and of very honest and discreet conversation' (Camden, 315). The benefaction was accepted by the university in May 1622, the donor specifying that he wished Wheare to lecture on the epitome of Roman history by Lucius Annaeus Florus. In a letter dated 6 January 1623 Camden stated that the new professor 'should read a civil history, and therein make such observations as might bee most usefull and profitable for the younger students of the University, to direct and instruct them in the knowledge and use of history, antiquity, and times past. (Jones, 175)' For more than twenty years after he began lecturing in 1623 Wheare obeyed Camden's instructions to develop themes from sections of Florus. He deposited the Latin manuscript of many of his lectures in the Bodleian Library in 1645. Occasionally he drew parallels with modern times, and suggested how Roman examples might be followed by statesmen, but, despite his contact with Rous and Pym, he made no specific allusions to contemporary political troubles in Britain. His reputation rests less upon these lectures than upon his Latin manual on how to read and profit from history, which he composed and published at the beginning of his tenure, and revised and expanded in subsequent editions. Two titles were used: 'De ratione et methodo legendi historias dissertatio' (1623, 1625, 1628) and 'Relectiones hyemales de ratione et methodo legendi utrasque historias civiles et ecclesiasticas' (1637, 1662, 1684). The 1662 edition contained many additions by Nicholas Horseman. Further changes and additions were made in an English translation by the tory pamphleteer Edmund Bohun, 'The Method and Order of Reading both Civil and Ecclesiastical Histories' (1685, 1694, 1698, 1710). A later incumbent of the Camden chair, Henry Dodwell, added a preface to the 1694 English version entitled 'An invitation to gentlemen to acquaint themselves with ancient history'. 

'The Method and Order' was one of the best and last examples of the Renaissance 'ars historica'. This popular genre was based on 'obiter dicta' on the nature and purpose of history pronounced in classical antiquity and applied by historians then and since. Its practitioners glossed not only the ancient texts but also each other's remarks about them. History was assumed to have both a practical and a moral application indicated by the phrase attributed to Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 'history is philosophy teaching by examples'. The European authors of 'artes historicae' differed as to whether the readers should first study the precepts exemplified by history before approaching the subject matter or whether these precepts should be directly inferred from historical example. It was Wheare's achievement to see both sides of this issue, and to attempt to reconcile them. In so doing he displayed remarkable erudition in both classical and Renaissance historians. He was less informed about medieval historians, but this weakness was compensated for by the additions of Horseman and Bohun. 
In 1643 Wheare endeavoured to have his son Charles ('b'. 1613) endorsed as his successor in the Camden chair. He does not seem to have played any part in politics at Oxford during the civil war, and was still Camden professor and principal of Gloucester Hall when he died in Oxford on 1 August 1647, leaving a widow and four sons. He was buried in Exeter College chapel. Charles Wheare ran as a candidate for the chair, but was not elected. 


@@@@@


doc= 29181


Wheatley, Benjamin Robert (1819-1884), bibliographer, born in London on 29 September 1819, was the eldest son of Benjamin Wheatley, an auctioneer in Piccadilly. His half-brother Henry Benjamin Wheatley was a well-known historian. Wheatley was educated at King's College School, London, and after leaving, at the age of just seventeen, he prepared a catalogue for his father of the twelfth part of the huge library of the bibliophile Richard Heber, which was published in 1841. 
Wheatley became a professional cataloguer and indexer, highly productive, accurate, and organized. He was judicious in the classification and arrangement of works, modifying the essentially pragmatic Paris system of classification to suit the character of the library in which he was working: his principles were explained in a paper entitled 'Desultory thoughts on the arrangement of a private library', which appeared in 1878 in the 'Library Journal'. In 1843 he catalogued a portion of the library of the Athenaeum, under the supervision of C. J. Stewart, the bookseller. In 1844 he catalogued the library of Charles Shaw-Lefevre (afterwards Viscount Eversley) at Heckfield in Hampshire, and in 1845 the remains of the library at Hafod in Cardiganshire collected by Thomas Johnes, the translator of Froissart. In the same year he catalogued the library of the Geological Society, and in 1846 that of the numismatist Charles Richard Fox in Addison Road, Kensington, and the collection of the Mancunian Jacobite John Byrom at Kersal Cell (published 1848). During his stay at Manchester he made the acquaintance of the lawyer and antiquary James Crossley and of other literary figures. Between 1847 and 1850 Wheatley catalogued, among others, the libraries of the marquess of Lansdowne at Bowood in Wiltshire, and in Lansdowne House, Berkeley Square, of the Royal College of Physicians, and of the Army and Navy Club. 
From 1850 to 1851 Wheatley was engaged in compiling an index of subjects to supplement the catalogue of authors at the Athenaeum library; it was printed in 1851 and served as a model for several subsequent indexes. In 1852 he catalogued the libraries of the Travellers' and the Oxford and Cambridge clubs, and in 1853 that of the United Service Club and the Dugald Stewart collection, bequeathed to the club by his son Colonel Matthew Stewart. In subsequent years Wheatley catalogued various other libraries, including that of the privy council office and that of Lady Charlotte Guest at Canford Manor, Dorset. In 1854 he made an index to the first fifteen volumes of the Statistical Society's 'Journal'; he continued to make the indexes of the annual volumes until his death. 
In 1855 Wheatley was appointed resident librarian of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, for whom he had worked as early as 1841. From this date he ceased to work on library catalogues, with the exception of one with bibliographical notes which he subsequently prepared for the Royal College of Physicians. In 1857 he completed an index to Thomas Tooke's 'History of Prices' (1838-57). He also made two printed catalogues of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society's library in 1856 and 1869, and two indexes of subjects in 1860 and 1879; the edition of 1879 was a useful guide to medical literature. In addition, he found time to make a manuscript catalogue of the collection of engraved portraits of medical people in the possession of the society, with short biographies of 900 of the individuals portrayed. He also compiled indexes to the 'Transactions' of the Pathological and Clinical societies of London which were published in 1878 and 1880 respectively. 
Wheatley was one of the organizing committee of the conference of librarians, and served on the first council. He occasionally acted as vice-president of the Library Association. Its Wheatley medal is awarded annually for the best British index. He also contributed articles on bibliographical subjects to the 'Transactions and Proceedings of the Conference of Librarians', the 'Monthly Notes of the Library Association of the United Kingdom', 'The Bibliographer', and the 'Library Journal'. Wheatley was an amateur poet as well as a bibliographer, and printed several of his poems privately, including 'Buds of Poesy' (1838). He died in London, unmarried, on 9 January 1884, in his rooms at 53 Berners Street, the premises of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. His sister Maria, herself a spinster, had lived with him for many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 29182


Wheatley, Francis (1747-1801), painter, was born in London, the son of a master tailor of Wild Court, Covent Garden. His father first placed him under a neighbour, Daniel Fournier, a drawing-master, and later moved him to the drawing school run by William Shipley, the founder of the Society of Arts, where he received the only regular instruction of his life. 
In 1762 and 1763 Wheatley won prizes awarded by the Society of Arts for youths under sixteen who drew the human figure. Instead of formal instruction he appears to have associated with other young men who were apprenticed to leading artists, but he took up his studies again when admitted as one of the Royal Academy's first students on 13 November 1769, applying also to draw at the academy of the Society of Artists on 14 December. He had exhibited for the first time at the Society of Artists in 1765, sending 'Portrait of a Gentleman', and was elected to the society on 4 September 1770; he continued to exhibit there as required for the next seven years, and became a director on 7 March 1774. 
Wheatley derived professional advantage from his friendship with John Hamilton Mortimer, a fellow member of the Society of Artists. By copying his drawings and paintings Wheatley is said by his obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' to have 'acquired a style more pure', evident in his portraiture alone, for Mortimer's wiry line is not reflected in Wheatley's drawing style. The commission to paint the 'Cascade' scene at Vauxhall Gardens in 1771 was probably due to the influence of Mortimer, who engaged him that same year to assist in painting the ceiling of the saloon at Brocket Hall, Hertfordshire, for Peniston Lamb, Lord Melbourne. Divided into compartments framed in gilt stucco, the decorations were executed in light, gay colours and symbolized Love, Time, and Fecundity, with intermediate frames containing grotesques and arabesques. Wheatley's last known decorative commission was also for Lord Melbourne, for whom Sir William Chambers built a grand town house in Piccadilly; in the finest room -- the saloon on the first floor which was finished by 1775 -- the elaborate ceiling and alcoves were decorated by Giovanni Battista Cipriani and Biago Rebecca and the walls with large inset panels representing landscapes by Wheatley. 
For the next ten years Wheatley painted landscapes in both oil and watercolour, exhibiting them regularly at the Society of Artists in London and Dublin and at the Royal Academy. The earliest known, 'The Harvest Waggon' (1774; Nottingham Castle Museum and Art Gallery) reflects Gainsborough as his source of inspiration, but he soon discarded such imaginative scenes of nature in favour of the landscape views which were the taste of the day. Dutch landscape painting with its wide open skies emphasizing the horizontal plane and its soft yellowish green and russet-brown tones became notable influences in his compositions, of which 'The Medway at Rochester' and 'View on the Banks of the Medway' (both 1776; Yale U. CBA) foreshadow his more popular placid renderings of places. The figures enlivening his landscapes are often very generalized, a problem he overcame on occasions by enlisting the collaboration of Mortimer, Sawrey Gilpin, and even P. J. de Loutherbourg. 
Wheatley's watercolour landscapes, deriving from studies from nature made during sketching tours in the south of England, the Lake District, and later in Ireland, were worked up in the studio into highly finished drawings in pen and ink, lightly tinted in greys, blues, greens, and browns, as for example 'View near Ilfracombe' (1778; V&A). They appear to have been faithful portraits of places, sometimes with trees added to balance the composition, and peopled with small figures going about their everyday activities; a number were made to be sold as pairs. 
Early in his career Wheatley exhibited small portraits, mostly in the fashionable medium of crayon, none of which has been identified, and soon branched out into small whole lengths in oils. In 1772 he attempted an ambitious theatrical conversation piece, 'The Duel', from 'Twelfth Night' (Manchester City Art Galleries), which was praised for its spirit and good likenesses, 'but upon the whole an Effect is wanted' (J. H. Mortimer and T. Jones, 'Candid Observations on the Principal Performances now Exhibiting at the New Rooms of the Society of Artists', 1772). It was from Mortimer that Wheatley learned to silhouette his sitters against a background of trees or landscape, and he imitated Mortimer's lustrous renderings of silk and satin to great effect, but Wheatley's handling was richer and more fluid, while his detailed rendering of foliage harks back to Gainsborough. The informal small whole-length portraits of the 1770s in which Wheatley gave his sitters a lively air, painting them in bright colours in a landscape setting, for example 'Portrait of a Man with a Dog' (Tate collection), 'Thomas Grimston' (priv. coll.), and 'Lord Spencer Hamilton' (Royal Collection), soon led to commissions for conversation pieces. With his ability to paint a good likeness and to set his gaily dressed sitters before a composition of trees and distant landscape or in front of a portico, Wheatley's family groups were a fashionable formula that he continued to repeat until the late 1780s: 'The Browne Family' ('c'.1779; Yale U. CBA); 'Mr and Mrs Richardson' ('c'.1777; NG Ire.); 'Mrs Ralph Winstanley Wood with her Daughters' (1787; Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, San Marino, California). 
By 1778, when Wheatley first exhibited at the Royal Academy, he had built up a good practice and was praised by the critics, but he fell in with extravagant company and was forced to flee not only his creditors but also an irate husband, the artist John Alexander Gresse. In summer 1779 he was in Dublin with Elizabeth Gresse (died 'c'.1799), whom he passed off as his wife. There Wheatley quickly took advantage of the political excitement generated by the demands for free trade that gave rise to the volunteer movement and painted a large group, 'A View of College Green with a Meeting of the Volunteers' (NG Ire.; engraved 1784), which brought him into prominence with the Irish aristocracy. In 'The Irish House of Commons' (1780; Leeds City Art Gallery) Wheatley again captured a moment of political fervour when Henry Grattan made a famous speech on the repeal of Poynings' law before a full house and galleries thronged with fashionable crowds; his composition, for all its bright colouring and recognizable likenesses, is one of reportage. The success of these two pictures led in the early 1780s to many commissions from Irish families for large groups and informal conversation pieces both commemorating events and providing a setting for family portraits: examples include 'Lord Aldborough on Pomposo, a Review in Belan Park, County Kildare' (1780-81; Waddesdon Manor), 'Review of Troops in Phoenix Park by General Sir John Irwin' (1781; NPG), 'The Fifth Earl of Carlisle in Phoenix Park' (1781; priv. coll.). Other commissions were half-length and small whole-length single portraits, including 'Henry Grattan' (1780; NPG), 'Miss Fridiswede Moore' (1782; exh. Sothebys, New York, 22 May 1992). 
Wheatley recorded the Irish landscape, particularly the beauty spots around Dublin which were admired for their picturesque and romantic situations, as in his 'Ennischerry' (lost; engraving in British Museum), 'The Hill of Howth' ('c'.1782-1783; Southampton Art Gallery), and his views of Dublin Bay, the waterfalls of the River Dargle, and the Liffey. He also made drawings of houses -- for example 'Malahide Castle' (1778; priv. coll.) -- and noted landscape views for engraving in Thomas Milton's 'Collection of Select Views' and the 'Copperplate Magazine'. In addition he produced lightly tinted watercolours of mountain, sea, and river, some of which he transposed into subject pictures in oil, for example 'Salmon Leap at Leixlip with Nymphs Bathing' (1783; Yale U. CBA). His most immediate, and lasting, success was with the watercolour scenes of Irish rustic life, of fairs with tents and whisky-stills, of peasants, Gypsies, and fisherfolk, scenes that he continued to produce until the end of his life. But in spite of commissions for portraits and the profit from his watercolours, Wheatley again fell into debt, and his imposture in passing off Mrs Gresse as his wife was discovered. Dublin no longer being agreeable, he returned to London towards the end of 1783. 
Turning to the printsellers for patronage, Wheatley's future long connection with Alderman John Boydell, the publisher and printseller, began with a commission to paint 'The Riot in Broad Street' (des.) for engraving. He was one of the first artists to contribute to the 'Shakspeare Gallery', initiated in 1786 by Boydell to encourage history painting by exhibition and engraving. 'The Winter's Tale' (1788; Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London) is a composition of elegant and graceful figures, as were his contributions to Macklin's Poets' Gallery and Bowyer's 'History of England', also set up to foster history painting. Only Wheatley's scene from 'The Comedy of Errors' (1794; Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford upon Avon) is an essay in historical painting in the grand manner. 
While Wheatley continued his practice as a portrait painter of single figures and groups, including 'Arthur Philip' (1786; NPG) and 'The Return from Shooting' (1788; priv. coll.), and produced a large number of fine landscape watercolours, the making of designs for engraving henceforward became the basis for his success and future reputation. His own attempts at working the copperplate, for example 'St. Preux and Julia' (1786; watercolour and engraving, BM), being quickly abandoned in favour of professional engravers, Wheatley produced a wide variety of compositions of allegorical figures, of scenes from literature and contemporary poetry, of bourgeois life, as well as fancy pictures reflecting high-flown sentimental subjects in a pastoral-moral vein. Stemming from the new-found sensibility of Jean-Baptiste Greuze and contemporary French printmakers, Wheatley adapted his rural landscapes and rural figures, which were based on direct observation, into softer prettified and elegant scenes of pastoral life. His work in these genres is significant as a mirror of late eighteenth-century taste and sensitivity -- recognized by Wheatley himself when he deposited 'A Peasant Boy' as his diploma picture on his election to the Royal Academy in 1791. His series of 'The Cries of London', exhibited at the Royal Academy and engraved and published in pairs from 1793, has proved his most lastingly popular work, and found a ready market on the continent. 
Few biographical facts are known about Wheatley's career after his return from Ireland. He continued to lead the pleasure-loving life that brought about his final downfall, and was described as 'a handsome man, of elegant manners, and generally a favourite in genteel company. He understood his art, and spoke with great taste and precision on every branch of it' (A. Chalmers, 'Biographical Dictionary', 1817). Probably in or before 1787 he married Clara Maria Leigh ['see 'Pope, Clara Maria (bap. 1767, d. 1838)], the daughter of Jared Leigh (1724-1769), a proctor in Doctors' Commons and landscape painter. Clara, who became well known as a flower painter, taught drawing in order to make money and help provide for their children; after Wheatley's death she married the actor and miniature painter Alexander Pope. Wheatley suffered from gout in the 1790s, becoming severely crippled by the end of the decade; this illness affected both his output and his style and his late productions are weak. His last years are recorded in Joseph Farington's 'Diary'. They are a wretched story of continuous ill health and debt from 1796 until his death on 28 June 1801. He was buried in the great cemetery of St Marylebone Church, Middlesex, on 2 July. 
Wheatley was a proficient artist technically with a fine sense of colour; he recorded eighteenth-century society in a series of accomplished portraits and conversation pieces, while three of his larger compositions are important visual commemorations of major political events of the years 1779 and 1780. He was one of the most talented designers of fancy and genre subjects, his fluent and graceful art images perfectly idealizing the sentiment of his age, unmoved by any of its deeper currents. 


@@@@@


doc= 29183


Wheatly, Charles (1686-1742), Church of England clergyman and liturgical scholar, the son of John Wheatly, a gentleman of London, and his wife, a descendant of Sir Thomas White, founder of St John's College, Oxford, was born on 6 February 1686 in Paternoster Row, London. He was sent to Merchant Taylors' School in 1699 and in 1705 matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, where he was elected a fellow in 1707, graduating BA in 1710 and proceeding MA in 1713. He incorporated at Cambridge in 1728. His tutor was James Knight (1672-1735), later vicar of St Sepulchre's in London: Wheatly maintained that he continued '... his 'pupil' to his dying-day.' ('GM', 1801, 110). He resigned his fellowship in 1716, on his marriage, on 9 August that year, to Mary ('c'.1676-1724), daughter of William Findall of the Clarendon Press, and after her death in 1724 he married Mary, daughter of Daniel Fogg, rector of All Hallows Staining; she survived him. After holding lecturerships in London at St Mildred Poultry and St Swithin with St Mary Bothaw, Wheatly was instituted in 1726 to the combined benefices of Brent and Furneux Pelham in Hertfordshire, where he built a new vicarage house and secured augmentation for the livings from Queen Anne's Bounty. 
Arguably the most influential liturgical scholar of his generation, Wheatly is best remembered for 'The Church of England Man's Companion, or, A Rational Illustration of... the Book of Common Prayer' (1710; 8th edn, 1759; many other edns). This epitomized earlier studies by Hamon L'Estrange, Anthony Sparrow, Thomas Comber, and William Nicholls, and remained the standard work on its subject for over 100 years. Markedly high-church in emphasis, it drew on deep patristic learning to uphold the Church of England's claims to a spiritual commission independent of any reliance upon the State; to assert the indispensable nature of the apostolic succession in the ministry; and to justify the use of external ceremonies in the conduct of public worship. Much of its teaching, particularly in relation to eucharistic theology, was identical to that of 'usager' nonjurors. However, Wheatly rejected Jacobitism, arguing in the 'Rational Illustration' and elsewhere in favour of allegiance to the 'de facto' powers. 
Wheatly was an active writer and controversialist, who maintained a regular correspondence with both conforming high-churchmen, such as Daniel Waterland, and nonjurors like Thomas Brett and Richard Rawlinson. His Moyer lectures for 1733-4 (published in 1738) defended the Nicene and Athanasian creeds as indispensable statements of orthodox Christian belief. A notable opponent of the spread of Methodism, he used an important opportunity at St Paul's in October 1739 to distinguish between the calm spirit of real devotion and '... those high Raptures and 'Feelings' of Joy... to... which some modern Enthusiasts pretend.' (Wheatly, 'Fifty Sermons', 1.217). He died of dropsy and asthma on 13 May 1742 at Furneux Pelham, and was buried in the parish church there, where an inscription was placed in his memory. He left several of his books to St John's College, including important annotated editions of R. Hooker's 'Ecclesiastical Polity' and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. A collection entitled 'Fifty Sermons on Several Subjects and Occasions', edited by Wheatly's friend John Berriman, with a short biographical note, was published in three volumes in 1746 and reprinted in 1753. 


@@@@@


doc= 29184


Wheatstone, Sir Charles (1802-1875), developer of telegraphy, was born on 6 February 1802 at the Manor House, Barnwood, Gloucester, the second of four children of William Wheatstone (1775-1854), shoemaker, and his wife, Beatta. In 1806 the family moved to London, where Wheatstone went to school. At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to an uncle, also Charles Wheatstone, who had a musical instrument manufacturing business in the Strand. Young Wheatstone did not take to business life, but he was fascinated by the physics of sound, and studied the working of musical instruments. In particular, he wanted to know what distinguished sounds of the same pitch but different timbre, and how sounds were transmitted through solid rods and stretched wires. 
On his uncle's death in 1823, Wheatstone, together with his younger brother William, took over the business. In the same year he contributed a paper to Thomson's 'Annals of Philosophy', describing his early experiments with sound. Other papers followed, including a description of his 'kaleidophone'. This instrument consisted of steel wire of rectangular cross-section fixed to a heavy base and carrying a silver bead at the top. The times of vibration of the bead in two directions at right angles being regulated by the particular rectangular section of the wire, the bead could be made to describe very beautiful curves illustrating the combination of harmonic motions of different periods. In 1825 he constructed a mouth organ with free reeds governed by a small button keyboard; further experiments led to the bellows-blown concertina (patent 10,041 of 1844), an improvement on the German instrument, which was allied to the accordion. One of the few original British musical instrument designs, it is still being played at the present time. His principal contribution to acoustics, a memoir on the so-called Chladni's figures, produced by strewing sand on an elastic plane and throwing it into vibration by means of a violin bow, was presented to the Royal Society and published in their 'Transactions' (1833). Wheatstone showed that in square and rectangular plates every figure, however complicated, was the resultant of two or more sets of isochronous parallel vibrations; and by means of simple geometrical relations he carried out the principle of the 'superposition of small motions' without the aid of any profound mathematical analysis, and succeeded in predicting the curves that given modes of vibration should produce. 
Wheatstone made several important contributions to optics. The stereoscope, which, by presenting slightly different pictures to each eye, gives the viewer an apparently solid image, is entirely due to Wheatstone. In 1835 he read a paper on the 'Prismatic analysis of electric light' before the British Association meeting at Dublin. He demonstrated that the spectrum of the electric spark from different metals included rays of definite refrangibility, producing a series of lines differing in position and colour from each other. Thus the presence of a minute portion of any given metal might be determined. 'We have here', he said, 'a mode of discriminating metallic bodies more readily than by chemical examination, and which may hereafter be employed for useful purposes.' This remark is typical of his far-sightedness into the practical utility of any known scientific fact. His 'polar clock' was another instance of this trait. When David Brewster discovered that light from the sky is always polarized in a plane 90 degree from the sun, Wheatstone devised a clock by which it was possible to tell the hour of the day by the light from the sky even though the sun might be invisible. 
This skill in turning knowledge to practical account was used to its full in Wheatstone's telegraph inventions. Although his inventions in other branches of science are as numerous as they are various, the name of Wheatstone has been most closely connected with the electric telegraph. He was not the 'inventor' of this; indeed, no one can lay claim to such a title. But to Wheatstone, with his collaborator William Fothergill Cooke, is due the credit for having been the first to render it available for the public transmission of messages. In 1834, at about the time he was appointed professor of experimental philosophy at King's College, London, Wheatstone began experimenting on the rate of transmission of electricity along wires, using about half a mile of copper wire. He then obtained permission from the college to suspend 4 miles of wire in the vaults under the buildings. Three interruptions of this circuit were made by three pairs of brass knobs with a small interval between them. One of these interruptions was in the middle of the conductor, and the other two were near the ends. A Leyden electrical storage jar was discharged through the wire, and the interval of time between the occurrence of the sparks at the ends and the occurrence of the spark at the middle was observed by noting the displacement of the image of the middle spark in a mirror revolving at a known speed. This experiment yielded a transmission velocity of about 250,000 miles per second -- rather more than the true speed of 186,000 miles per second. 
From this research Wheatstone passed on to the transmission of messages by electricity, and, in conjunction with Cooke, he devised the five-needle telegraph, and then the two-needle telegraph, the first that came into general use. Wheatstone's fertility of scientific resource led to many new developments, including the letter-showing dial telegraph in 1840, and the type-printing telegraph in 1841. The automatic transmitting and receiving instruments by which messages were sent with great rapidity over the telegraph system in the last third of the nineteenth century were designed by Wheatstone alone, after the partnership with Cooke had been dissolved. Wheatstone was the first to appreciate the importance of reducing to a minimum the amount of work to be done by the current at the receiving station, by diminishing as far as practicable the mass, and therefore the inertia, of the moving parts; this was beautifully exemplified in that marvel of ingenuity, the 'ABC' letter-showing telegraph, which was much used for private telegraphic communication. 
From 1837 Wheatstone devoted a good deal of time to submarine telegraphy, and in 1844 experiments were made in Swansea Bay, with the assistance of J. D. Llewellyn. Wheatstone also had a share in the development of the electric generator. In 1837 he devised a method of combining several armatures on one shaft so as to generate a continuous current, and in 1867 he described to the Royal Society a method of making such machines self-exciting. He used a shunt circuit; the use of a series circuit for the same purpose by Werner Siemens was described at the same meeting. Wheatstone was also inventor of a system of electro-magnetic clocks for indicating time at any number of different places united on a circuit. 
Wheatstone had an extraordinary facility in deciphering hieroglyphics and cipher dispatches, and himself invented a cryptograph, or secret dispatch writer, which was used by the British army. His miscellaneous inventions are too numerous to mention in detail but they include electric chronographs, apparatus for making instruments record automatically, and instruments for measuring electricity and electrical resistance, including the rheostat. It was he who called attention to Christy's combination of wires, commonly known as 'Wheatstone's bridge', in which an electric balancing of the currents is obtained, and he worked out its application to electrical measurement. He was one of the first in Britain to appreciate the importance of Ohm's simple law of the relation between electromotive force, resistance of conductors, and resulting current -- the law which is the foundation of all electrical engineering. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1836. 
Wheatstone married, on 12 February 1847, Emma (died 21 Jan 1865), daughter of J. West, and they had a family of two sons and three daughters. He was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1855, and a foreign associate of the Academie des Sciences in 1873. On 2 July 1862 he was created DCL by the University of Oxford, and in 1864 LLD by the University of Cambridge. Moreover he possessed some thirty-four distinctions or diplomas conferred upon him by various governments, universities, and learned societies. On 30 January 1868 he was knighted. 
Wheatstone bequeathed his collection of books and instruments to King's College, London. Although nominally professor of experimental philosophy there, he seldom lectured after 1840, and indeed was an indifferent teacher because of an almost morbid timidity in the presence of an audience. On a one-to-one basis, however, he was an excellent tutor, and there are testimonies to his eloquence in such circumstances. He died of bronchitis in the Hotel du Louvre, Paris, on 19 October 1875, and was buried on 27 October in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29185


Wheeler, Daniel (1771-1840), missionary, son of William Wheeler (died 1778?), of Conduit Street, Hanover Square, London, and Sarah (died 1784?), his wife, was born at home on 27 November 1771. His parents were active members of the Church of England. His father, a wine merchant, died when Daniel was about six; his mother died six years later, by which time he was at a boarding-school in London at Parson's Green, Fulham. A clerical relative managed the estate and the business, until his brother could take it over. A situation was obtained for Wheeler on board a merchant ship trading to Porto, but after two or three voyages he entered the Royal Navy as a midshipman, being then under fourteen. He was soon promoted to a flagship, but abandoned the sea after six years, and, having squandered all his pay, enlisted as a private soldier in a regiment ordered to Ireland. In a year or two he was drafted into one of the new regiments raised to fight the French, and he sailed for Flanders to join the British army under command of the duke of York. Later, having obtained a commission in a regiment destined for the West Indies, he sailed under Sir Ralph Abercromby, about September 1795. 
In 1796 Wheeler left the army and settled at Handsworth Woodhouse, near Sheffield, with his elder sister, Barbara, who had married William Hoyland, a Quaker. In 1797 he was received as a member of the society, and set up as a seed merchant in Sheffield. His life was now lived within the Society of Friends. On 13 June 1800 he married Jane (died 1833), daughter of Thomas and Rachel Brady of Thorne, Yorkshire, a well-established Quaker family. They had four sons: William (died 24 Nov 1836), Joshua (died 29 March 1841), Daniel (died 1848), and Charles (died 6 Feb 1840). His elder daughter, Sarah ('b'. 1807), who afterwards married William Tanner of Bristol, survived him. Of his younger daughter, Jane (died 15 July 1837, at Shoosharry), a short account was published in London and Bristol in 1841. 
About 1809 Wheeler and his family moved to a farm in the country, where he began to prepare himself for a life of ministry. He was recognized as a minister in 1816. He had had for several years a sense that he should again go abroad, and after the emperor Alexander I of Russia had in 1814 visited a Friend's farm during a visit to England, and had sought a manager of that persuasion for his establishment at Okhta, Wheeler in 1817 proceeded to St Petersburg. He saw the tsar, and explained to him the leaning he had for two years felt towards Russia as a sphere of missionary labour. He then returned to England, wound up his affairs, and with his wife, family, and servants -- in all twenty persons -- along with implements, seeds, and cattle, he left Hull for St Petersburg on 22 June 1818. 
Besides the tsar's farm, Wheeler was soon appointed to the management of an estate belonging to the dowager empress, consisting, like the other, chiefly of swamp. This, after being thoroughly drained, was divided into farms of 30-100 acres each, which were let to peasants at moderate rents; a portion of each district was kept as a model farm. More than 3000 acres were in cultivation under Wheeler's own eye. The little Quaker meeting he established was visited by William Allen (1770-1843), Stephen Grellett, and Thomas Shillitoe, with whom Wheeler in 1825 returned to Britain. He stayed for three months, and attended the Dublin and London yearly meetings. 
About September 1828 Wheeler moved to Shoosharry, near St Petersburg, where visitors were almost unknown. The land, where he bored in vain for water, was on the edge of a huge bog. Wheeler's son William was now his assistant, and in 1830 Wheeler was able to visit Britain, where he held meetings in Yorkshire, Durham, Devon, Cornwall, Ireland, and the Isles of Scilly. On returning to Shoosharry in July 1831 he found cholera rife in the district, but out of his 500 employees none died. A year later he was allowed by an imperial ukase to resign his post in favour of his son. 
To the monthly meeting at Doncaster on 23 September 1832 Wheeler unfolded his mission of gospel visits to the Pacific islands, New South Wales, and Van Diemen's Land. While making his preparations, his wife (who had remained in Russia) died. Accompanied by his son Charles, Wheeler set sail from the Thames on 13 November 1833 in the 'Henry Freeling', a cutter of 101 tons, which had been purchased and provisioned by private members of the Society of Friends. The ship arrived off Hobart Town on 10 September 1834, and left again in December, conveying James Blackhouse and George Washington Walker to Port Jackson and Norfolk Island on the way to Tahiti. During the four or five months spent on that island Wheeler held many services, sometimes on board his ship, with the queen and the chiefs, and with the missionaries, English residents, and crews of vessels in the harbour. Queen Pomare remitted the 'Henry Freeling''s port dues because Wheeler's was 'a visit of love, and not a trading voyage' ('Memoirs', 351). She again came to his meetings on the island of Eimeo. 
Christmas day 1835 was spent in the Sandwich Islands, and the first Quaker meeting was held there, attended by native chiefs, the governor, and the queen. The 'Henry Freeling' also stayed some time at Honolulu and at Rarotonga, the Friendly Islands, and New Zealand (Christmas 1836). On reaching Sydney in January 1837, the ship was sold and its company discharged. The ship's course was entirely without pre-arrangement, and was directed from day to day by Wheeler's spiritual intimations. In a letter to a friend Wheeler illustrates his sense of divine protection by saying that he has been ashamed, even in landing in canoes through the broken surf, to use a lifebelt which a friend had given him on leaving. 
After leaving Hobart Town, Wheeler reached London on 1 May 1838. On returning his certificates to his quarterly meeting, Wheeler laid before them his wish to visit America. First he visited his surviving children at Shoosharry, and then travelled through Finland and Stockholm; finally he sailed for America from Liverpool in November 1838. He attended a number of the yearly meetings there, visited the place where Mary Dyer and other Quakers were executed, went to Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, and returned to England in October 1839, hastened by the illness of his son Charles, who died at St Germains on his way south in the spring of the following year. Wheeler sailed for New York to complete his mission in May 1840 but caught a severe cold at sea, and died six weeks after landing, on 12 June 1840, in the house of his friend John Clapp. He was buried on 15 June in the Friends' burial-ground, Orchard Street, New York. 
Wheeler's journals were edited by his son Charles in four parts (1835-9), and in a consolidated volume (1839). 'Memoirs of the Life... of Daniel Wheeler' (1842) was edited by his son Daniel and was popular in several editions and versions. Wheeler's writings provide a vivid and quite candid account of a Quaker missionary's varied activities. 


@@@@@


doc= 29186


Wheeler, Sir Hugh Massy (1789-1857), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 30 June 1789 at Clonbeg, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the son of Captain Hugh Wheeler of the East India Company's service and his wife, Margaret, second daughter of Hugh, first Lord Massy. He was educated at Richmond, Surrey, and at Bath grammar school. Wheeler married Frances Matilda (died 1857), the Anglo-Indian widow of Thomas Samuel Oliver, at Agra on 6 March 1842, and they had a son and two daughters. 
Wheeler was commissioned ensign in the 24th Bengal infantry, in the East India Company's service, in 1803 and the following year served with his regiment during Lord Lake's campaign against Delhi. On 5 April 1805 he was promoted lieutenant, and captain on 1 January 1818. Wheeler was sent on detached duty in December 1824 with two companies, and dealt successfully with the robber Diraj Singh. On 27 June 1835 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and in December was appointed to command the 48th native infantry. Wheeler led this regiment in Afghanistan in 1838-9, and was present at the assault and capture of Ghazni on 23 July 1839 and the occupation of Kabul on 6 August. For his services during the war he was mentioned in dispatches in October and made a CB on 20 December 1839. Wheeler was also highly commended by Sir Willoughby Cotton and mentioned in dispatches when on 19 August 1840 he dealt with a gathering of hostile Waziri tribesmen near Kaja, 30 miles from Jalalabad, and destroyed several enemy forts. In December 1840 Wheeler accompanied Cotton to India, his regiment forming part of the escort guarding Dost Muhammad, the former shah, who had surrendered. For his services in Afghanistan Wheeler was allowed to accept from the Shuja al-Mulk and wear the order of the Durani empire. 
Wheeler was appointed to command the 2nd infantry brigade, composed of the 50th foot, 48th native infantry, and the Sirmur battalion, in the army of the Sutlej on 13 December 1845. At the battle of Mudki on 18 December he was badly wounded, but, although still suffering from his injuries, with his brigade he joined Sir Harry Smith near Ludhiana on 26 January 1846 and took a prominent part in the battle of Aliwal two days later. In his dispatch dated 30 January 1846 Sir Harry Smith observed: 'In Brigadier Wheeler, my second in command, I had a support I could rely on with every confidence, and most gallantly did he head his brigade.' On 17 February Wheeler led his brigade across the Sutlej River and occupied the strong fort at Phillaur, before advancing to the banks of the Beas. For his services he was made aide-de-camp to the queen with the rank of colonel in the army from 3 April 1846. 
On 29 April Wheeler was appointed to command the Jullundur Doab as a brigadier-general of the first class. Following the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Sikh War he took the field in September, and on 14 October reduced the strong fortress of Rangal Naga. For this action he was congratulated by Lord Gough, who ascribed the success to 'his soldier-like and judicious arrangements'. Wheeler was appointed to command the 9th brigade of the 4th infantry division of the army of the Punjab on 8 November 1848. Later that month he was mentioned in dispatches by Sir Hugh Gough for his important role in the reduction of Kalawala. While commanding the Punjab division and the Jullundur field force Wheeler was also later mentioned in dispatches for his assault and the capture of the heights of Dallah during his difficult operations against Ram Singh. When the war ended the governor-general commented in general orders on the great skill and success with which Wheeler had carried out the duties assigned to him. For his services Wheeler received the campaign medal, the thanks of both houses of parliament, and the thanks of the directors of the East India Company; on 16 August 1850 he was made a KCB. 
Wheeler resumed his command of the Jullundur Doab, and on 20 June 1854 was promoted to be major-general. He was appointed to the command of the Cawnpore division on 30 June 1856. When the Indian mutiny began in May 1857 Wheeler remained surprisingly optimistic when news reached him that the Indian regiments stationed at Meerut and Delhi had mutinied. As a precautionary measure, however, Wheeler selected a defensive position outside the city of Cawnpore, near the sepoy lines, where some half-completed barracks offered suitable accommodation for the European men, women, and children under his command. His small European force was also reinforced by a small detachment from Lucknow, and despite Sir Henry Lawrence's words of warning Wheeler also enlisted the support of the Raja Dundhu Panth of Bithur (afterwards known as Nana Sahib). Three hundred of his men and two guns arrived at Cawnpore on 22 May and took over the custody of the treasury at Nawabganj. The incomplete entrenchment was quickly occupied by the European women, children, and other non-combatants who were joined at the beginning of June by Wheeler. On 1 June Wheeler confidently wrote to Lord Canning informing him that he had sent transport to bring in the European population of Allahabad 'and in a few days -- a very few days -- I shall consider Cawnpore safe -- nay, that I may send aid to Lucknow if needed'. Despite Sir Henry Lawrence's unease about Cawnpore's defences, two officers and fifty men were sent two days later from the city to help defend Lucknow. He had good grounds for concern. In fact, Wheeler's position at Cawnpore was very weak. A combination of over-confidence about the loyalty of the Indian regiments stationed at Cawnpore and his anxiety not to provoke an incident had persuaded Wheeler deliberately to reject occupying the easily defensible magazine, a large walled enclosure near the river that was amply supplied with arms, ammunition, and stores, which could have held out until help arrived. The hastily constructed entrenchment that he had chosen to occupy instead was badly sited, its defences were weak, and inadequate supplies had been collected to withstand a long siege. 
During the night of 4 June the 2nd cavalry regiment and 1st native infantry stationed at Cawnpore mutinied, joining with the Nana's troops at Nawabganj. The treasury was looted, public buildings set on fire, and the magazine, with its heavy artillery, ammunition, and stores, was occupied by the rebels. The two unaffected native infantry regiments followed suit the next day and the mutineers, laden with loot, started marching towards Delhi until the Nana persuaded them to return to attack the Europeans -- numbering just under 1000 -- gathered at Cawnpore. On the night of 6 June the bombardment of Wheeler's position commenced, using guns captured at the arsenal. Heavy casualties were inflicted in the exposed entrenchment each day, including Wheeler's already wounded son, Godfrey, who was decapitated by a roundshot. A combination of intense heat, hunger, and thirst caused further intense suffering among the handful of defenders and the large number of non-combatants crowding the position. On 25 June Nana offered the garrison terms of surrender, but although Wheeler wanted to reject them outright he was persuaded by his fellow officers that the safety and well-being of the civilians was paramount. The remnant of the garrison, with the surviving women and children, marched out of the entrenchment under arms after a three-week siege on the morning of 27 June, under a safe conduct from the Nana to proceed downstream by river to Allahabad. While this column embarked on boats at the Satichaura Ghat and started to journey downriver, however, the mutineers and Nana's troops suddenly opened fire, killing and wounding large numbers of the surviving soldiers, women, and children. Wheeler was among those killed, along with his wife and elder daughter, Margaret Frances. His eighteen-year-old daughter, Ulrica, was rescued from the ghat by an Indian cavalryman who later married her. The women and children who survived the massacre were imprisoned in atrocious conditions in the 'bibigarh' in Cawnpore, and later murdered. 


@@@@@


doc= 29187


Wheeler, James Talboys (1824-1897), historian of India, son of James Luff Wheeler, bookseller (died 1862), and his wife, Anne Ophelia, daughter of David Alphonso Talboys, was born at Oxford on 22 December 1824. Educated at a private school, he was unsuccessful as a publisher and bookseller but gained some credit as a writer of handbooks for university students and of a more elaborate work on the geography of Herodotus (1848). During the Crimean War he was appointed to a supernumerary clerkship at the War Office. He married, on 15 January 1852 in Cambridge, Emily, daughter of Robert Roe, printseller; they had three surviving sons and one daughter. 
In 1858 Wheeler went to India as editor of the 'Madras Spectator', but abandoned journalism on being appointed professor of moral and mental philosophy in the Madras Presidency College in 1858. In May 1860 he was employed by the Madras government to examine its records; the results of his research appeared as 'Madras in the Olden Time' (1861). On 26 February 1862 he was appointed assistant secretary to the government of India in the foreign department, and moved to Calcutta, where, among other duties, he had charge of the foreign and, later, of the home offices when the secretaries were at Simla. In Calcutta he compiled under orders of government a series of background memoranda on the history and political relations of a number of countries bordering on India. Early in 1870 he was transferred to Rangoon as secretary to the chief commissioner of British Burma. In November 1870 he visited Mandalay and Bhamo in that capacity, and had an interview with the king of Burma. 
In 1873 Wheeler obtained a long leave of absence in England, where he continued his work on an extended 'History of India', the first volume of which had been published in 1867; the last of its four volumes appeared in 1881. After returning to India in 1876, he was employed to report on the records in the home and foreign departments at Calcutta; he compiled two volumes, which he was allowed to publish. He also prepared and published an official 'History of the Imperial Assemblage at Delhi' (1877). He retired from the service and lived at Witham, Essex, and then Fulham, London, where in 1884 he was the subject of bankruptcy proceedings brought by his creditors. He died at Ramsgate on 13 January 1897. Wheeler was one of the first historians of British India to rely primarily on documentary sources. Although his perspectives were unequivocally imperialist, his work continues to be consulted for its empirical strengths. 


@@@@@


doc= 29188


Wheeler, John (d. 1617), secretary of the Company of Merchant Adventurers, is of obscure origins. His supposed connection to Great Yarmouth appears to be solely the result of confusion with John Wheeler ('fl'. 1610), the member of parliament for that town. By 1589 Wheeler had joined the Society of Merchant Adventurers, the controllers of the cloth trade between England and the continent, and was the secretary by 1601. In that year the privy council granted freedom of trade to the two Hanseatic League cities of Hamburg and Stade, and Elizabeth granted a ten-year licence to the earl of Cumberland for the export of 'white' or unfinished cloth. Both these grants threatened to undermine the arrangements made by the society to regulate the cloth trade and to keep in check its German rival, the Hanseatic League. In April 1601 Thomas Milles distributed his tract 'The Customer's Apology', which attacked the society and its supposed monopolistic practices. 
Within two months Wheeler had written and published his 40,000-word reply, a strongly worded defence of the society entitled 'A Treatise of commerce wherein are showed the commodities arising by a well ordered and ruled trade such as that of the Society of Merchants Adventurers is proved to be, written principally for the better information of those who doubt the necessities of the said society in the state of the realm of England'. The prefatory dedication was signed by Wheeler on 6 June 1601 in Middelburg in Zeeland, then the society's base on the continent, and it is there that the first edition was printed. The second edition appeared in London later in the month. An eight-page draft of the 'Treatise', possibly in Wheeler's hand, is in the Public Record Office. 
Written to persuade the English government and merchants of the value of the society and to convince the friends of the Hanseatics that they would not be reinstated in England, the 'Treatise' proved to be a most successful piece of propaganda. Although much of the historical background and even some of the statistics were taken from George Nedham's 1565 'Letter to the earls of East Friesland', in the absence of other records, Wheeler's account of the society's development over the centuries provided such detail that it remains the principal source for the history of the Merchant Adventurers. His draft begins: 'The traffick of this land hath been managed under the government of a companie almost 400 years, first in the staple and wool trade and next in the M. Adventurers and cloth trade' ('John Wheeler's treatise', 167). The stability given to the trade by this management was such 'that the State and Commonwealth hereby reapeth more profit than if men were suffered to run a loose and irregular course without order, command or oversight' (Hotchkiss, 341). The allegation that the society was a monopoly was 'a slander and injurious imputation, maliciously devised by the Hanses', behind whom were the Spanish, whose object was 'through the side of the Merchants Adventurers to hurt and wound the state of England' (ibid., 73). 
In 1602 Wheeler was considered the natural successor to George Gilpin in the important diplomatic post of councillor to the council of estate in the Low Countries, but he nevertheless remained in the society's employ. Christopher Hoddeson, the governor of the society, wrote of him: 'The man is wise and honest, hath a sharp sight and quick conceit to prevent any mishap, is of good estimation and long acquainted with the manners of the Netherlanders. He hath their language, Latin and French as perfect as English, with a good taste of Italian and Greek. He is not sparing of his pen, [and] hath good advertisements from Prague, Cologne and other places of far remote matters. ('Salisbury MSS', 12, 390)' In 1608 Wheeler prepared 'The lawes customes and ordinances of the fellowshippe of Merchantes Adventurers of the realm of England collected and digested into order by John Wheeler'. Although the original is now lost, a contemporary copy is in the British Library. In 1609 a new ordinance was added to forbid marriage with foreign-born women, which Wheeler himself transgressed, and he was disfranchised from the society until February 1612. 
Following privileges given to the Merchant Adventurers by the city of Hamburg in 1612, the chief seat of the society moved there. Wheeler, who opposed the move, stayed on in Middelburg, partly because of the threat posed by the interlopers in the Netherlands. The Merchant Adventurers' control of the cloth trade had been weakened because, he wrote, 'Amsterdam, in maintaining the interloperie, sucketh the very heart blood from us' ('Buccleuch MSS', 122). 
In 1614 Alderman William Cokayne, perhaps the wealthiest and most influential of London merchants, threw the cloth trade into crisis. Through his persuasion, the king suspended the society's charter on 2 November 1614, and arranged the grant of a new charter to the King's Merchant Adventurers of the New Trade of London on 29 August 1615. Cokayne's intention was to foster in England the trades of dyeing, dressing, and finishing woollen cloth in England so as to compete with both the Merchant Adventurers in the export of cloth and also the foreign manufacturers of finished cloth. It was an idea that Wheeler had himself tested in 1612 by ordering the export of coloured cloths to Antwerp as an experiment to find out the reaction of authorities there. Although Wheeler was initially unwilling to join the new venture, the crisis deepened and, after holding out for eight or nine months, he joined the King's Merchants. The new project did not prosper against the opposition of the society and the foreign markets, and great damage was done to the cloth trade. On 1 January 1617 the king restored the society, and on 9 January the King's Merchants surrendered their charter. Wheeler was dismissed by the Merchant Adventurers after twenty-seven years' service and died within the year, in 1617. The society contributed $50 towards the upkeep of his orphans. 


@@@@@


doc= 29189


Wheeler, Maurice (1647/8-1727), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Maurice Wheeler of St Giles, Dorset. He matriculated from New Inn Hall, Oxford, on 1 April 1664, aged sixteen, and proceeded BA on 17 October 1667. He was ordained deacon on 19 December 1668 at Worcester. He was appointed chaplain of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1670, and on 5 July that year proceeded MA. Also in 1670 he was appointed rector of St Ebbe's, Oxford. In 1673 he became the tutor of William Wake, the future bishop of Lincoln and archbishop of Canterbury. Also in 1673 Wheeler published 'The Oxford Almanac for the Year of Our Lord 1673', more than 30,000 being printed. Such was his success that the Society of Booksellers 'bought off the copy for the future' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.785-6). While rector of St Ebbe's Wheeler married. Both the identity of his bride and the date of the marriage are uncertain, but the most likely possibility is that he married Anne Lowe in Christ Church in 1679. The St Ebbe's parish registers record the burial of twin sons in June 1680. According to his will his son George was the only survivor of eight sons, although he also had a daughter, Susanna, who survived him out of a total of eleven children. 
On 4 August 1680 Wheeler was installed as rector of Sibbertoft, Northamptonshire. He stayed four years before being appointed on 11 September 1684 master of the cathedral school in Gloucester, known as College School. In 1684 Wheeler demonstrated his interest in the manufacture of clocks when he published 'A letter to Dr. Robert Plot, concerning a movement that measures time after a peculiar manner, with an account of the reasons of the said motion', and that same year he contributed a section 'Of curiosity' to an English translation of Plutarch's 'Moralia'. Thereafter Wheeler concentrated on west country affairs and in particular his school. According to Bonner he 'new modelled it in every respect, both within doors and without' (Bonner, 17-18), even to the extent of designing the school clock. While in Gloucester Wheeler maintained a regular correspondence with William Wake, by now a rising star in the Church of England. In June 1702 he offered Wake the opinion that 'I have more charity for any sort of honest dissenter, than for such kind of church-man among us who of all men seem to me to have the least sense of religion' (Wake MSS, 23/138). It was Wheeler's connection to Wake which saw him installed as a prebendary of Lincoln on 13 March 1708. From about 1708 Wheeler's letters to Wake evinced a yearning to retire. On 3 October 1708 he recorded that he had preached for the first time in 'about 25 years' (Wake MSS, 23/183). On 19 August 1711 Wheeler's wife died after many years of ill health. This allowed Wheeler to leave Gloucester after twenty-eight years as master, following his installation as rector of Wappenham on 17 May 1712. By this date Wheeler suffered from poor eyesight, which made reading difficult. His intention was to retire once his daughter had been provided for, and on 20 May 1714 she married his curate, John Fletcher. Wheeler duly resigned Wappenham to his son-in-law, who was installed on 13 May 1715 'by my interest in the R. R. William Ld Bp of Lincoln' (will, fol. 234'v'). 
Wheeler was installed as rector of Thorpe Mandeville, Northamptonshire, on 12 November 1720, which he retained until his death. According to Rudder he died on 6 October 1727, being buried at Wappenham on 9 October 1727. He made his will in his seventy-eighth year in May 1726. He referred to his son George as 'now in a languishing condition' (will, fol. 234'r'); he received just $10 'having formerly in his education and farther encouragement bestowed upon him more than at that time could well be afforded' (ibid.). His daughter Susanna Fletcher received furniture including the desk 'where I have spent many delightfull hours in usefull meditations upon the vanitys of this World' (ibid.). John Fletcher received his books and mathematical, musical, and mechanical instruments. There was also a bequest to Wappenham's rector and churchwardens towards a charity school and workhouse to be formed 'by a friendly combination of the neighbouring parishes' (ibid., fol. 234'v'), but if no progress had been made after two years the money was to go to the charity school and workhouse at Gloucester with which Wheeler had been much concerned. 


