@@@@@


doc= 29190


Wheeler, Thomas (1754-1847), apothecary and botanist, second son of Thomas Wheeler ('bap'. 1710, died 1769/70), and his wife, Susan Rivington, was born on 24 June 1754 in Basinghall Street, London, where his father practised as an apothecary. Mrs Cibber, the actress, was his father's first cousin. His grandfather, John Wheeler, surgeon to the Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals, died in 1740 during his year of office as master of the Barber-Surgeons' Company. Thomas Wheeler received his elementary education under the Revd David Garrow, the father of Sir William Garrow, at Hadley, Middlesex, and was admitted a pupil at St Paul's School on 25 January 1765, where he became an excellent classical scholar. After leaving St Paul's he was apprenticed to his father on 5 July 1768 for eight years. He gained his freedom of the Society of Apothecaries on 4 July 1775 by patrimony, as his father had died a few years before. On 24 July that year he entered St Thomas's Hospital as a pupil of Mr Whitfield, one of the apothecaries. Wheeler spent a year at St Thomas's, and it is probable that he then worked at the firm of Truesdale and Partridge, royal apothecaries. 
From an early age Wheeler showed a great interest in botany, a taste which was fostered by William Hudson, the botanical demonstrator at the Society of Apothecaries. On 18 March 1778 Wheeler was appointed 'Botanic Demonstrator... at the usual salary and an additional 40's'. for the summer excursion', so making a total of $32 a year (Society of Apothecaries, MS 8200/9), at the physic garden at Chelsea, London, in succession to William Curtis. In 1784 Wheeler began a series of lectures on botany in the library of the Apothecaries' Hall, but the poor attendance deterred him from continuing it after 1786. In 1783 he was living in George Street, Foster Lane, when he was appointed assistant apothecary to Joseph Roberts at Christ's Hospital; 'being [a] very sober, diligent and knowing man in his business, and living near the hospital [he] will be ready on any call to attend' (Christ's Hospital, MS 12,806/12, fol. 368). Wheeler held the position until September 1801, when he was made apothecary. He resigned in December 1806 as he had been, 'favor'd with the appointment of Apothecary to St Bartholomews' Hospital' (ibid., MS 12,806/13, fol. 490). His salary as a result had now been increased from $250 a year to $350 with 'a house rent and taxes free' (Church, 26). He resigned in June 1821, when he was succeeded by his second son, Charles West Wheeler; in 1822 his third son, James Lowe Wheeler, succeeded him as botanical demonstrator at the Society of Apothecaries. Wheeler had married Ann Blatch (died 1800) of Amesbury, at Pancras Old Church, on 24 June 1789, and they had six sons, all of whom were freemen of the Society of Apothecaries and practised medicine. 
Wheeler was admitted an assistant of the Society of Apothecaries on 29 June 1815; he served as junior and then senior warden between 1821 and 1823, and he was master in 1823-4. He was also appointed a member on 19 July 1815 of the first court of examiners under the act of that year. On his resignation Wheeler continued to live in London; first with his son Charles in St Bartholomew's, until the latter's resignation in 1835, after which he went to live with his eldest son, Thomas Lowe Wheeler, at 61 Gracechurch Street and then at Newcastle Court, College Hill, Cloak Lane, Queen Street. 
Wheeler, a devotee of the doctrines of Linnaeus, was an able botanist, and as a teacher he was eminently successful, the 'herborisings' of the Society of Apothecaries under his guidance becoming famous throughout England. He took part in these excursions until 1834, when he was eighty, clad in an old hat, worn suit, and a pair of leather gaiters, but full of good spirits and agility. A man of simple faith and habits Wheeler was a non-smoker and abstained from alcohol, but he would break the ice in order to bathe in winter. He taught himself Hebrew at the age of seventy-five. Wheeler died at his home in Newcastle Court, Queen Street, London, on 10 August 1847 and was buried at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29191


Wheelocke, Abraham (c.1593-1653), linguist and librarian, was born in the parish of Whitchurch in Shropshire. He was brought up at Loppington in the same county, and remained deeply attached to Shropshire throughout his life. Wheelocke was always ready to help students from Shropshire, and it appears to have been their common origins that account for his lasting friendship with one of his principal patrons, the merchant Thomas Adams. Wheelocke matriculated as a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, at Easter 1611, and graduated BA in 1615 and MA in 1618. In 1619 he was appointed Exeter fellow of Clare College, and in the following year he voted for Thomas Paske as master. He was ordained deacon in London on 19 December 1619 and priest at Peterborough on 22 September 1622. In the same year he was made vicar of the church of Holy Sepulchre in Cambridge, a living which he retained until 1642. In 1623 he was appointed one of the university preachers. In 1625 he proceeded BD but failed to succeed Andrew Downes as professor of Greek. In the following year he became rector of Passenham in Northamptonshire, and he relinquished his appointment in 1627. In 1629 he was nominated public librarian and amanuensis at Cambridge University Library. 
While he was at Clare College, Wheelocke, already a competent Hebraist, embarked on the study of Arabic. By 1624 he had made considerable progress. He studied with William Bedwell, and in 1631 Bedwell's wife told Thomas Adams he was 'as able as any in the kingdom' (Holt, 40). Wheelocke also learned Persian, Syriac, and Samaritan, and seems to have obtained at least a smattering of other Eastern languages. 
Probably late in 1631 Wheelocke proposed to Thomas Adams that a chair of Arabic be set up at Cambridge, financed either by the City of London or by a merchant company. Adams replied that it would be easier to find an individual ready to subsidize the professorship. Soon after, when he was sure of the approval of the university and of Richard Holdsworth, then professor of divinity at Gresham College, Adams himself promised a salary of $40 for a period of three years. By 23 March 1632 Wheelocke had been installed as the first professor of Arabic in England, with the obligation of lecturing twice a week. Adams continued to pay him for as long as he lived. 
Wheelocke's motives for studying Arabic are connected with his piety and his interest in the English church. Like so many of his contemporaries he was drawn by Arabic on account of its use for biblical studies. When urging Adams to found a chair he dwelt on the value of the language for the propagation of Christianity in the East, and his work on the 'Koran' was undoubtedly intended as an aid to missionaries. For this purpose he regarded the Arabic-speaking Christians as useful vehicles. But he was also attracted by the Christianity of the East as the source of a pristine Anglo-Saxon Christianity free of the Church of Rome. The investigation of such a tradition, in increasing fashion at the time, was an additional incentive for him to study Old English. Wheelocke justified what he called 'my two-fold imployment', his concern with both Arabic and Anglo-Saxon, in a letter to Sir Simonds D'Ewes in January 1640. He wished, he wrote: 'to compile a body of our Divinity, I say of our doctrine out of the Saxon, & British writers: & to present the papists with these, as a rule to leade them by, if they would be constant to the best Antiquities: most sure it is, that Antiquitie tels us we owe more to the Easterne Church then to Rome: and what of good from Rome, even that we have from the Easterne. (Ellis, 157-9)' Wheelocke was clearly fascinated by Arabic as a language -- from 1635 on he followed his signature in the registers of Holy Sepulchre with the Arabic 'hamdullah' ('thanks be to God') -- but he seems to have had little interest in Arab culture. In the 1640s he hoped to publish a translation of the 'Koran' into Latin and Greek, together with a refutation, and he dispatched a specimen to Samuel Hartlib. In his letters he revealed a loathing for Islam which went far beyond the frequently rhetorical hostility of his contemporaries. 'Set aside some grosse idolatries of the church of Roome, & their Tyrannicall government,' he wrote, 'the onlie pressure on the bodie of the Church of Christ is Mahomets 'Alcoran'' (Hartlib papers, 33/4/2). He described the 'Koran' as 'full of hipocrisie, falshoode, savage crueltie against the world of mankinde, which it would subdue; & against the sonne of God whom it pretends to advance' (ibid., 33/4/3). 
Although such statements are in accordance with Wheelocke's orthodoxy -- in 1639 he expressed his horror to D'Ewes that the ideas of those he regarded as the great heretics of the sixteenth century, Castellio, Servetus, and Socinus, should be 'alive againe', and added 'I could wish theire very names were buried' (BL, Harley MS 374, fol. 133'v') -- they are in contrast with the efforts of two fellow professors of Arabic, Jacobus Golius at Leiden and Edward Pococke at Oxford, to introduce a more objective approach to Islam by way of a deeper investigation of Muslim culture. Wheelocke's prejudices may also account for Hartlib's decision to reject his specimen, possibly prompted by the German Arabist Christian Ravius. 
Wheelocke lectured regularly in Arabic. His few pupils included a number of students from King's College (where his son Abraham would study), such as Robert Austin, Richard Hunt, future Gresham professor of rhetoric, and, most distinguished of all, Thomas Hyde, future librarian of the Bodleian and successor to Edward Pococke as Laudian professor of Arabic at Oxford. To both Austin and Hyde, Wheelocke also taught Persian. In the late 1640s Wheelocke did his utmost to set up an oriental press at Cambridge, and tried to obtain a better set of Arabic types than had been bequeathed by William Bedwell. 
Ever since the early 1620s Wheelocke had been particularly helpful to scholars from outside the university who were looking for manuscripts in Cambridge. With his appointment at the university library he had unlimited access to the main Cambridge collection and a limited access, of which he made good use, to the college libraries. He continued to assist his correspondents in locating manuscripts, copying them, or simply checking details. It was thus, in the mid-1630s, that he made the acquaintance of the historian and antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, engaged in his major work, the 'Concilia'. Wheelocke served him in his quest for Anglo-Saxon manuscripts and, with Spelman's encouragement, turned to the study of Old English himself. In 1638 Spelman agreed to finance a chair for a lecturer and reader of the Old English language and the history of the early British church. In November he gave Wheelocke the vicarage of Middleton in Norfolk, the proceeds of which were to be regarded as part of his salary, even though it was not until 1640 that the lectureship was actually approved by the university. 
With Wheelocke's appointment as professor of Anglo-Saxon the study of the subject shifted to Cambridge. It had previously been centred on the library of Robert Cotton in London, but the library had been closed by the king from 1629 to 1631, the year of Cotton's death, largely because of the political significance assumed by the examination of early texts in connection with legal and constitutional history. With his work on the church councils Spelman placed the study of early English documents in the strictly ecclesiastical sphere it had occupied in the sixteenth century, when the principal purpose of research had been to prove a tradition of independence from Rome, linking the reformed Church of England to its Anglo-Saxon predecessor. 
Wheelocke's own contribution to Anglo-Saxon studies was immense. The object of the Cambridge lectureship was to publish Old English sources and to prepare an Old English grammar and dictionary. In 1643 Wheelocke published the 'editio princeps' of the Old English translation of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica' and the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. He reissued these works a year later, together with an edition of William Lambarde's 'Archaionomia' of 1568. He based his text of Bede on three manuscripts, one at Cambridge University Library, one at Corpus Christi College, and one in the Cotton Library. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' was taken almost entirely from the so-called Winchester text in a manuscript at the Cotton Library; Wheelocke completed it with another codex at Corpus Christi. Because he made no use of the other five surviving manuscripts Wheelocke was severely criticized by Edmund Gibson, who published a further edition of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' at Oxford in 1692, and Gibson's objections were taken up by many subsequent scholars. It has since been proved, however, that Wheelocke was fully aware of the existence of the other codices, but wished only to provide 'a consciously selective edition of the Winchester text' (Lutz, 63). That the original Cotton manuscript should have been almost completely destroyed by fire in the eighteenth century adds to the importance of Wheelocke's work for modern scholars. Objections to his edition as mutilated and incomplete are unfounded, but he is more open to criticism in his failure to identify Anglo-Saxon verse. Accustomed to prose, he knew nothing of the structure of Old English alliterative poetry, as his own attempts at writing it show. He dismissed those sections of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' written in verse as obsolete and coarse. At the time of his death he was also preparing an Old English dictionary and grammar. 
Wheelocke's other great achievements were as librarian of Cambridge University Library. When he was appointed in 1629 the library had barely 1000 volumes; when he died in 1653 it had about 12,000. Such an advance was not due to Wheelocke alone, but he took an active part in persuading donors to present their collections, and, above all, in ordering and describing what actually entered the library. He thus assisted the university in obtaining the collection of some eighty-six oriental manuscripts assembled by Thomas Erpenius, the professor of Arabic at Leiden. The collection had been purchased by the duke of Buckingham in 1625, the year after Erpenius's death, and was finally presented to Cambridge by the widowed duchess in June 1632. It contained a wide variety of Eastern manuscripts, mainly Arabic but also Turkish, Persian, Hebrew, Syriac, Coptic, and Javanese, and included five of the oldest Malay manuscripts in existence. The acquisition of the collection meant that Cambridge, which had previously only had a single Arabic manuscript, could briefly compete with Oxford. In 1648 parliament decided to buy and present to the university library the invaluable collection of 167 books and manuscripts imported from Italy by the London bookseller George Thomason. Although the works were mainly in Hebrew, they also included texts in Syriac, Arabic, Armenian, and Slavonic. Wheelocke described and listed them. 
In 1632 Wheelocke renounced his fellowship at Clare College, moved to a house near Queen's College, and, against the advice of Adams, married Clemence Goad ('fl'. 1610-1653), a widow. She already had a son, Christopher, and had five more children with Wheelocke: Abraham, Sarah, Clemence, Joan, and Ann. Wheelocke often advanced the necessity of supporting so large a family as a reason for his state of permanent financial distress. He seems, however, to have exaggerated his poverty. It has been estimated that for six years after his marriage he had an annual income of about $60, and that this rose to about $130 in 1638. Besides his fear of not having enough money, Wheelocke was haunted by the terror of losing the favour of his patrons (and consequently his salary). This too proved unfounded. Adams paid him throughout his life, and after Henry Spelman's death in 1641, Wheelocke continued to receive his wages, first from Spelman's son John, and then from his grandson Roger. 
By nature Wheelocke was sedentary, retiring, and diffident. In the encomium he delivered at Wheelocke's funeral William Sclater, another student of King's who had known Wheelocke well at Cambridge, said 'that... which I observed remarkable, and worthy of universall imitation in him, was, under his many and exceeding abilities, his humble and exceeding modestie; so that others took more notice of him, than he did of himselfe' (Sclater, sig. E3'r'). Wheelocke's intellectual accomplishments were appreciated both in England and on the European continent (where his correspondents included Johannes de Laet). John Selden and James Ussher admired him, and John Lightfoot referred to 'the Al-learned Mr. Wheelocke, to whom nothing is too difficult or unattainable' (Lightfoot, sig. b3'r'). 
Wheelocke exhibited his versatility in various poems written on royal occasions: Latin verses lamenting the death of Anne of Denmark in 1619, and celebrating the marriage of the future Charles I to Princess Henrietta Maria of France in 1625; Latin and Greek poems on the births of the future Charles II and his sister Mary in 1631; Greek verses on Charles I's coronation in Scotland and the birth of the future James II in 1633 (and those contributed to James Duport's 'Thrinothriambos' in 1637); and verses in Hebrew and Anglo-Saxon on Charles I's return from Scotland in 1641. 
By 1651 Wheelocke had started to prepare his edition and Latin translation of the gospels in Persian. He was assisted by his former student Robert Austin, then a fellow of King's. In order to conclude his work and see to its publication, Wheelocke took up temporary residence in what he described to Richard Minshull, the vice-chancellor of Cambridge, as 'an obscure and little cell' in London (Todd, 233). The Persian gospels were in fact edited (with Wheelocke's unfinished commentary) by John Pearson, the future bishop of Chester, and published posthumously at Adams's expense in 1657. This other 'editio princeps', however, was not entirely satisfactory. The Bodleian manuscript (MS Laud. Or.2) and the manuscript in Cambridge University Library (MS Gg.5.26), on which the text is mainly based, are of an inferior translation. At a late stage in his labours Wheelocke borrowed a codex belonging to Pococke (Bodl. Oxf., MS Pococke 241) which contained an earlier and better version translated from Syriac. Wheelocke acknowledged its superiority but was reluctant to ask Austin, already on the verge of a nervous breakdown, to start all over again. Wheelocke's edition was thus immediately surpassed by the version, based entirely on Pococke's manuscript, prepared by his pupil Thomas Hyde for the London polyglot 'Bible', which also came out in 1657. 
Wheelocke's combination of piety and interest in languages induced him to join James Ussher, Brian Walton, William Fuller, Herbert Thorndike, and Bruno Ryves in signing the first printed proposals for the polyglot 'Bible' on 1 March 1653. He assisted the editors with the Samaritan text, and is said to have intended to help Edmund Castell correct the Syriac and Arabic versions. In the end, however, Wheelocke's tasks were taken over by Hyde. Wheelocke's health had been declining for some time; he died in London, and was buried at St Botolph, Aldersgate, on 25 September 1653. 


@@@@@


doc= 29192


Wheler, Sir Francis (c.1656-1694), naval officer, was the youngest son of Sir Charles Wheler, second baronet ('c'.1620-1683), of Birdingbury, Warwickshire, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1684), daughter of Sir Francis Bindloss, of Borwick Hall, Lancashire. The Whelers had sold their original Worcestershire estates in the early seventeenth century, and Francis's grandfather became a goldsmith. His father had been a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, before service in the royalist army during the civil war led him to court, parliament, and the governorship of the Leeward Islands under Charles II. Francis was himself clearly well educated, to judge from his elegant handwriting. He joined the navy as a 'king's letter' (volunteer) officer thanks to his family's cavalier loyalties: as was usual he was primarily a soldier, but he quickly developed an aptitude for the sea service to which he was repeatedly seconded. On 22 October 1674 he was commissioned ensign in Prince Rupert's company in the garrison at Windsor Castle. His naval promotion was owed chiefly to Admiral Herbert (later Lord Torrington), who on 30 April 1678 appointed him second lieutenant of the 'Rupert'. On 5 May 1679 he was promoted first lieutenant in the same ship, and on 6 April 1680 he transferred to the 'Bristol' as first lieutenant. 
On 11 September 1680 Wheler was given his first command, the 'Nonsuch'. While his ship was careening at Gibraltar in February 1681 he wrote to his father asking for assistance in his regimental and naval careers; he looked shortly to 'try [his] fortune with the Argerins' (BL, Add. MS 28054, fol. 208; Davies, 239). Success duly came with the seizure of a corsair on 8 April. On 10 August at Tangier he took possession of the 'Kingfisher' by Herbert's commission, and brought her back to Portsmouth in October 1682. On 26 January 1683 he was promoted captain in the army. On 25 August he was appointed to the 'Tiger' to assist with the evacuation of Tangier, where he arrived on 29 September. Pepys, who was also present during the last months of the English occupation, met Wheler several times and heard others tell of his notable obsequiousness to Herbert, allegedly performing menial tasks for him, and owing his place to his being so much 'privy to things' that the admiral 'durst not but oblige' him ('Tangier Papers', 118). Since Pepys also reported what he must have known to be a wholly false complaint that Wheler had been made captain without having served as lieutenant, his other comments invite little respect. Wheler clearly made himself useful to his admiral, but Herbert would not have been impressed by mere servility. 
Wheler returned to England, not without mishap, by the end of March 1684, after spending the best part of six years in the Mediterranean. In June 1685, as captain of the 'Tiger', he was active in intercepting Dutch ships running munitions to Monmouth's rebels. On 12 November he married Arabella, daughter of Sir Clifford Clinton. By 3 June 1687 he had been knighted, and on 12 June he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of foot. On 18 September 1688 he was made captain of the 'Centurion'. This ship was badly damaged in an accident at sea and needed to return to Chatham, an embarrassment compounded by a large-scale desertion of the crew. The king was reported to be angered by the mishandling of the ship, but Wheler escaped censure and was transferred to the command of the 'Kent' on 16 November. In the course of the revolution immediately following, Wheler's associations with Herbert and the duke of Grafton (now his military commander) aligned him with the Orangists, and his career was secured under the new regime. In April 1689 he was given command of the 'Rupert', and during the summer he successfully intercepted a number of French ships taking arms and dispatches to the Jacobites in Ireland. On 5 January 1690 he was appointed to the 'Albemarle' (90 guns), which fought at Beachy Head (30 June). In August he was shortlisted for a flag: this was not yet to be his, but on 20 December he was given the captaincy of Deal Castle. 
Meanwhile the English colonies in the West Indies waited anxiously for the strong naval force they required for protection and, if possible, for assault on the French islands. In July 1691 James Kendall, governor of Barbados, had urged that the command be given to 'a gentleman of good sense, well affected, and a seaman', suggesting that Wheler fitted this profile ('CSP col.', 13.498). The recommendation was accepted, and in October Wheler's instructions were drafted: he was due to go to the Caribbean in April 1692, but only a small squadron under Robert Wrenn could be sent that year. Wheler remained in home waters, and commanded the 'Albemarle' at La Hogue in May. In July, still afloat, he submitted a vast twenty-seven-point proposal for revising the instructions for his West Indies command, particularly asking to be independent of the colonial governments, and for a defined share of plunder ashore. The latter was conceded by assigning a detachment of 400 soldiers to his personal command. He also stressed the need for adequate medical facilities, in line with what would be the most positive outcome of the current war. The privy council approved his instructions on 18 October. Attacks were envisaged on Martinique and Hispaniola; to this the king added the extraordinary order that on his way home Wheler should call in and annex Canada. At the same time Wheler was designated rear-admiral of the blue, effective from 6 February 1693. Having made his will on 30 October, with the provision that if his fortune were increased by $500 or more this should go to his younger son, he joined his fleet at Cowes on 21 December. 
Wheler sailed on 9 January 1693 aboard the 'Resolution', accompanied by ten other warships, together with supports, and carrying about 1500 soldiers. They reached Barbados on 28 February/1 March, and on 3 March Wheler was sworn of the island council. A message was sent to Christopher Codrington, governor of the Leewards, to rendezvous off Martinique. Wheler left Barbados on 30 March and arrived at Cul de Sac Marine, Martinique, two days later. While reinforcements were awaited some successful raids were made ashore. Codrington arrived on 9 April, and an assault on the fort of St Pierre was begun on 17 April. On the 20th, however, a council of war decided to abandon the attempt, only Wheler and another officer arguing for continued naval bombardment. On 22 April they withdrew to Dominica, where a further council rejected an assault on Guadeloupe. By this time Wheler's forces were severely depleted by an infection caught at Barbados, and he sailed to the healthier climate of St Kitts to recover as best he could. Since leaving England he had already lost almost 700 men. The campaigning season was now virtually over; his orders were to quit the Caribbean before the rains at the end of May, and as soon as he had regrouped he sailed north. 
By 12 June Wheler reached Boston, to find that the governor of Massachusetts, Sir William Phips, was wholly unprepared for his arrival; the projected attack on Quebec was therefore abandoned. Wheler was understandably keen to hurt the French somewhere, and Phips suggested that Newfoundland might be the place to do so. But when Wheler actually proposed an attack, Phips discovered a string of constitutional and practical reasons for withholding his own forces. His concern in fact was to prevent what remained of Wheler's men from becoming a burden on his own colony. Wheler therefore sailed homewards on 22 September, and arrived at Portsmouth on 18 October. There was much anger that so carefully prepared an expedition had achieved nothing, but Wheler's leadership was not held accountable. He was immediately re-engaged, being appointed commander in the Mediterranean on 1 November, ranking as rear-admiral of the red. He sailed on 27 December and arrived at Cadiz on 19 January 1694. On 17 February he left to pass through the straits, but on the night of the 18th met a hurricane off Malaga. In the confusion several of his ships ran aground in Gibraltar Bay. Wheler's flagship, the 'Sussex', struck at 5 a.m. on 19 February, with the loss of all but two Turks from the complement of 550. It was consequently never possible to establish the precise circumstances of the accident or of Wheler's death. The disaster seemed to confirm suspicions already voiced about the inherent instability of 80-gun ships with only two decks, such as the 'Sussex', and a third deck would be added for new ships of this armament. 
Wheler was survived by his wife, his eldest son, Charles (who died soon afterwards), his younger sons William and Francis, and his daughter Anna Sophia. Among his executors were Sir Cloudesley Shovell and his kinsman William Binckes, dean of Lichfield. Wheler was a gallant and competent officer, and it cannot be reckoned his fault that his career achieved little, and ended in calamity. 


@@@@@


doc= 29193


Wheler, Sir George (1651-1724), Church of England clergyman and scholar, was born at Breda in the Netherlands on 20 January 1651, the third child and eldest son of Charles Wheler, a colonel in the Life Guards, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Hutchin of Egerton, Kent, who were royalists living in exile. The family had been originally from Tottenham High Cross, Middlesex, and had changed their name from Bradford to Wheler in order to inherit an estate. They were able to return to a house at Charing, Kent, in 1652. Wheler was educated at schools in Ashford and Wye, of which he retained an unfavourable memory. After the death of Sir William Wheler of Westminster, the family acquired his substantial property, so that a university education for George became feasible, and on 31 January 1668, aged seventeen and helped by a letter of introduction from the son of the rector, he matriculated at Lincoln College, Oxford. Within a week he caught smallpox, but although he had been a frail child, unable to indulge in sports or hunting, his health did not suffer further and in fact improved. While at Oxford he read widely, and took up an interest in heraldry, decorating his rooms with coats of arms. He was a man of many interests and practical skills. As a boy he had amused himself with woodwork, constructing a birdcage and a small harpsichord, and had taken an interest in plants; the latter he maintained in Oxford by frequent visits to the physic garden. 
On 4 July 1671 Wheler was admitted to the Middle Temple, at least partly in order to facilitate his father's legal battle over the terms of Sir William Wheler's widow's will, but law did not appeal to him. By the summer of 1673 the lawsuit had reached a successful conclusion and Wheler, now financially secure, set out on a continental tour with George Hickes, one of his former tutors. On his travels he displayed keen curiosity and took the opportunity to collect plant specimens. While at Venice in 1675 he made the acquaintance of Jacques Spon, a doctor from Lyons, with whom he travelled in Greece in 1675-6. Both travellers published an account of their adventures, Spon in 1678 and Wheler in 1682. The latter's 'A Journey into Greece' is a large volume with illustrations of inscriptions, coins, plants, and buildings (one of the engravings shows the Parthenon before the fateful explosion of 1687), but much disfigured by misprints (which the author took the trouble to correct in a copy he presented to his college). A French translation appeared in 1689, with a reprint in 1723; in the preface Wheler is complimented for the fact that he had provided a much more accurate map of Greece than had previously been available. 
On 3 September 1677 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, Wheler married Grace (1662?-1703), daughter of the diplomat Sir Thomas Higgons (1623/4-1691) and his second wife, Bridget Grenville. The same year he became a fellow of the Royal Society, but he devoted himself mainly to an ecclesiastical career, in which he doubtless owed much to his acquaintance with Nathaniel, Lord Crewe, who had been elected rector of Lincoln College while he was a student there and from 1674 was bishop of Durham. Wheler was knighted on 1 September 1682, was ordained about 1683 (in which year he was created MA of Oxford) and became a canon of Durham in 1684. From 1685 to 1702 he was vicar of Basingstoke, Hampshire. 
In 1689 Wheler published a slim volume entitled 'An Account of Churches and Places of Assembly of the Primitive Christians'. It is an attempt to use the evidence of Eusebius, combined with the author's own experience of archaeological sites, to reconstruct the plan of certain early churches in Tyre, Jerusalem, and Constantinople, and is illustrated with plans. The book appears to be one of the earliest studies of Christian archaeology. A sign of Wheler's continuing interest in the affairs of Greece is that in 1693 he was involved in an abortive project to endow places for Greek students at Gloucester Hall, Oxford. 
In 1702 Wheler became DD by diploma. He subsequently enjoyed additional preferment in Durham, being appointed rector of Winston in 1706 and then of Houghton-le-Spring in 1709. At Houghton he founded a charity school for girls and enlarged the almshouse. He died in Durham on 15 January 1724 and was buried in Durham Cathedral. His will, begun on 3 May 1717 and completed, after several codicils, on 4 September 1723, reveals that he had extensive property in London, including a tenement called Skinners in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, 'where I lately lived' (1717). He and his wife had had eighteen children, of whom two sons and six daughters were alive in 1723. The elder son, George, was his father's chief heir; the younger son, Granville Wheler (1701-1770), 'being intended for the study of divinity', was left his books on theology and by Greek and Latin authors. Substantial and complicated charitable bequests included $100 for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, a house for the minister of the new conformist French church at Spitalfields, and endowments for the poor of St Oswald, Houghton, for the school and almshouse there, and for Joanna, Lady Thornhill's poor school at Wye, Kent. He gave to his Oxford college more than thirty Greek manuscripts, acquired mainly in Athens and Constantinople; they included a priceless illuminated typicon, the foundation charter of a convent established in Constantinople about 1300. His plant specimens were given to the Oxford Physic Garden. Wheler occupies a significant position in the history of botany, since he introduced to Britain some plants hitherto unknown, including St John's wort. 


@@@@@


doc= 29194


Wheler, Granville (1701-1770), experimental philosopher, was born in August 1701 in London, the third son of Sir George Wheler (1651-1724) and his wife, Grace (died 1703), daughter of Sir Thomas Higgons of Grewel, Hampshire. At the time of his son's birth, Sir George was a canon of Durham Cathedral. Wheler attended school at Durham before being admitted pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1717; he graduated BA in 1721, held a fellowship at Christ's in 1722-4, and proceeded MA in 1734. He was ordained deacon and priest at St Margaret's, Westminster, London, and was rector of Leake, Nottinghamshire, from 1737 until his death. His first wife was Lady Catherine Maria (died 1740), daughter of Theophilus Hastings, seventh earl of Huntingdon; they had seven children. His second marriage, to Mary, daughter of John Dove of London, was childless. 
Wheler acquired the estate of Otterden, near Charing, Kent, about 1717, by purchase from the widow of his deceased brother, and in the spacious galleries of Otterden Place he and his friends, among them John Godfrey, Stephen Gray, and Thomas Ruddock, carried out various electrical experiments on the lines of those published by Benjamin Franklin and others. They confirmed Franklin's identification of lightning as an electrical discharge, and sought to discover how to communicate electricity, leading the 'electric virtue' through silk threads running through the building. They tested various substances, identifying those that could receive a charge and those that did not. To Wheler fell the fame of being the first in England to electrify a live animal. He succeeded in leading electricity through the bodies of live chickens, then through the footboy, 'a good stout lad', whom he suspended by a silk rope, touching his hand or foot with a long glass rod, which had been previously rubbed so as to bear a charge, and making another person point to the boy's face or hands, whereupon sparks crackled between the two, and they felt a burning sensation. Wheler was elected to the Royal Society on 27 June 1728, to which he wrote in later years conveying news of his experiments. Wheler died on 12 May 1770, and was buried in Otterden church. 


@@@@@


doc= 29195


Wheler, Robert Bell (1785-1857), antiquary, was born at Stratford upon Avon on 7 January 1785, the fourth child but only son of Robert Wheler (1742-1819), a solicitor of that town. His mother was Elizabeth Loader (1756-1786) of Quinton, Warwickshire, who died when he was only a year old. His forenames were derived from Robert Bell, who lodged with the Whelers until his death in 1802. He was the brother-in-law of Dionysius Bradley, a Stratford attorney, to whom Robert Wheler had been articled in 1777. Robert Bell Wheler was educated at the town's grammar school and was articled to his father in 1803. He appears scarcely to have left Stratford, except in 1812, when he went to London for a month at the date of his formal admission as a solicitor in the court of king's bench. He practised his profession at Stratford until his death, residing continuously in a house now known as Avoncroft in Old Town. 
In youth Wheler joined the Stratford volunteer corps and in 1810 was commissioned as an ensign in the 3rd regiment of Warwickshire militia, stationed at Stratford; he later became lieutenant and quartermaster. But his main interest through life was in Shakespearian research and local topography. At the age of twenty-one he published his first book, 'The History and Antiquities of Stratford-upon-Avon' (1806), the research for which had been completed, by his own account, three years earlier. This accurate and careful compilation, illustrated with his own accomplished sketches, though based largely on printed sources, included transcripts of, or reference to, several previously undiscovered documents relating to Shakespeare and his family. This was followed in 1814 by his 'Guide to Stratford-upon-Avon', in some respects an abridged version of his 'History', but incorporating additional discoveries he had since made concerning Shakespeare and other Stratford figures with Shakespearian associations. It also contained a rudimentary history of Shakespeare's birthplace, which was treated more fully in his final published work, 'A Historical and Descriptive Account of the Birthplace of Shakespeare' (1824). Wheler also contributed articles, chiefly on Shakespearian subjects, to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He was secretary to the committee which organized celebrations in Stratford to commemorate, in 1816, the bicentenary of Shakespeare's death, and, from 1820 to 1823, secretary and treasurer to another seeking to erect a 'mausoleum' in the town in memory of the poet. He was a friend of the antiquary John Britton, and intimate with Captain James Saunders of Stratford, in conjunction with whom most of his research was undertaken. On Saunders's death in 1830, 'a great loss' to him, Wheler's antiquarian activities, which had already been curtailed by his father's death in 1819, virtually ceased. He died unmarried on 15 July 1857 at his house, Avoncroft, in Old Town, Stratford and was buried six days later beside his father in the churchyard (Holy Trinity) of his native town. 
Wheler left a quarto autograph manuscript volume of 'Collectanea de Stratford', containing personal anecdotes and many transcripts and notes, some from sources since lost, which has become a major source for the history of the town. This, together with his other notes and part of his library, his collection of local deeds and original documents, coins, and other relics local and Shakespearian, were given by his sister Anne Wheler (1783-1870) to the trustees of Shakespeare's birthplace, and are now located in the record office of the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust. Also of great importance is another autograph volume, now in the British Library, largely comprising copies from a lost manuscript history of Warwickshire by the antiquary Simon Archer (1581-1662). 


@@@@@


doc= 29196


Whelpdale, Roger (d. 1423), bishop of Carlisle, was later said to have been born of a Cumbrian gentry family near Penrith. Educated at Oxford University, he was a fellow of Balliol College before 1400, and then became successively fellow, chamberlain, treasurer, and, in 1404, provost of Queen's College. He was senior proctor of the university in 1403-4. The author of treatises on logic and mathematics, he had proceeded BTh before January 1413. His earliest promotions outside Oxford were in southern England, successively to the rectories of Stockton, Wiltshire, and Burghclere, Hampshire. It is not known to whose patronage he owed these benefices, or through whose agency he became bishop of Carlisle in 1419, following the death of William Strickland on 30 August. Licence to elect was given on 12 October, and Whelpdale was papally provided on 22 December. The temporalities of the see were restored on 17 March 1420, and he was consecrated in London on 21 August in that year, professing obedience to York on the same day. 
Whelpdale's episcopate was brief, and all that can be said of it is that, like his predecessor, Whelpdale concerned himself with the protracted restoration of his cathedral, and in January 1422 obtained an indulgence for those contributing to the works. He was clearly not always resident in his diocese, and might, indeed, have been absent from it for some time, since on 22 November 1422 he was appointed to represent the northern province at the church council summoned to Pavia in 1423. Presumably his preparations for attendance account for his having been in London when he made his will, on 25 January 1423, and when he died there on 4 February following. He had requested burial in a church dedicated either to the Virgin, or to St Mary Magdalen, or to St Paul, and was consequently interred in St Paul's Cathedral in London. 
Whelpdale's will shows him as concerned for his family, his see, and his 'Alma Mater'. It also shows that he was a man of means, able to make bequests whose value amounted to about $530, part of which was to be raised by the sale of property in Beverley, Oxford, and, apparently, north Kent. The beneficiaries of his will included a sister, a nephew, and a niece, and the children of Matthew Whelpdale, presumably also a relation. He left vestments, furnishings, and plate to Carlisle Cathedral, and $200 to found a chantry there for two of his Cumbrian friends. He had brought books from Oxford to his official residence at Rose Castle; these, with other volumes of theology, political theory, and canon law, he now bequeathed to Queen's College, together with vestments, plate, $10 for the repair of the vestry, and 20's'. to buy keys to the library for the fellows. A more general bequest gave $20 to be distributed among Oxford scholars. 


@@@@@


doc= 29197


Whethamstede, John (c.1392-1465), scholar and abbot of St Albans, was probably born at Wheathampstead, Hertfordshire, 'c'.1392 -- in 1442 he was described as being 'in about his fiftieth year' ('CEPR letters', 9.266). His father, Hugh Bostock ('c'.1360- 'c'.1430), was a landowner originally from the west midlands who had settled at Wheathampstead following his marriage to Margaret ('c'.1370- 'c'.1420), daughter of Sir Thomas Makery. This and other fortunate marriages seem to have raised the Bostocks from the ranks of the lesser gentry, so that in old age John could claim kinship with local nobles like Elizabeth, Lady Sudeley. John was the eldest child and only son, and as a result he appears to have retained control of the family estates and manors despite his later monastic career. 
According to a family memoir, Whethamstede attended a local grammar school 'at a young age' ('ad annos dociles'), and proved himself a proficient scholar ('multum proficiens'; BL, Harley MS 139 fol. 91'r'). Before he was sixteen, however, between 'c'.1405 and 'c'.1408, he had entered St Albans as a novice. His unusually early admission, though probably a testimony to his promise as a scholar, must also have been a product of close family ties with the monastery: his uncle, William Whethamstede, had been a distinguished prior of the St Albans cell at Tynemouth, where his cousin John had also been a monk. Following his profession Whethamstede was sent to study at Gloucester College, the Benedictine studium in Oxford. Making rapid progress there, as early as 1414 he served as the college's 'prior studentium', and in 1417, after less than a decade of study, he incepted as doctor of theology. 
Whethamstede probably returned to St Albans in the same year or shortly after, and on 2 September 1420 was elected abbot. His election was exceptional for a monk so young, and again reflected his reputation as a man of considerable intellectual capabilities. The expectation that attended his election might explain the fact that within the first months of his administration he was drawn into national ecclesiastical and political affairs. In May 1421 he was selected, together with five other more senior abbots, to represent the Benedictines before the king's commissioners at the Council of Westminster. Henry V had convened the council to examine the case for monastic reform, a case vigorously rejected by the monks. Although the youngest of the negotiators, Whethamstede emerged as his order's most able spokesman, and it was he who compiled and presented the proposals that eventually sealed an agreement between the parties. His compromise recommendations for reform were adopted throughout the English communities and also formed the basis of his own internal reforms which he introduced during visitations at St Albans and its cells in 1422-3. 
Whethamstede was again called upon to represent his order in spring 1423, as a delegate at the Council of Pavia. His journey to Italy took him through much of Germany, and he remained for some time at Ulm and Worms. During the council Whethamstede fell into a bitter dispute with Richard Flemming, bishop of Lincoln, from whose episcopal jurisdiction the St Albans monks claimed complete exemption. Flemming appears to have threatened to raise the question of St Albans' status before the pope, but the bishop's health collapsed, and when he did reach Rome some time later he was reconciled to the abbot. Whethamstede followed the council when it removed to Siena, and then travelled to Rome for his own audience with Martin V to secure confirmation of St Albans' most important privileges. Before he could complete his suit he was taken ill with dysentery, and was later said to have survived only through the intercession of St Alban himself, and following a vision in which St Bernard appeared and reassured him that he would live. Following his recovery he successfully concluded an agreement with the pope which provided both recognition of the abbey's existing privileges and also a number of important new dispensations. 
Whethamstede returned to St Albans in February 1424. He devoted much of the rest of the 1420s and 1430s to internal reforms, and to reviving the material condition of the community. From 1425 to 1426 he conducted a thorough visitation of the dependent cells. He dissolved the priory at Beadlow entirely, and devised reform constitutions for the communities at Redbourne and Tynemouth. He embarked on an extensive programme of rebuilding, spending $2334 on fabric and furnishings, including $641 on plate and vestments alone. He expended a further $2000 on conventual properties outside the abbey, including a large contribution to the new buildings at Gloucester College. He also reorganized the abbey's financial administration, spending more than $1000 on the acquisition of new properties, and creating a new office of 'master of works' to supervise the distribution of resources. In the later 1420s and 1430s Whethamstede also made renewed efforts through litigation and negotiation to defend the abbey's endowments and extend its exemptions and other privileges. In 1428 he won a case against the abbot of Westminster over claims to certain manors. He also worked to establish new guarantees for the abbey's long-standing claims of independence from episcopal and secular authorities. In 1425 he negotiated royal recognition of the exemptions and privileges recently confirmed by the pope. Between 1431 and 1433 he also successfully challenged efforts by William Alnwick, bishop of Norwich, to subject the cell at Binham, Norfolk, to episcopal visitation. Whethamstede's monks regarded these battles over properties and privileges as among their abbot's most significant achievements: when his portrait was added to the 'Liber benefactorum' after his death he was depicted proudly clutching bulls and charters to his chest. 
In pursuing these cases Whethamstede benefited from the support of a number of distinguished allies among the senior clergy, the nobility, and the court circle. He appears to have cultivated friendships with such figures as Cardinal Henry Beaufort, Thomas Beckington, dean of the court of arches, Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, and John, duke of Bedford. However, his closest relationship was with the protector, Humphrey, duke of Gloucester. Gloucester was a frequent visitor to St Albans and in 1423 Whethamstede granted him, his wife, and his retinue rights of confraternity. Their friendship seems to have been based on mutual intellectual interests, focused in particular on the work of Italian classical scholars. However there was also a political dimension to the alliance: Gloucester was Beaufort's rival for influence over the king and in the 1430s and 1440s an early focus of opposition towards Henry VI and his advisers. In the 1420s Whethamstede seems to have used his connection with the duke as a defence against Beaufort, who showed some hostility towards St Albans. But when the king declared his majority in 1437 and Gloucester was reduced to an isolated and increasingly suspect figure, Whethamstede became more openly partisan. When the duke died in captivity in 1447 the abbot sued for custody of his remains, and had them interred in the abbey church in a chantry he may have originally prepared for himself. 
By the end of the 1430s Whethamstede's work of reconstruction and reform had placed considerable strain on conventual resources and his continuous disputes had damaged his own public reputation, leaving him physically exhausted, and even allowing dissension to emerge within the community. In November 1440 he resigned the abbacy and retired to his own manor at Wheathampstead. The abbot himself seems to have blamed his difficulties on his external and internal opponents, although he also recognized that his public image had been tarnished, confessing that he found himself increasingly awkward in confrontations and was 'given to excessive blushing' ('Annales... Amundesham', 2.234). His monks, however, attributed his failure to his own inflated ambitions, which had led to almost unrestrained prodigality with conventual resources. Whethamstede seems to have left St Albans precipitately, leaving books and other personal items behind which he never recovered. His activities during his retirement remain obscure: it seems likely he spent much of the time pursuing his scholarly interests, although he may have returned to St Albans briefly in 1447 to supervise the burial of Humphrey of Gloucester. Following the death of Abbot John Stoke in January 1452, Whethamstede was persuaded to return to St Albans and on 16 January was re-elected abbot. Stoke's administration had proved disastrous and there seems to have been a small but vocal minority that had been working to secure Whethamstede's return since the late 1440s. Even so, his re-election appears to have been an eleventh-hour decision, coming only after other candidates had withdrawn. The townspeople were said to have rejoiced at Whethamstede's re-election, describing it as a miracle comparable to Saul's transformation on the road to Damascus. 
Whethamstede's second administration was undoubtedly more troubled than his first, but none the less he continued to make significant improvements to the fabric and fortunes of the abbey. In an address following his election he outlined a wide-ranging programme for reform, with a particular emphasis on reviving the intellectual activities of the monks: the number of monks attending the universities was to be increased and teachers and preachers were to be provided to direct the studies of the monks in the cloister. He also launched a detailed review of the administration of his obedientiaries: the audit for 1452 had revealed a significant fall in conventual income despite the abundant harvests and rising prices that had prevailed throughout the 1440s. The review revealed serious maladministration on the part of the bursar and official-general, William Wallingford, and further evidence of corruption emerged in 1454. Whethamstede was unable to pursue charges against Wallingford because of the latter's powerful position within the community, but he did succeed in dismissing some corrupt lesser officials, including his own secretary, who was known to be a habitual frequenter of taverns. 
Whethamstede also resumed his efforts to defend and extend the abbey's properties and privileges in the face of royal and seigneurial intervention. He initiated litigation against a number of local lords, and entered into a protracted dispute with the royal exchequer over infringements of the abbey's rights during Stoke's rule. He recovered a loan of $600 from Henry VI, and in 1456 successfully petitioned for confirmation and resumption of all gifts and grants made to the abbey since the beginning of the reign, including the significant privilege of a remission of $20 on all clerical tenths levied by the crown. Whethamstede also continued to make improvements to the abbey buildings. He constructed a self-contained library building to provide a new focus for the studies of the monks, he glazed the cloister windows, and rebuilt the parochial chapel of St Andrew. 
Despite his advancing age, throughout his second administration Whethamstede continued to be drawn into public affairs. In the late 1450s he was involved in discussions over the planned crusade against the Turks: two Hungarian clerics visited St Albans in 1457 to discuss the matter, and in 1459 he also met the papal legate to consider the issue. He also seems to have become involved in the case against Reginald Pecock, bishop of Chichester, whose writings were condemned as heretical in 1459: Whethamstede's register is filled with detailed notes on Pecock's conclusions. In the political struggles between Henry VI and his opponents, Whethamstede seems at first to have strongly opposed the king and his followers, and in the early 1450s he supported parliamentary demands for the posthumous exoneration of Humphrey of Gloucester from accusations of treason. But after military conflict began he became less partisan: following the first battle of St Albans, on 22 May 1455, he demanded that the duke of York make proper provision for the burial of the dead, and himself offered, and subsequently provided, burial places in the abbey church for the bodies of Beaufort, Clifford, and Percy. After two decades of poor relations, he also made new overtures to the king, and as late as 1458 invited Henry VI to spend Easter at St Albans. According to his register, as the political crisis intensified after 1460 Whethamstede became increasingly depressed, and following the second battle of St Albans in February 1461 he recommended that the community be temporarily dispersed, and himself probably withdrew to his family manor, there to pursue the contemplative life. 
From the mid-1450s Whethamstede suffered increasing infirmity, and he was forced to delegate daily administration to his officials. Too ill to attend the Coventry parliament in 1459, in 1460 he was forced to cede the direction of a lawsuit against Lord Sudeley to his archdeacon because of his sickness. Shortly afterwards he appears to have retired from active life at St Albans and returned to Wheathampstead: an abbatial document dated 1464 was issued 'from our house of solitary residence at Makery End' (Riley, 2.23). He died, probably at Wheathampstead, on 20 January 1465 and was buried in the abbey church, in the chantry chapel which he himself had constructed, before the 25th. His death does not seem to have been marked with great ceremony at St Albans, an indication perhaps that he had few supporters remaining in the community, and it is significant that within a decade William Wallingford, the monk whose fraud he exposed in the 1450s, was himself elected abbot. 
Whethamstede was the leading Benedictine of his time, a defender of traditional monastic interests, but also a champion of monastic reform. In addition to his involvement in the council of 1421 he served three times as president of the Benedictine general chapter, and also organized the Benedictine delegation to the Council of Basel in 1440. He was especially energetic in his promotion of the monastic studia at Oxford and Cambridge, and in his later years became Gloucester College's most important benefactor, funding the construction of both its chapel and library. Through his extensive and lively correspondence he also encouraged other abbots to adopt his devotional and educational reforms in their own communities. These achievements notwithstanding, Whethamstede probably never fulfilled his full potential as a prelate: increasingly his public role was undermined by arrogance, litigiousness, and ill-advised political alliances. 
Indeed, Whethamstede's most significant achievements were not as an abbot but as an educationist, a scholar, and writer. Regarding intellectual activities as being at the heart of the monastic life, he devoted considerable effort and expense, during both his administrations, to make better provision for the studies of his monks. He had a large number of new books produced for the conventual library, which he himself described as 'the best in the whole country' (BL, Egerton MS 646 fol. 105'r'). He also commissioned new works for the use of the monks, including an English life of St Alban and St Amphibalus from John Lydgate, and a St Alban motet from the composer John Dunstaple. His own intellectual interests were very broad: although trained as a theologian he also studied and wrote on astronomy, grammar, history, philosophy, poetry, and politics. His surviving notebooks reveal him to have been an almost compulsive writer, their pages filled with a diverse range of letters, verses, and other scribbles. He was also an accomplished scribe and several of the extant St Albans books are copied in his own hand. Many of his own compositions were intended as aids to his studies, for instance, an analytical index to John of Salisbury's 'Policraticus'. He also composed numerous commemorative verses relating to his own life, such as his defeat of his episcopal opponents in the 1420s and 1430s, and the construction of his library in the 1450s, and wrote several epitaphs. In the 1450s he also compiled and edited his own collection of letters. 
Whethamstede's principal intellectual interests, however, were in classical scholarship and the new work of the Italian humanists, interests he had developed during his time in Oxford and as a result of his travels in Italy. He collected copies of classical and humanist texts and cultivated the friendship of Italian scholars. He was probably the first English scholar to cite Leonardo Bruni's translation of Aristotle's 'Politics' and he also owned early copies of translations of Plato and of the Latin Plutarch. He sustained a brief correspondence with Piero da Monte, and according to Amundsham also met with other unidentified Italian scholars while at Florence in 1423. He also composed his own works in which he developed his interest in poetry and philosophy, ancient history, and mythography. His largest and most important work was the 'Granarium' (its title was a deliberate pun on his own name), which combined material on a diverse range of historical and literary topics. Three of its four parts survive (BL, Cotton MSS Nero C.vi; Tiberius D.v; Add. MS 26764). He also compiled a number of collections based on the work of classical and high-medieval writers: three of these, the 'Palearium poetarum', the 'Pabularium poetarum', and the 'Manipularium doctorum', survive in incomplete texts, while three more, the 'Floriarium', the 'Propinarium', and the 'Proverbiarium', have been lost. 
These writings were compilations of extracts rather than self-contained commentaries, and are less important for the insights into the subject that they offer than for the wide range of sources from which they were drawn. Whethamstede demonstrated a remarkably wide knowledge of Latin and Greek classical texts, including Quintilian's 'Institutes' and Cicero's 'De oratore', which had only recently been discovered. It would be mistaken, however, to suggest that Whethamstede's own work was comparable to that of the Italians: he cannot be described as a 'humanist'. But he was among the first English scholars to promote the writings and values at the heart of the European classical revival in England, and his own compilations did play an important role in the transmission and reception of classical and humanist texts in English learned communities from the second half of the fifteenth century. Humphrey of Gloucester included a three-volume edition of Whethamstede's 'Granarium' among the books he donated to Oxford University in 1437, and even in the early sixteenth century, under the nickname Frumentarius, his work continued to attract a considerable following. 


@@@@@


doc= 29198


Whetstone, George (bap. 1550, d. 1587), writer, was born in London, where he was baptized at St Lawrence, Old Jewry, on 27 July 1550, the third son of Robert Whetstone (died 1557), a wealthy merchant and haberdasher, and Margaret, daughter of Philip Barnard of Suffolk. Whetstone's father had been imprisoned in the Tower in 1554 after acting as foreman of the Guildhall jury which had refused to find Sir Nicholas Throckmorton guilty of treason after his part in Wyatt's rebellion, as reported in Holinshed's 'Chronicles'. He was fined $2000 for his conduct, but released from seven months' imprisonment after paying about a tenth of this sum. 
On their father's death, estates in Essex, Leicestershire, Middlesex, Kent, Suffolk, and Yorkshire were part of the Whetstone children's patrimony: George received from his father's estate London houses in Cheapside and Gutter Lane later valued at $23 a year. Despite coming of age in 1571, he did not receive his inheritance until 1573, signing the receipt 'Per me Georgium Whetstonn'. Throughout the 1570s there were legal battles over the children's inheritance following Margaret Whetstone's remarriage to Robert Browne of Northamptonshire. Browne was a neighbour of Sir Thomas Cecil, and Cecil's kindness to the family was acknowledged by Whetstone in his dedication to 'The Orchard of Repentance' in 'The Rocke of Regarde' (1576): 'righte worshipfull, waying howe deepely bothe my good mother and all her children are bounde unto you for received friendships, among the rest (acknowledging your desire of my well doing) I have sought howe (for suche benefites) to avoyde the vile vice of ingratitude.' After Browne's death in 1572 his widow married Francis Ashby of a Leicestershire family. As a child, Whetstone probably lived in Cheapside with his stepfather and mother, although he may have spent time on Browne's estate at Walcot. He did not, unlike some of his brothers, attend university until his inheritance from his father in 1573, after which he registered to study law at Furnival's Inn. He addresses a poem in 'The Rocke of Regarde', 'written from my lodging in Holborne' to 'my friends and companions at Furnival's Inn'. 
Accounts of Whetstone's life at this period have tended, in the absence of much hard evidence, to take for truth a colourful and supposedly autobiographical section of 'The Rocke of Regarde', in which the young hero seeks preferment at court but is unsuccessful and, having spent his inheritance on dissolute living, becomes an officer in the army and serves in the Low Countries. There is, however, nothing to corroborate this account of Whetstone's career, and, indeed, he denies in his later work 'The Honorable Reputation of a Soldier' (1586) that he had had any military experience before going to the Netherlands with his older brother Barnard in 1585-6. The autobiographical application of 'The Rocke of Regarde' cannot, however, be entirely resisted. At the end of his 'A Touchstone for the Time' (1584), Whetstone asserts that the earlier work was indeed true: 'no man was ever assaulted with a more daungerous strategeme of cosonage than my selfe, with which my life & living was hardly beset. No man has more cause to thanke God for a free delivery than my self, nor anie man ever sawe, more suddaine vengeance inflicted upon his adversaries, than I my selfe of mine: as lively appeareth in the ende of my booke intituled 'The Rocke of Regarde'.' This allusion is to the legal battle which lasted some three years in the Star Chamber, and its fictionalized counterpart in the section of 'The Rocke of Regarde' entitled 'The Invention of P. Plasmos'. From these accounts, it seems that in a complicated fraud, Whetstone was tricked into signing over his property to four acquaintances who then tried to implicate him in violent quarrels so that he would be killed and thus the property would revert to them. Whetstone took the four to court to get redress: the outcome of the lengthy process is not known. 
Perhaps this experience stirred the interest in social and legal reform which characterizes much of Whetstone's diverse literary output. His literary career may have received its initial stimulus from the group of writers associated with the inns of court, and many of his early poems are enmeshed in personal networks of friendship and obligation: his first published verse was in commendation of George Gascoigne's 'Flowers', published in 1575, and in 1577 Whetstone was to begin his career as an elegist with a volume of poetry entitled 'A Remembraunce of the Wel Imployed Life and Godly End of George Gaskoigne', claiming to have been an eyewitness to the poet's death while Gascoigne was staying at Whetstone's house in Stamford, Lincolnshire. His further elegies commemorating Sir Nicholas Bacon (1579), Sir James Dyer (1582), Thomas Radcliffe, earl of Sussex (1583), and Francis Russell, earl of Bedford (1585), culminated in his verse life of Sir Philip Sidney in 1587, of whose death at Zutphen he may have heard from Barnard Whetstone, who also provided an account of Sidney's funeral published with the elegy. In his poem, George Whetstone likens himself to a Homer praising an English Alexander, and his apparently carefully researched biography takes Sidney from childhood virtue and education, via his travels in Europe from which he returned untainted by foreign influences, his courtliness, his manly courage in the Netherlands, to his eloquent death speech. Whetstone is little concerned with Sidney as a writer, although he does mention the 'Arcadia' as 'unmacht for sweete devise'. Sidney's death predated Whetstone's own by almost a year, but the two events have some curious connections. Whetstone's death was publicly announced by his publisher, Thomas Cadman, in an epistle to the reader of 'Sir Phillip Sidney, his Honorable Life, his Valiant Death, and True Virtues'; and it seems likely that the Captain Edmond Uvedall or Udall at whose hand Whetstone met his own death was the same person that he had praised in his elegy on Sidney. It is not clear that Whetstone knew the subjects of his elegies personally, but he was conscious that, as the elegy on Sussex puts it, 'some skill I have on good men's tombs to write' and ever aware of the classical ideas of fame and posterity through verse. In his apparent care to ascertain detailed information about his subjects, he has a claim to be called the first professional biographer. 
Whetstone's most famous work, an apparently unperformed two-part play called 'Promos and Cassandra' (1578), is his best-known because it is a major source for Shakespeare's 'Measure for Measure' (1604). Its title-page suggests the proximity of the two stories: 'In the fyrste parte is showne, the unsufferable abuse, of a lewde Magistrate: the virtuous behaviours of a chaste Ladye: the uncontrowled leawdenes of a favoured Curtisan. And the undeserved estimation of a pernicious Parasyte'. Whetstone's tale of urban low life was dedicated 'to his worshipfull friende and Kinseman William Fleetewoode Esquier, Recorder of London'. This dedication, like the rest of the play, shows his abiding interest in civic life and morals, and his depiction of the underworld urban characters in 'Promos and Cassandra' adds a distinctly contemporary feel to his Italian source. Promos is the equivalent of Shakespeare's Angelo, a deputy left in charge of Julio, a city in Hungary; Cassandra is the Isabella figure who comes to plead for her brother's life. Whetstone's additions and alterations to his source material are taken up by Shakespeare in a number of ways: Whetstone's sense of the urban moral landscape, his stress on the emotional relationships between the characters, and his tempering of the crime of his Claudio, here called Andrugio, from rape to pre-marital but mutual sexual intercourse all reappear in Shakespeare's play. Like Philip Sidney in his 'Defence of Poesy', Whetstone stresses that the function of dramatic literature is didactic: 'the conclusion showes, the confusion of Vice, and the cherising of Vertue'. He decries the fashion for transgressing the dramatic unities, arguing that it is the particular fault of the English playwright that 'he fyrst groundes his worke on impossibilities', and also condemns generic mingling, explaining to Fleetwood that it is 'decorum', derived from the authority of Plato, which has encouraged him to divide the play into two parts so as to separate out its divergent generic trajectories. 
The dedication to 'Promos and Cassandra' explains that the author has not had time to correct his work, because he has 'resolved to accompane, the adventurous Capraie, Syr Humfrey Gylbert, in his honorable voiadge'. Whetstone travelled on the 'Hope' under the command of Gilbert's half-brother Carew Ralegh, on an expedition beset by bad winds and ship defects which seems never to have got beyond the west coast of Ireland. After his return to England, he travelled in Italy during 1580, visiting Rome, Naples, and Ravenna. It seems unlikely, given the tenor of his published opinions, that he was the 'Whetstonn' listed among supposed English Catholics remaining in France in April 1580 ('CSP for.', '1579-80', 279). 
In 1582 Whetstone published the main literary fruits of his Italian tour, his 'Heptameron of Civill Discourses', a series of courtly Italianate romance stories. He dedicated the work to Sir Christopher Hatton and, in his epistle, mentions in veiled terms the Italian nobleman shadowed as Phyloxenus, the originator of the stories. T. W.'s dedicatory poem gives an indication of Whetstone's didactic literary aims, announcing that: '
Morall Whetstone, to his Countrey doth impart, 

A Worke of worth. 

' The collection is particularly concerned with the condition of marriage, and different stories illustrate the folly of forced or hasty marriages, ways of maintaining love within marriage, and general precepts for married and unmarried alike. A prose version of 'Promos and Cassandra' is included. The 'Heptameron' was reprinted under the title 'Aurelia, the Paragon of Pleasure and Princely Delights', in 1593. 
In 1584 Whetstone published the moralistic collection 'A Mirror for Magistrates', dedicated to the mayor, aldermen, and recorder of London and expounding the example of the Roman emperor Severus in suppressing urban vices such as insanitary conditions, prostitution, usury, and gambling. This classical precedent was given a more local application in 'A Touchstone for the Time' (1584), which comprises a detailed discussion of the London underworld with suggestions for civic reform, including the suppression of prostitution and the closing of taverns and gaming houses. In a similar vein 'The English Myrror' was published in 1586. Its detailed title-page gives an indication of its tone and content: 'A regard wherein al estates may behold the Conquests of Envy: containing the ruine of common weales, murther of Princes, causes of heresies, and in all ages, spoile of devine and humane blessings [...] publishing the peaceable victories obtained by the Queenes most excellent Majesty, against this mortall enimie of publicke peace and prosperitie.' This compendium of historical narrative, proverbial wisdom, and patriotic encomium combines the moralistic concerns of his earlier works and makes explicit the protestant fervour which had underlined them. Unlike other near contemporaries such as Robert Greene, Thomas Nashe, or Thomas Dekker, Whetstone's anatomization of urban failings does not slip into cynicism, nor does he take an obvious vicarious enjoyment in the vices he describes. By contrast with these other writers, his didacticism is apparently sincerely felt. 
The same tone is evident in 'The Censure of a Loyall Subject', published in 1587 with a second edition in quick succession to take account of the execution of Mary, queen of Scots. The book takes the form of a dialogue between three interlocutors about the hanging of those implicated in the Babington conspiracy in 1586. It has been suggested that the character of 'Weston', who has not witnessed the executions, is a figure for the author (Izard, 221). His conduct book for soldiers 'Honourable Reputation of a Soldier' was published in London in 1585, and in Leiden the following year with a parallel Dutch translation and vocabulary and pronunciation appendices designed to help Dutch readers learn English. The book is less concerned with military strategy than with personal conduct, stressing the importance of religious preparation as well as courage and mercy in warfare. 
In 1587 Whetstone got a fatal taste of warfare. At the instigation of Burghley, to whom he had dedicated 'The Censure of a Loyall Subject', he was appointed 'commissary of musters' (Eccles, 'Whetstone's death', 648) under the mustermaster-general, the mathematician Thomas Digges, in the Low Countries. He was killed in a duel outside the garrison town of Bergen-op-Zoom in September 1587, having accused his adversary Udall of financial abuses. Digges wrote that Whetstone died 'no doubt because he could not be corrupted' (ibid.); the comment draws together Whetstone's life and his work in a way he, as a biographer, would have admired, and suggests that he died by the principles of honesty and uprightness his work had consistently advocated as the proper conduct of rulers, citizens, and nations. Udall was acquitted of his murder by a military court who judged that he had acted in defence of his reputation. Whetstone's wife, Anne, of whom no more is known, was named in letters of administration regarding his will in January 1580. 
Whetstone's literary reputation has left some traces. Francis Meres, in his 'Palladis tamia' (1598), included him with 'the most passionate among us to bewaile and bemoane the perplexities of love', although it is not clear from his extant work that he is primarily a love-poet. In 1586 William Webbe identified him as one worthy to 'weare the Lawrell wreathe... a man singularly well skyld in his faculty of Poetrie' (E. Arber, ed., 'A Discourse of English Poetrie', 1871, 35). Neither of these comments captures the ceaseless and earnest didacticism about individual and civic behaviour which is so characteristic of Whetstone's writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 29199


Whetstone, Sir William (d. 1711), naval officer, was probably the son of John Whetstone, naval officer. He was a member of Bristol corporation and master of the 'Mary' of Bristol, a merchant ship trading with Virginia and Barbados. He carried a wide variety of goods including serges. He seems to have married his first wife, Sarah (died 1698), before 1677, in which year he took on an apprentice for seven years. He had two sons and two daughters by his first marriage; his eldest daughter, Sarah, married the naval officer Woodes Rogers. Whetstone's first wife was buried in St Nicholas's, Bristol, on 19 October 1698. On 30 July 1689, the date from which he took post, he was appointed captain of the hired ship 'Europa'. For the next two years he served in Ireland convoying victuallers. He served as captain of the 'Portsmouth' from 3 February to 12 August 1691. Admiral Russell described him as 'a good man' but he was unemployed in 1692. In 1693 he was part owner of the 'Delavall' privateer and the same year was given a commission to command the 'Norfolk', being built at Southampton, and also to man the ship, launched on 27 March 1693. He was discharged from the 'Norfolk' on 23 May and held a series of brief commands before holding command of the 'York' from 13 July 1693 to 13 June 1695. 
Whetstone was appointed to the 'Dreadnought' on 6 July 1696 and served at Newfoundland and in the channel until discharged on 13 July 1699. He was appointed to command the 'Yarmouth', from 19 May 1700 to 4 June 1701, then the 'York', with the rank of commodore and the command of the squadron to be sent out to Jamaica. The 'York' was twice forced into Plymouth for repairs and, having sustained more damage on the way to Cork, was there surveyed and pronounced unfit to go to the West Indies. Consequently he moved into the 'Canterbury' on 4 February 1702, on board which he arrived in May, joining Vice-Admiral John Benbow at Port Royal and taking the local rank of rear-admiral. Benbow left him to command at Jamaica while he went to look for a small French squadron expected in the area. When the squadron returned to Port Royal, Whetstone was president of the courts martial which tried the several captains who had shamefully conspired against their admiral. When Benbow died on 4 November 1702 Whetstone succeeded to the command, which he held until the following June, when he was superseded by Vice-Admiral John Graydon. He destroyed a number of privateers off San Domingo but an attempt on the French colony at Placentia was abandoned because of the weather, the island's defences, and sickness in the fleet. When Whetstone and Graydon came to leave Jamaica they were asked by the governor to leave ten ships for defence; Whetstone advised that seven should remain but in the end only four small ships were left. He returned to England in October 1703. 
In January 1704 Prince George promoted Whetstone to rear-admiral of the blue, to show that he approved of his conduct while holding acting rank, and at the same time to separate him from charges arising against Graydon. This promotion, over the heads of other captains including Sir James Wishart, caused great offence and Sir George Rooke, with whom Wishart was serving, threatened to resign his commission unless things were put right. The matter was eventually settled by making Wishart rear-admiral of the blue, and senior to Whetstone through antedating his commission. In March 1704 Whetstone commanded a squadron in the channel. On 18 January 1705 he was promoted to rear-admiral of the white and on 17 February was appointed commander-in-chief in the West Indies, being knighted on 22 February. With his flag on board the 'Montagu' he arrived at Jamaica in the middle of May. The smaller vessels under his command took several valuable prizes but his squadron was not strong enough to let him attack any Spanish settlements. To an invitation to declare in favour of King Charles, the governor of Cartagena replied that 'he knew no sovereign but King Philip'. In 1706 Whetstone and Governor Handyside continued to try and persuade the Spanish at Cuba and Cartagena to declare for Charles and join the allied cause. Later that year William Kerr was sent out with a squadron to relieve Whetstone and, with considerable knowledge of how things stood in South America, he returned to England in December 1706. 
In May 1707 Whetstone commanded a squadron off Dunkirk, with orders to look out for Forbin, a dangerous corsair. In June he was ordered to convoy nineteen ships of the Muscovy Company as far as the Shetland Islands. He accompanied the convoy well past the Shetlands and then parted company with them; later Forbin fell in with them and captured fifteen ships. Though Whetstone had more than fulfilled his orders, which were clearly insufficient, there was an outcry from the Muscovy Company merchants and he was tried for leaving the ships to be attacked. The Admiralty defended him and declared that the only ships which had been taken were those which had left the regular convoy and that none had been attacked until three weeks after he had left them. However, a victim was needed, and he was dismissed from his command and not employed again. He was buried in St Michael's, Bristol, on 3 April 1711 and on 7 May letters of administration were granted to his widow, Mary (or Maria) Whetstone, with whom he had one daughter, Mary. An inventory dated 30 April 1711, though badly damaged, shows that Whetstone was owed over $2500 by various people. 


@@@@@


doc= 29200


Whewell, William (1794-1866), college head and writer on the history and philosophy of science, was born on 24 May 1794 at Brock Street, Lancaster, the eldest of seven children of John Whewell, master carpenter, and his wife, Elizabeth Bennison. 
Whewell at first attended the Blue School in Lancaster. Subsequently, at the suggestion of the Revd Joseph Rowley, the master of Lancaster grammar school, his father agreed to send him there, rather than making him an apprentice carpenter. In 1810 he transferred to Heversham grammar school in order to compete for a scholarship, worth $50 a year, to Trinity College. Before going to Cambridge he was also tutored for some months by John Gough, the blind mathematician of Kendal. Whewell was formally entered at Cambridge in 1811 and began his first term in October 1812 as a sub-sizar. 
During his undergraduate years most of Whewell's family died: his mother in 1807, three younger brothers by 1812, and his father in July 1816. Only two sisters -- Martha and Ann -- remained after the eldest, Elizabeth, died in 1821. In his early years Whewell's own health is said to have been poor, and he was described as a delicate boy, but in November 1812 he told his father that 'I have enjoyed very good health since I left Lancaster' (Douglas, 9). From then on, Whewell's tall and powerful physical form was remarked on by his contemporaries, and was seen to match the vigorous style of his intellectual and personal exchanges. 
Whewell's letters from Cambridge to his family convey a strong sense of being their chosen representative in a different social world. Announcing a first place in every subject in June 1814 Whewell told his father that ''We' have reason to be proud' (26 June 1814, Whewell MSS, Add. MS a. 301). His string of academic successes began with the Latin declamation prize in 1813. In 1814 he won the Chancellor's medal for an English poem on Boadicea (published in 1820), but assured his family that he was not neglecting mathematical studies. These triumphs were unexpectedly interrupted when Whewell graduated as second wrangler in January 1816, beaten by Edward Jacob of Caius College, who was also first Smith's prizeman, with Whewell taking the second prize. 
However, Whewell's aim was not just academic glory but a fellowship that would justify the financial support of his father and give him an independent position. His father died in July 1816, before his graduation and election as fellow in October 1817. Of the latter event, Whewell explained to his sisters that it was 'the most substantial benefit at which you ever had to rejoice with me. It secures me a comfortable establishment for life at least so long as my life is a simple one' (1 Oct 1817, Whewell MSS, Add. MS a. 301). He was appointed mathematical lecturer and assistant tutor in 1818, tutor in 1823. 
These academic achievements were accompanied by personal trials associated with the passage from Lancaster to Cambridge. For a time Whewell was not only very much alone, but also seen as unusual. His manners and speech were considered rude or rustic. There is a report of Whewell's comment upon a herd of pigs being driven past the college gate soon after his arrival: 'They're a hard thing to drive -- very -- when there's many of them -- is a pig' ('The Athenaeum', 333). Having visited London for the first time in 1815 Whewell admitted to his sisters that he had only seen the city from 'the outside' because, not knowing anyone there, he could not 'see anything of its society' (14 April 1815, Whewell MSS, Add. MS a. 301). Whewell regarded Trinity College as a second home, so much so that his letters to his family were punctuated with excuses for not making more visits to Lancaster. In April 1815 he explained to his sister that a trip to Lancaster was expensive and that, in spite of the plague in Cambridge, he had decided to stay 'because I can employ my time better here' (ibid.). 
Although known for his constant reading Whewell appears to have participated in a wide range of undergraduate social activities; indeed, Isaac Todhunter hinted that some of his early acquaintances were not salubrious, and that he ignored the proper boundaries between town and gown (Todhunter, 1.3). But the summer pursuits Whewell described to Richard Gwatkin in 1815 were harmless: 'shooting swallows, bathing by half dozens, sailing to Chesterton, dancing at country fairs, playing billiards, turning beakers into musical glasses, making rockets, riding out in bodies' (ibid., 2.8). In March 1817 he was president of the union -- a society of undergraduates -- when the vice-chancellor sent the proctors to disband a meeting. It is not clear why, but at a time when some European countries were monitoring student societies and the 'Sidmouth Acts' in Britain banned large assemblies the prospect of critical political discussion no doubt frightened the leaders of the university. Whewell is reported to have stood his ground, achieving an audience with the vice-chancellor, even though the meeting did then disband. 
Whewell was able to make and sustain friendships that gave him intellectual and personal support. Richard Sheepshanks, another student from the north of England with scientific interests, entered Cambridge in the same year as Whewell. From 1819 they made several trips to the continent, after surviving a shipwreck on their first attempt. Whewell also travelled in 1823 with Kenelm Digby to study the architecture of churches and abbeys in Normandy and Picardy. He met John Herschel (senior wrangler in 1813), Charles Babbage, George Peacock, Michael Slegg, and Edward Bromhead as members of the Analytical Society, founded by Babbage and Herschel in 1811 to advocate continental mathematical notation in the use of the calculus, and to introduce formal algebraic analysis into Cambridge teaching. Whewell was at first impressed by their plans, but when in a position to influence the curriculum, through his textbooks, he began to fear that continental analysis, especially Lagrange's treatment of the calculus, did not ensure a proper geometrical grasp of the problems addressed in mechanics and other branches of mixed mathematics. In addition to these mathematical friends the political economist Richard Jones, the astronomer George Biddell Airy, the professor of botany John Henslow, and the classical and theological scholars Julius Hare, Connop Thirlwall, and Hugh James Rose were all colleagues at Cambridge. The geologist Adam Sedgwick, who graduated in 1805, was an older and respected member of the college; with him Whewell took geological field trips to the Lake District, and first met William Wordsworth there in 1821. 
By 1817 two of his closest friends, Herschel and Jones, had left Cambridge, and Whewell spoke of the loss he felt. However, he continued a lively correspondence with them, as he did with other early friends such as Hare and Rose, and later with younger men, some of whom he worked with on various projects: John Lubbock, Robert Willis, Augustus De Morgan, William Rowan Hamilton, and James Forbes. Whewell's extensive correspondence reveals him as a candid and sensitive friend, a penetrating critic, and an astute participant in a range of scientific and university debates and activities. 
During the 1820s Whewell began to move more easily in the social circles outside the university. In 1823 he met Sir John Malcolm, who lived at Hyde Hall, near Cambridge, and he subsequently enjoyed the friendship of the Malcolm family. There is a definite sense in which this was a surrogate family for Whewell; his correspondence with Lady Malcolm continued after the family moved from the Cambridge area in 1827, and soon after his marriage in 1841 Whewell told her that he remembered this earlier period as 'one of the bright passages of my life' (Douglas, 239). Whewell also met aristocratic graduates of Cambridge such as the third Earl Fitzwilliam (1786-1857) and the second marquess of Northampton (1790-1851), both of whom were involved in the affairs of scientific societies. 
From the 1830s Whewell's activities extended beyond Cambridge as he became more involved with the British and European scientific and intellectual communities. He was consulted by William Vernon Harcourt, the first secretary of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (founded in 1831) and suggested the commissioning of annual reports on the state of the various sciences. Whewell's own reports on mineralogy (1832) and electricity and magnetism (1835) were informed by the historical insights later used in his major works. Whewell did not attend the first meeting of the British Association in York, but subsequently served as vice-president in 1832 and 1837, local secretary in 1833 for the Cambridge meeting, and president in 1841. 
Whewell's social rise was completed in June 1841 when he was engaged to Cordelia (died 1855), the daughter of John Marshall, a flax spinner of liberal political sympathies; his eldest daughter, Mary, had married Lord Monteagle. Whewell had been introduced to the Marshalls by the Wordsworth family. On 12 October 1841 Cordelia married Whewell in Cumberland. On the same day Christopher Wordsworth, master of Trinity, wrote to Whewell saying that he intended to resign; by 17 October 1841 Sir Robert Peel, the Conservative prime minister, had written that the queen had accepted his recommendation of Whewell as the next master -- a decision that passed over his senior colleague, Sedgwick, who might have been appointed under a whig government. 
Whewell's first book was 'An Elementary Treatise on Mechanics' (1819), a textbook that he revised in five later editions; this was supplemented by 'A Treatise on Dynamics' (1823). The second work, in particular, introduced calculus to Cambridge undergraduates and praised its use by the French mathematician and astronomer, Pierre Laplace, in his 'Mecanique celeste'. But subsequent editions of both these books contained far less calculus and more emphasis on geometrical methods. Whewell's 'Essay on Mineralogical Classification and Nomenclature' (1828) sought to offer a revision of Friedrich Moh's system. In 1830 he published, anonymously, 'Architectural Notes on German Churches, with Remarks on the Origin of Gothic Architecture'; other editions appeared in 1835 and 1842, both now bearing his name. This discussed the mechanical principles underlying Gothic architecture, a topic pursued in more detail by Whewell's collaborator, Robert Willis. In 1833 his 'Astronomy and General Physics', a volume in the 'Bridgewater Treatises' on natural theology, was a clear success, becoming the best-seller of the series and reaching a sixth edition in 1864. This offered a fairly conventional argument from design: Whewell suggested that the position of the earth in the solar system and its orientation to the sun were clearly and benevolently adapted to the needs of living things, including human beings. But he also included a discussion of inductive and deductive thinking, noting the tendency of the latter to dilute appreciation of design in nature. Two major works followed: 'History of the Inductive Sciences' (3 vols.) in 1837 and 'The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences' (2 vols.) in 1840. During this period Whewell also wrote reviews for some of the major quarterly journals, scientific papers on mineralogy and chemistry (both on nomenclature), a pamphlet on mathematical education, a book 'On the Principles of English University Education' (1837), 'Sermons, Preached in the Chapel of Trinity College' (1847), reports for the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and (with others) a translation of Goethe's 'Hermann und Dorothea' (1837). 
By 1841 Whewell had made his scholarly mark and completed an extraordinary feat of social elevation. The conventional markers of this rise were his university posts and his writings. He was assistant mathematics tutor in 1818, head tutor at Trinity in 1823, ordained deacon in 1825 and priest in 1826, professor of mineralogy in 1828, Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy (formerly moral theology) in 1838, and master of Trinity from 1841. Whewell took formal possession of the master's lodge on 16 November 1841. This position allowed a continuation of his association with Trinity -- the college, as he often reflected, of Bacon and Newton. As master he allowed a statue of another past resident -- Lord Byron -- to be rescued from a London vault and installed in the college library in 1843; he also commissioned a copy (by Henry Weekes) of the statue of Francis Bacon at St Albans for the ante-chapel. Whewell revised the college statutes in 1844, sought to limit the system of private tuition and placed more emphasis on professorial lectures. As master of the largest college in the university he was well positioned to influence academic policy, which he did in the role of vice-chancellor in 1842-3 and again in 1855. Whewell initiated the installation of Prince Albert as chancellor in 1847 and seems to have had his support for broadening the Cambridge curriculum -- as achieved with Whewell's introduction of the moral sciences and natural sciences triposes in 1848. When the royal commission into Cambridge reported in August 1852 Whewell replied to its queries but resisted its intrusion, partly because he wanted reform to be internally directed rather than externally imposed, but also because he did not wish to weaken the autonomy of the colleges in favour of the central power of the university. He defended the practice of election as the mode of entry to fellowships, rejecting open competition on the ground that this might weaken the obligation of fellows to the colleges. Whewell was also reluctant to abandon the tradition by which the master and eight senior fellows governed the college. 
In his early years as master Whewell acquired a reputation for imperiousness and formality. Not all of this was new behaviour, because his dominating physical presence, fierce debating, and hard horse riding were well known. Airy remembered a section of Cornwall as the place 'where Whewell overturned me in a gig' (Airy, 84). Hare's advice to Whewell in December 1840 not to think of taking up a college living was informed by a judgement that he was better suited as a doctor, not a pastor, of the church. Hare mentioned the possibility of the mastership, but when it came to Whewell a year later this new office elicited a stiffness and formality that had not been so evident. Whewell's admonition of Sedgwick is often cited. Whewell wrote to his older colleague in 1845 saying that 'your frequent appearance in the College courts accompanied by a dog [his pet] is inconsistent with... Rules [of the College] and with the Statutes cap.xx' (Clark and Hughes, 2.97-8). But even Whewell's harshest critics agreed that he was the most prestigious master of Trinity since Richard Bentley. 
As second wrangler in 1816 Whewell had the credentials for major participation in science, and might have been expected to use the security of his fellowship as a basis for such activity. This was the path to a scientific vocation pursued by colleagues such as Sedgwick in geology and Airy in astronomy, although it differed from that followed by Herschel, Charles Lyell, and Charles Darwin, whose independent incomes allowed full-time devotion to scientific research. 
Whewell's practical scientific work indicates his considerable presence in a number of fields. While his mechanics textbooks reflected pedagogic rather than research interests, he was involved in geological expeditions with Sedgwick from 1821 and sought the most advanced instruction in mineralogy and crystallography in Berlin, Freiburg, and Vienna in 1825. Commenting on a paper by Whewell about mathematical aspects of crystallography, Herschel affirmed that it was 'fit for the transactions of any Society in the world' (Herschel to Whewell, 15 Oct 1823, RS, Herschel MSS, vol. 18, no. 164). This paper appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London' in 1824; he also contributed four papers on related topics to the 'Cambridge Philosophical Transactions' between 1821 and 1827. In May 1826 Whewell set off to Cornwall with Airy to spend several weeks in a mine shaft experimenting on the mean density of the earth. They planned to compare the effect of gravity on invariable pendulums at the surface and at a depth of 1200 feet. Whewell wrote letters to Herschel and Lady Malcolm describing himself as a correspondent 'sitting in a small cavern deep in the recesses of the earth' (Todhunter, 2.65-7; Douglas, 103-4). The experiment was not successful and they made another attempt two years later, accompanied this time by Sheepshanks. A description of their efforts was published as 'Account of Experiments Made at Dolcoath Mine, in Cornwall' (1828). In that year Whewell became professor of mineralogy, nominating for the position on the platform of applying mathematics to crystallography and improving classification in mineralogy. He had already published five papers in the area. In 1834 he began to develop a self-registering anemometer to measure the velocity of the wind; by 1837 he had devised such an instrument. These scientific activities supported Whewell's election to the Royal Society in 1820, admission to the Geological Society in 1827 and nomination for its presidency in 1837, a position he occupied until 1839. 
Whewell's most significant scientific work was his study of tides -- or 'tidology', as he called it -- recorded in fourteen papers presented to the Royal Society of London from 1833 to 1850. With John Lubbock (his former student) he began a quest to chart the movements of the world's oceans, aiming to produce a map of co-tidal lines showing the points throughout the globe where high water occurs at the same time. This research was substantially funded by the British Association, and, although he was not fully satisfied with the results, Whewell was rewarded in 1837 with a royal prize medal from the Royal Society. In spite of these achievements Whewell did not consider himself a major scientific discoverer. His contributions in mineralogy and tidology were important, but neither met his own criteria for truly significant advances in science. By 1840 Whewell was devaluing his scientific achievements, saying that 'there is nothing of such a stamp, in what I have attempted, as entitles me to be considered an eminent man of science' (Todhunter, 2.286). 
Leslie Stephen remarked that the sheer mass of Whewell's publications evinced his 'extraordinary powers of accumulating knowledge' ('DNB'). But Stephen also identified a puzzle: 'Whewell began as a man of science' but then 'scarcely became a philosopher' (ibid.). From a late Victorian perspective this made Whewell's reputation an indeterminate one. Francis Galton offered a similar diagnosis in 1869. Noting that fame in science was heavily influenced by the association of an individual's name with some striking discovery, he cited Whewell as an example of one who, in spite of being among the most able of his generation, was destined to be forgotten. 
Sydney Smith's quip -- that science was Whewell's forte but omniscience his foible -- has influenced most responses to the man and his work. It is not surprising that Whewell has commonly been approached as a polymath, an individual who, on his own early confession, aspired to 'universal knowledge' or omniscience (Whewell to George Morland, 15 Dec 1815, Todhunter, 2.10). By any measure, the range of his writings and accomplishments was remarkable: mathematics, mechanics, architecture, mineralogy, tidology, moral philosophy, political economy, educational theory, natural theology, translations of Greek philosophy and German poetry, and the history and philosophy of the physical sciences. This breadth and productivity were extraordinary, especially by the standards of a Cambridge don at a time when research was not a required duty of academic life. When Lyell told a friend that he had taken Whewell's last work to read while travelling on the continent he was asked to clarify to which of the three works -- published within a year -- he was referring ('Life, Letters, and Journals', 2.38). Herschel doubted whether any other individual had gathered a 'more wonderful variety and amount of knowledge in almost every department of human inquiry... in the same interval of time' (Herschel, liii). 
Thus Whewell was seen as a phenomenon -- the equal of other polymaths of the period like Macaulay, Brougham, and Coleridge -- but different in that science was his forte, even though he did not make a major discovery. On the other hand, members of the scientific community appreciated the synthetic overview his works provided. Critical reflection on the nature and value of science was not peculiar to Whewell -- other men of science such as Herschel, Lyell, and David Brewster also made such pronouncements. But, in admitting that research and discovery were not his main concerns, Whewell was seen to be different. In 1836 Lyell said that he used to regret that Whewell had not concentrated on one or two sciences, but now he believed that by being a universalist rather than a specialist he was assisting the progress of science. Lyell told Whewell that this was his proper calling (Todhunter, 1.112). In the same year Whewell told Herschel that 'In a year of two I expect to be a philosopher and nothing else' (Todhunter, 2.235). How did Whewell pursue this vocation? 
Even before his two major works Whewell offered critical commentaries on the nature of science. He did this in his address to the British Association in 1833, in two reports to that body on the state of particular sciences and, for a wider audience, in reviews of scientific works in periodical journals. His review of Herschel's 'Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy' (1830) in the 'Quarterly Review' for July 1831 was his first appearance in public (albeit under the convention of anonymity) as a philosophical writer. In the same year he reviewed two other major works: the first volume of Lyell's 'Principles of Geology' (1830) and the 'Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, and on the Sources of Taxation' (1831) by his friend, Richard Jones -- both in the 'British Critic'. These three works allowed him to discuss Baconian methodology and comment on the new sciences of geology and political economy in relation to the mature disciplines of astronomy, mechanics, and optics. Whewell explained that the mature sciences had reached the stage of being able to deduce consequences from general laws. On the other hand, some political economists were being prematurely deductive, without having the necessary empirical data, such as that contributed by Jones about different kinds of rent. Geologists, however, now had a good store of observations. In reviewing, at Lyell's request, the second volume of 'Principles of Geology' for the 'Quarterly Review' in March 1832, Whewell coined 'Uniformitarian' and 'Catastrophist' -- terms that were adopted as labels for the opposing doctrines in the geological debates of the day. Later, Whewell described disciplines such as geology, archaeology, and philology as 'palaetiology' -- studies of historical causation -- and supplied Lyell with Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene as names for geological periods. 
Whewell also first introduced the term 'scientist' in a review article on Mary Somerville's 'On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences' (1834) in the 'Quarterly Review' (51, 1834, 59). He had made this suggestion -- by way of analogy with 'artist' -- at a meeting of the British Association in 1833. He used the context of this review to offer this word as a means of noting the common enterprise of those who studied the natural world, even if the various scientific disciplines were becoming more specialized and less unified than Somerville thought. Whewell confirmed this neologism in the 'Philosophy', saying that 'as an Artist is a Musician, Painter, or Poet, a Scientist is a Mathematician, Physicist [also his word], or Naturalist' ('The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences', 1847, 2.560). One of his other significant contributions to scientific terminology came in the course of discussions with Michael Faraday about appropriate terms to describe opposing directions of electric currents. In 1834, and again in subsequent letters, after rejecting some of Faraday's suggestions, Whewell recommended 'anode' and 'cathode' (Whewell MSS, O.15.147-8; Todhunter, 2.179-81). 
Whewell's two major works, 'History of the Inductive Sciences' (3 vols., 1837) and 'The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences' (2 vols., 1840; 2nd edn 1847), were appreciated as considerable achievements when they appeared. Even his critics drew upon the 'History', but the 'Philosophy' was seen by some as too close to Immanuel Kant's idealist epistemology. Herschel and Jones, for example, regarded this as inconsistent with the empirical character of scientific inquiry and a threat to its claim to offer true descriptions of the natural world. Today, however, Whewell's work is seen as posing some of the central issues of the philosophy of science -- the relationship between theory and observation, the role of imagination and hypotheses, and the concept of theoretical revolutions, all supported by appeals to the historical record. 
Whewell saw these two works as parts of a single inquiry into the philosophy of knowledge, focusing on the nature of 'the most certain and stable portions of knowledge which we already possess' ('The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences', 1847, 1.1). It was commonly accepted, he contended, that these were the sciences concerned with knowledge of the material world. In the 'History', Whewell abandoned the orthodox Baconian account of induction assumed in his earlier notebooks, and defended the speculative guesses of Johann Kepler as the more usual path to great discoveries. In using the term 'induction' he referred to the general process by which laws and theories were attained; but he stressed that this was more than a mere generalization from the facts because it involved the addition of a conception from the mind of the scientist. When a number of facts were brought together under some conception Whewell called this the 'Colligation of Facts' (ibid., 1.ix). He made this point directly in 'The Mechanical Euclid', published in 1837: 'Some notion is 'superinduced' upon the observed facts. In each inductive process, there is some general idea introduced, which is given, not by the phenomena, but by the mind' ('Mechanical Euclid', 1837, 178). Whewell suggested that once this had been accomplished previously detached observations assumed a unity that now required an imaginative effort to dissolve: 'The pearls once strung, they seem to form a chain by their nature' ('Philosophy', 2.52). 
In the 'History', Whewell began with this assumption: 'the present generation finds itself the heir of a vast patrimony of science; and it must needs concern us to know the steps by which these possessions were acquired, and the documents by which they are secured to us and our heirs for ever. ('History of the Inductive Sciences', 1.4)' He outlined a three-stage pattern in the progress of particular sciences, especially in astronomy, his 'pattern science'. In this tripartite scheme, the crucial period of discovery -- the 'inductive epoch' -- was marked by a convergence of distinct facts and clear, appropriate ideas in the minds of great discoverers. This was preceded by a 'Prelude' in which these facts and ideas were gradually clarified. The inductive epoch was succeeded by a 'Sequel' in which the discovery was accepted and consolidated by the scientific community. Although progress was the motif of the drama that Whewell unfolded he was not dismissive of failures, arguing that they often revealed clues about the nature of scientific discovery. One implication was that present theories, especially in new scientific disciplines, may not be permanent ones. 
Whewell's historical vision of the inductive sciences combined moments of dramatic, theoretical change -- he used the term 'revolution' -- with periods of gradual progress and consolidation. On this view, each science built on its past, incorporating aspects of older doctrines in most recent developments. This idea of a balance between progress and continuity was also a feature of Whewell's political outlook, one that resonated with Peel's Conservatism. In a letter to James Marshall (his brother-in-law) Whewell professed his belief in 'our National Constitution and in our National Religion', and argued that both needed to be invigorated by 'a formative spirit which makes 'reform' unnecessary' (Douglas, 282). 
In the 'Philosophy' Whewell elaborated the epistemological doctrine underlying his view of the intimate connection between facts and ideas in the formation of scientific theories. He called this the 'Fundamental Antithesis' of philosophy. Whewell contended that all knowledge depended on the practical union of sensations and ideas, facts and theories; equally, philosophy required their analytical separation. Thus while not denying such distinctions, he argued that the distinction between 'Fact and Theory' was not a simple one. There was, he declared, 'a mask of theory over the whole face of nature', so that a fact from one perspective was a theory under another ('Philosophy', 1.42). 
Whewell believed that inadequate views about the nature of scientific and other knowledge could in part be attributed to John Locke's view of the mind as a passive receiver of knowledge from the world. For Whewell the mind was active: ideas were not simply transformed sensations; they were the active element that gave form to sensations. 'We cannot,' he explained, 'see one object without the idea of space; we cannot see two without the idea of resemblance or difference'. These and other 'Fundamental Ideas' (as he called them) such as time, number, cause, substance, likeness, and polarity supplied 'Ideal Conceptions' appropriate to the various sciences: for example, that of the ellipse in Kepler's astronomy, or force in dynamics. Whewell claimed that these, and other ideas, regulated the active operations of the mind and were the grounds of the necessary truths which certain branches of science had so far established ('Philosophy', 1.66). Over time other fundamental ideas would be progressively revealed as the basis of necessary truths in other branches of science ('On the Philosophy of Discovery', 1860, 354-75). Because different branches of science were grounded in distinctive fundamental ideas, there was, in Whewell's philosophy, a limit to synthetic notions of the unity of sciences. 
In Whewell's account of science the mind was dynamic and creative; great discoverers were imaginative and speculative in their quest for knowledge of nature. There was no simple art or method of discovery, but Whewell sought a philosophical understanding of how knowledge advanced. This included some reference to what later became known as the logic of proof and verification. Thus Whewell's notion of the 'Consilience of Inductions' suggested a way of identifying powerful hypotheses: for example, 'cases in which inductions from classes of facts altogether different have thus 'jumped together', belong only to the best established theories which the history of science contains' ('Philosophy', 2.65). 
In noting the anti-Lockean disposition of the 'Philosophy', Leslie Stephen judged that Whewell's work had not been very influential: even towards the end of Whewell's mastership John Stuart Mill was the authority in Cambridge. This assessment made the conflict between idealist and empiricist epistemology crucial for the estimation of Whewell's achievement -- a consideration that has since affected his reputation, placing him on the losing side. Stephen said that his philosophy of scientific knowledge was 'scarcely coherent' ('DNB') and did not gain acceptance. Nevertheless, Henry Sidgwick and Mark Pattison both admired Whewell's work for the way it kept the natural sciences in contact with philosophical thought. Sidgwick remarked that 'it is to Whewell more than to any other single man that the revival of Philosophy in Cambridge is to be attributed' (Sidgwick, 241-2). James Clerk Maxwell endorsed Whewell's search for the philosophical assumptions behind particular experimental inquiries, and soon regarded himself as more metaphysical than Whewell (Maxwell, 206-7). Another commentator, looking back on the 'History' and 'Philosophy' suggested that at the time Whewell was 'probably the only Englishman who was capable of conceiving the work, or of carrying out the conception' (Carlisle, 144). 
Whewell answered philosophical criticism of his position, especially in a short book, 'Of Induction' (1849), which replied to J. S. Mill's 'System of Logic' (1843). Here Whewell marshalled his superior knowledge of the historical record. In a letter to Herschel, Whewell insisted that the role of fundamental ideas did not compromise the empirical content of science: 'Our real knowledge is knowledge because it involves ideas, real, because it involves facts' ('On the Philosophy of Discovery', 1860, 488). But he was concerned about an unfavourable reception from practising men of science, and acknowledged that criticism of the section on physiology in the 'History' indicated a more general issue: 'Those who have well studied that subject, feel a persuasion, a very natural and just one, that nothing less than a life professionally devoted to the science, can entitle a person to decide the still controverted questions which it involves; and hence they look, with a reasonable jealousy, upon attempts to discuss such questions, made by a 'lay' speculator. ('Philosophy', 1840 edn, 1.xii)' 

Whewell published three contributions to the debate on university education. The first of these -- 'Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics as a Part of a Liberal Education' (1835) -- assumed that mathematics provided an invaluable mental training. Whewell did not think this needed a defence, although he was happy to argue the claims of mathematics against those of logic (philosophy) -- as put by Sir William Hamilton in a review of this pamphlet in the 'Edinburgh Review' in 1836. Whewell's main concern was with the appropriate kind of mathematics for undergraduates. On this question (as mentioned earlier), he was convinced that analysis, as practised on the continent, was not suitable, and he stressed the importance of solid geometrical reasoning in any elementary curriculum. He recommended the inclusion of Newtonian mechanics and hydrostatics in the undergraduate programme, and edited book 1 of Newton's 'Principia' (1846). His two larger books -- 'On the Principles of English University Education' (1837) and 'Of a liberal education in general; and with particular reference to the leading studies of the University of Cambridge' (1845-52) -- considered the ideal of liberal education, again emphasizing the foundational character of geometry and classical languages. Both works proposed a distinction between 'permanent' and 'progressive' studies that allowed only the most advanced (and stable) physical sciences to be included among the permanent elements of the curriculum. Lyell complained to Whewell that this was a recipe for the exclusion of most of the modern sciences for perhaps a century, or until their degree of theoretical consensus matched that of Newtonian mechanics. Thus although Whewell was able to introduce a natural sciences tripos in 1848, his views on the priority of geometry and classics were seen as unhelpful to the campaign aimed at raising the status of science in Victorian society. 
In his major writings Whewell did not comment in any detail on the triumphs of what is now seen as the industrial revolution. While acknowledging that the practical and mechanical arts (or technology) sometimes produced phenomena subsequently explained by science, he firmly distinguished technical applications from the theoretical understanding sought by science. However, in a lecture of 26 November 1851 on 'The General Bearing of the Great Exhibition on the Progress of Art and Science' (published in 1852), Whewell praised the display of objects and machinery and accepted that modern technological developments -- such as the electric telegraph and chemical industry -- were more closely dependent on scientific discoveries. 
Whewell's major writings on science and education were published by 1845. In the latter part of his career he produced new editions of the 'History' (1847 and 1857) and 'Philosophy' (1847); the latter was also rearranged (with some additions) under new titles: 'Novum organon renovatum' (1858), 'The History of Scientific Ideas' (2 vols., 1858), and 'On the Philosophy of Discovery' (1860). His response to the anonymous 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' (by Robert Chambers) was a selection of chapters from his two major works, published as 'Indications of the Creator' (1845). He also published two books on moral philosophy -- 'The Elements of Morality, Including Polity' (2 vols., 1845) and 'Lectures on Systematic Morality' (1846), neither of which were well received, being seen as ponderous and conservative, especially by J. S. Mill and other utilitarian ethical thinkers. However, Whewell viewed them as important for his views on the analogies between the development of moral and physical knowledge. His 'Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy in England' (1852) derived from his teaching as professor of moral philosophy. 
Whewell's most engaging and controversial work in the latter part of his life was the anonymous 'Of the Plurality of Worlds: an Essay' (1853), followed by 'A Dialogue on the Plurality of Worlds' (1854), a short supplement to the original essay. The book (well known to be by Whewell) reached a seventh edition by 1859 -- an indication of the reaction to his iconoclastic rejection of the commonly held belief in the probable existence of intelligent life on other planets. Whewell dismissed the analogies by which this belief was sustained, arguing for the uniqueness of rational life and human history on earth. In the course of his discussion Whewell also rejected a version of the principle of plenitude -- as maintained by critics such as David Brewster -- that God had filled all possible space with life. To this Whewell asked rhetorically 'whether Mount Blanc would be more sublime, if millions of frogs were known to live in the crevasses of its glaciers' (W. Whewell, 'A Dialogue on the Plurality of Worlds', 1854, 366). The prospect of Whewell (with his reputation for arrogance) choosing this topic stimulated Stephen to observe that the book was meant to prove that 'through all infinity, there was nothing so great as the master of Trinity' ('DNB'). 
Whewell also edited other writings -- explaining their significance in careful prefaces. James Mackintosh's 'Dissertation on the Progress of Ethical Philosophy' (1836) and Butler's 'Three Sermons on Human Nature' (1848) were relevant to his quest for a non-utilitarian ethics; the edition of 'Literary remains, consisting of lectures and tracts on political economy, of the late Rev. Richard Jones' (1859) derived from Whewell's respect for Jones and his own interest in political economy. Whewell published three papers in the 'Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society' (1830, 1831, and 1850) on the political economy of, respectively, Thomas Perronet Thompson, David Ricardo, and J. S. Mill. In each case Whewell gave a mathematical exposition of the deductive reasoning of these writers, clarifying their premises, and then leaving open the suggestion that these were not grounded in empirical observation -- of the kind Jones provided with respect to rents. In returning to this topic in 1850, at the time of his dispute with Mill over philosophy of science, Whewell indicated that Mill's inadequate grasp of induction in physical science was also revealed in his political economy. Between 1859 and 1861 Whewell produced 'Platonic Dialogues for English Readers'; in 1857 he reviewed James Spedding's edition of the complete works of Francis Bacon for the 'Edinburgh Review'; in 1860 he edited 'The Mathematical Works of Isaac Barrow'; in 1862 he wrote two reviews of English translations of 'The Iliad' for 'Macmillan's Magazine', and one of George Grote's edition of Plato, which was published posthumously in 'Fraser's Magazine' in April 1866. His essay on 'Comte and positivism' for 'Macmillan's Magazine' (1866) appeared in the month of his death. 
The last ten years of Whewell's life were marked by personal losses. His wife, Cordelia, died after a long illness on 18 December 1855. He married Everina Frances, widow of Sir Gilbert Affleck, on 1 July 1858. She died on 1 April 1865. Whewell preached his last sermon in Trinity College chapel on 11 February 1866, returning to themes that had appeared both in earlier sermons and in his writings on science. Noting that geology and astronomy imagined 'vast cycles of change succeeding each other' he warned that this did not remove the religious conviction that there was a beginning, and that there will be an end, to the world. The manner of this event lay outside the common history of the world, but Whewell reminded his audience that the scriptures spoke of it as 'an event which is to be sudden, violent, and overwhelming' (Todhunter, 1.343-4). On 24 February he went riding outside Cambridge and fell from his horse; the injuries were severe and Whewell died at Trinity College on 6 March 1866. He was buried in the ante-chapel on 10 March 1866. 
At the time of his death Whewell was known as a great master of Trinity and a man of enormous intellectual power and learning. Within the scientific community throughout Europe he was recognized for his research on the tides, his contributions to conceptual debates and terminology, and for his unrivalled knowledge of the history of the sciences. Although some aspects of his philosophy of science were criticized, Whewell's work set an example for the critical study of the nature of science and, since the 1970s, the historical inquiry on which he claimed to base his philosophy of science has been more warmly appreciated. He combined this study of the physical sciences with publications on education, moral philosophy, and other subjects in a manner that astonished his contemporaries. He did this at a time when intellectual activity was becoming more specialized -- a phenomenon that Whewell recognized in his own philosophy of knowledge. Today we are able to see that his achievement was one of the last of its kind. 


@@@@@


doc= 29201


Whichcord, John (1823-1885), architect, was born on 11 November 1823 at Maidstone, Kent, the son of John Whichcord (1790-1860), an architect who designed two churches (St Philip and Holy Trinity), the corn exchange, and the Kent fire office in Maidstone, and various churches, parsonages, and institutions elsewhere in Kent. His father was also surveyor to the county of Kent and to the Medway Navigation Company, for whom he executed extensive hydraulic works, some tidal locks, and a number of bridges. 
Whichcord was educated at Maidstone and at King's College, London. He was married twice, the first time to an Italian woman. He had seven children. In 1840 he became an assistant to his father, and in 1844 a student at the Royal Academy. In 1848 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. After extensive travel in Italy, Greece, Asiatic Turkey, Syria, Egypt, and the Holy Land (1846-50), and a tour of France, Italy, Germany, and Denmark (1850), he entered into a partnership (until 1858) with Arthur Ashpitel. Together they carried out additions to Lord Abergavenny's house, Birling, Kent (1852), and built fourteen houses on the Mount Elliott estate at Lee, also in Kent (1858). Subsequently most of his output was concentrated upon the design of offices in the City of London; he was responsible for 9 Mincing Lane, 24 Lombard Street, 8 Old Jewry, Mansion House Chambers, the New Zealand Bank, and the National Safe Deposit, all in Queen Victoria Street, and Brown Janson & Co.'s bank, Abchurch Lane. He built the Grand Hotel at Brighton (1862-4) and the Clarence Hotel at Dover, as well as St Mary's Church and parsonage at Shortlands, near Bromley, Kent. One of Whichcord's best-known works is the St Stephen's Club (1874), a classical building with boldly corbelled projections which faces Westminster Bridge. He designed the internal fittings for the house of parliament at Cape Town. He was often employed as an arbitrator of disputes connected with government contracts, and was one of the surveyors to the railway department of the Board of Trade. 
From 1854 Whichcord held the post of district surveyor for Deptford, and from 1879 to 1881 was president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), where he delivered various addresses and papers. The 'Transactions' of the RIBA (1845-80) record his instrumental role in the establishment of the examination system. Whichcord's publications include 'The History and Antiquities of the Collegiate Church of All Saints, Maidstone' (1845); 'Observations on the sanitary condition of Maidstone, with a view to the introduction of the act for promoting public health' (1849); and, with A. Ashpitel, 'Observations on Baths and Wash-Houses' (2nd edn, 1851) and 'Town dwellings: an essay on the erection of fireproof houses in flats; a modification of the Scottish and continental systems' (1855). 
In 1865 Whichcord unsuccessfully stood as a Conservative candidate for the Barnstaple constituency. He also served with the Kent yeomanry and in 1869 became a captain in the 1st Middlesex artillery volunteers, where he formed a battery composed mainly of young architects and lawyers. He died at his home, 23 Inverness Terrace, London, on 9 January 1885, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London. His second wife, Marian Emma, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29202


Whichcote, Benjamin (1609-1683), theologian and moral philosopher, was born in Stoke, Shropshire, in March 1609, the sixth son of at least seven children of Christopher Whichcote of Whichcote Hall and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Fox). In 1626 he entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where his tutors were first Anthony Tuckney and subsequently Thomas Hill. He graduated BA in 1629, proceeded MA and became a fellow in 1633, and was ordained deacon by Bishop John Williams in 1636. At Emmanuel his pupils included Samuel Cradock, John Wallis, Jeremiah Horrocks, John Smith, and John Worthington but a constellation of younger men came under his wider influence. Notable among them were the so-called Cambridge Platonists -- Worthington, Ralph Cudworth, Peter Sterry, and Nathaniel Culverwell. Their circle also took in other members of Whichcote's family -- his niece Mary (the daughter of his brother Christopher) who married Worthington, his sister Elizabeth Foxcroft (1600-1679) (at one time the companion of Anne Conway), her husband, George Foxcroft, and their son Ezekiel Foxcroft. 
Having proceeded BD in 1640 Whichcote was, on 26 October 1641, a candidate for the professorship of divinity at Gresham College, but he lost the election to Thomas Horton. From 1643 he lectured at Trinity Church, Cambridge, on Sunday and Wednesday afternoons. That year he married Rebecca Cradock, widow of Matthew Cradock (died 1641), first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Company, and was also presented to the living of North Cadbury, Somerset. He did not resign his fellowship until the following year, and a dispute over the right of presentation prevented him from taking up his preferment until 1645. On 19 March 1645 he was appointed provost of King's College by parliament in place of Samuel Collins, ejected by the earl of Manchester. Whichcote did not himself subscribe to the covenant, possibly because he was absent from Cambridge at the time. In 1649 he became DD by mandate. In 1650 he was appointed vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge. The sermon that he preached on this occasion resulted, in 1651, in an exchange of letters with Anthony Tuckney, who expressed alarm at Whichcote's subordination of faith to reason. In reply Whichcote defended the role of reason in religious matters and his advocacy of ecumenism, which was based on an agreed minimum set of beliefs. The theological liberalism that he enunciated in response to Tuckney's doctrinaire Calvinism characterizes the Cambridge Platonists and their latitudinarian successors. On 20 September 1651 Whichcote was presented to the living of Milton, near Cambridge. In 1654 he contributed a poem to the collection 'Oliva pacis' celebrating Oliver Cromwell's peace with the Netherlands. In 1655 he was one of sixteen divines on the committee set up to advise Cromwell on the readmission of the Jews to England. In 1659, along with Edward Stillingfleet and John Tillotson, he backed Matthew Poole's scheme for supporting able students at university. He was a friend of Samuel Hartlib, and encouraged Thomas Gouge's educational project in Wales. 
As provost of King's, Whichcote was an able administrator who steered his college through difficult times, and won the respect of fellows for his considerate treatment of his predecessor, Samuel Collins, and for winning exemption for fellows of King's from subscribing to the covenant. In 1660 Whichcote's academic career came to an abrupt end when he was supplanted in the provostship of King's by James Fleetwood on 26 June. With support from Lord Lauderdale, Whichcote attempted to oppose the appointment of Fleetwood. The vice-provost of King's, Matthew Barlow, and twenty-one fellows supported his petition, commending his 'peaceable and prudent management' during his time as provost ('CSP dom.', 'July 1660', petition 94.II). In spite of the fact that his deprived predecessor had died, he was forced to resign in favour of the royal nominee, Fleetwood, who successfully argued that Whichcote could not hold the provostship because college statutes required that the provost be elected from among the fellows of King's. Whichcote was permitted to retain the living of Milton, after resigning it in November 1661 in order that it might be re-presented to him a few days later. 
Although he complied with the 'Act of Uniformity', Whichcote did not obtain another university appointment after his ejection from King's College. Instead, he found employment as a clergyman. On 8 November 1662 he was appointed curate of St Ann Blackfriars. After the fire of London he retired to his living at Milton. In December 1668, with the help of the outgoing incumbent, his friend John Wilkins, he obtained the living of St Lawrence Jewry in London, where he preached twice weekly and where John Locke attended his sermons. While the church was being rebuilt he was permitted to preach at the Guildhall. In 1670, acting as the executor of John Larkin, he founded fellowships and scholarships at Emmanuel College, funded by a bequest of $1000 13's'. 4died In 1673 he preached before parliament. He died in May 1683 in Cambridge at the house of his friend Ralph Cudworth, and was buried on 24 May at St Lawrence Jewry. His funeral sermon was preached by John Tillotson, future archbishop of Canterbury. In his will he bequeathed land to finance poor relief and education in Milton. He had no children. His nephew, Benjamin Whichcote of Bishopsgate, one of his executors, passed his papers to John Jeffrey for publication, though some were still in the hands of his great-nephew, Francis Whichcote, bt, in 1753. 
Whichcote impressed those who met him with his mild and courteous disposition. He was, according to Gilbert Burnet, 'a man of rare temper'. During the strife-riven years of the civil war and its aftermath Whichcote was an important eirenic presence in the University of Cambridge. In religion Whichcote placed emphasis on interior spirituality rather than the externals of religion, and on Christian practice rather than on the institutions of the church. For him the core of Christianity was its moral content. He published nothing in his lifetime: his writings consist of posthumously published collections of his sermons and works derived from these. A teacher rather than a systematizer, his most important published legacy comprised the moral and religious aphorisms derived from his sermons. These amount to a consistent body of ethical teachings in which he asserted the permanence of moral distinctions and the rational nature of moral understanding. By reason he meant practical reason, the end of which is the exercise of virtue. Although he never denied the role of revelation he regarded religion as intrinsically rational: reason is the means by which the truth of religion is communicated to men. Indeed, he believed that it was possible to arrive at the truth by reason without scripture. He was, accordingly, optimistic in his view of human nature. He believed, nevertheless, that human beings are fallible, and that therefore it behoved them to be charitable, and therefore tolerant, towards the religious convictions of others. 
Whichcote's tolerant, optimistic, and rational theology, with its emphasis on practical ethics, shaped the theology of the Cambridge Platonists, through whom his theological legacy extends to the latitudinarian movement of the latter half of the seventeenth century. His philosophical admirers included his friends Ralph Cudworth and John Locke, Samuel Clarke, who published a volume of his sermons in 1707, and Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury, who edited another volume of his sermons in 1698. He was also held in esteem by John Ray and William Whiston and continued to attract a readership throughout the eighteenth century, when several collections of his writings were published, including a four-volume collection of his sermons which was published by Samuel Salter in 1753. In the nineteenth century he was highly esteemed by the Anglican scholars J. B. Lightfoot, B. F. Westcott, and H. J. A. Hort, and, in the twentieth century, by W. R. Inge. 


@@@@@


doc= 29203


Whichcote, George (1794-1891), army officer, born on 21 December 1794, was the fourth son of Sir Thomas Whichcote, fifth baronet (1763-1824), of Aswarby Park, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Diana (died 1826), third daughter of Edmund Turnor of Panton and Stoke Rochford. In 1803 he entered Rugby School, where he fagged for William Charles Macready, the actor. In December 1810, on leaving Rugby, he joined the 52nd foot as a volunteer, and received a commission as ensign on 10 January 1811. That year he joined the British army in the Spanish peninsula, where his regiment, with the 43rd and the 95th, formed the famous light division. He took part in the battle of Sabugal on 3 April, and in the combat of El Bodon on 25 September, though his regiment was not engaged. He assisted in the storming of Ciudad Rodrigo on 19 January 1812, and of Badajoz on 6 April. On 8 July 1812 he became lieutenant, and was present at the battle of Salamanca on 22 July and at that of Vitoria on 21 June 1813, where the 52nd carried the village of Magarita with an impetuous charge. He took part with his regiment in the combats in the Pyrenees in July and August, the combat of Vera on 3 October, and the battle of the Nivelle on 10 November, of the Nive on 10-13 December, of Orthez on 27 February 1814, of Tarbes on 12 March, and of Toulouse on 12 April. He was the first man in the British army to enter Toulouse. While in command of an advanced picket he observed the French retreat, and, boldly pushing on, took possession of the town. At the close of the war the regiment was placed in garrison at Castelsarrasin on the Garonne, and afterwards was sent to Ireland. Whichcote took part in the battle of Waterloo, where the 52nd completed the rout of the imperial guard. He was quartered in Paris during the occupation by the allies, and on his return home received the Waterloo medal and the silver war medal with nine clasps, before he had attained his majority. When his regiment was sent to Australia, Whichcote transferred into the Buffs. 
On 22 January 1818 Whichcote obtained his captaincy, and in 1822 transferred to the 4th dragoon guards. He was made major on 29 October 1825, lieutenant-colonel on 28 June 1838, and colonel on 11 November 1851. In 1825 he was placed on half pay, and on 4 June 1857 attained the rank of major-general; he was promoted lieutenant-general on 31 January 1864, and became a full general on 5 December 1871. In 1842 he married Charlotte Sophia (died 1880), daughter of Philip Monckton; they had no children. Whichcote died on 26 August 1891 at Meriden, near Coventry, where he had lived since retiring from active service, and was buried there on 31 August. At his death he was well known as almost the last surviving British officer who had fought at Waterloo. 


@@@@@


doc= 29204


Whichelo, (Charles) John Mayle (bap. 1784, d. 1865), watercolour painter, was baptized on 28 December 1784 at St Nicholas's Church, Brighton, the eldest of the five children (he had three brothers and a sister) of Richard Whichelo, brewer, and his wife, Ann, the daughter of Francis Wood, yeoman. He is believed to have been a pupil of John Varley, and of Joshua Cristall, whose style his work more closely resembles. Whichelo was chiefly a marine painter who made studies of the channel coasts in England, and to a lesser extent the Netherlands and Belgium, as well as of the harbours and dockyards of his native land. But he was also a landscapist and an art teacher, and he spent his early career as a topographer in London. He was first known as the illustrator of 'Select Views of London and its Environs' (2 vols., 1804-5). Some of his drawings were engraved for Robert Wilkinson's 'Londina illustrata' (1819) and three plates, after drawings by 'Whichelo', appear in E. W. Brayley's 'Beauties of England and Wales' (18 vols., 1801-15). He is also said to have produced topographical drawings to illustrate copies of 'Pennant's Tours', at 5's'. each. At this time he lived centrally but in 1823 he moved further out, to Chalk Cottage, Brixton, and later Norwood. From 1834 until his death he again lived in the city. 
Two of his brothers, Henry Mayle Whichelo and Richard Mayle Whichelo, served in the Royal Navy, the latter at Trafalgar, and it was as a promising marine artist that John Whichelo was fortunate enough to be given a sitting by Nelson when he visited Merton in September 1805. Whichelo's fine chalk portrait, mounted on canvas, depicts Nelson in vice-admiral's undress uniform, wearing the star of Bath. He is pictured in left profile 'with grey hair, grey eye, leathery and weather-beaten complexion' (Walker, 260). In 1811 Whichelo's large canvas 'The Battle of Trafalgar' was exhibited at the British Institution, and he returned to this theme in later years. Graves's 'Dictionary' identifies four artists with the surname Whichelo who exhibited in the mid-nineteenth century, and the potential for confusion in attributing works is made greater by Whichelo's 'proved trick of shedding prefixes', so that exhibition catalogues 'show some looseness in recording his name' (Roget, 1.525). He is listed in the catalogues of the Society of Painters in Water Colours as 'J. Whichelo' (1823-9), 'J. M. Whichelo' (1830-34), and 'John Whichelo' (after 1835). He first appears in the catalogues of the Royal Academy as 'C. J. M. Whichelo' in 1810, when he exhibited 'View on Brighton Beach'. In 1812 he sent 'Portsmouth Beach' to the Royal Academy. By this date he was described as 'Marine and Landscape Painter to His R. H. the Prince Regent'. After 1818 there is no further mention of his position at court. He exhibited at the academy in 1816-17, and again in 1819 -- on the latter occasion he sent 'A Scene from Roderick the Last of the Goths' which illustrates lines from Robert Southey. Although the subject matter is untypical of his work, the painting, attributed to 'John Whichelo', is assumed to be his. He sent a total of fifteen works to the academy and thirteen to the British Institution. 
On 10 February 1823 Whichelo was one of three landscape painters to be elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, which was seeking to secure its future by augmenting its numerical strength. Whichelo contributed four sea pieces to the exhibition at the society's new gallery in Pall Mall East in 1823 and remained an associate to his death. He generally sent three or four drawings to the summer exhibitions, besides having some fifty 'sketches and studies' in the first four winter shows. In all he sent over 200 works, the majority of them marine paintings such as 'Portsmouth Naval Arsenal' (1827) and 'Rotterdam Boats Passing Dort in a Fresh Breeze' (1831). There were also occasional studies of men-of-war at Portsmouth and the Medway. He painted four naval scenes, two of which depicted events of his own time, namely 'The Bombardment of St Jean d'Acre' (1841) and 'The British Fleet, under Sir Charles Napier, Entering the Baltic' (1854); the others were 'The Glorious Battle of the Nile' (1844) and 'HMS Victory in the Battle of Trafalgar Firing Her First Broadside' (1851). The fiery theme of these two works was also evident in the sketch 'Burning of Drury Lane Theatre', exhibited in 1864-5. Whichelo also exhibited five subjects from Jersey in 1854, including a man-of-war coming to relieve a mail steamer in distress off Corbiere rocks. 
Whichelo's last works were chiefly English landscapes, mostly views from Surrey and the New Forest. He painted 'elaborate tree subjects with small figures, in which the foliage, though rather stiff and mannered, was not ill executed' (Roget, 2.202). He also produced some river views from the Rhine and the Scheldt, and landscapes from Switzerland. One or two works on the coast of Sicily were most probably from sketches made by other hands. Whichelo is described by a friend who knew him when he lived in Haymarket (1838-46) as 'a gentlemanlike man, and tall in stature' (ibid., 2.203). There is uncertainty as to whether or not John Whichelo married, and the drawing-master son that some authorities credit him with was probably his nephew Henry Mayle Whichelo junior. Around 1841 he lived with his sister Ann (or Anne) Rowe and her two daughters at Charles Street Chambers, and a decade later he was living at Ravenscourt Park with the same two nieces. He died at Kensington on 2 August 1865. His drawings and art property were sold at Christies on 10 April 1866. His works are represented in the collections of the Fitzwilliam Museum, the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, and the National Maritime Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 29205


Whiddon, Jacob (d. 1595), sea captain, whose origins are obscure, was by 1578 the master of the 'Hope of Greenway' on the influentially supported but unsuccessful colonizing expedition to Newfoundland headed by Sir Humphrey Gilbert. On 30 January 1584 Sir George Carey, governor of the Isle of Wight, told Sir Francis Walsingham that Whiddon reported great preparation in Lisbon for the fitting out of a large fleet and the collecting of ships in other parts of Portugal and Spain 'for the making of the hugest army by sea that ever was set forth by Spain' for the subversion of religion in England (TNA: PRO, SP 12/167, no. 53). He was captain of Sir Walter Ralegh's ship 'Roebuck' in the fleet commanded by Sir Richard Grenville which sailed from Plymouth on 9 April 1585, but not before privateering a French ship in the channel. Thomas Harriot ('c'.1560-1621) had tutored Ralegh's sea captains at Durham House in mathematics and navigation and went on this voyage, recording the findings memorably in 'A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land' (1588). In June 1586 Ralegh sent out from Plymouth two privateers, the 'Serpent' and the 'Mary Sparke', under Whiddon's command and they took prizes including three Portuguese ships. 
Famously, Whiddon took the 'Roebuck' against the Armada and was used by Drake to escort into Torbay his prize, the 'Nuestra Senora del Rosario', the crippled flagship of Don Pedro de Valdes. The lords lieutenant of Devon took all the shot and powder out of Valdes's ship and sent it to the navy, as well as a piece of ordnance; Whiddon appears to have rustled out of the galleon nine or ten other pieces of ordnance, a quantity of muskets and calivers, and fourteen or fifteen coffers containing cloth of gold and other rich furniture. In 1589 the States complained that the 'Roebuck' had taken from a ship of Holland bound for London four butts of sack, and in March it took into Plymouth the 'Angel Gabriel' of Holland returning from Spain; goods worth over $1000 were seized. About the same time, the 'Roebuck' took goods belonging to merchants of the United Provinces from a Hamburg ship. 
In 1590 Whiddon was captain of the 'Pilgrim' which took a prize of $500. In 1591 he served gallantly in the assault by Spanish ships on the 'Revenge' off the Azores and stayed all night to help Grenville, escaping in the morning when he was being 'hunted like a hare amongst many ravenous hounds' (Hakluyt, 7.44). In 1594, when Whiddon was arrested at the suit of Dutch merchants, Sir Robert Cecil wrote to the judges of the admiralty court requesting his prompt release, 'for I assure you it concerns Sir Walter Ralegh very near' (BL, Lansdowne MS 158, fol. 395). For Ralegh was sending Whiddon to explore the River Orinoco and its tributaries in Guiana in the search for El Dorado. In preparation, Thomas Harriot had provided Ralegh's ships with new tables from observations of the pole star and sun and laid down rules for the use of the improved instruments of his devising (BL, Add. MS 6788, fols. 468-492). Whiddon's journey had no very promising outcome. After receiving him with apparent amity, the governor of Trinidad treacherously ambushed eight of his men when Whiddon left temporarily to see a sister ship, the 'Edward Bonaventure'. Meeting many other unexpected impediments, Whiddon returned home. 
Nevertheless Ralegh sailed for Guiana early in 1595. Arriving at Trinidad on 22 March, he sent Whiddon to speak with the Spaniards who kept guard at Port of Spain and gather information about Guiana. Ralegh secured his base on the island by firing the Spanish settlement at San Josef and capturing the governor, Antonio de Berreo. He put to death all the Spaniards he caught, but spared Berreo and his second in command for the intelligence which they might provide. Once in Guiana, Whiddon and the ship's surgeon went to discover what they could by land when floods prevented Ralegh entering the River Caroli by water; they brought him stones like sapphires, and upon his return to England in August 1595 he declared the empire of Guiana would afford queen and country 'no less quantities of treasure, than the King of Spain hath in all the Indies, east or west' (Hakluyt, 10.351). Whiddon, however, had died in Trinidad on the journey home; Ralegh declared him 'a man most honest and valiant' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 29206


Whiddon, Sir John (d. 1576), judge, was the eldest son of John Whiddon of Chagford, Devon, where his family had long been established. His mother, whose maiden name was Rugg, was also a native of Chagford. He was admitted to the Inner Temple, probably between 1510 and 1515, though his presence is not recorded before 1519, when he was fined for a moot-fail and was then put out of commons for misbehaviour. Already by 1520 he is mentioned as an attorney in the court of requests, and in the poll-tax assessment of 1523 he was reckoned to be worth $40 in goods, the same as Thomas Audley and Nicholas Hare. He was elected autumn reader in 1528, but the reading was postponed until Lent 1529; it was well attended by future legal dignitaries, including Audley, Hare, and John Baldwin. From 1530 he was a justice of the peace for Devon. 
Whiddon was twice married. His first wife was Anne, daughter of Sir William Hollis; they had a daughter. His second was Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William Shilston; they had a large family of six sons and seven daughters. Whiddon gave a second reading in 1536, and served as treasurer of his inn from 1538 to 1539. He was the most senior of the last general call of serjeants projected by Henry VIII; the writs abated on the demise of the crown, but Whiddon and the others were duly created in February 1547. In 1551, on the death of fellow Devonian John Harris, he was made one of the king's serjeants; and on 4 October 1553 he was appointed a justice of the queen's bench. In 1555 he became the secondary justice, and he was knighted the same year. He is reputed to have been the first judge to ride to Westminster Hall on a horse rather than a mule, as was the previous custom. His judicial appointment was renewed by Elizabeth I, and he remained in office until his death on 27 January 1576, which probably occurred at Chagford where he was buried and where there is a monumental inscription. His estates included several tin-workings in the Devon stannaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 29207


Whincop, Thomas (1697-1730), playwright and literary biographer, was the only son of Dr Thomas Whincop (died 1713), rector of St Mary Abchurch, and Judith Hastings ('fl'. 1694-1712), of Shadwell in Middlesex. He was born in London on 2 June 1697, and baptized three days later in his father's church. Among his relatives may be numbered Dr John Whincop (died 1653), rector of St Martin-in-the-Fields between 1642 and 1643, and Samuel Whincop (died 1660), vicar of Cheshunt. Between 1706 and 1709 Whincop attended Merchant Taylors' School in London. He then moved to a school in Bishop's Stortford, before gaining admission to Corpus Christi, Cambridge. In 1713 Whincop's father died, leaving instructions that the family inheritance, invested 'upon Mortgages or upon East-India Bonds or any other new Securities', should be held in trust until his son's twenty-fourth birthday. After graduating BA in 1719, Whincop had every expectation of inheriting this estate. However, before the funds could be released, the entire fortune disappeared in the South Sea stock crash of 1720-21. At an unknown date he married a woman named Martha (died 1782). 
Little is known of the final years of Whincop's life. He died at home in Totteridge, Hertfordshire, on 1 September 1730, having spent his final months as a lodger in the house of a Mr Porter. The parish register of St Andrew's Church, Totteridge, where he was buried, describes Whincop as a 'Poet', yet his only known drama, 'Scanderbeg, or, Love and Liberty', remained unpublished until 1747. The tragedy, which dramatizes the struggle of George Castriot to defend Albania from Turkish conquest, takes as its source the 1721 English translation of 'Scanderbeg the Great' by Anne de La Roche-Guilhem. In the light of the patriot whig opposition to Walpole, Whincop's dramatic portrait of the Albanian hero whose 'conqu'ring sword / Oppos'd the torrent of the tyrant's power' ('Scanderbeg', 16) may well have been intended as a propaganda piece. However, Whincop's play was never performed, John Rich telling Whincop's widow that 'it will by no means do for the Stage' (ibid., preface). 
More than a decade after its rejection by Rich, Martha Whincop finally succeeded in publishing her husband's play by subscription. Appended to the printed edition of 1747 is 'A compleat list of all the English dramatic poets, and of all the plays ever printed in the English language', illustrated with a series of small medallion engravings by Nathaniel Parr. This 'List', which contains details of over 1500 plays and 350 authors, draws heavily upon Gerard Langbaine's 'Account of the English Dramatic Poets' (1691), and Giles Jacob's 'Poetical Register' (1720-21). However, as Whincop died in 1730, the extent of his involvement in its compilation is uncertain. Internal evidence suggests that the 'List' was revised and expanded by John Mottley, the entry on Mottley himself being full of personal anecdote. 
Following the publication of 'Scanderbeg' in 1747, Martha Whincop found work in London as a linen draper. She died on 21 March 1782 and was buried near her husband in the north-east corner of the churchyard at Totteridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 29208


Whinyates, Sir Edward Charles (1782-1865), army officer, born on 6 May 1782, was the third son of Major Thomas Whinyates (1755-1806) of Abbotsleigh, Devon, and Catherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Frankland, bt, of Thirkleby Park, Yorkshire. He was educated at Mr Newcombe's school, Hackney, and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, which he entered as a cadet on 16 May 1796. He was commissioned as second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery on 1 March 1798, and became lieutenant on 2 October 1799. He served in the expedition of that year to The Helder, and in the expedition to Madeira in 1801. When Madeira was evacuated at the peace of Amiens, he went with his company to Jamaica, and was made adjutant. On 8 July 1805 he was promoted second captain, and came home. He served as adjutant to the artillery in the attack on Copenhagen in 1807. In the following year he was posted to D troop of the horse artillery. 
In February 1810 Whinyates embarked with his troop for the Peninsula, but the 'Camilla' transport, on which he was sailing, nearly foundered, and had to put back. Owing to this, D troop did not take the field as a unit until 1811, but Whinyates was present at Busaco on 27 September 1810, and acted as adjutant to the officer commanding the artillery. He was at Albuera on 16 May 1811 with four guns, and there are letters of his describing this and subsequent actions. He and his troop took part in the cavalry affair at Usagre on 25 May, and in the actions at Fuentes-Guinaldo and Aldea de Ponte on 25 and 27 September. 
In 1812 the troop was with Hill's corps on the Tagus; at Ribera, on 24 July, Whinyates made such good use of two guns that the French commander Lallemand enquired his name, and sent him a message: 'Tell that brave man that if it had not been for him, I should have beaten your cavalry' (F. T. Whinyates, 63). The captain of D troop died at Madrid on 22 October, and for the next four months Whinyates was in command of it. It distinguished itself at San Munoz on 17 November, at the close of the retreat from Burgos, five out of its six guns being injured. General Long, who commanded the cavalry to which it was attached, afterwards wrote of the troop that he had never witnessed 'more exemplary conduct in quarters, nor more distinguished zeal and gallantry in the field'. 
On 24 January 1813 Whinyates became captain, and consequently left the Peninsula in March. His service there won him no promotion, as brevet rank was not given at that time to second captains. In 1814 he was appointed to the 2nd rocket troop, and he commanded it at Waterloo. Wellington, who did not believe in rockets, ordered that they should be left behind; when he was told that this would break Whinyates's heart, he replied: 'Damn his heart; let my orders be obeyed.' However, Whinyates eventually obtained leave to bring them into the field, together with his six guns. When Ponsonby's brigade charged D'Erlon's corps, he followed it with his rocket sections, and fired several volleys of ground rockets with good effect against the French cavalry. In the course of the day he had three horses shot under him, was struck on the leg, and severely wounded in the left arm. He received a brevet majority and the Waterloo medal, and afterwards the Peninsular silver medal with clasps for Busaco and Albuera. 
At the end of 1815 the rocket troop went to England to be reduced, and Whinyates was appointed to a troop of drivers in the army of occupation, with which he remained until 1818. He commanded H troop of horse artillery from 1823 to 22 July 1830, when he became regimental lieutenant-colonel. He was knighted in 1823 and made CB in 1831. He had command of the horse artillery at Woolwich from November 1834 to May 1840, and of the artillery in the northern district for eleven years afterwards, having become regimental colonel on 23 November 1841. 
On 1 April 1852 Whinyates was appointed director-general of artillery, and on 19 August commandant at Woolwich, where he remained until 1 June 1856. He had been promoted major-general on 20 June 1854, and became lieutenant-general on 7 June 1856 and general on 10 December 1864. He was made KCB on 18 May 1860. He had become colonel-commandant of a battalion on 1 April 1855, and was transferred to the horse artillery on 22 July 1864. He was 'an officer whose ability, zeal, and services have hardly been surpassed in the regiment' (Duncan, 2.37). 
In 1827 Whinyates had married Elizabeth, only daughter of Samuel Compton of Wood End, North Riding, Yorkshire. They had no children. He died at Dorset Villa, Cheltenham, on 25 December 1865. Whinyates had five brothers, of whom four served with distinction in the army and navy. 
The eldest, 
Whinyates was made post captain on 12 August 1812, and on his way home, in charge of convoy, he was attacked on 18 October by the United States sloop 'Wasp' of 434 tons. The 'Frolic' had been much damaged in a gale, and after an action of fifty minutes, in which more than half her crew were killed or wounded, including her commander, she was boarded and taken. She was recovered, and the 'Wasp' was taken by the 'Poictiers' the same day. The court martial which tried Whinyates for the loss of his ship acquitted him most honourably, as having done all that could be done. In 1815 he was appointed to a corvette, but she was paid off at the peace. He was promoted rear-admiral on 1 October 1846, and died unmarried at Cheltenham on 15 March 1857. He received the silver war medal with five clasps. 
The fourth son of Thomas Whinyates, 
The fifth son, 
The sixth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 29209


Francis Frankland Whinyates (1796-1887), army officer in the East India company, born on 30 June 1796, entered the East India Company's service at the age of sixteen, and was gazetted as lieutenant-fireworker in the Madras artillery in July 1813. After serving in Ceylon and against the Pindaris, he took part in the Anglo-Maratha War of 1817-19 as a subaltern in A troop horse artillery, and received the medal with clasp for Mehidpur (21 December 1817). Promoted captain on 24 October 1824, he served at the siege of Kittur at the end of that year. He was principal commissary of ordnance from 1845 to 1850, and then had command of the horse artillery, and of the Madras artillery as brigadier. He left India in 1854, having 'filled, with the highest credit to himself, every appointment and command connected with his corps' (General Order, 10 Feb 1854). He became major-general on 28 November 1854, lieutenant-general on 14 July 1867, and general on 21 January 1872. On 7 August 1826 he had married Elizabeth, daughter of John Campbell of Ormidale, Argyll; they had no children. Whinyates died at 94 Sydney Place, Bath, on 22 January 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 29210


Frederick William Whinyates (1793-1881), army officer in the East India Company, born on 29 August 1793, was commissioned as second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 14 December 1811, and became lieutenant on 1 July 1812. He was present at the bombardment of Algiers on 27 August 1816, being in command of a detachment of sappers and miners on the 'Impregnable'. He left a graphic account of the bombardment ('Royal Engineers' Journal', 11.26). He received the medal. He served with the army of occupation in France, and made reports on some of the French fortresses (later acquired by the Royal Engineers' Institute, Chatham). He was commanding royal engineer with the field force in New Brunswick when the disputed territory was invaded by the state of Maine in 1839. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 9 November 1846, and colonel on 16 December 1854. He retired as major-general on 13 January 1855. He married, on 25 January 1830, Sarah Marianne, second daughter of Charles Whalley of Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, and had six children, four of whom became officers of the army. He died at Cheltenham on 9 January 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 29211


George Barrington Whinyates (1783-1808), naval officer, born on 31 August 1783, entered the navy as first-class volunteer in 1797, and saw much active service, chiefly in the Mediterranean. In 1805, as lieutenant in the 'Spencer', seventy-four guns, he served under Nelson in the blockade of Toulon, the voyage to the West Indies, and the blockade of Cadiz, but his ship, which formed part of the inshore squadron, was sent to Gibraltar for provisions three days before Trafalgar. He was in Duckworth's action off St Domingo on 6 February 1806. In 1807 he commanded the 'Bergere' sloop in the Mediterranean and the channel. He died of consumption, brought on by hardship and exposure, on 5 August 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 29212


Thomas Whinyates (1778-1857), naval officer, born on 7 September 1778, entered the navy as first-class volunteer on 24 May 1793. He commanded a boat in the attack and capture of Martinique in March 1794, and assisted in boarding the French frigate 'Bienvenue'. He was also present at the capture of St Lucia and Guadeloupe. He was in Lord Bridport's action of 23 June 1795, and in that of Sir John Warren on 12 October 1798. He was commissioned as lieutenant on 7 September 1799, and as commander on 16 May 1805. In April 1807 he was appointed to the 'Frolic', an eighteen-gun brig of 384 tons. He took her out to the West Indies, and spent five years there, being present at the recapture of Martinique on 24 February 1809 and of Guadeloupe on 5 February 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 29213


Whipple, George Mathews (1842-1893), physicist, was born on 15 September 1842 at Teddington, Middlesex, the son of George Whipple, master of the public school. He was educated at the grammar school, Kingston upon Thames, at Dr Williams's school at Richmond, Surrey, and at King's College, London, taking the degree of BSc of the University of London as a mature student in 1871. Whipple joined the staff of Kew observatory in January 1858, becoming magnetic assistant in 1862, chief assistant in November 1863, and superintendent in 1876. He drew the plates for Warren de la Rue's 'Researches in solar physics', 1865-6, improved the Kew magnetic instruments, and invented, besides other optical apparatus, a device for testing the dark shades of sextants. On 30 June 1870 he married Elizabeth Martha, daughter of Robert Beckley, machinist at the observatory. Their eldest son was the manufacturer and collector of scientific instruments Robert Stewart Whipple. 
Between 1873 and 1888 Whipple undertook a series of pendulum experiments to determine the constant of gravitation. Wind pressure and velocity were his lifelong study; he carried out at the Crystal Palace in 1874 a reinvestigation of the cup anemometer invented by Thomas Romney Robinson, and with General Richard Strachey in 1890 experimented with cloud photography for the meteorological council, communicating the results to the Royal Society on 23 April 1891. 
Whipple contributed freely to scientific collections, especially to the 'Quarterly Journal of the Meteorological Society'. He joined the Meteorological Society (later the Royal Meteorological Society) on 18 April 1874. He served on its council (1876-87), and acted as its foreign secretary (1884-5). He sat also for many years on the council of the Physical Society of London, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society on 12 April 1872. He was assistant examiner in natural philosophy to the University of London (1876-81), and in the Department of Science and Art, South Kensington (1879-82 and 1884-9). The magnetic section of the 'Report on the Eruption of Krakatoa', published by the Royal Society in 1888, was compiled by him. He died at his home, Oak Villa, Jocelyn Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 8 February 1893. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 29214


Whish, Sir William Sampson (1787-1853), army officer in the East India Company, was the son of Richard Whish (died 1810), rector of West Walton, Norfolk, and vicar of Wickford, Essex, and his wife, Philippa, daughter of William Sandys. He was born at Northwold, Norfolk, on 27 February 1787. He received a commission as lieutenant in the Bengal artillery on 21 August 1804, and arrived in India in December. He was promoted captain on 13 May 1807, and commanded the rocket troop of horse artillery of the centre division of the grand army under the marquess of Hastings in the Pindari and Anglo-Maratha wars at the end of 1817 and beginning of 1818. He afterwards took the troop to Meerut, where, on 26 July 1820, he was appointed to act as brigade major. He was promoted major on 19 July 1821. 
Whish married, in 1809, a daughter of George Dixon, and his eldest son, G. Palmer Whish, general of the Bengal staff corps, served with his father at Gujrat. Another son, Henry Edward Whish, major-general of the Bengal staff corps, served with his father at the siege of Multan, and was in the Indian mutiny campaign. 
Whish commanded the 1st brigade of horse artillery in the army assembled at Agra, under Lord Combermere, in December 1825, for the siege of Bharatpur. The place was captured by assault on 18 January 1826, and Whish was mentioned in dispatches and promoted lieutenant-colonel for distinguished service in the field from 19 January. On 23 December 1826 he was appointed to command the Karnal and Sirhind division of artillery. He received the CB, military division, in 1838; was appointed a colonel commandant of artillery, with rank of brigadier-general and with a seat on the military board, on 21 December; and in February 1839 he succeeded Major-General Faithful in command of the presidency division of artillery at Dum-Dum. He was promoted major-general on 23 November 1841, and went on furlough to England until the end of 1847. 
Whish was appointed to the command at Lahore of the Punjab division on 23 January 1848. In August he was given the command of the Multan field force, 8000 strong, to operate against Mulraj, the Muslim governor of Multan province, and towards the end of the month took up a position in front of Multan. The siege commenced on 7 September, but, owing to the defection of Sher Singh a week later, Whish withdrew his forces to Tibi, and a period of inaction followed, which enabled Mulraj to improve his defences and to increase his garrison in Multan. At the beginning of November Mulraj prepared batteries which threatened Whish's camp, and on 7 November a successful action resulted in the destruction of Mulraj's advanced batteries and the capture of five guns. On 21 December Whish was reinforced by a column from Bombay, and on Christmas day was able to occupy his old position before Multan. On 27 December the enemy were driven from the suburbs, and the siege recommenced on 28 December. The city was captured on 2 January 1849, and the siege of the citadel pressed forward. On 22 January Mulraj surrendered the citadel rather than face an assault. 
Leaving a strong garrison in Multan, Whish marched to join Lord Gough, capturing the fort of Chiniot on 9 February, on which day the advanced portion of his force reached Ramnagar. Anticipating Lord Gough's orders, Whish secured the fords of the Chenab at Wazirabad, and on 21 February commanded the 1st division of Lord Gough's army at the battle of Gujrat. He received the thanks of the governor-general, of the court of directors of the East India Company, and of both houses of parliament. He was made KCB, military division, and was transferred to the command of the Bengal division of the army in March. In October 1851 he was appointed to the Cis-Jhelum division, but before assuming command went on furlough, 'driven home by extreme ill health' ('GM', 437). He was promoted lieutenant-general on 11 November 1851. Having come from Cheltenham for medical treatment, he died at Claridge's Hotel, Brook Street, London, on 25 February 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 29215


Whistler, Daniel (1618/19-1684), physician, son of William Whistler, gentleman of Elvington, Goring, Oxfordshire, was born at Walthamstow, Essex. He was educated at the free school of Thame, Oxfordshire, and matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 12 June 1635, aged sixteen. He graduated BA in 1639, became a fellow of Merton College in 1640, and on 8 August 1642 began studying medicine at Leiden. He returned to Oxford to take his MA in 1644, in which year he became a member of Gray's Inn, London, and spent time with William Harvey (1578-1657), then warden of Merton, before returning to Leiden, where he graduated MD on 19 October 1645. He incorporated his Leiden MD at Oxford on 20 May 1647, decamped soon after for London, and was elected professor of geometry at Gresham College on 13 June 1648. He became superior Linacre reader at Oxford about the time of his Gresham appointment, though he did not deliver the lectures. He was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians on 13 December 1649. During 1653-4 he and an Oxford colleague, Ralph Bathurst (died 1704), cared for seamen, wounded in the Dutch war, at Ipswich, Harwich, and possibly London. 
In 1653 Whistler served as physician to Bulstrode Whitelocke's embassy to Sweden, which he commemorated with Latin verses on the abdication of Queen Kristina that were printed in the 'Journal of the Swedish Ambassy'. In July 1654 he returned to London and developed a lucrative practice. He may have been the Daniel Whistler who, on 7 April 1656, married Elizabeth Lowther at Little Ilford, Essex, at which time he resigned his Gresham professorship. At the College of Physicians he delivered the Harveian oration in 1659 and served twelve terms as censor between 1657 and 1680; he also served as college registrar in 1674-82, elect from 1676, treasurer in 1682, and president in 1683. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1663 ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. 
Whistler completed his major intellectual project, 'De morbo puerili Anglorum, quem patrio idiomate indigenae vocant 'The rickets'' (1645) at the age of twenty-six as a thesis for his Leiden MD. During the 1640s the disease of rickets, which may have accounted for as many as 3 per cent of English deaths (bills of mortality for 1659: 476 of 15,000 burials; cited in Walter Langdon-Brown, 'Some Chapters in Cambridge Medical History', 1946, 35), aroused the interest of several English physicians and natural philosophers, including an informal study group of seven from the College of Physicians. Whistler's text is the first printed book devoted to rickets, but it is highly theoretical, contains little original material, and did not influence contemporaries. In contrast, the college project which culminated in Francis Glisson's influential 1650 publication 'Tractatus de rachitide' of 416 pages was soon republished in several Latin and English editions. 
Whistler seems to have been a man of charming manners and considerable talent, but he died facing imminent disgrace. While Pepys, who dined with him several times, wrote that he was 'good company, and a very ingenious man' and John Evelyn found him exceedingly pleasant in manner, Whistler performed negligently as registrar of the College of Physicians. At the time of his death in London from fever and pneumonia on 11 May 1684 he was living at the college, then in Warwick Lane. He was buried in the north aisle of Christ Church Greyfriars, London. Shortly after his death, Whistler's former colleagues in the college became convinced that he had defrauded it of substantial sums. Wood observed that although Whistler earned $1000 per year from his medical practice and was married to a rich widow, 'yet he died very much in debt'. In 1704 Mr Boulter gave a portrait of him to the college, a gesture its nineteenth-century chronicler believed placed Whistler 'in company too good for his deserts' (Munk, 251). 


@@@@@


doc= 29216


Whiston, John (1711-1780), bookseller, was born in London on 30 July 1711, son of William Whiston (1667-1752), theologian, and his wife, Ruth Antrobus (1671-1751). Whiston's early years remain vague, though it is known that he was apprenticed to Fletcher Gyles, a bookseller in Holborn, before being made free of the Merchant Taylors' Company on 6 February 1733; he entered the livery of that company on 19 December 1746. Within a year of completing his apprenticeship, Whiston had established a bookshop in Fleet Street, London, under the sign of Mr Boyle's Head in honour of Robert Boyle and in recognition of his father's position in 1707 as the Boyle lecturer at Oxford. The shop reputedly became the rendezvous for distinguished literati and clergymen. 
Whiston's earliest distinctions were as one of the printers of the votes of the House of Commons and as one of the original publishers of priced catalogues. In 1735 he bought and catalogued the entire library of Edward Chishull and in 1747 he catalogued the library of Bishop Moore at Cambridge University which had been bequeathed by George I in 1715. Whiston was also called upon to assist with the disposal of Nicholas Mann's library at Eton College following Mann's death in 1753. Some twelve years later Whiston purchased, seemingly for his own collection, the books which had been in the possession of Adam Anderson (1692?-1765). 
Whiston seems to have published numerous books though nothing of any real distinction. His father's writings were a primary concern and it was in 1749 that he issued the 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Mr William Whiston'; he issued a corrected version in the year after his father's death. During 1761-2, he was actively involved in promoting the 'New and General Biographical Dictionary', which was printed in twelve volumes; a copy of it in the British Library contains extensive marginalia in his hand. He was also noted by John Nichols in 'Literary Anecdotes' as the source of much biographical information. It is believed that at one point his elder brother, George Whiston, was associated with Whiston's business, although this cannot be substantiated. However, between 1749 and 1765 Whiston was, in fact, in partnership with Benjamin White, a former apprentice. It was during this time that Whiston most likely married and his daughters, Sarah and Sophia, were born. On 3 July 1759 Nathaniel Conant was turned over to Whiston to complete his apprenticeship; he later married Whiston's daughter Sarah. 
About 1767 Whiston's business moved to premises at 64 Fleet Street following the dissolution of his partnership with White, who opened his own bookshop next door. By most accounts, though, Whiston had not taken an active role in conducting his business since 1759 when he was apparently forced to retire by a nervous breakdown, reputedly, though implausibly, brought on by shock occasioned by a practical joke. It is said that he spent some time in an asylum and that the bookselling business was carried on by Conant in his absence. On 20 November 1766 Whiston drew up a lengthy, complicated, and at times anguished will over which the experience of his breakdown loomed very large. He began by imploring God to 'supply my want of faith and hope both [of] which by a fatal accident I have for more than seven years been deprived of' and concluded with the request that he be buried at Lyndon, Rutland, near the graves of his parents, with a 'plain stone' carrying an inscription that 'A most unhappy [matter?] in May 1759 caused him to pass the remainder of his days in great misery of Mind and Body' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1066, fols. 71'v', 73'r'). The bookseller Lockyer Davis is cited as one of the executors. However, despite his morbid thoughts of late 1766, Whiston did not die until 3 May 1780 and his will, several lines of which he had crossed out in the meantime, was proved on 22 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 29217


Whiston, William (1667-1752), natural philosopher and theologian, was born on 9 December 1667 at the rectory, Norton-juxta-Twycross, Leicestershire, the fourth of the nine children of Josiah Whiston (1622-1685), rector at Norton, and his wife, Katherine (1639-1701), daughter of Gabriel Rosse, the previous incumbent at Norton, and his first wife, Elizabeth. Josiah Whiston, a presbyterian, retained his living at the Restoration and, though blind in his later years, served his parish diligently until his death. 
Whiston was educated at home by his father, for whom he also acted as amanuensis, and attended grammar school at Tamworth between 1684 and 1686. As second surviving son he inherited the family library and provision for university 'that he may be an able minister of the 'New Testament'' (Farrell, 6). He entered Clare College, Cambridge, as a sizar in September 1686. 
Whiston excelled as a student. He took a keen interest in mathematics, and appeared on the honours list in 1689-90. He graduated BA in 1689, was elected to the Exeter fellowship in July 1691, and was promoted to probationary senior fellow of the college in February 1693, in which year he received his degree of MA. He established himself as a tutor at Clare, counting among his students the nephew of Archbishop Tillotson. He was ordained a deacon in September 1693 by the latitudinarian William Lloyd (1627-1717), bishop of Lichfield and prophetic exegete, from whom he may have begun to derive his interest in biblical prophecy. 
In 1694, claiming ill health, Whiston resigned his tutorship to Richard Laughton, whom he replaced as chaplain to fellow Clare graduate John Moore (1646-1714), bishop of Norwich. During his chaplaincy Whiston divided his time between Norwich, London, and Cambridge -- after his ordination he had returned to Clare to study 'particularly the mathematicks, and the 'Cartesian' philosophy' (Whiston, 'Memoirs', 35-6). He set out to master Isaac Newton's recently published 'Principia mathematica' (1687), encouraged by a paper of the early Newtonian David Gregory (1659-1708). As an undergraduate Whiston had attended only 'one or two' of Newton's lectures, finding them incomprehensible at the time, as he later conceded (ibid., 36). He first met Newton in 1694, and a friendship began that was to last until their estrangement two decades later. 
Whiston's swift conversion to Newton's natural philosophy soon bore fruit in his first publication, 'A New Theory of the Earth' (1696). He had shown this millenarian cosmogony in manuscript to Richard Bentley (1662-1742), Christopher Wren (1632-1723), and Newton himself, whom Whiston claims 'well approved of it' (Whiston, 'Memoirs', 43) and to whom the book was dedicated. Whiston's 'New Theory' applied the physics of Newton and the geology of John Woodward (died 1728) to demonstrate that the scriptural accounts of creation, the flood, and the final conflagration were 'perfectly agreeable to Reason and Phylosophy' (ibid.). He also sought to correct Thomas Burnet's Cartesian and deistically tinged 'Sacred Theory of the Earth' (1681, 1684), which Whiston had defended for his BA degree. Whiston prefaced his earth theory with an essay on the style of 'Genesis' and, like Newton, argued for a more literal hermeneutic. He drew from Newton's work on comets, and posited that the planetary system had solidified from comets attracted by the sun's gravitation. He used a catastrophist cometography to explain the flood, suggesting that the near approach of a divinely guided comet had initiated the diurnal rotation of the earth, transformed its orbit from circular to elliptical, and caused the deluge through the condensation of vapours from the comet's tail. He also identified stratified sedimentary rock and marine fossils found in continental areas as vestiges of the flood. 
The 'New Theory' proved popular and after the initial run of 1500 copies went through five further editions (1708-55), was translated into German (1713), epitomized in French (1718), and summarized by the comte de Buffon (1707-1788) in 1749. The latter wrote ostensibly to refute the 'New Theory', but was nevertheless indebted to some of Whiston's ideas, as were other earth theorists. Praised by John Locke (1632-1704) for its novel hypotheses, the 'New Theory' was the first full-length popularization of Newtonianism and the most direct cause of Whiston's meteoric rise. 
In 1698 Bishop Moore secured the living of Lowestoft-cum-Kessingland, Suffolk, for Whiston, and there the latter regularly delivered sermons, held catechetical lectures, and had 2000 parishioners under his care. Samuel Clarke (1675-1729), with whom Whiston had come into contact in 1697 through their common interest in Newtonianism, replaced him as chaplain at Norwich. Whiston resigned his fellowship at Clare in June 1699 on his marriage to Ruth Antrobus (1671-1751), daughter of George Antrobus, Whiston's headmaster at Tamworth. In 1701, as part of the marriage settlement, Whiston received from his father-in-law farm land near Dullingham, Cambridgeshire, with an annual revenue of $30-$40. Shortly after Whiston's marriage, Newton called him to Cambridge to lecture as his deputy with the full income of his post (Newton had become warden of the Royal Mint in 1696). Whiston began lecturing by February 1701. In December that year Newton resigned and ensured Whiston's election as the third Lucasian professor of mathematics in May 1702. 
During his tenure as professor, Whiston published several works on mathematics, physics, and astronomy. In 1703 he produced an edition of Euclid's 'Elements' 'for the Use of young Students in the University' (Whiston, 'Memoirs', 131). This text was published in six Latin editions (1703-95), ten in English (1714-72), and one in Greek (1805), with printings in Cambridge, London, Dublin, Amsterdam, Venice, and Vienna. In 1707, with Newton's acquiescence, Whiston published some of the former's lectures on algebra ('Arithmetica universalis'). Later the same year Whiston published his own astronomical lectures ('Praelectiones astronomicae'), which appeared subsequently in English ('Astronomical Lectures', 1715, 1728). His 'Praelectiones physico-mathematicae' appeared in 1710 and was later printed as 'Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematick Philosophy More Easily Demonstrated' (1716). Whiston was always far more willing to publish than Newton, and the latter two works, originally composed as undergraduate lectures, offered more accessible treatments of Newtonian astronomy, physics, and mathematics than was available in the abstruse 'Principia'. From May 1707 Whiston and the Plumian professor, Roger Cotes (1682-1716), were the first to deliver lectures on experimental philosophy at Cambridge, presenting experiments elucidating the natural philosophy of both Newton and Robert Boyle (1627-1691). 
Whiston devoted much time to prophetic researches in this period, publishing his 'Essay on the Revelation' in 1706, the first of several works on biblical prophecy. He was also called on to deliver the Boyle lectures for 1707, and chose as his theme the evidence of fulfilled prophecy ('The Accomplishment of Scripture Prophecies', 1708). Finally, Whiston led an initiative to establish charity schools for the education of poor children in Cambridge, and preached the inauguration sermon at Trinity Church in 1705. 
From his achievements as a student and his 'New Theory', through his succession to the Lucasian chair, appointment as Boyle lecturer, and emergence as one of the first leading Newtonians, Whiston accomplished much in these early years. In 1710, however, there came a turning point. By 1706 or 1707, almost certainly as a result of his contact with Newton and Clarke, Whiston embraced an anti-trinitarian theology similar to Arianism, which he often characterized as 'Eusebian'. While the initial impulse to unorthodoxy likely came from Newton, Whiston differed in details -- as well as level of caution -- from his mentor. He became convinced of the canonicity of the pseudepigraphal and Arian 'Apostolic Constitutions', and in 1708 unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the vice-chancellor of Cambridge to license a treatise he had written on this document. Whiston next wrote to the archbishops of Canterbury and York requesting a review of the 'Constitutions'. Spurning advice from friends and superiors, he grew bolder and published a heretical work in 1709 ('Sermons and Essays'). Unwilling to back down, he was brought before the heads of the Cambridge colleges, charged under an Elizabethan university heresy statute, and on 30 October 1710 expelled from his professorship and the university. 
Now a disestablished figure, Whiston began a new phase of his life. Experienced in teaching mathematics, astronomy, physics, and experimental philosophy in an academic setting, he moved to London and became an entrepreneur of natural philosophy, delivering public lectures, publishing popular texts, and successfully seeking patronage from royalty and the nobility for his various schemes. By the summer of 1711 he was living in Hatton Garden and advertising himself as a tutor in mathematics. The following summer he became involved in a public experimental lecture course with Humphrey Ditton (1675-1715), Francis Hauksbee the elder ('c'.1666-1713), and Francis Hauksbee the younger (1687-1763). 
By March 1713 Whiston formed a lecturing partnership with the younger Hauksbee, and a survey of newspaper advertisements reveals that this experimental lecture course was scheduled biannually into the early 1730s. The course syllabus was originally quadripartite, covering mechanics, hydrostatics, pneumatics, and optics; a section on magnetics was added by 1725. In 1714 the partners produced an illustrated course manual, which was reprinted several times into the late 1720s and also used for an experimental course delivered at Oxford by John Whiteside and James Bradley (1693-1762). From the late 1710s to the mid-1720s, Whiston and Hauksbee jointly ran a course of astronomy as well. Both courses were held next door to the Royal Society at Hauksbee's instrument shop in Crane Court, with Whiston delivering the lectures and Hauksbee demonstrating. Whiston also lectured alone on experimental philosophy in Bath and Bristol in the 1720s and into the 1740s on mathematics, astronomy, and longitude in various London coffee shops. Furthermore, he delivered lectures during or after displays of astronomical phenomena, such as eclipses and the aurora borealis, and sold popular charts of the solar system and the solar eclipses of 1715 and 1724. His income was supplemented from 1727 by a $50 annuity from Queen Caroline and King George, and from 1738 by a $20 annuity left by Sir Joseph Jekyll, master of the rolls and one of Whiston's long-time patrons. To these were added various other benefactions and payments of patronage. As he grew older and accumulated more income from patronage, Whiston lectured less frequently. 
Whiston also played an important role in early eighteenth-century attempts to determine longitude at sea, having been interested in this problem from his days as Lucasian professor and convinced that a reliable method would benefit both safety and trade. Whiston and Ditton petitioned parliament in 1714 suggesting a reward be offered for a method accurate to one degree at sea. After the intervention of Newton, Clarke, Cotes, and Edmond Halley (1656-1742), and the circulation of a broadsheet printed by Whiston and Ditton, the 'Longitude Act' was passed the same year. The act and its reward triggered a plethora of hopeful solutions, with Whiston himself presenting several methods. 
The first of these was Whiston's and Ditton's 'New Method for Discovering the Longitude both at Sea and Land' (1714), which proposed that ships anchored at precise intervals across the Atlantic fire star shells to 6440 feet at set times, thus allowing navigators to determine their longitude by calculating the time between the flash and sound of the shell. Whiston also carried out experiments in southern England on the use of star shells for survey work. Second, from 1718 to 1723 Whiston experimented with dipping needles: he presented his findings at the Royal Society and sent the instruments on ocean voyages to various parts of the globe. As part of this work he produced maps of the English Channel, perhaps the first to show isogonic lines ('The Longitude and Latitude Found by the Inclinatory or Dipping Needle', 1721). A subscription raised in 1721 for his longitude work raised just over $470 from royalty, the nobility, and politicians. In 1724 he outlined a method using solar eclipses. A fourth method involved the observation of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites ('The Longitude Discovered by the Eclipses, Occultations, and Conjunctions of Jupiter's Planets', 1738), for which he attempted to improve the design of reflecting telescopes. Finally, supported by $175 from various patrons (including Sir Charles Wager, first commissioner of the Admiralty) and a $500 grant from the board of longitude, Whiston carried out a coastal survey of southern England, and in 1743 published the results in a new map of the English Channel. 
Whiston's prophetic work figures large as well. Believing that the design argument was insufficient on its own to convince deists and other unbelievers of the truth of the 'Bible', he emphasized the argument from prophecy. In his Boyle lectures he claimed that biblical prophecy is 'the most plain and unquestionable evidence that has been produced for the Christian Religion' (Whiston, 'Accomplishment', 2). As in experimental philosophy, he held that the multiplication of proofs increased the probability of the truth of prophecy. He thus presented no fewer than 300 prophetic fulfilments in the lectures. It was probably his quantitative approach to prophecy that encouraged him to expand the prophetic corpus beyond the protestant 'Bible' to defend in print the authority of such pseudepigraphal works as the Sibylline oracles. He also wanted to establish an exact method of prophetic hermeneutics, and with respect to Messianic prophecies rejected allegorical interpretations and multiple fulfilments of the same prophecy. For him, there was only one fulfilment: a literal one, uniquely accomplished in the person of Christ. This claim helped bring him into controversy with the freethinker Anthony Collins (1676-1729), who argued that only the first, historical fulfilment was literal, while Messianic applications were based on strained, allegorical interpretations. 
In his desire to secure literal and exact interpretations, Whiston also employed textual criticism to correct corruptions in the Hebrew text putatively introduced by Jewish copyists ('Essay towards Restoring the True Text of the Old Testament', 1722). This work was the primary target of Collins's 'Discourse on the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion' (1724), which declared that the result of such an endeavour would be 'a mere WHISTONIAN 'BIBLE'' (Collins, 225). The 'Discourse' elicited three replies from Whiston, including two works that bolstered further his inductive programme by listing page after page of prophetic fulfilments. 
Throughout the last three decades of his life, Whiston proclaimed in publications, lectures, and private conversations his belief that by 1766 the temple would be rebuilt, the Jews restored to their land, and the millennium established. This effort included the construction in 1726 of what he contended was 'an exacter model' of the Jerusalem temple (Whiston, 'Description'). He lectured on this model in London and the resort towns of Bristol, Bath, and Tunbridge Wells, and presented it at the court of Queen Caroline. Revealing his twofold interest in anomalous celestial and terrestrial phenomena, Whiston held that such were prophetic signs of the coming end. This belief is exemplified by his public lectures during and after the London earthquakes of 1750, in which he proclaimed divine judgement on the wicked city of London. 
In the wake of his expulsion from Cambridge and during further heresy proceedings against him, Whiston published a manifesto of his faith ('Primitive Christianity Reviv'd', 1711-12), a series of commentaries on, and translations of, early Christian writings. Along with Clarke he was at the centre of the trinitarian controversies of the 1710s and 1720s. In 1715 he founded the Society for Promoting Primitive Christianity, which met for two years in his home. Discussions focused on early Christian texts, beliefs, and practices; members included John Gale (1680-1721), Thomas Emlyn (1663-1741), and Arthur Onslow (1691-1768). By the 1720s Whiston also organized a dissenting conventicle of Unitarians, and there is evidence that some dissenters and early Unitarians looked to him as a role model. 
During the period of tory ascendancy from 1710 to 1714, Whiston became something of a 'cause celebre' among the whigs, just as Henry Sacheverell was seen by many tories and high-churchmen as a martyr. While heresy proceedings against Whiston were dropped at the death of Queen Anne, and though he was never defrocked, he continued to face opposition, particularly from the high church. In 1719 he was excluded from St Andrew's Church in Holborn by its rector, none other than Sacheverell himself, after which Whiston moved from this parish to Great Russell Street in Bloomsbury. Most of the opposition, however, manifested itself in a steady torrent of critical publications. Objecting to the inclusion in liturgy of the Athanasian creed, with its anathemas against those who denied the Trinity, Whiston was often able to persuade clergy to omit it while he was in attendance. However, when a priest began to read it again at the church in Lyndon in 1747, Whiston walked out and thereafter attended the meetings of the General Baptists. 
Whiston produced many publications on theology, church history, chronology, liturgy, ecclesiastical polity, demonology, and miracles. In 1717 he first published his 'Astronomical Principles of Religion', a work highlighting the design argument but also replete with valuable astronomical data and engravings. His translation of the Jewish historian Josephus can be seen as part of these efforts as well. This most successful of Whiston's works, published in 1737 with maps of the Holy Land and engravings of the temple, was long the standard English translation and was in continuous reprint throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Whiston also published a translation of the 'New Testament' from Beza's text in 1745. His beliefs bore remarkable similarities to those of Newton, not only in his subordinationist Christology, rejection of the Trinity, and antipathy towards Athanasius, but also in his Christian primitivism, eirenicism, acceptance of believers' baptism, and movement away from the eternity of hell. 
Although he lived well into his eighty-fifth year, Whiston complained of a weak disposition, which he claimed improved somewhat in later life. In 1710 the German traveller Uffenbach said he '[is] a man of very quick and ardent spirit, tall and spare, with a pointed chin and wears his own hair. In look, he greatly resembles Calvin. He is very fond of speaking and argues with great vehemence' (Mayor, 179). Portraits confirm Whiston's austere appearance; he is said to have gone grey as a young man. Although not a practising minister after 1710, he seems to have retained his clerical garb throughout his life. His writings and actions reveal a headstrong nature and a pronounced martyr complex, along with an attempt to position himself as a religious reformer and latter-day prophet. Nevertheless, he was a principled man whose career clearly suffered for his unwavering commitment to his beliefs. 
William and Ruth Whiston had eight children, of whom Sarah, William, George, and John Whiston survived to adulthood. In 1717 Sarah married the Hebraist Samuel Barker, whose manor, Lyndon Hall, Rutland, became the summer residence for his wife's parents. Her brothers William and George studied at Clare College, though as dissenters they did not take degrees. With their father's involvement the two published a Latin translation of the Armenian historian Mosis Khorenaci (1736). John became a prominent Fleet Street bookseller, who published most of his father's later works and whose home came to serve as his parents' London residence from the 1730s. Thomas Barker (1722-1809), Whiston's grandson through his daughter, published 'An Account of the Discoveries Concerning Comets' (1757), along with meteorological reports in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' and controversial works on baptism, prophecy, and demonology. Whiston died at Lyndon Hall, after a week's illness, on 22 August 1752, and was buried in Lyndon churchyard. At his death he was in possession of farm land valued at over $1300; this was left to his children. 
A tireless and prolific writer, Whiston published over 120 separate books, pamphlets, and charts, many of which appeared in later editions. His range was considerable, extending from geology, mathematics, astronomy, and longitude, to prophecy, doctrine, chronology, and textual criticism, along with translations of biblical, apocryphal, pseudepigraphal, and historical texts. Near the end of his life, he published an 'apologia pro vita sua' ('Memoirs', 1749-50; 2nd edn, 1753), an uneven but invaluable account of his life. 
In natural philosophy Whiston's greatest significance lies not in any important innovations, but in his early and varied efforts at popularizing Newtonianism, along with his role in stimulating the founding of the board of longitude. He was at the forefront of British philosophers that made the transition from Cartesianism to Newtonianism, and one of his most important contributions as Lucasian professor was his teaching of the latter to a new generation. Along with Clarke, Whiston both played a leading role in promoting unitarian theology in England and helped make some of Newton's private theological opinions public. Whiston's commentary on 'Revelation' was cited by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century prophetic exegetes, and his translation of Josephus proved an enduring legacy, finding a place in many Anglo-American homes well into the late twentieth century. 
While Whiston's heterodox theology, prophetic views, longitude schemes, and impetuous nature attracted much criticism and ridicule, he was not without supporters, including royal, noble, and whig patrons, along with fellow dissenters. A vigorous opponent of both deism and unbelief on the one hand and high-church orthodoxy on the other, Whiston sought a middle course between what were to him two extremes. There was a unity in his natural philosophical, prophetic, and religious endeavours, and he fervently believed that both Newton's discoveries in natural philosophy and his own advances in furthering 'primitive Christianity' were preludes to the millennium. 


@@@@@


doc= 29218


Whitaker, Sir Edward (1660?-1735), naval officer, was appointed lieutenant of the 'Swallow', then commanded by Matthew Aylmer, on 16 October 1688. In 1689 he was in the 'Mary', in 1690 (again with Aylmer) in the 'Royal Katherine', and on 15 May 1690 he was promoted captain of the 'Dover' (44 guns), in which, during the following three years, he took several rich prizes and captured many French privateers. On 27 September 1692 he married Ann Stephens (died 1705) of Leigh, Essex. In the same year he was noted as a client of Edward Russell (later earl of Orford), as well as continuing to enjoy the patronage of Aylmer, under whom he was flag-captain in the 'Royal Sovereign' in 1693-4. Between 1695 and 1696 he commanded the 'Elizabeth', 'Monck', and 'St Andrew', and was flag-captain to Sir Cloudesley Shovell in the 'Victory'. In the 1690s he was living at Leigh in Essex. 
In May 1699 Whitaker was appointed to the 'Portland', and on 13 January 1702 to the 'Ranelagh', one of fifty ships commissioned on the same day. A month later, on 16 February, he was appointed master-attendant at Woolwich; he held that office throughout the year. In January 1703 he took command of the 'Dorsetshire', one of the fleet which went with Sir George Rooke to the Mediterranean in 1704. In the capture of Gibraltar, Whitaker acted as aide-de-camp to Sir George Byng, commanded the boats in the attack, rallied the men when they were panic-stricken by the explosion of a magazine, and hoisted the English colours on the bastion. In the battle of Malaga (August 1704) the 'Dorsetshire' was one of the Red squadron, and was closely engaged throughout. Whitaker was knighted soon afterwards, and in 1705 he commanded the 'Barfleur'. Early in 1706 he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue and appointed to command a squadron off Dunkirk; in April he convoyed the duke of Marlborough to Holland. 
In 1708, with his flag in the 'Northumberland', Whitaker went out to the Mediterranean with Sir John Leake, and in August he commanded the detachment which co-operated in the capture of Minorca. When Leake returned to England, Whitaker remained in command, and on 21 December was promoted vice-admiral of the blue. A commission of 20 December to admiral of the blue seems to have been cancelled, and on 14 November 1709 he was made vice-admiral of the white. In January 1709 he was relieved from the position of commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean by Sir George Byng, with whom he remained as second in command, ferrying imperial troops and taking part in the failed attempt to lift the siege of Alicante. He succeeded to the chief command again when Byng returned to England in September 1709. In the summer of 1710 Whitaker also returned to England, and on 26 June he married Cecil (died 1726), his first wife, Ann, having died on 17 June 1705. He was commanding in the downs, cruising in the channel in 1710-12, and played a major part in the occupation of Dunkirk in July 1712. After declining the post of second in command in the Baltic in 1716 he lived in retirement at Carshalton, Surrey. Whitaker died there on 12 November 1735. His will was proved on 3 December by his niece, Mary Whitaker, sole executrix, his second wife having died on 14 February 1726. The will also mentioned first, a nephew, Samuel Whitaker, captain of a ship at Gibraltar and Malaga, and therefore often confused with his uncle; and, second, a granddaughter Ann, daughter of his son, Edward (died 1729). 


@@@@@


doc= 29219


Whitaker, Edward William (bap. 1752, d. 1818), Church of England clergyman and charity administrator, was baptized on 26 January 1752 at St Martin Outwich, London, the son of William Whitaker of London and of Sandgates, Chertsey, Surrey, serjeant-at-law, and his wife, Isabella Rebecca North. He spent some of his early life in the household of a dissenter; nevertheless he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 2 April 1773 as a gentleman commoner, and graduated BA on 4 February 1777. 
Following ordination Whitaker's main income originated from his livings. He was instituted to the rectory of St John the Baptist, Clerkenwell, in 1778 and afterwards held the rectory of St Mildred, Bread Street, in the City of London. From 1783 he was rector of St Mary de Castro and All Saints', Canterbury, a living which he held until his death. On 11 May of the following year he married Mary Morgan at St George's, Hanover Square, London, and their first child, Edward John, was born in 1786. Between 1786 and 1787 Whitaker taught at the King's School, Canterbury, and for many years the family lived at Thorpe, near Egham, Surrey, where Whitaker kept a school. Other energies went into charitable good works. In the early years of the nineteenth century he established a charity to provide an 'Asylum for Male and Female Outcasts' ('GM', 76/1.424), later renamed the Refuge for the Destitute. The institution began by providing out-relief, and then 'a place of refuge for persons discharged from prisons, or the hulks, unfortunate and deserted females, and others, who from loss of character, or extreme indigence' ('A Short Account', 2) could not support themselves. A building on Cuper's Bridge, Lambeth, was acquired and the first two inmates admitted on 12 November 1806. A pamphlet, probably published in 1807, named Prince Frederick, duke of York, as president, with Whitaker as joint treasurer, and stated that of 275 applicants 119 had been admitted, 67 relieved out of house, and 89 rejected, and 64 were at present in the refuge. 
Whitaker was also a productive and varied author. He joined in the polemical warfare against Joseph Priestley's Unitarianism with his 'Four dialogues on the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, taught throughout the scriptures, and on other points which have of late been subjects of... discussion' (1786) and followed it with 'A letter to the Reverend Dr Priestley, on his appeal to the ecclesiastical writers of the first centuries', which contained trinitarian references drawn from the apostles and the fathers. The 'Sermons on Education' (1788) were prompted by his intention of taking pupils; they insisted that each boy must receive a thorough grounding in the principles of Christianity. Whitaker had an incurable interest in prophetic literature. His 'A general and connected view of the prophecies relating to the times of the gentiles, delivered by our blessed saviour, the prophet David, and the apostles Paul and John; with a brief account of their accomplishment to the present age' (1795) offers proof of real learning. It was, Whitaker unblushingly admitted, inspired by reading Edward Gibbon on the predictions of the book of 'Revelation'. 'The Manual of Prophecy' (1808) was a collection of 'predictions relating to that restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy Prophets since the world began' (p. 3). Whitaker was always strongly anti-Romanist, insisting against other commentators that the Antichrist appeared exclusively in papal guise. His most substantial book was 'An Abridgement of Universal History' (1817), in four volumes; the author proceeded on the basis that 'the moral government of the world is sufficiently evinced by the facts of history' (p. v) and included a remarkable amount of non-European material. Whitaker died, at Bread Street Hill, London, on 14 October 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 29220


Whitaker, Sir Frederick (1812-1891), entrepreneur and premier of New Zealand, the eldest son of Frederick Whitaker, deputy lieutenant of Oxfordshire, and his wife, Susanna Humfrey, was born on 23 April 1812 at Manor House, Bampton, Oxfordshire. In 1839, soon after he had qualified as a solicitor, he emigrated to Australia and settled in Sydney. He went on to New Zealand in March 1840 and began to practise at Kororareka, then the seat of government, and moved with the government to Auckland, the new capital, the following year. In 1842 he was appointed a county court judge; in 1844, however, these courts were abolished, and he once more returned to the practice of his profession, and also began investing in mines. On 4 March 1843 he married Jane Augusta Griffith (died 1884), the stepdaughter of Alexander Shepherd, colonial treasurer of New Zealand; they had four sons and three daughters who survived childhood. 
In 1845 Whitaker was appointed an unofficial member of the legislative council. A superb legal draftsman, he there began an enduring association with the attorney-general, William Swainson, and the chief justice, William Martin; over the years they framed a new code of statutes. Under the new constitution of 1852 Whitaker was elected a member of the Auckland provincial council; he later became provincial law officer and a member of the superintendent's executive. In 1853 he was nominated a member of the legislative council of the colony, and in 1854 took his seat as such in the first general assembly. In 1855 he was appointed attorney-general in succession to Swainson, and later in the year he became speaker of the legislative council. In June 1856, shortly after the grant of responsible government, Whitaker became attorney-general under Edward William Stafford, and acted as leader of the government in the legislative council. This stable ministry lasted until it was defeated over native affairs on 12 July 1861; this had become an explosively divisive issue with the opening of the New Zealand wars in 1860. 
Shortly afterwards, Whitaker entered into a legal partnership with Thomas Russell, a dashing speculator and already a founder of financial institutions. Together they set up one of the most lucrative practices in the colony. Whitaker became attorney-general to the Domett ministry on 1 June 1863. When Domett resigned in October, Whitaker himself became premier, and his partner Russell was appointed minister of defence. Together they represented the 'war party' of Auckland, standing for a military reckoning with 'rebel' Maori and for a sweeping confiscation of their lands. Outraged at the extent of the confiscations envisaged by Whitaker, the governor, Sir George Grey, contrived to topple this ministry in November 1864. In 1865 Whitaker was elected superintendent of Auckland, and in the same year was member for Parnell in the house of representatives. He led the opposition to the change of the seat of government from Auckland to Wellington. His scheme for the administration of the land fund was one of the chief items of his policy. 
In March 1867 Whitaker retired from the assembly and the post of superintendent, and devoted himself once more to his profession and his business interests, which had suffered because of his preoccupation with politics. Between 1867 and 1871 he invested heavily, and generally successfully, in provincial gold mining companies. In the 1870s, invariably in association with his partner Russell, he extended his investment in timber, banking, coal, and companies. But above all else Whitaker and Russell were land speculators. Some of their land claims, such as the Piako swamp, came before the legislature and were the subject of acrimonious debate. 
In 1876 Whitaker once more returned to politics, and was elected for Waikato to the house of representatives; in September 1876 he entered Atkinson's government as attorney-general, a post he held on seven occasions during his political career. On 15 October 1877 the government was defeated, and in the general election which followed Whitaker lost his seat. But the incoming ministry was relatively short-lived, and when Sir John Hall formed his administration in October 1879 Whitaker became once again attorney-general with a seat in the legislative council. On 21 April 1882, on Hall's resignation, he became premier, albeit reluctantly, and reconstructed the ministry, but on 25 September 1883 he resigned to attend to private affairs, now threatened by a deepening colonial depression. He was created KCMG in January 1884. Again, in October 1887, Whitaker resumed his old position of attorney-general, under Sir Henry Atkinson, and sat in the council until his health began to fail in 1890; in December of that year the ministry resigned, and Whitaker retired from public life. He was broken in health and distraught over heavy business losses: he who had once been wealthy was on the brink of poverty. He died at his office desk, in Symonds Street, Auckland, on 4 December 1891, and was buried on 6 December in St Stephen's cemetery, Parnell, Auckland, with masonic honours and much sign of public mourning. 
Whitaker was described by a fellow politician as 'probably the most remarkable public man in New Zealand' (Gisborne, 71). Yet he avoided the limelight, preferring to exercise his influence behind the scenes. There, by the 1880s, his mastery was absolute. Within the legislative council he was said to be 'a Triton among minnows'. As a counsel on political matters he was without peer; his skill in drafting bills in clear, unambiguous language was a byword. Twentieth-century research and better understanding of the Maori people, however, have much diminished the reputation of one so anxious to amalgamate indigenous people with Western society regardless of consequences. Nevertheless, he could be liberal in other causes concerned with colonial democracy, and in such was much ahead of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 29221


Whitaker, Jeremiah (1599-1654), Church of England clergyman, was born at Wakefield, Yorkshire; nothing is known about his parents. He was educated at Wakefield grammar school and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1619 and proceeded MA in 1623. He was ordained priest at Peterborough on 25 March 1623. 
Whitaker's friend and godly hagiographer, Simeon Ashe, claimed his favourite saying was 'I had rather be a Preacher of the Gospel than an Emperor' (Ashe, 53), and this evangelical mission does seem to have been the main impetus of Whitaker's life. After university he was appointed master of Oakham School, Rutland, founded by the puritan Robert Johnson, who in 1625 promoted him to governor. His energetic extra-curricular activity included reading a weekly lecture in the town and preaching in neighbouring parishes and he quickly established influential puritan contacts. In 1620 he married Chephtzibah, daughter of William Peachy, the puritan incumbent at Oakham; they had two sons, Jeremiah and William Whitaker (d. 1672), both eventually clergymen. More exalted socially were the Cecil family of Burghley, earls of Exeter, Whitaker's lifelong patrons. He witnessed the will of David, the third earl, and his own funeral sermon was to be dedicated to David's widow. On 17 April 1627 the puritans Sir John Pickering and Robert Horsman appointed Whitaker the rector of nearby Stretton. He continued to read the Oakham lecture, preached at Stretton 'twice every Sabbath', was a 'principal prop to hold up Lectures in the neighbourhood', and attended private godly prayer meetings (Ashe, 56). He even preached at the archdeacon of Northampton's visitation at Uppingham in 1628, but fell foul of the church courts in the same year for conspiring with a parishioner to omit the sign of the cross in baptism. 
Ashe claimed that Whitaker played a prominent role in resisting royal policy in the 1630s by refusing to read the anti-sabbatarian 'Book of Sports' (1633), conscientiously objecting to paying the clerical contribution to fund the bishops' wars (1639), and preaching on Sundays not only in the morning but also in the afternoon, which the Caroline church discouraged. Extant church court records contain no account of this intransigence: Ashe conceded that a sympathetic neighbour paid the contribution for Whitaker against his wishes. In August 1640, however, Whitaker was indeed one of the leaders of a conference of puritan ministers meeting at Kettering, which declared the 'etcetera oath' (legitimizing the new Laudian canons) illegal and endorsed the invasion of the Scottish army as a means of attaining a common redress of grievances. 
The Long Parliament was regarded as an instrument of godly reformation, and in 1641 Whitaker subscribed to a petition calling for a missionary effort to convert Native Americans. However, the embryonic process of reform was jeopardized by the outbreak of civil war, as Whitaker made clear in a sermon (later printed as 'Eirenopoios') delivered at the parliamentary fast on 25 January 1643 prior to the abortive Oxford negotiations with Charles I. He called for unity among those desiring reformation and reinforced this by signing a plea for an end to the foundation of separatist churches, 'Certaine Considerations' (1643). The same year he was chosen as a member of the Westminster assembly of divines, convened to produce a new religious settlement, and served on one of the crucial standing committees. Now a high-profile presbyterian, he made influential contributions on several subjects, most notably condemning ordination by parish congregations. He preached at a further eight parliamentary fasts (1646-8) but the only other sermons to be published were 'The Christian's Hope Triumphing', preached on 28 May 1645, and 'The Danger of Greatnesse', delivered on 14 January 1646. In the latter he attributed the violent deaths of successive kings of Judah to their preference for arbitrary government. He replaced London ministers ejected by parliament during the civil wars at St Stephen, Coleman Street (May to July 1645), and St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey Street (1644-54). He participated in the presbyterian classis founded by London ministers, and refused to swear allegiance to the republic after Charles I's execution, although he seems to have been on good terms with the subsequent regime of Lord Protector Cromwell, to whom he wrote with the gift of a book. 
Whitaker died at Bermondsey on 1 June 1654 and was buried on 6 June in the chancel of the church. Ashe's funeral oration was the basis of the biography in Samuel Clarke's 'Lives'. At a memorial service tributes were delivered by Matthew Newcomen, among others. Ashe said Christ's own comment would have been: 'Our friend Whitaker sleepeth' (Ashe, 68). 


@@@@@


doc= 29222


Whitaker, John (1735-1808), historian, son of James Whitaker, innkeeper, was born in Manchester on 27 April 1735. He attended Manchester grammar school from January 1745 until 1752, when he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, with a school exhibition. On 2 March 1753 he was elected a Lancashire scholar of Corpus Christi College and became a fellow on 21 January 1763. He graduated BA on 24 October 1755, MA on 27 February 1759, and BD on 1 July 1767. He was ordained at Oxford in 1760 and acted as curate successively at Newton Heath chapel, near Manchester (1760-61), and at Bray in Berkshire. He was elected FSA on 10 January 1771, and in the same year published the first volume of 'The History of Manchester', in quarto, covering the British and Roman periods. A second edition was published in octavo in 1773 with a quarto volume of the 'principal corrections' to the original. The second volume, which extended as far as the Saxon period, was published in 1775 in quarto. A copy of Whitaker's manuscript of the continuation to the fifteenth century is in Chetham's Library, Manchester. 
Whitaker deliberately took a very broad approach to the history of his native town -- he was a stout critic of the limitations and parochialism inherent in the 'private and dull annals' of local history (J. Whitaker, 'The History of Manchester', 2nd edn, 4 vols., 1773, 1.ix) and instead placed the history of Manchester within the much broader context of the early history of the British people in general. The history received a mixed reception -- some readers welcomed the wide range and accessible prose and recognized the substantial amount of erudition behind it; others cavilled at his extravagant generalizations, his unsubstantiated assertions, contrived reasoning, and the strongly tory flavour of his views. Francis Douce's view of Whitaker, noted on his annotated copy of the 'History', now in the British Library, was that he was a 'bully, brute and blockhead' (ibid., 2.1, BL, C. 28.1.6, 7). John Collier (Tim Bobbin) satirized the history in two tracts published in 1771 and 1773. 
Whitaker's next publication responded to the current fashionable interest in the early inhabitants of the British Isles that had been fuelled by the Ossian controversy. 'The Genuine History of the Ancient History of the Britons Asserted' (1772) was written in refutation of James Macpherson's 'History of Great Britain and Ireland'. This work confirmed Whitaker's reputation as a controversial and provocative polemicist and his penchant for merciless 'ad hominem' attacks on those from whose opinions he differed. From November 1773 to February 1774 he held the morning preachership at Berkeley Chapel, London, but left it following a dispute, concerning which he published a typically intemperate 'State of the Case', leading to the threat of a libel suit. While in London he made the acquaintance of Dr Johnson and Edward Gibbon, with whom he continued to correspond after he left London. Gibbon allowed him to read the first volume of 'Decline and Fall' in manuscript, which Whitaker greeted with great enthusiasm. Gibbon had, however, withheld the chapter on Christianity, which Whitaker later read with high indignation. 
From London, Whitaker moved back in 1774 to Manchester, where he became involved in disputes over the proposed improvement of the town; this gave rise to another ill-tempered paper war over the improvement bill in 1776. He endeavoured to persuade Gibbon, at that time MP for Liskeard, to use his influence to secure restraining clauses in the bill. Meanwhile he remained true to his tory principles, composing an ode to promote the formation of the Manchester regiment intended to reduce the American rebels. 
On 22 August 1777 Whitaker was presented by Corpus Christi College to the rectory of Ruan Lanyhorn, Cornwall. Soon afterwards he married Jane ('bap'. 1742, died 1828), daughter of the Revd John Tregenna, rector of Mawgan in Pyder, Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth; they had three daughters. He was an active parish priest and JP, and a forceful figure within the local community. The first ten years of his rectorship were blighted by disputes with his parishioners, who failed to see eye to eye with him on the divine right of tithes. At length he was victorious, and commented that he had his parish in a better state of subjection and amity towards him than any of his neighbours. For many years Whitaker hankered after the wardenship of Manchester collegiate church -- a position in which he believed he would be able to employ his talents to the full, and counteract the spread of heretical dissent and radical opinions in Manchester. Despite endless lobbying of political patrons, including Pitt, his ambitions were never realized. He also struck up a friendship with the bishop of Derry, from whom he similarly had high hopes of preferment in Ireland for a time. He blamed his failure to secure preferment in his native town upon the poor reception which his history of Manchester had received there, but the inhabitants had some cause at least to be grateful to him when, in 1787, he published 'The Charter of Manchester Translated, with Explanations and Remarks' at the request of a committee engaged in vindicating the rights of the town against the lord of the manor (in return for which he was presented with a silver cup). In the same year he threw himself into historical controversy with his 'Mary Queen of Scots Vindicated', in which he denied the authenticity of the casket letters, championed the cause of Mary, and incriminated her enemies, particularly Elizabeth. A second edition was published in 1790. Throughout the rest of his life he compiled material for a 'Private life of Mary queen of Scots', originally begun as commentary to accompany engravings which he had collected of the queen, but it remained unpublished until George Chalmers, a long-time friend and correspondent, used the material (much of which had in any case originally been supplied by him) in his own life of the queen, published in 1818. 
Whitaker reacted strongly to the turn of events in France during the 1790s. In 1791 he published the 'Origin of Arianism Disclosed', in which he warned his readers against the spread of inflammatory ideas of liberty, and attributed the origins of the Arian heresy to the Jews. Appalled by the course of the riots in Birmingham and in Manchester, which he attributed solely to the spread of libertarian ideas and heresy, he proposed to write a history of the disorders, but found himself pre-empted. There was more in a similar vein in 'The Real Origin of Government' (1795), originally written as a sermon against the French Revolution. His hopes that this overtly authoritarian pamphlet would secure him preferment from Pitt's government were disappointed. By this time Gibbon's anti-Christian stance had come to seem ever more inimical to Whitaker's extremely orthodox sensibilities, and in 1791 his comments were published in a compilation of reviews from ten issues of the 'English Review'. As with so much of Whitaker's 'oeuvre', some legitimate criticisms were overshadowed by absurd generalizations and vicious personal invective. On the historical side he made an early attempt at interdisciplinary history, combining a study of history and geography, published as 'The Course of Hannibal over the Alps Ascertained' (1794). Despite his aversion to the limitations of local history and his low opinion of antiquarian studies in general, in 1804 he issued 'The Ancient Cathedral of Cornwall'. While purporting to be a study of the church of St Germans, it was, more controversially, a polemic on the history of early Christianity and druidism (with many a criticism hurled at Cornwall's previous historian, William Borlase) and the history of Gothic architecture. Whitaker's views on early British society were idiosyncratic: in both this and the 'History of Manchester', he argued that the ancient Britons had already established a feudal system, and under the Romans had been entirely converted to Christianity. The 'Life of St Neots', published posthumously in 1809, was similarly intended to challenge traditional orthodoxies in the form of the extant saint's lives. He also published a number of sermons, poems, and articles for Richard Polwhele's 'History of Cornwall'. He was a prolific reviewer for the 'English Review', 'British Critic', and 'Anti-Jacobin Review', finding this an important means of supplementing his income and paying for the books necessary for his studies. In addition to his published works he had planned or contemplated a number of other projects: a parochial history of Cornwall, a military history of the Romans in Britain, a history of Oxford, one of London, notes on Shakespeare, and illustrations to the 'Bible'. He was a man of fiery temperament and extreme views, and a fervent belief in all the tenets of 'orthodox' Christianity. He was able to inspire considerable friendship and loyalty from those who knew him best. His close friend Richard Polwhele described him as being of a tall, muscular frame, dark featured, and with light greenish eyes. He reputedly had a squint and wore false teeth made of ebony. He died at his rectory on 30 October 1808 and was buried in the parish; his widow, who had long suffered ill health, lived on until 30 December 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 29223


Whitaker, John (1776?-1847), composer, was a teacher of music, and organist at the church of St Clement, Eastcheap, in London. He also became a partner in the music-publishing firm of Button and Whitaker at St Paul's Churchyard in the City. In 1818 Whitaker collected and published two volumes of sacred music for four voices entitled 'The Seraph', which included many original pieces. However, he made his name chiefly through the composition of numerous popular dramatic pieces and occasional songs introduced in musical plays at the principal London theatres between 1807 and 1825. He wrote music with William Reeve for 'Who's to Have Her?' (1813) and joined Henry Bishop in contributing some songs to a stage version of Scott's 'Guy Mannering' (1816), including a number that were favourites in their day: 'Oh, slumber, my darling', 'Dog Tray', and 'O say not woman's heart is bought'. He also composed the music for several pantomines, including 'The Weird Sisters, or, The Thane and the Throne', based on Shakespeare's 'Macbeth'. This was produced at Sadler's Wells Theatre on Easter Monday, 12 April 1819, and contained the then famous clown's song 'Hot Codlins', written for Joseph Grimaldi. Other songs that were popular were 'Fly away, dove', sung by Miss Cawse on her debut in 'The Hebrew Family', 'Go, rover, go', 'Remember me', 'The Little Farmer's Daughter', and 'The Lily that Blooms'. Comic songs, such as 'Darby Kelly' and 'Paddy Carey', adapted from Irish airs, helped to broaden Whitaker's appeal. Additional works include the glee 'Winds, Gently Whisper', some anthems, music for English versions of the odes of Anacreon and of Aesop's fables, and 'Twelve Pedal Exercises' for organ. Whitaker died at his home, Thavies Inn, Holborn, London, on 4 December 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 29224


Whitaker, Joseph (1820-1895), publisher, was born in London on 4 May 1820, the son of a silversmith. At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to Mr Barritt, bookseller, of Fleet Street, London. Nine years later he joined the firm of John William Parker in the Strand. He then became the London agent for the Oxford booksellers J. H. and J. Parker, opening a branch in the Strand. 
In 1849 Whitaker started the 'Penny Post', the first penny monthly church magazine, which long continued in its original form, and edited an edition of the 'Morning and Evening Church Services'. In 1850 he projected and published for four years the 'Educational Register' and 'Whitaker's Clergyman's Diary'. He then started his own business as a theological publisher in Pall Mall. In 1855 he moved to the Strand, where he published, with the assistance of Thomas Delph, 'The Artist', a fine-art review. Between 1856 and 1859 he edited the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. In January 1858 Whitaker started 'The Bookseller', intended primarily as an organ for booksellers and publishers, but also for book buyers generally. The new monthly journal was very successful, and was well received by the bookselling and publishing trade; in 1860 'Bent's Literary Advertiser' was merged with it. His most significant publication was 'Whitaker's Almanack', of which he was founding editor. This began in 1868: 36,000 copies of the first issue were subscribed before publication. For a long time the 'Almanack', like 'The Bookseller', changed little except in the direction of natural expansion. 
Along with other British publishers, Whitaker had a large share in the organization of a relief fund, which ultimately reached $2000, for Paris booksellers and their assistants who had suffered during the Prussian siege of the city in the winter of 1870-71. As a distributor of the fund he was one of the first Englishmen to enter Paris after the siege. 
In 1874 Whitaker produced the 'Reference Catalogue of Current Literature', which consisted of a collection of catalogues of books on sale by English publishers, with an elaborate index. This went through many editions until 1898. He published a few devotional works, including 'The Daily Round' and Ridley's 'Holy Communion'. Whitaker was always a keen and judicious defender of the interests of the bookselling trade, and was recognized as an authority on copyright. In 1875 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He died at his home, White Lodge, Enfield, Middlesex, on 15 May 1895. 
Whitaker had a family of fifteen children, of whom the eldest was 


@@@@@


doc= 29225


Joseph Vernon Whitaker (1845-1895). He was born on 3 February 1845, and was educated at Bloxham School. He preferred a life of adventure to business, and, after a voyage to the East Indies, enlisted in the army, and became a sergeant at the age of twenty-one. Having purchased his discharge, he entered the office of 'The Bookseller' for a year or two. At the invitation of George William Childs of Philadelphia he went to the United States; he was editor of the 'American Literary Gazette', and then acted as sub-editor of the 'Public Ledger' for three years. He returned to England in 1875 to resume his connection with 'The Bookseller', and ultimately became editor of both it and the 'Reference Catalogue'. In 1880 he started the 'Stationery Trades' Journal' with his father. He took an active interest in all trade questions, especially those of a social and charitable character. He and his American wife, whom he married in 1875, had two children. He died on 15 January 1895, at Redcliffe Gardens, South Kensington, London. He was survived by his father by a few months and by one of his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 29226


Whitaker, Thomas Dunham (1759-1821), topographer and antiquary, was born on 8 June 1759 at the rectory, East Raynham, Norfolk, son of William Whitaker (1730-1782) and his wife, Lucy (died 1788), daughter of Robert Dunham and widow of Ambrose Allen. His father had been curate of East and West Raynham from 1756, but in 1760 he succeeded to his family's ancestral estate at Holme in Cliviger, between Burnley and Todmorden in Lancashire. In November 1766 Whitaker was sent to board at Rochdale grammar school, then run by the Revd John Shaw, and he remained there until November 1774. After a brief period of private tuition with the Revd William Sheepshanks of Grassington in the West Riding, he was in October 1775 admitted to St John's College, Cambridge. In November 1781 he took the degree of LLB and seemed destined for a legal career, but the untimely death of his father in June 1782 put paid to that ambition, although in 1801 he received his LLD. On 13 January 1783 at Leeds parish church he married Lucy Thursby (1759-1837), daughter of Thomas Thursby, a relative of the Yorkshire antiquary Ralph Thoresby, both descendants of Ralph's great-grandfather. Whitaker and his wife had six children. He returned to Cliviger and assumed the mantle of a country squire. His passion for the ancestral property and the neighbouring countryside was a driving force for the rest of his life. He determined to enter the church, but with no ambition beyond that of ruling in the locality. Although ordained in 1785 he sought no living, but in the same year paid $400 to obtain the right of presentation to the chapel at Cliviger. In 1788 he had the old chapel demolished and, at a cost to himself of $870, a new one was built and consecrated in 1794. 
The first part of Whitaker's strategy was concluded in 1797, when, as patron of the living, he licensed himself to the perpetual curacy of Holme in Cliviger on the death of the curate, William Halliwell. It is clear, however, that for some years he had been, 'de facto', in control of the chapel and all its affairs. In 1809 he fulfilled his next great ambition, when he became vicar of the great parish of Whalley, which covered much of east Lancashire and was the second largest (and one of the most populous) in England. In November 1818 his already very considerable local position and status were greatly augmented when he became, in plurality, vicar of Blackburn. In the interim, from 1813 to 1819, he had also been rector of Heysham, near Lancaster. 
All this might imply that Whitaker was interested merely in aggrandizement, financial and social, but that was not the case. He was an assiduous and meticulous pastor, and proudly claimed that he preached at least once a year in each of the churches and chapels of his great personal empire. In 1799 he was appointed a county magistrate for Lancashire and in 1800 for the West Riding, and from 1815 to 1821 presided over the Cliviger select vestry. His great personal authority was employed in 1820, when, as vicar and the leading local magistrate, he drove into Burnley during a bloody strike by local miners and, rather than order the military out (with the likelihood of further bloodshed) addressed the strikers and persuaded them to return home. He was known as a severe and demanding man, possessed of abundant energies and intolerant of the failings or weaknesses of others, reactionary in his views of class and social status, perhaps respected rather than loved. His attention to detail, and to intellectual curiosity, is exemplified by the registers of Holme in Cliviger, which he wrote in person from 1791 until 1815. The pre-1812 register contains remarkable detail, of great interest to social and economic historians, giving the age, residence, occupation, and cause of death of almost all those buried, and the occupation of the father in all baptism entries. For 1795 and 1805-12 it also includes tabular statistical analyses of age at death. His love of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Pennines is emphasized by his landscape 'improvements' in the Cliviger area. He undertook large-scale schemes for planting and beautifying the wild moorland and impressive gorge, according to the most fashionable taste -- he planted about half a million trees between 1785 and 1815, and his work is still the prevailing influence upon the scenery in the valley. 
For posterity these many legacies are eclipsed by the results of Whitaker's other great love -- topography and antiquarian studies. In the early 1790s, influenced by his friend and patron Charles Towneley of Towneley Hall, 2 miles from Holme, he began work on a monumental history of the parish of Whalley, a project which fuelled his growing ambition to become vicar of that parish and which was researched extensively from original sources. The history was published, as a subscription work, in 1801 and was an immediate success: a second edition appeared in 1806 and a third in 1818. Whitaker's 'Whalley' is among the most important and valuable topographical-cum-antiquarian histories of the early nineteenth century, and its interest is greatly enhanced by the author's employment of the young J. M. W. Turner to illustrate the book. Turner was introduced to Whitaker through their mutual friend Charles Towneley, and he visited the Whalley area to paint a number of watercolours from which the published engravings were made. The success of 'Whalley' encouraged Whitaker to extend his geographical scope. In 1805 he published his 'History of Craven', which went into a second edition in 1812; in 1816 came 'Loidis and Elmete', a history of the area around Leeds, including lower Wharfedale and Airedale; and in 1823, posthumously, 'The History of Richmondshire', the first and only part of a projected history of Yorkshire. The last two were also illustrated by Turner, their value today being associated more with the artist than the author. Whitaker also published a number of other minor works, including twenty-eight articles in the 'Quarterly Review', but it is the topographical histories which remain his monument. 
Whitaker died at the vicarage in Blackburn on 18 December 1821 and was buried at Holme in Cliviger chapel on 24 December in a coffin made from one of the larch trees which he had planted on the estate thirty-five years before. One of his sons, Robert Nowell Whitaker, succeeded him as perpetual curate of Holme in Cliviger in 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 29227


Whitaker, Tobias (bap. 1601?, d. 1664), physician, may have been the Tobias Whitaker, son of Francis Whitaker, who was baptized on 1 May 1601 at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, Middlesex. In the preface to his first published work, 'A Discourse of Water' (1634), he describes himself as 'Doctor of Physicke, of Norwich', but moved to London some time before 1638. In that year he brought out his principal work, 'The tree of humane life, or the blood of the grape, proving the possibilitie of maintaining humane life from infancy to extreame old age without sickness, by the use of wine', which was republished several times and translated into Latin (Frankfurt, 1655; The Hague, 1660, 1663). The purpose of this work, as stated in the introduction to the 1654 edition, was as 'an addition to our medicinal faculty, and more exactly to declare, how, and after what manner the juice of the Grape may be conducible to humane bodyes, both for Aliment and Medicament'. Whitaker seems to have encountered some criticism of his recommendation of wine as a universal prophylactic and remedy, for he declares that his book is 'for the acquaintance of more reasonable creatures' rather than the 'Tred of Dunghill-Cocks' who oppose him. The work describes wine in terms of temperature and dryness, and parallels symptoms of various illnesses to these two conditions before indicating which can be used to treat each ailment, and concludes rousingly that 'other Herculian braines' should take wine 'plentifull in substance and measure, by which every sense shall be refreshed, every capacity filled, and every intellect really delighted'. 
In September 1660 Whitaker was appointed physician-in-ordinary to the royal household with a salary of $50 per year, although the position had first been offered to him by Charles II when in exile in 1649. In 1661 Whitaker published 'An elenchus of opinions concerning the cure of the small pox. Together with problematical questions concerning the French pest', prefixed to which was a portrait engraved by John Chantrey. Whitaker died in 1664. His widow received his pay, in arrears, in 1668. 
Both Wood and Munk ascribe the writing of 'The Tree of Humane Life' to William Whitaker, admitted a candidate of the College of Physicians in 1654, who died in the parish of St Clement Danes in January 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 29228


Whitaker, William (1547/8-1595), theologian and college head, was possibly born in the first year of Edward VI's reign. He was the third son of Thomas Whitaker of Holme, near Burnley, Lancashire, the head of a gentry family established there since the fourteenth century. Thomas had in 1530 or possibly 1531 married Elizabeth, daughter of John Nowell from Read, 10 miles away; William was consequently nephew to three distinguished brothers: Alexander Nowell (c.1516/17-1602), dean of St Paul's, Laurence Nowell (c.1516-1576) ['see under 'Nowell, Laurence (1530-c.1570)], dean of Lichfield, and Robert Nowell, attorney of the court of wards. 
Whitaker first attended a private school at Burnley run by William Hatgrave. At the age of twelve or thirteen he was extracted from Lancashire and the Catholic sympathies of his parents by Alexander Nowell, who entered him at St Paul's School, London, then under the high mastership of John Cook. On 4 October 1564 Whitaker was admitted pensioner of Trinity College, Cambridge, where his tutor was Robert West. In 1565 he was admitted scholar. Nowell continued to support his education with a reversionary lease of a St Paul's Cathedral property (5 August 1566). He graduated BA in March 1568. In 1569 he published 'Liber precum publicarum', a Latin rendering of the daily offices, collects, and other matter from the 'Book of Common Prayer'; this he dedicated to Alexander Nowell (23 May). On 6 September that year he became a minor fellow of Trinity. On 25 March 1571 he was advanced to a major fellowship, and five days later he proceeded MA. In this year he published some Greek verses appended to Nicholas Carr's 'Demosthenis Olynthicae orationes tres & Philippicae quatuor'. In 1573 he provided the Greek version of Nowell's larger catechism, issued with the Latin original. He did likewise for the shorter (1574) and 'middle' (1575) polyglot versions. His work was dedicated to Sir William Cecil with whom the Nowells had long connections, and whom he was evidently now cultivating. His talents had already been recognized by the master of Trinity, John Whitgift. While still a junior figure, he had the assurance to advise Whitgift against responding to Thomas Cartwright's 'Second replye' (1575), which he derided as 'loose... childish... unworthy to be refuted by any man of learning' (Paule, 15). 
On 31 July 1576 Whitaker was presented by the crown to the rectory of St Florence, Pembrokeshire; the appointment seems not to have taken effect, since another presentation was made to the same vacancy in the following year, but on 21 December he was ordained deacon and priest in London. On 25 October 1577 the queen presented him to a canonry of Norwich Cathedral, where he was installed by proxy on 23 February 1578. Shortly afterwards he gave his first university sermon by way of supplicating BTh, as which he was admitted on 14 June. On 14 July he incorporated his degree at Oxford. On 27 September 1578 Nowell had asked William Cecil, Lord Burghley, to obtain for his nephew the living of Withington, Gloucestershire, should John Bullingham be made bishop of Chester, none of which happened. On 3 November there appeared the first of Whitaker's anti-Catholic works, a translation of John Jewel's book against Thomas Harding which he dedicated to archbishops Edmund Grindal and Edwin Sandys, bishops John Aylmer, John Whitgift, and Edmund Freake, and Nowell -- a stupendous feat of self-promotion which his disclaimer merely highlighted, but which served its purpose. The elevation of William Chaderton, regius professor of divinity at Cambridge, to the bishopric of Chester was Whitaker's opening. The chair was first offered to and declined by William Fulke; by 4 October 1579 Whitaker was regarded in Cambridge as the only remaining candidate, and he was appointed in the following year. He at once found himself at odds with the Lady Margaret professor, Peter Baro, whose lectures on the book of 'Jonah' had questioned the Calvinist orthodoxy on salvation and election to which Whitaker resolutely adhered. This debate dominated Cambridge theology for fifteen years, and intermittently erupted on to the wider world. On 23 September 1580 Whitaker became chancellor of St Paul's Cathedral by royal grant, though obviously on the recommendation of Dean Nowell. In 1581 Whitaker brought out 'Ad rationes decem Edmundi Campiani jesuitae responsio'. By thus taking on the most gifted of the English Catholic missioners, he built up his reputation as 'David... against the popish Goliath' ('An Answere to... Downame', 19). The mass of anti-Catholic propaganda which he published ensured him a respected place within the church which may (as in the case of John Reynolds at Oxford) have amounted to a kind of protected status. While adhering firmly to the establishment, he had a continuing sympathy with those protestants who were uncomfortable within it. In the summer of 1583, following the death of Grindal, he feared for puritan ministers under the next regime at Lambeth, and was among those who urged that only those of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' which concerned doctrine should be enforced by subscription. He joined the puritans who encouraged Cartwright to respond to the Rheims translation of the 'Bible'. Whitaker himself published 'Ad Nicolai Sanderi... responsio' in that year. The appointment of Whitgift to Canterbury (August 1583) cannot have entirely gladdened him, though it meant his friends were now in the highest places. He continued to court Burghley's patronage, and submitted to him his answers to Campion's 'Quaestiones'. In 1585 he dedicated to him 'An Aunswere to... W. Rainoldes'. 
By this time Whitaker had acquired another wide and interrelated set of connections in the city of London, in colonial investment, and in religious radicalism. Perhaps early in 1580 he married Susan, widow of Cuthbert Fuller, a London merchant who died late in 1579, and daughter of the haberdasher Nicholas Culverwell (d. 1569) ['see under 'Culverwell family]. The couple had three daughters, Susan, Elizabeth, and Mary (all named in the 1589 will of their grandmother Elizabeth Culverwell), and two sons, Alexander Whitaker (1585-1617) and Samuel (1587-1617). Susan Whitaker predeceased her mother, Mistress Culverwell, but a notable family connection persisted. Susan's sister Cecilia had married in 1577 or 1578 Laurence Chaderton, who became in 1584 the founding master of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. For a time Whitaker and Chaderton had set up house together; they remained closer friends than Whitaker sometimes cared to admit as he advanced his career. 
In 1585 Whitaker was being run by Burghley and Whitgift as a candidate for the mastership of St John's College, Cambridge (Burghley's old college), which should have been vacated by Richard Howland's consecration to the see of Peterborough that February. However, most of the fellows were against Whitaker's appointment; some objected simply because he was an outsider, but there were also suspicions of his in-laws and other puritan connections. It was rumoured that Whitaker had withdrawn an application to supplicate DTh before reaching the statutory age because he had developed puritan qualms about taking the title 'doctor'. Less than a quarter of the fellows openly supported his candidacy. He felt obliged to set before Burghley his qualifications for the post, promising to rule the college without partiality. Meanwhile Howland was kept in office, and did his best to promote Whitaker's cause. Only on 17 February 1587 were the college's acting visitors (including Burghley and Whitgift) able to proceed, authorizing an election before the full fellowship could be assembled. Even so, the fellows appear to have chosen another candidate; yet Whitaker was admitted to office by the vice-chancellor in Trinity on 25 February. On 27 May he proceeded DTh. By 29 June he had resigned the chancellorship at St Paul's. On 30 June he was admitted fellow of Eton College. 
New statutes (1580) had given the master of St John's increased powers, and Whitaker was determined from the outset to exercise them. His first move was to expel Everard Digby, whom he identified as the leader of opposition among the fellows. Whitaker's real objection to him was his eclectic and relatively liberal theology; but knowing that this alone could not justify dismissal, he concocted a ragbag of disciplinary and financial charges. Digby managed a few hits by way of exchange (quoting Nowell against Calvin; and, having himself been accused of non-residence, mischievously noting that the master spent his nights in town with his wife). Digby was expelled and appealed to Whitgift; both he and Burghley felt that Whitaker had exceeded his powers, and in April 1588 ordered Digby's return. Neither party, however, was looking for a compromise. Digby provocatively boasted of his readeption, while Whitaker raised his game by appealing to the earls of Essex, Leicester, and Warwick. Whitgift continued to regret the 'violence of praecisenesse' with which he saw his protege acting, and told Leicester that the affair had degenerated into 'private revenge' (BL, Lansdowne MS 57, nos. 70, 72). Leicester intervened decisively by arranging for Digby to have a few months' grace and then, in effect, to be paid off. Whitaker seems to have had no connection with Leicester before this case, which therefore demonstrates the social address and political competence he already commanded. 
Whitaker now embarked on a wholesale revision of the college statutes, designed to ensure the dominance of the divines over those of other faculties, and to curb gambling and other recreations. This was partly the customary purge of a new regime, but in sum it attempted to restructure St John's on the lines of the puritan academy founded at Emmanuel under Chaderton's mastership. The opposition at St John's drafted a counter-proposal of forty-three 'flatt breaches of statute' which Whitaker had committed since his appointment, such as pushing through his own, unsuitable, nominations for college posts at inquorate meetings (CUL, CUR 6.1, no. 35). But the fellows could not hope to remove the master under the existing statutes, and he would obviously not consent to changes making this possible; the controversy therefore subsided into deadlock. Meanwhile Whitaker's polemical output continued with 'Disputatio ad sacra scriptura', issued on 2 May 1588, in which he attacked Cardinal Bellarmine. 
Further puritan agitation at Cambridge in 1589-90 made Whitaker fear that a new visitation might 'pull up moe good plants than weedes', and he was worried even for his own tenure (BL, Lansdowne MS 62, no. 41). Hostilities in St John's were resumed when it was revealed that in September 1589 a national presbyterian synod had been held in the college. Some said this took place in Whitaker's own lodging while he was away in Lancashire. The issue was raised in a letter of 20 October 1590 from Eleazar (son of John) Knox, one of the conservative fellows. Whitaker was at once summoned to London to explain. That the synod, the last of its kind, took place at St John's, is not in doubt; Chaderton and Cartwright attended, and the host was Henry Alvey, Whitaker's favourite and a noted radical activist. The question exercising the government was what the master knew, and when he knew it. In a carefully worded response, conveyed in a letter to Burghley on 26 October, Whitaker avoided all reference to the specific meeting of the national synod; instead he solemnly swore ignorance of a continuing presbyterian cell within the college -- something much harder to define and detect, and in any case not the issue. Whitaker's absence was genuine enough, but it it is difficult to believe that on his return he really was surprised to find his lodge appropriated for such a meeting. He was not the last Cambridge head to give covert assistance to a radical cause he was unable openly to endorse. Significantly, his regard for Alvey was undimmed, and in December 1591 he secured him as president (vice-master) against the wishes of the majority of the electors. He used the textbook tactic of provoking the conservatives to withdraw, and voting through his appointees in their absence. He added the delightful touch of naming some of the absentees to minor offices, so demonstrating his magisterial impartiality. 
That the remaining years of Whitaker's mastership were uneventful is witness to the success with which he had packed the college with men of his own stamp. He gazed, however, on the lusher pasture next door. In April 1591 Nowell had recommended him for the mastership of Trinity should John Still be made a bishop. Whitaker jeopardized his prospects of any further crown appointment when, that month, he married Joan, widow of Dudley Fenner (c.1558-1587), puritan minister of Cranbrook, Kent. She brought with her two daughters, More Fruit (died in or after 1602) and Faint Not (died in or after 1604). Whitaker would not have given his own children such ostentatiously puritan names, but his sympathies were again expressed in February 1593 in deploring the execution of separatists, which he contrasted with leniency shown to many Catholics. 
Whitaker's final major publication, 'Adversus Thomae Stapletoni' (1594), was a refutation of another leading Catholic apologist. The last year of his life was dominated by the controversy over predestination, simmering at Cambridge throughout his professorship, which he now moved into the public domain. On 27 February 1595, preaching before a congregation including eight peers and many gentry, he condemned the doctrine of universal grace as taught by Peter Baro. In response on 29 April a junior fellow of Gonville and Caius College, William Barrett, preached a university sermon which shocked the establishment with its outright rejection of the Calvinist dogma of assured salvation for the self-recognized elect, and which included personal attacks on Calvin, Pietro Martire Vermigli (known as Peter Martyr), and other leading reformers. Whitaker, as regius professor, took a lead in prosecuting Barrett before the university's consistory court and beyond. Whitgift at first thought Barrett had been harshly treated for what seemed a fair point of academic debate. Whitaker and his colleagues eventually persuaded the archbishop and Burghley (as chancellor) that the emerging anti-Calvinist party, for whom Barrett was obviously a stalking horse, was a threat to the university's 'magisterium' and privilege. If such offensive novelties were tolerated, 'greate difference in poyntes of religion will breake furthe' (Trinity College, Cambridge, MS B.14.9, p. 47). Whitgift proposed a conference at Lambeth between Barrett and his principal opponents. The archbishop's continuing confidence in Whitaker is shown by his appointment on 10 May to a canonry in Canterbury Cathedral. 
Though further debate at Cambridge was meanwhile forbidden, on 9 October Whitaker set out in a Latin sermon his own uncompromising supralapsarian position. As he left for Lambeth he promised Chaderton he would 'stand to Gods cause against the Lutherans' ('Two Elizabethan Puritan Diaries', 125). He took with him nine propositions in which his doctrine was hammered home from different angles: salvation and reprobation were determined for eternity; saving grace could never be forfeit. Though minor changes were agreed at the meeting on 20 November, perhaps by way of according Whitgift a share in the drafting, the Lambeth articles remain Whitaker's composition. Whitgift circumspectly commended them as 'private judgments' in settlement of the Cambridge controversy ('Salisbury MSS', 5.465). Others would have had them tacked to the established articles of religion; this was sought at the Hampton Court conference in 1604, and in 1613 they were formally adopted by the Church of Ireland. In England, though Calvinism remained the orthodoxy for a generation more, the Lambeth articles were the high water mark of Calvinist doctrine. By the time Whitaker was on the way back to Cambridge, the queen had expressed outrage and had ordered the articles to be abrogated. Their particular theological definition, though misliked by her, was less the issue than the attempt by an unofficial assembly to ordain narrow confessionalism in place of settled imprecision. Whitaker had forgotten whose church he served. His usual self-confidence seems to have been ebbing before the Lambeth meeting. On 19 November, in an uncharacteristically whingeing letter to Burghley, he begged for a more lucrative position, with greater freedom for the further writing he planned. As he rode home on 29 November he was taken ill at Trumpington; on arriving at St John's he went straight to bed with a hot ague, and died in the master's lodge on 4 December, trusting 'shortly to see God face to face' ('Two Elizabethan Puritan Diaries', 125). The whole university mustered for his funeral on the 9th; the vice-chancellor (Roger Goad) preached in Great St Mary's, and John Bois spoke at the interment in St John's on the same day. 
Two days after his death Whitaker's widow had a son, whom she called Jabez. She subsequently married Josias Nicholls (c.1553-1639/40), puritan minister and religious controversialist. Whitaker's will does not survive, but he is known to have left means to his eldest son, Alexander. Whitaker had at least eight children. Samuel became a fellow of King's, while Richard was a prominent bookseller and publisher in Paul's Churchyard from 1618 to his death in 1648; in the 1630s he dedicated works to Charles I and Archbishop William Laud, but among his last publications was a work of Calvin. Jabez followed Alexander to Virginia and as a missionary to the Indians; he died in 1624. 
Despite his many sinecures, Whitaker complained of poverty; no doubt his children and two stepchildren were a hefty expense. He also collected a library which the queen is said to have coveted, though Nowell said it had small resale value. Whitaker may have mismanaged his finances, but the claim that he was a 'contemner of money' (Fuller, 115) is a pious fiction. There is a wider contradiction, since it was axiomatic of Whitaker's anti-Roman polemic to discount the visible church, whose material benefits he nevertheless so obviously enjoyed, and in whose political machinations he excelled. Even his friends sensed this dilemma; Samuel Ward was thankful that Whitaker had died before becoming (as was expected) provost of Eton, and so being 'overcome with the world' ('Two Elizabethan Puritan Diaries', 125). Whitaker's reputation was also oddly distorted by the wish of the conservative fellows of St John's to acquire a new master more to their liking; being now in a minority they could not risk a free election, but instead asked Burghley to nominate a successor to Whitaker, whom they could not overtly criticize. They therefore described their late master as a gentle and retiring scholar, whose unrelenting studies had prevented him from noticing the infiltration of the college by radicals. The plentiful encomiums of his friends were less devious but scarcely more plausible; chief among these was a life by Abdias Ashton, fellow of St John's, published in 1599 and reprinted in the 1610 Geneva edition of Whitaker's collected works. 
The Whitaker who finally emerges is, by contrast, a formidable but believable figure, as sharp-minded and decisive in his administrative role as he was in theological argument. Yet even there is a paradox. Determined to eliminate mere philosophy from scriptural exegesis, asserting that reason alone was 'no lawful weapon in the Lords warfare' ('An Aunswere to... W. Rainoldes', 187), he deployed a rarefied system of logic proceeding from his own considerable intellect. In debate he maintained a civil tone (except to Stapleton), and was generally respected by his opponents: it is said that Bellarmine placed his picture above his desk, rather as Montgomery was to keep an eye on Rommel. In appearance Whitaker was dark-haired, with a red face which nobody seems to have attributed to drink. He enjoyed chess and archery and, like his uncle Alexander, was an angler whose skill is recalled by Isaak Walton. When the new chapel was built at St John's in 1869, his memorial was replaced in a position of honour at the centre of the west wall. 


@@@@@


doc= 29229


Whitaker, William (d. 1672), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Oakham, Rutland, the son of the schoolmaster Jeremiah Whitaker (1599-1654) and Chephtzibah, daughter of the vicar of Oakham, William Peachy. At Easter 1639 he matriculated as a sizar of Emmanuel College, Cambridge; he graduated BA in 1643. Having become a fellow of Queens' College in 1644, he proceeded MA in 1646. Like his father, Whitaker earned a reputation for his skill as a classical and oriental linguist. According to Samuel Annesley, Richard Holdsworth, master of the college, gave him the keys of the college library and set him the task of translating Eustathius upon Homer, which he performed very creditably. Having resigned his fellowship in 1647, on 2 October 1648 he was appointed by the visitors of the university as vicar of the parish of Hornchurch, Essex, an appropriated rectory of New College, Oxford. It seems that at about this time Whitaker married, for on 1 April 1652 the visitors appointed him a chaplain of New College, but found it necessary to dispense with the regulations against both marriage and non-residence; nothing is known of his wife. Following the death on 1 June 1654 of their rector, Jeremiah Whitaker, the parishioners of St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey, unanimously elected his son to replace him. On 4 July they petitioned Cromwell to this end, and William Whitaker was admitted on 20 November 1654. He was himself succeeded at Hornchurch the following year by John Johnson. 
Following the Restoration, Whitaker was ejected from Bermondsey, where his successor was instituted on 7 November 1662. He then gathered a congregation at Long Walk, Bermondsey, and the authorities were informed that he was preaching there in 1670. Whitaker also preached at the London house of Elizabeth Cecil, dowager countess of Exeter, and was friendly with her chaplain, Thomas Jacombe. For many years his house was full of candidates in divinity, and he had many foreign divines under his care. He was licensed to preach as a presbyterian at Court Yard, Bermondsey, on 2 April 1672, but died later that year. His funeral sermon was preached by Samuel Annesley, who published two of Whitaker's sermons in later editions of his 'Morning Exercises'. In 1674 Whitaker's widow published his 'Eighteen Sermons Preached on Several Texts of Scripture'. The preface, dedicated to Elizabeth Cecil, thanked her for kindnesses both to William Whitaker and to his father; Jacombe contributed a tribute to his colleague. 


@@@@@


doc= 29230


Whitbourne, Sir Richard (1561-1635), seaman and publicist for Newfoundland, was born and baptized on 11 June 1561 at Bishopsteignton near Newton Abbot in Devon, the son of John Whitbourne, yeoman, and his wife, Agnes. Serving as an apprentice between 1575 and 1583, probably to John Crooke, merchant adventurer of Southampton, he had voyaged to much of western Europe before sailing to Newfoundland in 1579 in search of whales and trade with the natives. For the next forty years he was a frequent visitor, witnessing Sir Humphrey Gilbert's formal annexation of the island in St John's harbour in 1583, and Sir Bernard Drake's capture of Portuguese fishing ships there in 1585. He was commended by the lord high admiral Lord Howard of Effingham for his services in commanding his own ship and three others against the Armada in 1588. In 1612 he was captured by 'that famous Arch-Pirate' Peter Easton, who was freely impressing fishermen and appropriating their supplies and catches (Cell, 'Newfoundland', 113). Yet once home he supported Easton's elusive search for a pardon. In 1614 he observed the depredations of the privateer-turned-pirate Henry Mainwaring. 
In response to these losses, and perhaps upon the representations of the London and Bristol Company (1610), which was promoting settled plantations in Newfoundland, Whitbourne was commissioned by the court of admiralty in 1615 to inquire into alleged abuses in the fishery. That summer, at his own expense, he equipped a ship and crew of eleven, and convened courts of vice-admiralty in the harbours between Trinity Bay and Ferryland. His judicial circuit was the first attempt to institute formal courts in Newfoundland. He adjudicated disputes and received presentments from 170 of the 250 English captains who were fishing there. This documentation and his report, which have not survived, are summarized in his 'Discourse and Discovery of New-Found-Land', which went into 3 editions in 1620-23. The abuses he reported reflected the views of his witnesses: non-observance of the sabbath; the indiscriminate dumping of ballast in the harbours; theft of supplies left to overwinter: boats, salt, casks, fishing stages, drying flakes, bait, and even the catch, predominantly cod and cod oil; the appropriation of overly large fishing rooms (waterlots); the use, contrary to statute, of foreign bottoms in the trade; the destruction of timber; and lazy seamen. Like the complaints regulated by John Guy, as governor of the colony of Cupids in Conception Bay in 1611, Whitbourne's efforts were ignored by the visiting fishermen, their west country employers, and the government. 
His experience in 1615 helped to turn Whitbourne, despite his continuing participation in the fishery, into an advocate of colonization. Anthony Parkhurst in the 1570s and Sir Humphrey Gilbert and Edward Hayes in the 1580s had tried to make the case for settlement, but none had Whitbourne's unique combination of experience and practicality. In 1618 he sailed to Renews, south of Ferryland, as governor of the colony established the previous year by William Vaughan, the first independent entrepreneur to purchase land from the London and Bristol Company. Finding the settlers living in temporary shelters and in hopeless disarray, he reorganized the colony. However, it did not long survive his departure the following spring. Three years later he was advising Henry Cary, Viscount Falkland, on his plans for a colony, visiting the subsequent settlement at Renews at least twice before 1626. He was knighted by Falkland (in his capacity as lord deputy of Ireland) in 1625. The next year he sought the patronage of the duke of Buckingham. In 1627 he was serving as lieutenant on the warship 'Bonaventure', but drowned at sea in 1635. His wife, Joanne, whom he married about 1585, had predeceased him in 1620 and was buried in Littleham, Devon. The couple had two daughters, Joan and Katherine. 
Whitbourne's historical significance rests on his 'Discourse'. To the second edition in 1622 he added 'A loving invitation... to all adventurers... for the advancement of his majesties most hopeful plantation in the new-found-land'. Unlike most contemporaries, who saw a contradiction between the seasonal migratory fishery and settlement, he argued that they were complementary imperial resources. The fishery was a cheap source of protein, a staple which could be exchanged for expensive Mediterranean goods, a 'seminary for fishers' and sailors for the Royal Navy, and a generator of industrial and agricultural supplies and employment at home. Settlement would extend the fishing season, permit the more efficient use of manpower, and lower costs. The island would yield up foodstuffs and minerals, especially iron. It offered an outlet for overpopulation at home and a strategic way station to Virginia. The result would be wealth and glory for the crown, entrepreneurs, and the nation. 
The 'Discourse' is a lively and practical guide to the climate, topography, vegetation, Native Americans, wildlife, and resources of the island. Detailed recommendations for extending and rationalizing the trade are supplemented by an analysis of costs and prospective profits, and an inventory for equipping a fishing vessel of 100 tons and forty planters. In a few cases Whitbourne was too optimistic. Newfoundland's climate was not benign, and it had a short growing season. Pervasive fog was not to be eliminated by burning off damp underbrush, and tobacco was unlikely to thrive. But these are minor miscalculations in a manual informed by experience, evidence, and enthusiasm; and by humour, as he notes the benefits of mosquitoes (black flies) in encouraging idle men to work, and his sighting of a mermaid in St John's harbour in 1610. 
State officials who were increasingly interested in imperial expansion took note. Whitbourne was granted permanent copyright over the 'Discourse'. In 1621 the privy council requested that each parish have a copy and take up a collection to recognize his services and help defray his expenses, estimated by him for his books alone at $240. Parishioners might even be canvassed in their homes. Described by the nationalist historian Prowse in 1895 as 'this sturdy old sailor [for whom] every Newfoundlander should feel a deep affection' (Prowse, 118), he is commemorated by the town of Whitbourne, 50 miles west of St John's. 


@@@@@


doc= 29231


Whitbread, Samuel (1764-1815), politician, was born on 18 January 1764 at Cardington, Bedfordshire, the only son and third child of Samuel Whitbread (1720-1796), brewer and politician, and his first wife, Harriet, daughter of William Hayton, attorney, of Ivinghoe, Buckinghamshire. She died three months later, and Whitbread senior took as his second wife in 1769 Lady Mary Cornwallis, daughter of Charles, first Earl Cornwallis. She died the following year, after giving birth to a daughter, Mary ['see 'Grey, Mary (1770-1858)]. 
The Whitbreads were minor Bedfordshire gentry by the mid-seventeenth century. Samuel Whitbread senior, a youngest son, was apprenticed into the London brewing trade in 1736. He subsequently went into business on his own account, and at Chiswell Street developed the largest and most technically advanced porter brewery in the country. By 1790 his capital in it was over $271,000. He invested heavily in landed property in Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, and six other counties. By the end of his life he owned 12,300 acres, of which 10,500 were in Bedfordshire, where he ranked second in acreage only to the dukes of Bedford. The former Torrington estates at Southill, bought in 1795, later became the family home. He was MP for Bedford on his own interest during 1768-74 and 1775-90. A forbidding, deeply devout man, who had abandoned the family's dissenting tradition for Anglicanism, he was a staunch supporter of Pitt. 
The younger Whitbread's upbringing was largely joyless, and great care was lavished on his education by his well-meaning but overbearing father. At Eton College from 1775, he was befriended there by Charles Grey and William Henry Lambton, youthful disciples of Fox. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1780, but was removed to St John's College, Cambridge, where he resumed his acquaintance with Grey and Lambton, in 1782. He graduated BA in 1785. On his return from a European tour in 1786 he was introduced by Grey to the salons of high whig society. He fell in love with Grey's sister Elizabeth, but his father initially vetoed a marriage and sent him abroad again in the summer of 1787 for a period of reflection. After a surly penance he got his way, marrying Elizabeth Grey on 26 January 1788. 
At the general election of 1790 Whitbread, after thinking better of an attempt on the county (which proved a step too far for the family until 1892), exploited his father's indecision and supplanted him at Bedford, where he was secure for his lifetime. His father, shocked and hurt, found a berth at Steyning in 1792, when his son was already established as one of the leading figures of the Foxite whig opposition in the Commons. Whitbread, who joined Brooks's in 1791 and the Whig Club in 1793, did well in the Ochakov debates of April and June 1791, and particularly distinguished himself on the same subject on 29 February 1792. He supported abolition of the slave trade and religious toleration, causes that he warmly espoused throughout his life. A leading spirit, with Grey, of the Society of the Friends of the People, on 25 May 1792 he advocated parliamentary reform. He supported Fox's calls for peace negotiations in December, and condemned the outbreak of war, on 1 February 1793. For the rest of that parliament he used his powerful if crude oratory to denounce allied war aims and attack coercive legislation. Although his rather superficial measure of 1796 to empower magistrates to fix a minimum wage was unsuccessful, it revealed the humanitarianism in which his liberalism was rooted, and which set him above many of his political associates. 
On the death of his millionaire father in 1796 Whitbread inherited the brewery, some London property, and estates in seven counties. He later consolidated and increased his Bedfordshire estates to about 12,000 acres and sold most of the outlying lands. He carried on the brewery business alone for two years, but took in three partners in 1798 and three more in 1800: by these arrangements he was freed from the necessity of personal attendance, while remaining individually responsible for the brewery's finances. His net income from land (about $12,600 a year) almost always exceeded brewery profits (about $8000), but the business offered a far more lucrative return on capital. This alone probably explains why he never succumbed to strong political and social pressures to dispose of it. It was, however, a potentially unstable element in his wealth, which forced him into extensive borrowing and was a source of worry, especially from about 1808, when his finances evidently began to run into difficulties. 
Whitbread, who supported parliamentary reform in May 1797, participated in the Foxite secession. After resuming regular attendance in 1801, he acted with the Foxite opposition to Addington, but abstained from the division on the peace settlement on 14 May 1802. He supported Grey's protest against the renewal of war on 24 May 1803, and was active in the combined attack on Addington in 1804, when Fox named him, Grey, and Lord Lauderdale as his most effective political allies. Whitbread took the centre of the national political stage in 1805 with his remorseless attempt to bring Lord Melville to justice for alleged financial malpractice during his tenure of the treasurership of the navy in Pitt's first administration. Although he made some tactical blunders during the parliamentary campaign, which ended in a vote to impeach Melville on 25 June 1805, Whitbread gained much credit for the tenacity with which he conducted it. Its initial success helped to stimulate a revival of radicalism in the country, as well as fatally weakening Pitt's feeble second ministry. Whitbread regarded it as a considerable personal triumph, though Melville's acquittal in June 1806 and the ridicule excited by lapses of taste and judgement in his own concluding speech of 16 May detracted from it. 
Whitbread's failure to secure office when the Foxites came to power in Lord Grenville's coalition ministry early in 1806 marked the turning point of his political career. The sketchy evidence suggests that his inferiority complex over his origins and involvement in trade, which made him fear rejection by the aristocratic order represented by Fox and Grey, prevented him from staking a forthright claim in his preliminary discussions with them. Grey, who never understood Whitbread and was an inveterate snob, appears to have taken literally his diffident observation that he did not wish to be considered if his inclusion would create problems. Fox, greatly harassed by the many claims pressing on him, was not disposed to quibble. In any case, Whitbread, in considering himself entitled, as it emerged, to office of cabinet or, at least, important departmental rank, overrated his pretensions. When the intensity of his mortification became clear, Grey -- whose earlier throwaway remark that he might sell the brewery, ownership of which disqualified him from the exchequer, had rankled -- sought to propitiate him. Whitbread now claimed the offer of the first suitable vacancy. In the reshuffle following Fox's death in September 1806 Grey, with Grenville's approval, offered him the secretaryship at war as soon as the incumbent, Richard Fitzpatrick, Fox's oldest political crony, could be accommodated elsewhere. He convinced Whitbread of the folly of his initial peevish rejection of the proposal because it did not entail cabinet rank; but he further soured their relationship by doing nothing to accelerate Fitzpatrick's removal and by trying to fob off the impatient Whitbread with a peerage, which he indignantly refused. Nothing had been done when the ministry fell in March 1807. 
By then Whitbread had put himself at odds with Grey and the other whig leaders on an important political issue, by pointedly opposing on 5 January 1807 the address on the ministry's abortive peace negotiations of the summer, which he denounced as inflexible and unimaginative. In thus revealing himself as an irresponsible extremist and potential political liability, he not only annoyed Grey but also alarmed Grenville and the conservatives. His scheme for reform of the poor laws, which he outlined on 19 February 1807, fell foul of fanatics of various persuasions. He subsequently embodied its most radical proposal, for the establishment of a national system of education, in a separate bill, which, after being amended to make it optional, passed the Commons but was rejected by the Lords. 
Whitbread had no realistic claim to the opposition leadership in the Commons when Grey succeeded to the peerage late in 1807. While Grey, who had long been grooming his wife's uncle George Ponsonby for the position, could not be criticized for passing Whitbread over, he was at fault in failing to try to reach a clear understanding with him. His pathetic attempt to mollify his brother-in-law at second hand through George Tierney, who was shocked by his discovery of the intensity of Whitbread's bitterness and resentment, made matters worse. Whitbread, who believed sincerely, if fatuously, in the feasibility of a negotiated peace, lost his temper with Grey on the subject in Grenville's company in January 1808, and soon afterwards gave notice of three resolutions calling for negotiations. A subterfuge initiated by Lauderdale seemed to have succeeded in persuading him to accept a more moderate address; but at the party meeting on the eve of the debate Ponsonby lost control of the warmongers, whose hostility prompted Whitbread to revert to his own resolutions. On 29 February 1808 Ponsonby moved the previous question on the third and last of these, which was lost by 211 votes to 58. 
Although Whitbread was now irrevocably set on a course of erratic extremism, he and the whigs did not actually part company until 1812. He established himself as the most frequent and powerful speaker on the opposition side. His enthusiasm for the Spanish cause was short-lived and, although he was talked out of moving an amendment to the address in 1809, he criticized British involvement in the Peninsula on 19 January, and on 31 January went out on a limb by proposing a peace amendment on the address on the Erfurt overtures. Increasingly influenced and flattered by Thomas Creevey, he enthusiastically took up the cause of economical reform, setting a lead and example for the radical whigs of the 'Mountain', who were seeking to encourage the revival of radicalism inspired by the acquittal of the duke of York on charges of involvement in the corrupt disposal of army patronage in March 1809. Whitbread's call at the Westminster meeting of 29 March for a national campaign for parliamentary reform further shocked the party hierarchy. Yet his relations with the extra-parliamentary reform movement were uneasy: he was never entirely trusted by its leaders, and, indeed, was not prepared to go to their extremes. He did, however, help to perpetuate and sustain the Foxite reforming tradition in unpropitious times. 
Attempts by the whig leaders, scenting office, to re-establish a practical relationship with Whitbread in the winter of 1809-10, when Grey again left the dirty work largely to Tierney, failed in so far as he refused to acknowledge Ponsonby's titular leadership. At the same time, he was personally amiable towards Grey and Grenville, and not inclined to be provocative. The 1810 session passed without an open breach, though he showed considerable independence. His bid on 25 January to commit the house to economical reform was defeated by 95 votes to 54. He was included in opposition discussions of their plans for the attack on the Scheldt fiasco, and took a leading and effective part in the debates on it. His guarded support for Burdett in his conflict with parliament, and his advocacy of reform agitation at the London livery dinner on 19 April 1810, earned him a written rebuke from Grenville, but he was politely unrepentant. 
Had the whigs come to power on the establishment of the Regency in February 1811, Whitbread, whose ambition for office was still strong, would have become first lord of the Admiralty. Grey and Lord Holland overcame Grenville's resistance but, characteristically, Whitbread himself almost wrecked the arrangement by raising objections to serving under Grenville if he retained his auditorship of the exchequer. He was eventually mollified by Grenville's grudging agreement to forgo the salary, but it was the regent who finally dashed his hopes. He was less active than recently in the 1811 session, when he refused to countenance Cartwright's plan for an alliance between whig reformers and radicals. In 1812 Whitbread went increasingly his own way, and put himself beyond the pale as far as the opposition leaders were concerned. His call on 7 January for peace with and exoneration of Napoleon set the tone, while his motion for information on deteriorating relations with America, on 13 February, secured only twenty-three votes. In May 1812 Grenville, though acknowledging that Whitbread had acted without personal malice in supporting Creevey's attack on the sinecure tellership of the exchequer held by his brother the marquess of Buckingham, renounced all future political co-operation with him. Grey's was the only dissenting voice when the whig hierarchy excluded Whitbread from consideration for office in the early negotiations for a new administration following Perceval's assassination. Whitbread's ambition and poor judgement betrayed him into supporting Lord Moira's abortive and half-hearted scheme to set up a reforming government. His wild denunciation of Grey and Grenville for insisting on changing the household, which he blamed for its failure, caused great offence. 
For the rest of his life Whitbread was an outcast from the main body of opposition. He kept up his obsessive demands for peace negotiations and sought, to a limited extent, to promote economic and parliamentary reform. His involvement in 1813 in the campaign on behalf of the princess of Wales, in which he acted as Henry Brougham's lieutenant, was a waste of his talents. After early successes he made a mistake by accusing the commissioners of the inquiry of 1806, Grenville and lords Spencer, Erskine, and Ellenborough, of deliberately misrepresenting evidence. His churlish withdrawal of the charge did him little good. He renewed his efforts in Caroline's cause in 1814, but only succeeded in playing into the hands of ministers and exasperating Brougham. Desperate for peace, he expressed confidence on 20 December 1813 in the ministry's wish to effect it. On 29 June 1814 he concurred in the address on the treaty of Paris and praised Lord Castlereagh, but objected to the notion that the end of the war justified the way in which it had been waged. 
On 8 November 1814 Whitbread attacked the government over the war with America. In the following months, when the barely controlled vehemence of his parliamentary speeches raised eyebrows, he voiced his concern at the repression of liberalism in Europe. In March 1815 he protested against a renewal of hostilities, and on 7 April he got thirty-seven votes for an amendment deploring war for the purpose of determining who should rule France. His address of protest on 28 April against a war to destroy Napoleon was rejected by 273 votes to 72. There was a strain of hysteria in many of Whitbread's pronouncements on the situation in Europe, though he denied being an unreserved apologist for the French emperor. 
The decline in Whitbread's health, noticeable for about six years and marked by excessive increase in weight and susceptibility to debilitating headaches, accelerated in June 1815. Worn out, but unable to sleep, he oscillated between extremes of agitation and despair. On receipt of the news of Waterloo and Napoleon's abdication, he caused surprise on 23 June by praising the duke of Wellington and the ministry, albeit in qualified terms. His last speech in the house, on 4 July, was on a motion thanking the duke of York for his work as commander-in-chief, in which, after a brief show of his old defiance, he tamely acquiesced. He spent the evening of the following day in frenzied talks with his attorney on the tangled finances of the Drury Lane Theatre, which had taken up much of his time since he had become chairman of the committee to promote its rebuilding after the fire of 1809. On the morning of 6 July 1815 he killed himself by cutting his throat at his London house at 35 Dover Street, Piccadilly. 
The evidence strongly suggests that the mental disturbance prevailing when Whitbread committed suicide had its basis in an organic disorder, possibly Cushing's syndrome, a disease of the endocrine glands. It is idle to speculate whether he was driven to the final act by worry and guilt over the problems of the theatre, or by a paranoiac belief that the defeat of Napoleon symbolized his own political failure. With his wife, who died on 28 November 1848, he had two sons and two daughters: William Henry (1795-1867), MP for Bedford 1818-34; Samuel Charles (1796-1879), MP for Middlesex 1820-30; Elizabeth (1791-1843), who married William, eighth Earl Waldegrave; and Emma Laura (1798-1857), who married Charles Shaw Lefevre, first Viscount Eversley. 
Whitbread's political career was one of honest endeavour rather than achievement, though he was among the half-dozen dominant figures of the House of Commons in the years following the deaths of Pitt and Fox. His waywardness was more a symptom than a cause of whig disarray in the period. While he brought many of his difficulties on himself through deficiencies of temperament and judgement, he was to some extent the victim of aristocratic prejudice against his involvement in trade, and he deserved more sympathetic handling than he received from Grey. Sir Robert Heron wrote of him: 'Though his harsh and overbearing manners had, for a long time, been obnoxious to many of all ranks, and particularly to the poor, even whilst they received benefits from him; yet, the experience of his honesty, his enlightened benevolence, and his indefatigable exertions in almost every department of town and country business had, at length, procured for him universal respect, and, out of Parliament, almost universal acquiescence in his measures; and, probably, few men have been so extensively useful to the country... In Parliament, his bad taste and, what is perhaps the same thing, want of judgment, above all, his impractical disposition, diminished greatly the advantages which might otherwise have been derived from his great ability as an orator, his experience, and his incorruptible firmness. (Heron, 'Notes', 1851, 58-9)' Sir Samuel Romilly commented that 'the only faults he had proceeded from an excess of his virtues' (S. Romilly, 'Memoirs', 1840, 3.191). 


@@@@@


doc= 29232


Whitby, Daniel (1637/8-1726), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Rushden, Northamptonshire (on 24 March 1638 according to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', a date which has not been substantiated). His father, Thomas Whitby ('fl'. 1620-1638), was rector of the parish but moved soon after his son's birth to Barrow-on-Humber, Lincolnshire. His uncle and namesake was rector of Theydon Mount, Essex, but was ejected during the civil war, and became a canon of Chichester at the Restoration. Daniel matriculated as a commoner at Trinity College, Oxford, on 23 July 1653, was elected scholar on 13 June 1655, aged seventeen, graduated BA on 20 April 1657 and MA on 14 April 1660, and was elected fellow of Trinity in 1664. He then found favour with the bishop of Salisbury and former president of Trinity, Seth Ward, who made him his chaplain in 1668 and preferred him lavishly in his Salisbury diocese. On top of a valuable prebend and the rectory of St Edmund's, Whitby became precentor in September 1672 -- a dignity he held until his death -- and a canon residentiary in June 1676. He accumulated BD and DD on 13 September 1672. 
Whitby's first publications (three anti-Roman works in 1664, 1666, and 1674, and an apologetical treatise in 1671 to withstand 'the encrease of Atheism and Irreligion'; D. Whitby, ''Logos tes pisteos', or, An Endeavour to Evince the Certainty of Christian Faith', 1671, 2) were fully consonant with orthodox Oxford divinity. Whitby was well read in the fathers, especially the Greek ones, provided some assistance for the preparation of John Fell's Cyprian, and was for years a great admirer of Henry Dodwell, with whom he 'had once the honour of an intimate acquaintance' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Cherry 23, 259). His first deviation was his 'Discourse concerning the laws ecclesiastical and civil made against hereticks by popes, emperors and kings' (1682), to show what protestants might expect to suffer under a popish prince. The book was published anonymously and Whitby managed to hide his authorship until 1726, when he claimed it for himself in his last collection of sermons. Although he avoided advocating exclusion explicitly, such was clearly the conclusion that the reader was invited to draw for himself, all the more so as Whitby insisted that no resistance was allowed once a prince had lawfully come to power. He was certainly sincere but this was also a subtle move to turn tory theology against the tories. 
Whitby made fuller use of this tactic in his 'Protestant reconciler, humbly pleading for condescention to dissenting brethren, in things indifferent and unnecessary for the sake of peace, and shewing how unreasonable it is to make such things the necessary conditions of communion', also published anonymously (with the imprint of 1683 but actually issued in November 1682), arguing that the very heinousness of schism, as represented by Church of England writers, made it incumbent upon ecclesiastical authorities to cease to impose indifferent ceremonies 'which do occasion the Schism, and consequently the destruction of so many precious and immortal Souls' (D. Whitby, 'Protestant Reconciler', 1683, 30-31). Although Whitby stated that dissenters were guilty too, the 'Protestant Reconciler' caused an outcry in ecclesiastical circles and its author, who was soon identified, was subjected to much abuse. He vainly tried to defuse the crisis by hastening to issue, in June 1683, a second part to exhort dissenters to conformity. Nicknamed Whigby, he was even accused of having encouraged the Rye House plot. Two propositions extracted from the 'Reconciler' were condemned by the Oxford decree of 21 July 1683, and the book was among those subsequently burnt in the schools quadrangle. Whitby had to make a public submission in Salisbury at the bishop's consistory on 9 October 1683, declaring himself 'truly and heartily sorry' for his book, professing to 'revoke and renounce all irreverent and unmeet Expressions contained therein' and engaging never to print anything hereafter without episcopal approbation (Sykes, vi-vii; Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 34, fol. 182'r'). Whitby protested later that this had not been a recantation: 'That very Morning that I was to make my Submission to the then present Chancellor, I declared, that if any such Thing was required of me, I would rather lose all, be imprisoned and die, than I would do it. (D. Whitby, 'A Full Answer to the Arguments of the Reverend Dr. Jonathan Edwards', 1712, vii)' However, his declaration certainly went under that title, being first circulated in manuscript and then printed in L'Estrange's 'Observator'. The Latin manual of ethics which he published in 1684 and which later became a favourite of the Oxford curriculum underwent censure on these questions. 
Whitby was not at the end of his troubles, as his case became part of the fierce conflict at Salisbury Cathedral between Ward and Dean Thomas Pierce. The latter's party declared Whitby's submission unsatisfactory and, in the aftermath of Monmouth's rebellion, tried to have him presented at the assizes in September 1685. Whitby was only saved by a certificate 'from the bishop, Chapter and severall Loyall Justices of the Peace, that hee had behaved himself very loyally' since 1683 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 143, fol. 117'r'). To justify himself further he published three ultra-tory sermons, in which he taught passive obedience, confuted Samuel Johnson's 'Julian', and even flirted with the patriarchal scheme. The whole affair must have been traumatic for Whitby and may explain his readiness, later in his life, to side with 'heretics' against the tide of clerical feeling. 
The politics of James II brought Whitby in line again with dominant Anglican opinion. He contributed his patristic learning to the anti-Roman campaign, offering expert advice and writing himself against image worship, divine service in Latin, and traditions. After the revolution of 1688-9 he had serious scruples about taking the oaths to William and Mary, and almost resolved at one point to become a non-juror, though less because of 'the supposed unlawfuness of complyance' than of 'the scandal it is like to minister' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ballard 34, fol. 16'r'). He managed to satisfy himself, however, and then characteristically rushed into print with four pamphlets to demonstrate that allegiance is due to a king 'de facto'. 
Whitby was close to Gilbert Burnet, his new bishop, who chose him as godfather of his son, Gilbert junior, and promoted him in April 1696 to the prebend of Teynton Regis, the richest of the diocese. He now spent most of his time on his 'Paraphrase and Commentary on the New Testament'. The epistles came out first in 1700 (with a dedication to Burnet who is thanked for having perused and approved the work), and the whole was published in 1703 in two folio volumes. It was regularly reprinted and considered a classic in the eighteenth century. The commentary on 'Romans' 13 shows Whitby fully converted to whig theories of contract and resistance. His extreme Arminianism, which led him to deny any imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, engaged him in a violent controversy with both John and Jonathan Edwards. According to his own account Whitby, having been 'bred up Seven Years in the University under Men of the Calvinistical Persuasion', had 'once firmly entertained all their Doctrines' but went on to abandon them as contrary 'to the common Reason of Mankind' and conducive to disbelief and deism (D. Whitby, 'A Discourse Concerning, 1: The True Import of the Words Election and Reprobation', 1710, iii-v). He may have struggled for some time to reconcile his new views with the articles and the liturgy, and is said to have declined the deanery of Salisbury to avoid a new subscription. However, he held eventually that it was lawful to subscribe 'in any Sense, of which the words are fairly, and 'Grammatically' capable' (D. Whitby, 'An answer to a pamphlet', 'Reflections on some Assertions and Opinions of Mr Dodwell', 1707, 10). 
When preparing his 'New Testament', Whitby had failed to obtain communication of John Mill's then unpublished work and clearly resented the rebuke. This partly accounts for his most famous piece, the 'Examen variantium lectionum Millii' (1710), in which he argued that such a huge collection of variants was undermining the certainty of scripture and played into the hands of papists and atheists. Whitby's reaction was thoroughly theological; indeed, according to Hearne he 'hardly knows what a manuscript is' ('Remarks', 2.112). Freethinkers, starting with Anthony Collins, seized upon it gleefully and it was therefore mercilessly ridiculed by Richard Bentley in his 'Remarks upon a Late Discourse of Free-Thinking' (1713, pp. 63-9). 
Whitby's anti-Romanism remained fierce to the last and he was increasingly worried by what he perceived as the Romanizing tendencies of the high-church party: hence his furious attack against William Beveridge's posthumous writings in 1711. He had long been an orthodox trinitarian and had published in 1691 a Latin treatise on Christ's divinity which was heavily indebted to George Bull's 'Defensio', but he was won over to Samuel Clarke's 'Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity' and entered into a correspondence with the author, putting at his disposal the extended knowledge of the ante-Nicene fathers which was his forte ('for the reasons are much beyond me'; BL, Add. MS 4370, fol. 8'r'). He first entered the debate anonymously, but afterwards published under his name an attack against Bull ('Disquisitiones modestae in clarissimi Bulli defensionem fidei Nicaenae', 1718) and defended it against Daniel Waterland in 1720 and 1721. In his profession of faith, which he arranged to be published after his death by his young friend Arthur Ashley Sykes, he retracted what he had written in his 'New Testament' when he had been following 'the common beaten Road of other reputed Orthodox divines' (Sykes, sig. A2'r'). His final position has occasionally been labelled unitarian but should more properly be described as Arianism. It explains, together with his dislike of high-churchmanship, his 'Dissertatio de S. scripturarum interpretatione secundum patrum commentarios' (1714), in which he turned his patristic learning against the fathers, collecting their mistakes in order to show that they were neither adequate interpreters of scripture nor sufficient authorities to settle the debate on the Trinity. He repeated the same principles in the Bangorian controversy of 1718, in which he sided with Benjamin Hoadly. 
According to Wood, Whitby 'hath been all along so wholly devoted to his severer studies, that he hath scarce ever allowed himself leisure to mind' anything else (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 671). He never married and seems to have lived with his sister. His life is very much the story of his books (he published nearly fifty, including pamphlets and sermons). In his old age he had to employ an amanuensis because his sight was failing, but he retained his tenacious memory. He was short and very thin, and his features in his engraved portrait are rather severe; a portrait 'seems to have been presented' to Trinity in 1844 but 'is now nowhere to be found' (Pool, 146). His minute examination of Mill's variants would alone bear witness to his industry. On the other hand, he wrote bad Latin -- according to Hearne this was 'school Boy Jargon' ('Remarks', 3.21) -- and his English style was not better; there is some truth in John Edwards's cruel description: 'he is a great Pains-taker, and may be said to slave at the Work of Book-Making: But the Labour consists chiefly in Transcribing and in Repetitions' (Edwards, xii). Whitby certainly relished long quotations and was adept at reusing his own works in his later writings. He also unavoidably contradicted himself several times, the most blatant instance, as his orthodox opponents were eager to point out, being his notion of the Trinity. 
Whitby could hardly be considered an original thinker and, anyway, the majority of his books were meant to expose and confute the errors of others rather than to expound a personal position. They were none the less influential, and the Latin ones were much read and commented upon on the continent (they were all put on the Roman index in 1757). Whitby was consistently driven by the dread of popery, the tendency to reduce religion to plain morality, and the dislike of subtleties, be they those of theological speculation, of sacramentalism, or of textual criticism. Throughout his long career, from Restoration orthodoxy to the age of reason, he remained a latitudinarian, for whom Chillingworth's 'Religion of Protestants' and Taylor's 'Liberty of Prophesying' provided essential references. 
Whitby died in Salisbury on 21 March 1726. He had been very well and at church the day before, but 'returning Home was seiz'd with a Fainting, and died the Night following', aged eighty-eight (Sykes, ii). 


@@@@@


doc= 29233


Whitchurch, Edward (d. 1562), printer and bookseller, was a member of the Haberdashers' Company in London in the 1530s, working from the sign of the Well and Two Buckets in St Martin Outwich. In 1537 he and Richard Grafton became involved in Thomas Cromwell's project to produce an official English translation of the 'Bible'. In that year the so-called 'Matthew Bible', translated by John Rogers, was printed in Antwerp by Matthias Crom; Grafton and Whitchurch acted as publishers, under Cromwell's authority but at their own expense. However, the marginalia in the Matthew text continued to alarm Henry VIII, and in 1538 Cromwell ordered that a revised translation be printed, without marginal notes. Grafton and Whitchurch remained at the heart of the project, due to their experience and their comparatively deep pockets. The printing of what was to become known as the 'Great Bible' was again entrusted to a skilled foreign printer, this time the Parisian Francois Regnault. However, although the project was undertaken with the permission of the French king, the University of Paris viewed it as heretical. In December 1538 the inquisitor-general seized the sheets that had already been printed; Cromwell was unwilling to intervene, despite Whitchurch's pleas, and the two publishers were forced to return to England. Edmund Bonner, the English resident in Paris who had been supervising the project, was able only to secure the transportation of the equipment, paper and workmen back to England. As a result, Grafton and Whitchurch were forced -- apparently contrary to their original intentions -- to act as the printers themselves, with some assistance from the king's printer, Thomas Berthelet. They published the first edition of the 'Great Bible' in April 1539. 
For Whitchurch this was the beginning of an illustrious career in evangelical publishing. His partnership with Grafton was to prove enduring; they printed at least six editions of the 'Great Bible' in 1539-41, along with various 'New' testaments and English primers. In 1541 they obtained a joint patent for printing service books, which was renewed in 1543 and 1546, and they were given exclusive rights to the official king's primer of 1545. With the accession of Edward VI, they were granted a new seven-year privilege to print service books; and they were responsible for the first editions of the 1549 'Book of Common Prayer'. 
Whitchurch's interest in biblical and liturgical publication went beyond the professional; he was a consistent advocate of evangelical reform. In July 1540 he and Grafton were seized during a general round-up of London evangelicals, accused of failing to attend confession; however, like all the others arrested in this purge, they were quickly released without charge. On 8 April 1543 they were arrested along with six other leading figures in the London book trade for printing heretical books, and imprisoned for three and a half weeks. Whitchurch's approach to such troubles appears to have been pragmatic; in 1541 he counselled the evangelical preacher Robert Wisdom to recant rather than force a confrontation with his old collaborator Bishop Bonner. His greatest contribution to the cause was, of course, as a printer and publisher. Between 1539 and 1543 he published a range of works by moderate evangelicals including Lancelot Ridley, Richard Taverner, and Richard Tracy. After his imprisonment in the latter year, his output became less controversial for the remainder of Henry VIII's reign, but he continued to produce innovative works, such as Roger Ascham's 'Toxophilus' in 1545, and 'Yny lhyvyr hwnn y traethir', a primer which was the first book to be printed in Welsh, in 1546. With Edward VI's accession, he was able to produce openly evangelical material once again. He published at least ninety imprints during the six years of Edward's reign, including such key texts as Katherine Parr's 'Lamentacion of a Sinner', Erasmus's 'Paraphrases', and the metrical psalter of Sternhold and Hopkins. 
Little is known about Whitchurch's personal life. His first marriage or marriages are unrecorded; at his death he had a son, Edward, and three adult daughters, of whom only two, Helen and Elizabeth, can be named. Likewise, the location of Whitchurch's establishment in the early 1540s is not clear. It is possible he was at the sign of the Bible in St Paul's Churchyard in 1540; in 1544 he was based at the south side of St Mary Aldermanbury Church, but he can be placed in the Old Jewry at roughly the same time. In 1545 Whitchurch moved to John Byddell's old establishment at the sign of the Sun in Fleet Street (which had formerly belonged to Wynkyn de Worde), where he remained until 1553. After Mary's accession, however, Whitchurch's position became uncomfortable once again: he was exempted by name from the coronation pardons of 1553 and 1554. It is likely that he fled to Germany. However, all that is known of his activities during these years is that, at some point after Archbishop Cranmer's execution in 1555, Whitchurch married Cranmer's German widow, Margaret Cranmer. The archbishop's children became part of his household; Whitchurch negotiated his stepdaughter Margaret's marriage to Thomas Norton before 1561, and was probably instrumental in having Norton appointed as counsel to the Stationers' Company in 1562. Perhaps owing to failing health, Whitchurch's own attempt to resume printing after Mary's death was perfunctory; only two imprints of his are known from this period. In 1562 he retired to a house he had leased in Camberwell. He died within a week of making his will on 25 November 1562. 
It has been suggested that a bookseller's account book from 1545 that survives in the Houghton Library at Harvard may have been Whitchurch's. 


@@@@@


doc= 29234


White, Adam (1817-1878), naturalist, was born in Edinburgh on 29 April 1817, the son of Thomas White, a banker's clerk, and his wife, Mary Ann Gellatly. He was baptized in Kirkurd, Peebles, on 2 August 1818. He was educated at the high school in Edinburgh. When he was eighteen he went to London with a letter of introduction to John Edward Gray (1800-1875) of the British Museum and obtained employment in the zoological branch of the department of natural history in December 1835. To begin with his work was directed by the keeper, John George Children. On Children's retirement in 1840, supervision passed to Gray, his energetic successor. Once Gray had established a simple method for the systematic registration of specimens in the zoological department, he made preparations to publish catalogues of them. White was one of four assistants charged with carrying out these tasks. Some of his early work on the arthropod group was hindered by George Samouelle, a fellow assistant who had taken to drink and spited White by removing the registration numbers on many specimens. However, Samouelle was sacked in 1841 and, following the appointment of Edward Doubleday in 1842, White was able to concentrate uninterrupted on the Coleoptera and on Crustacea. On 27 January 1844 he married Helen Bolden ('b'. 1808/9, died in or before 1861), daughter of William Bolden, a bookbinder. The couple had one daughter. 
At the museum, White produced a 'List of the Specimens of Crustacea in the Collection of the British Museum' (1847), wrote most parts of 'Nomenclature of Coleopterous Insects in the Collection of the British Museum' (9 parts, 1847-55), and contributed to the 'List of Specimens of British Animals in the Collection of the British Museum' (1850-55). He also published a number of other books, including 'A Popular History of Mammalia' (1850), 'A Popular History of Birds' (1855), 'The Instructive Picture Book' (with R. M. Stark, 1857), and 'Heads and Tails' (1870). He contributed two works to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge's 'Diagrams of Natural History' series ('c'.1860), and between 1839 and 1867 wrote more than sixty scientific papers. Although known for his work on arthropods, he was also a keen botanist and was the first to apply the suffix '-idea' to designate the family names of insects. 
White was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1846. He was a member of the Entomological Society of London from 1839 to 1863, and a member of the Botanical Society of London. Visitors to the museum remembered White's readiness to assist and his scientific knowledge earned him their respect. Unfortunately, he was not always on such good terms with Gray, and never rose above the assistant grade. Nevertheless, employment at the British Museum provided him with first-hand knowledge of the advantages enjoyed by a national museum and, using the pseudonym Arachnophilus, he wrote to Scottish newspapers advocating the establishment of a national museum for Scotland. The letters were also published separately as 'Four Short Letters' (n.d. [1850]). 
White's wife, Helen, died in or before 1861, and grief caused him to have a nervous breakdown. He was for a time committed to an asylum in Scotland and retired from the museum on a small pension in 1863. On 28 July 1862 he married his second wife, Margaret Watson, daughter of Alexander Watson, farmer, and his wife, Helen. The couple's first son was born in 1863; by 1874 they had at least two more. However, White's new-found happiness was marred by financial worries and he died intestate at 111 St Andrews Road, Pollokshields, on 30 December 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 29235


White, Alice Mary Meadows (1839-1884), composer, was born at 1 Sidmouth Place, London, on 19 May 1839, the daughter of Richard Smith, a lace merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Lumley. She studied with William Sterndale Bennett and George Alexander Macfarren, and first came to notice at the age of twenty-one, when her first piano quartet was performed in 1861 at a trial of new compositions held by the London Musical Society. The same society later performed her first string quartet (1862), symphony (1863), and other orchestral works. 
On 2 January 1867 Alice Smith married Frederick Meadows White ('c'.1830-1898) QC, who was later recorder of Canterbury and a county court judge, but not, as is sometimes stated, director of the Royal Academy of Music. In November 1867 she was elected a female professional associate of the Philharmonic Society, and in 1884, Hon. RAM. She composed many large- and small-scale works, and was held in high esteem for much of her creative life. Her clarinet concerto was performed at the Norwich festival in 1872 and her setting of Collins's ode 'The Passions' at the Hereford festival in 1882. She also set Keats's 'Ode to the North-East Wind' (1880) and Kingsley's 'Song of the Little Baltung' (1883). Of the many piano pieces, songs, and duets which she composed, the duet for soprano and tenor 'Maying' was the most popular; the copyright of the piece was sold in 1883 for $663. With few exceptions, her style demonstrated a closer relationship to 'the classic rather than... the romantic school' ('The Athenaeum', 13 Dec 1884). 
Alice White died from typhoid fever at 42 Sussex Gardens, Kensington, on 4 December 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 29236


White, Andrew (1579-1656), Jesuit and missionary in America, was born of Catholic parents in London. Two brothers, whose identities are not known, became priests. In April 1593 White matriculated at the English College at Douai and during the academic year 1594-5 he studied at the English Jesuit college at St Omer. On 1 November 1595 he was received at the English College at Valladolid and he transferred in 1596 to the English College at Seville, where he completed his theological studies. Ordained most likely in 1604, White arrived in Douai on 4 June after visiting his two brothers in Lorraine. He crossed to England where he worked for two years, but returned to Douai on 24 July 1606, one of forty-nine Catholics expelled as a result of the Gunpowder Plot. On 1 February 1607 he joined the Society of Jesus at the recently opened English novitiate in Louvain. Shortly after his first vows on 2 February 1609, he returned to Valladolid; in 1611 he was assigned to Seville, where he remained for four years. 
White was professor of theology or of sacred scripture (perhaps both), at the English Jesuit school of theology in Louvain from 1617 until 1619, but before 13 June 1619 he returned to London, where he pronounced his final vows. In 1622 he resumed his position as professor in Louvain, moving with the theologate to Liege in 1624. In spite of his being a prominent theologian and a lauded professor, well-versed in the humanities and in Hebrew, White's academic career ended in 1629 because of his rigorously conservative adherence to Thomas Aquinas. According to a Jesuit catalogue for that year, White had an excellent intellect and good judgement, but mediocre prudence. In the summer of 1629 he returned to England, where he worked first in London and then in Hampshire in 1630-32. 
In early 1629, before his departure from Liege, White had volunteered for the North American missions, in which, despite his melancholic temperament, he was most competent to teach and to work. In November 1633 he was appointed superior of the three Jesuits sent to found the Maryland mission. In three extant works, 'Relatio itineris in Marylandiam', addressed to the Jesuit superior-general in April/May of 1634, 'A briefe relation of the voyage unto Maryland', and 'Declaratio coloniae' (in E. A. Dalrymple, ed., 'Relatio itineris in Marylandiam', 1874, 10-43), White described the journey and the colony both for his religious superior and for future colonists. White studied the native languages of the American Indians, and received the king of the Piscateway and his family into the Roman church. Unfortunately his dictionary, grammar, and catechism in the Timuquana language are no longer extant, but a few pages of prayers and commandments translated into Conoy, the language of the Piscateway, are preserved in the archives of the Maryland province of the Society of Jesus at Georgetown University, Washington, DC. White remained superior of the mission until 1638 and ministered both to the indigenous peoples and the settlers until he and Thomas Copley (alias Philip Fisher) were captured by English soldiers in early 1644 and sent back to England in chains. Charged with high treason because they were in England in violation of an Elizabethan statute (27 Eliz. c. 2), they pleaded that they were forcibly carried into the realm and held against their wills. 
After his acquittal White was expelled and went to Antwerp where he arrived in March 1648. Either before or immediately after his arrival, he was involved in the controversy surrounding the 'three propositions', a Roman Catholic attempt to win toleration from the Independents in 1647-8. White sided with the Catholic party negotiating with the Independents and wrote in their defence. Rome declared the propositions unacceptable and repudiated the agreement. After a very brief stay in Antwerp, White returned to England and is listed as working in Derbyshire in 1648 and London in 1649. By 1651 he worked in the Residence of St Thomas of Canterbury, Hampshire, where he remained for the rest of his life; he died, probably in Hampshire, on 6 January 1656. 


@@@@@


doc= 29237


White, Anthony (1781-1849), surgeon, was born on 16 December 1781 at Norton in co. Durham, the son of Robert and Isabella White. He was educated near Bishop Auckland, at Witton-le-Wear grammar school, and from 1799 at Cambridge, where he graduated MB from Emmanuel College in 1804. He was also the pupil in London of the able and eccentric surgeon Sir Anthony Carlisle, and he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons on 2 September 1803. 
White now settled in London, where at the Westminster Hospital he was elected assistant surgeon on 24 July 1806, and surgeon on 24 April 1823. He also possessed a very extensive private practice. He was active as a surgeon for twenty-three years until, his hands being so affected by repeated attacks of gout that he could no longer operate, in 1846 he resigned; the governors of the hospital immediately appointed him consulting surgeon. At the Royal College of Surgeons White was elected a member of the council on 6 September 1827, and two years later, on 10 September 1829, he became a member of the court of examiners in succession to William Wadd. In 1831 he delivered the Hunterian oration, and he was vice-president of the college in 1832 and 1840, and served as president in 1834 and 1842. A great lover of the arts, particularly painting and music, he also filled the office of surgeon to the Royal Society of Musicians. 
As a surgeon White was celebrated for his dexterity and success. Among his most remarkable work was the first operation to excise the head of the femur for disease of the hip joint, an operation then considered to be so dangerous that Sir Anthony Carlisle and Sir William Blizard not only tried to dissuade him but threatened to report him to the Royal College of Surgeons. White performed the operation with complete success, and sent the patient to call upon his opponents. White's besetting sins were indolence and unpunctuality, and he often completely forgot his appointments. White 'is said to have been the laziest man in his profession. He was habitually unpunctual, yet he was so good a surgeon that he soon obtained a large and lucrative practice' (Plarr, 512). As a result he published little and made few notes or records of his practice. His only publications were a 'Treatise on the Plague' (1846) and an inquiry entitled 'Proximate Cause of Gout, and its Rational Treatment' (1848). 
White himself suffered severely from gout in his later years, and he died in London at his house at 5 Parliament Street on 9 March 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 29238


White, Charles (1728-1813), surgeon and man-midwife, only son of Thomas White (1696-1776), surgeon and man-midwife, and his wife, Rosamond, 'nee' Bower, was born at Manchester on 4 October 1728 and educated there by the Revd Radcliffe Russell. About 1742 he was apprenticed to his father and subsequently studied medicine in London at the school of William Hunter, who was then establishing a reputation in obstetrics. There White became close friends with William's brother, John, who was also studying at the school. White completed his studies in Edinburgh, before returning to Manchester, where he joined his father's practice as a surgeon and man-midwife. 
In 1752 White was instrumental, along with Joseph Bancroft, a local merchant, in founding the Manchester Infirmary. This charity, funded by subscriptions of the wealthy, provided medical advice and treatment for the poor. White served as honorary surgeon from 1752 until 1790. 
From the 1750s White began to establish a reputation as an innovative surgeon. He carried out a wide range of procedures, including lithotomy, amputations, and the removal of tumours. In 1760, in a paper before the Royal Society, he described a successful operation on a fractured arm, which brought together and united the two ends of the broken bone. Two years later he presented a further paper describing the use of sponges to stop haemorrhaging. He became a fellow of the Royal Society on 18 February 1762, and a member of the Company of Surgeons in the same year. 
White was also concerned to develop the midwifery side of his father's practice. Following the principles established already by his father, he advocated 'rational methods' and became highly regarded. In his well-known and influential book, 'Treatise on the Management of Pregnant and Lying-in Women' (1773), he advised that women should give birth 'naturally'. Delivery should not be assisted until the shoulders of the baby were expelled by the force of the mother's labour pains. He advised mothers to get out of bed as soon after delivery as possible and stressed the importance of cleanliness and ventilation. He recognized the analogy between puerperal and surgical fevers. This book, dedicated to his former teacher, William Hunter, was translated into both French and German and was also published in North America. 
In 1757 White married Ann, daughter of John Bradshaw, one-time high sheriff for the county of Lancaster. They had eight children -- four sons and four daughters. Their second son, Thomas White ('b'. 1763), became physician to the Manchester Infirmary and a man-midwife. He died in 1793 following a fall from his horse. John Bradshaw White, their fourth son, also joined his father's practice but died in 1797. 
White played a prominent social role in Manchester, then rapidly developing into an industrial city. He was a founding member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1781. In 1783, along with the physicians Thomas Percival and Thomas Henry, he helped to establish the short lived College of Arts and Science, where he and his son Thomas lectured on anatomy. 
In 1790, after a dispute over the enlargement of the Manchester Infirmary, White resigned. Almost immediately he set up another hospital, the Lying-in Charity. This was, at first, a domiciliary service. In 1795 a modest in-patient facility was added. From its foundation the charity's aims were broad. A register of wet-nurses was kept and lecture courses were offered for both apothecaries and female midwives. In 1793 White himself gave a series of talks. White acted as man-midwife extraordinary to the charity until 1811. In 1854 the charity became known as St Mary's Hospital, the title it retains today. 
From about 1795 White became interested in the relationships between different human races and between species of plants and animals. He read a number of papers to the Literary and Philosophical Society on the subject, which were published in 1799 as 'An Account of the Regular Gradation in Man, Animals and Vegetables'. He concluded that there is general gradation from one species to another, suggesting relationships between species and races. However, he rejected the idea that one species may have developed from another. 
In 1803 White had an attack of epidemic ophthalmia, which resulted in blindness in 1812. He died at his country house, The Priory, Sale, Ashton-on-Mersey, Cheshire, on 20 February 1813. In the church of Ashton-on-Mersey a monument to him and several members of his family was later erected. 


@@@@@


doc= 29239


White, Francis (1563/4-1638), bishop of Ely, was born at Eaton Socon, Bedfordshire, the son of Peter White, who was first the curate and then vicar there. Nothing is known about his mother, but he had four brothers, who all became clergymen, including John White (1570-1615). He attended the grammar school at St Neots, Huntingdonshire, and in 1579, at the age of fifteen, was admitted a pensioner at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1583 and proceeded MA in 1586. He was ordained to the priesthood by the bishop of London on 17 May 1588. Early in his career White was rector of Broughton-Astley, Leicestershire, and it may have been during this period that he married; his wife's name is unknown. They had several daughters and at least one son, who may have been the Francis White baptized at Barrow upon Soar, Leicestershire, on 18 November 1612. 
White subsequently became a lecturer at St Paul's, London, and from about 1617, thanks to his association with his patron, Richard Neile, bishop of Durham, and his growing reputation as an anti-Catholic polemicist, he began to rise rapidly in the church. He acknowledged Neile's patronage in 'The Orthodoxe Faith and Way to the True Church', essentially a defence of his brother John in the latter's controversy with the Catholic controversialist, and former president of Douai, Thomas Worthington. In May 1622, shortly after he was appointed dean of Carlisle, White was called upon by George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham, to help persuade the duke's mother, Mary, countess of Buckingham, against converting to Catholicism. The countess had been under the influence of John Percy, better known as Fisher the Jesuit, who was secretly functioning as her chaplain at the court. White was asked to take the protestant side on the first day of three private debates with Percy organized by the marquess and King James and held in the presence of the Villiers family; the king and William Laud, bishop of St David's, took that role on the second and third days. When, against the king's wishes, Percy spread details of the debates in his 'An Answere to a Pamphlet' (1623), White responded by publishing a formal attack on the Jesuit, entitled 'A Replie to Jesuit Fishers Answere' (1624). In the meantime he had received his reward: on 27 September 1622 he was instituted rector of St Peter Cornhill, London. 
White's publications surrounding the Percy conflict marked him as a principal spokesman for the growing group of so-called Arminians, whose views were often linked with the Dutch remonstrance theology of Jacobus Arminius (1560-1609). Following the accession of Charles I many of these clerics rose to power in association with Neile, Villiers, who had become duke of Buckingham, and the future archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud. They all upheld the Roman church as a true, though errant, institution, questioned Calvinist opinions about predestination and the pope as the biblically predicted Anti-Christ, and gave greater place to the sacraments and ceremonies than to preaching in the worship service. White was usually one of the least contentious of this group, and his focus tended to be on separating essential matters of theology from those things he considered indifferent. He was most concerned to promote unity and conformity to the national church, and often railed against theological discord, claiming that when it rises, it 'overspreadeth the greene pastures of sacred truth'. Nevertheless White demonstrated his commitment to the 'Laudian-Arminian' party when early in 1625 he helped license for publication Richard Montague's 'Appello Caesarem', which was openly anti-Calvinist and launched the biggest theological controversy of the late Jacobean period. In endorsing it, White went even further, 'associating Calvin with the most extreme exponents of absolute reprobation' (Milton, 428), a significant move away from his earlier, more moderate, stance, which required some mental gymnastics. With John Cosin, chaplain to Bishop Neile, White formally defended Montague's orthodoxy at the York House conference of February 1626. Here his critical stance on the canons issued by the Synod of Dort and his apparent shift from previously expressed positions earned him a sometimes uncomfortable ride. 
White was rewarded, however, with further appointments in the church. Having become senior dean of Sion College, London, in 1625, he was consecrated bishop of Carlisle at Durham House on 3 December 1626 by bishops Neile, John Buckeridge, Theophilus Field, and William Murry. Cosin preached the consecration sermon to a crowd of over 500 people, including Buckingham's sister. For his episcopal visitation of 1627 White used articles previously prepared by Bishop John Overall for Norwich, 'which elevated the sacramental ministry of the priesthood, and enquired minutely into breaches of ceremony by the clergy and the reverence displayed by the laity during divine service' (Fincham, 'Visitation Articles', 1.xx). Following his election as bishop of Norwich in January 1629 he used a similar set for a visitation in 1631. Translated to Ely on 15 November that year, he did not, like bishops in neighbouring dioceses, enforce the railed altar, but his visitation of 1635 sought to establish uniformity of practice in catechizing and to curtail over-long sermons which resulted in the omission of parts of the liturgy. After Charles I reissued the controversial 'Book of Sports' in 1633 White was called upon to defend the crown on the issue of sabbatarianism and responded with 'A Treatise of the Sabbath Day' (1635), dedicated to the new archbishop, William Laud. 
White died at Ely House, Holborn, in February 1638 and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. By his more Calvinist-inclined detractors White was considered someone who paid for his positions by renouncing orthodoxy. A note in Archbishop James Ussher's correspondence indicates that White 'sold his orthodoxe bookes and bought Jesuits' ('DNB'). But up to his death White remained committed to a moderate form of protestantism rooted in a distaste for conflict and a concern to promote church unity by an emphasis on church ceremony and the physical 'beauty of holiness'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29240


White, Francis (d. 1711), chocolate-house keeper, was an Italian immigrant; in his will he left legacies to his sister and her husband, Angela Maria and Tomaso Casanova, and to his aunt Nicoletta Tomasi, all of Genoa. His name, it has been presumed, may well have been a straight translation from the Italian: Francesco Bianco or Bianchi, perhaps. It has not been possible to trace White in the records of naturalization and denization. 
White was the original proprietor of White's Chocolate House, which he set up in a house on the east side of St James's Street, Westminster. In 1697 White moved premises to a higher-rental building on the west side of St James's Street, later no. 69, where it remained until a fire destroyed the premises in 1733. In 1702 White leased an adjoining house to the north of his chocolate house, and soon after he employed the services of John Arthur to assist and later manage the business. 
From its inception, White's became associated with both whig politics and elite fashionability. The chocolate house cultivated an air of greater distinction than did the much more demotic coffee houses. The charge for entrance at White's was 6died, while the charge at most coffee houses was only 1died White's catered to the social rounds of London's male leisured class, although the discourse which took place there was not entirely devoted to the light-hearted matters of 'gallantry and pleasure' which Richard Steele thought most characteristic of the place and which William Congreve epitomized in 1700 in the first act of 'The Way of the World' ('Tatler', 1, 12 April 1709, ed. Bond, 1.16). It was at White's Chocolate House that James Brydges, the future duke of Chandos and paymaster-general of the army, engaged in debates concerning the popular origins of government; he also discussed more topical matters, such as, in the 1690s, the prospects for a peace and the question of the Spanish succession. Brydges polished his virtuoso credentials there by discussing the contents of the earl of Sunderland's library with Lord Derwentwater and the son of John Lake, the nonjuring bishop of Chichester (Brydges's journal). 
But it was gambling and gaming for which White's was both famous and notorious. Neither the whiggish flavour of its company nor its fashionability endeared White's to tory-inclined critics such as Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, who, according to Jonathan Swift, 'never passed by White's Chocolate-House (the common rendez-vous of infamous sharpers, and noble cullies) without bestowing a curse upon that famous academy, as the bane of half the English nobility' ('Prose Writings of Jonathan Swift', 12.50). Swift himself occasionally visited White's, although he complained of finding there 'drunken whiggish lords like... Lord Santry who come into the chocolate house and rail aloud at the Tories, and have challenges sent them, and the next morning come and beg pardon' (Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 485). 
At the time that he made his will in 1708, in which he left legacies worth $2500, White had a wife, Elizabeth (died 1729?), and four children, all minors. White died in February 1711 and was buried in St James's, Piccadilly. His widow continued to run the chocolate house after her husband's death, and began to promote the sales of tickets to operas, masquerades, and ridottos. She remarried, her next husband being Major George Skene (or Skreen) of Chelsea, who died in 1724; she probably died in 1729. Soon thereafter, the property passed out of the hands of the White family and the business was taken over by White's longtime servant, John Arthur, and his son, Robert (Lillywhite, 640-41). By this point, the society at White's had grown even more exclusive and was dominated by its famous club, the first list of rules and members for which date from 1736, making it the West End club with the longest continuous history. In 1755 Robert Arthur purchased a freehold for the great house in St James's Street, to which White's Club was relocated, and the chocolate house was finally closed. 


@@@@@


doc= 29241


White, Francis Buchanan White (1842-1894), botanist and entomologist, was born at Perth on 20 March 1842, the eldest son of Francis Isaiah White, a well-known Perth physician active in the botanical societies of Edinburgh and London, and his wife, Lilias Anne Bartlet Buchanan. Francis Buchanan White (as he was known) was educated in Perth, first at the school attached to St Ninian's episcopal cathedral and later by a private tutor. He is said to have attended St Ninian's Cathedral as his church throughout his life, despite being a 'thorough-going evolutionist' believing 'that, after all, evolution is but creation under a new name' (Coates). 
In 1860 White entered the University of Edinburgh, whence he graduated MD in 1864, his thesis on the relations, analogies, and similitudes of insects and plants giving an indication of his early interest in botany. During his residence as a student in Edinburgh he met Margaret Juliet Corrie, daughter of Thomas Corrie (died 1859), an Edinburgh banker. By the time of her marriage to White on 2 February 1866, both of Margaret's parents were dead, and she had received a substantial legacy. As a result, the couple spent nearly a year in Europe on their honeymoon, before returning to settle in Perth in December 1866. Free from the constraints of professional work, and possessed of 'a considerable competency' (Carrington), Buchanan White proceeded to devote his time entirely to the study of natural science. Although based at their home in Perth (Annat Lodge, purchased for the couple by White's father), almost every year the Whites spent several months in some other part of Scotland, the natural history of which White wished to study. 
Throughout his life White was devoted to the study of the Lepidoptera, his contributions to the 'Entomologist's Weekly Intelligencer' beginning as early as 1857. From 1869 onwards he also made a special study of the Hemiptera, acquiring specimens from all parts of the world. In botany he devoted much attention to local distribution, and to 'critical' groups, such as the willows; it was his desire for extreme accuracy which delayed the publication of his 'Flora of Perthshire' until after his death. 
In 1867 White was the moving spirit in founding the Perthshire Society of Natural Science, of which he was the first president, from 1867 to 1872; until his death in 1894 White was always one of the society's officers -- president, secretary, or editor. His communications to the society, many of which appeared in its 'Proceedings and Transactions', number over a hundred, and the society's museum was developed along the lines expounded in his presidential addresses. In 1871 he induced the society to establish the 'Scottish Naturalist', a journal which soon achieved an independent existence. White himself edited it from 1871 until 1882. 
White, who had great powers of endurance as a mountaineer and was very fond of alpine plants, also initiated the Perthshire Mountain Club as an offshoot from the Society of Natural Science, and in 1874 he was one of the founders of the Cryptogamic Society of Scotland, of which he acted as secretary. He was one of the first to recognize the need for co-operation among local natural history societies, and, acting on this conviction, he brought about the East of Scotland Union of Naturalists' Societies, over which he presided at its first meeting, which was held at Dundee in 1884. One of White's most distinguished achievements was his pioneer description in 1872 of the natural divisions of Scotland, the 'faunal areas', later taken up by Harvie-Brown in his well-known series of 'Scottish Vertebrate Faunas' (1887-1906) and which have remained the basis for all really critical work on Scottish natural history ever since. 
White's wider writings included articles on cockroaches, earwigs, ants, bees, locusts, and grasshoppers in 'Science for All' (vols. 3-5), the 'Report on pelagic Hemiptera' collected by HMS 'Challenger' ('Reports' of the 'Challenger' expedition, vol. 7, 1883) and a revision of the British willows in the 'Journal of the Linnean Society' for 1890. His separate publications were 'Fauna Perthensis-Lepidoptera' (1871), a small quarto monograph intended as the first of a series, but not continued, and 'The Flora of Perthshire' (1898), edited after his death by his friend Professor Trail. White joined the Entomological Society of London in 1868 and the Linnean Society in 1873, and was a member of several other scientific societies both at home and abroad. 
White died at Annat Lodge on 3 December 1894, survived by his wife, two sons and seven daughters. His various obituaries used words such as amiable, genial, entertaining, patient, gentle, courteous, modest, and retiring, but according to at least one writer he was capable of 'bitter sarcasm' when roused. 'His stalwart figure in his accustomed grey kilt, was one of great power and endurance, little short of perfect physical training enabling one to keep pace with him in those long mountain rambles' (Carrington). In all he was very much an outdoor man, who attended and led over a hundred field outings organized by the Perthshire Society; he was also skip of Scone and Perth Curling Club. He was buried in Wellshill cemetery, Perth. A bronze mural memorial to him was erected in Perth Museum and a stained-glass window in his honour was installed in St Ninian's Cathedral. In 1994, the centenary of his death, a two-day international conference was held in Perth Museum to commemorate the achievements of one of Scotland's foremost pioneer naturalists. White's greatest memorial, however, lies in his establishment of the national journal, the much-loved and highly respected 'Scottish Naturalist', which is still thriving some 130 years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 29242


George White (c.1684-1732), engraver, was Robert's son and worked with his father until the latter's death. He was an engraver for some years before, about 1712, taking up mezzotint with much greater success. Vertue (who knew him well and gives much information about him) records that he was able to command 15 or 20 guineas a plate, almost double what anyone had earned before, but was extremely dilatory in finishing them. Smith lists fifty-nine mezzotints by him, many of which he published himself. In later years he worked for Samuel Sympson in the Strand, who took over many plates after White's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29243


White, Gilbert (1720-1793), naturalist, was born on 18 July 1720 at the vicarage, Selborne, Hampshire, the eldest son of John White (1688-1758), JP and barrister, and Anne (1693-1739), daughter of Thomas Holt (died 1710), rector of Streatham, Surrey. White's grandfather, the Revd Gilbert White (1650-1728), fourth son of Sampson White (1607-1684), twice mayor of Oxford and knighted in 1660 by Charles II for loyalty to the crown, was vicar at Selborne from 1681 until his death in 1728, having previously been a fellow at Magdalen College, Oxford, in whose gift the living at Selborne lay. Shortly after his arrival at Selborne, he had married Rebecca Luckin (1654-1755), daughter of a yeoman farmer on Nore Hill, Newton Valence, a parish adjacent to Selborne, and from this combination of Oxford learning and local knowledge White derived the main influences that determined the principal features of his life and career. 
White's father had been called to the bar in 1713 and obtained at the Middle Temple a life interest in chambers (which he retained until his death), but on his marriage in 1719 he retired from practice and devoted himself to country pursuits. Living first at Compton, near Guildford, and briefly at East Harting, near Petersfield, he and his wife, together with their growing family (eleven children were born within thirteen years) soon established themselves permanently at Selborne. The Wakes, a village house on the west side of The Street, as Selborne's main thoroughfare was known, fell vacant and in 1728 John White and family, joined by his now widowed mother from the vicarage, made it the family home for the remainder of the century and beyond. In character John White was quiet and unassuming -- he played the harpsichord, observed the weather, and liked nothing better than to take his horse and 'amble along by Hedges under the wind' ('Letters to Gilbert White', 19) -- but he honoured the charitable bequests to the parish instituted by his father, and later (in 1741) laid out the 7 acres of the estate at The Wakes in walks and hedges. These features of his life, linked to his 'christian Temper' ('Letters to Gilbert White', 136), inspired in his eldest son a gentle filial regard, and during his final illness and decline White planted 'bunches of single snow-drops in bloom under [his] Father's window' (White, 'Garden Kalendar', March 1758). 
Familial devotion to parochial concerns, a disposition demonstrated to White not only through the interests of his father and grandfather but also through the country sympathies and country certainties of his paternal grandmother, had a profound effect on the future naturalist. After a childhood immersed in the wisdom of hanger, beech, and stream, including a notable occasion when he planted in the garden an oak and an ash to celebrate his tenth birthday, he went to school, first at Farnham and then to the grammar school at Basingstoke. At the latter he was under the tuition of Thomas Warton (died 1745) and made acquaintance with the Warton brothers, Joseph, a future headmaster of Winchester, and Thomas, who was to become professor of poetry at Oxford University and poet laureate. An extant pocket book of White's shows that he 'carryed to Basingstoke [on] January 17, 1739' (Holt-White, 31) over thirty books for study. Most of the volumes were essential classics (for example, Xenophon, Homer, Horace, Virgil, Caesar, Tacitus, 'Tully' or Cicero), but amid the Greek and the Latin were 'The Whole Duty of Man' (anonymous, 1758), and John Wilkins's 'Of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion' (1675); there was also a copy of James Thomson's 'The Seasons' (1730) and it seems that it was at Basingstoke that White learned to delight in literature and first tried his hand at making verses in English. 
Extensive as this learning was, White retained a growing pleasure in the outdoor life and during his schooldays he began the exploration of southern and central England that in later life was to earn him the sobriquet the Hussar Parson ('Letters to Gilbert White', 166); he was also adept with the gun. The first record of his observations of nature occur in a notebook belonging to a future brother-in-law, Thomas Barker (1722-1809) of Lyndon Hall, and were made on the occasion of a visit White made in 1736 to stay with an aunt at Whitwell, Rutland. Proceeding to Oriel College, Oxford, in April 1740 (he had been admitted a commoner on 17 December 1739, but the death of his mother on that day from an attack of measles delayed his entrance), he embraced the life of an undergraduate. From his account books it is known that he played chess, attended concerts and the coffee house, won and lost at cards, visited great houses and gardens (Burghley, Windsor, Stowe, Wilton, for example), and drank, buying wine by the gallon, cider by the hogshead, and tea in variety -- green, hyson, balm, congo, and bohea are all mentioned. In addition, he read modern (English) literature, and hunted. 
A close companion in the first of these activities was John Mulso (1721-1791) who was to become an enduring friend and a regular informant of events in the church and in literary circles. An uncle of Mulso, John Thomas, was successively bishop of Peterborough, Salisbury, and Winchester, the family often met a leading novelist of the age, Samuel Richardson, and a sister, Hester, was to become, on marriage, Hester Chapone. Mulso corresponded with White from 1744 to 1790; he also visited Selborne on a number of occasions and in 1747 White addressed to him the first version of his most sustained poetic effort, 'An Invitation to Selborne', a work that he later revised and used again. From Mulso's extant letters much can be learned about White's character and pursuits; this source reveals that his reading extended not only to the main figures of the literary tradition -- Spenser, Shakespeare, Donne, Milton, Dryden -- but also included many contemporaries: Swift, Pope, Fielding, and Richardson are referred to. This delight in literature, both classical and English, was to contribute much to White's education, and later in life, throughout his letters and journals, aspects of this period of his reading figure prominently even when the subject matter is the natural world. 
If it was a delight in literature that gave White his literary clothes, it was to his second pursuit, hunting, that can be traced his sense of the natural world as an encounter full of mystery and beauty, waiting to be observed and recorded. Expenses noted in the account books from his Oxford days show that the outlay was considerable. In addition to costs associated with the gun -- powder, shot, papers, flints, and repairs to his weapon are all mentioned -- there were other expenses since a boy had to be hired, boots paid for, and dogs bought, fed, and attended to; a notable sequence of costs centred on the dog Fairey, who went 'strolling' during a journey one Christmas from Oxford to Selborne, for entries refer to 'Advertising, & crying Fairey', a 'Reward to Bernard Bailey [to whom she had] strolled', and payment to a 'News-man for bringing her to Selborn' (G. White, account books). The persistence of payments of this kind suggests a regular, even relentless, pursuit of avian game, confirmation of which is given by Mulso who, writing in later life about this period, commented: 'at that time You used to practise with your Gun in Summer to steady your Hand for Winter, & inhospitably fetch down our Visitants, the Birds of Passage' ('Letters to Gilbert White', 293). However, during the routine of 'field-diversions' White experienced an event that was to shape his future and eventually lead to the single work for which he is so well known, 'The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne' (1789). The occasion can be dated precisely to 21 September 1741: up early, and out hunting for partridge, White 'found the stubbles and clover-grounds matted all over with [such] a thick coat of cobweb' that his dogs were 'so blinded and hoodwinked that they could not proceed'; and further, the 'perfect flakes or rags' (of gossamer -- for that is what White describes in 'Selborne', Barrington, letter 23) 'hung in the trees and hedges so thick, that a diligent person... might have gathered baskets full'. The immediate outcome of this singular experience was a forced return home, during which he mused on 'the oddness of the occurrence'. But a deeper magic was at work and White's devotion to hunting received a considerable shock. Gratuitous killing (even for sport), he came to realize, was alien to the purposes of Providence, and although he continued to shoot for the table and, later, to provide specimens for identification and dissection, the thrill of the chase and the deceit of the stalk were to be replaced in his maturity by a spirit of enquiry and the outcomes of scientific curiosity. 
White's immediate concern, however, was completion of his studies at university, and in June 1743 he graduated bachelor of arts. Award of the degree took place on 30 June and led to a notable memorial. The guest at the ceremony was Alexander Pope and he presented to White a copy of his own translation of Homer's 'Iliad', in six volumes which are now in the British Library and contain the sole authentic likenesses of White; two sketches, in volumes 3 and 5, were 'penned by T:C:', most probably Thomas Chapman of Trinity College, Oxford, with whom White played chess and later shared proctorial office in the university. In the following year, on 30 April, White was elected to a fellowship of his college. In 1746 he spent several months at Thorney, Isle of Ely, attending to the estate of Thomas Holt, a distant relative on his mother's side who bequeathed a small inheritance to each of the White brothers and entailed his estate (conditional on the adoption of his surname) to White's brother Thomas Holt White (1724-1797), and in the October was awarded his degree of master of arts; this and his fellowship were not the last honours he was to receive from either Oriel or the university, but the prospect of employment beckoned and he now sought to earn a living. 
From the mid-1740s for a period of nearly fifteen years White pursued a future that might have led to a career at Oxford. Beginning by joining the Anglican church (he was made a deacon on 27 April 1747 at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, by the bishop, Thomas Secker), he was appointed curate at a small country parish, Swarraton, Hampshire, held, together with Bradley, by the Revd Charles White, husband to his father's youngest sister, Elizabeth. Although detained that same year at Oxford for much of the autumn by a severe attack of smallpox, through which he was nursed by 'Goody Marshall' who came from Selborne solely for that purpose, on his recovery White soon recommenced a hectic series of tours and visits. At one moment he was in Gloucestershire seeing a college friend, then he visited Sunbury-on-Thames (where Mulso was the incumbent) and Ringmer, near Lewes in Sussex; there he saw a great-aunt, Rebecca Snooke, from whom in March 1780 he was to inherit a tortoise, Timothy, on which he was later to conduct several experiments. (Timothy proved on death to be female; her shell is now in the Natural History Museum, London.) In late summer 1750 he travelled to Wiltshire and on into Devon (where he stayed in the South Hams with an Oriel contemporary, Nathan Wells, and from where he returned with a specimen of sea-kale, 'Crambe maritima', which he was to grow at The Wakes for several years). In the following year, 1751, he was off again in July and August to make a wide, sweeping tour up to the west midlands and on east into Rutland to visit his youngest sister, Anne, who had married Thomas Barker of Lyndon Hall on 6 January that year at Selborne. The date of the marriage is significant as Barker was already a considerable observer of the natural scene (principally meteorology, and he had already submitted the first of more than thirty papers to the Royal Society, to which he was later elected as a fellow), for on the day following the wedding White made the first entry in a new record book that he termed (for that year) 'The Garden-Kalendar for the Year 1751'. 
In some form or other White was to keep a near daily record of his activities in the garden and of natural phenomena for more than forty years, until shortly before his death in 1793. Alongside this appetite for observation he continued his clerical duties, becoming in October 1751 curate-in-charge at Selborne (an office he was to hold again in 1756 and in 1758 and, for a fourth time, in 1784 right through to his death); he also maintained the social round, visiting Portsmouth, Winchester, and Midhurst (Cowdray Park), as well as fulfilling the necessary duties as fellow at Oriel. This commitment was to serve him well, for in 1752 the office of junior proctor in the University of Oxford fell to his college and White was elected for a twelvemonth from 8 April. Combining these duties with those of dean in his own college reinforced an interest in an academic future, and in 1757 -- after a sequence of short curacies, mostly for relatives in the Selborne area but including a period at West Dean in Wiltshire, and social visits in 1753 and 1755 to Bristol Hot-Well -- he offered himself for election as provost of his college. Associated as he was with the country scene, and with little academic or other public achievement to his credit, his election was always unlikely and the office went to Chardin Musgrave. White's merits, however, were recognized through preferment as perpetual curate at Moreton Pinkney, Northamptonshire, and, as he was able to hold the parish without residence, he accepted the office. As senior fellow of Oriel he was to receive in later years the offer of a number of wealthy parishes, but although he made numerous visits to inspect each opportunity as it came, he was never to accept further preferment, for it would have required residence away from Selborne. 
With no further prospects available to him, White turned his eyes back to his native village. His paternal grandmother, Rebecca Luckin, had died in 1755, and with the death of his father in September 1758 responsibility for The Wakes (the inheritance of which passed to him in 1763 on the death of the Revd Charles White of Bradley) was to fall to him. In November 1759 he began a tour that extended over six months, the longest absence from Selborne he was ever to make. After calling 'en route' at Sunbury to see the Mulsos, he first stayed in London with his brother Thomas (now partner in a wholesale merchant's business in Thames Street), and then set off for Rutland to visit his sister Anne and Thomas Barker at Lyndon Hall; he returned in mid-May 1760 and immediately noted in the 'Kalendar' for 17 May that his garden was 'in very good order... The Cucumbers in full bearing... The Cantaleupe-melons in good Condition [and all] the kitchen-crops... in good plight'. It was a situation in which he felt most at home and which also provided the seeds of his future acclaim. 
Concurrently with his clerical career and his plans for an academic future, White became interested in the formal study of the garden at The Wakes. His serious interest had been indicated by the purchase in 1743 of the standard text of the day, Philip Miller's 'The Gardeners Dictionary'. He planted more trees (elm, fir, and beech in 1750-51) and, most importantly, began, on Monday 7 January 1751, a journal record of work in the garden. This journal, named the 'Garden kalendar', contains much more than its title suggests. As well as being a record of garden operations, details are given about the weather, with annual summaries; about how best to ventilate a hotbed; and about seed-trials -- planting potatoes, for example, in 'peat-dust' instead of 'old-thatch' for 'experiment sake'. Further, across the whole journal from 1751 until 1767 occur instances of White's gift for homely measurement: succade melons 'come by heaps' (that is, in abundance); a cucumber in April is 'about as big as the top of one's finger'; snow is 'deeper than a horse's belly'; and after ploughing, the clods stand 'as high as one's knees'. In addition, in 1758 White entered the first explicit references to natural history: 'Saw two swallows' (9 April), and in November the much longer: 'Saw a very unusual sight; a large flock of House-Martens playing about between our fields, and the Hanger'. The location for this observation, the ground behind The Wakes, is significant for it was to the garden that White now looked for his main satisfactions and to which he chiefly directed his energies, particularly as his clerical income was now secure, for he accepted in 1761 the curacy at Faringdon, a parish adjacent to Selborne and an office he was to hold for over twenty years since it could be easily served from The Wakes. 
Throughout the 1750s and on into the early 1760s construction work in the garden, aided by the purchase of part of a neighbour's orchard, was unending. It included brick walks leading from the house to an arbour that he used for observation; a grassed terrace, on which a sundial was erected; a turfed mount; a zig-zag path up the slope of the Hanger (the steep slope of Selborne Hill to the west of The Wakes, clothed with beech); a ha-ha (a large ditch at the boundary, effective as a fence to keep livestock out of the garden but also offering an unrestricted view of the surrounding countryside); vistas that looked to huge oil-jars erected on pedestals; and on the Hanger itself a statue of Hercules, and also a hermitage, a mock hermit's cell roofed with thatch. In good weather, this last became a centre of social activity: Henry (1733-1788), White's youngest brother, rector and schoolmaster at Fyfield, near Andover, played the hermit, guests were entertained, and the fruits of White's exertions in the garden were enjoyed at cantaloupe feasts. 
In White's records for 1764-5, however, a new note is struck: he began to extend his library. In addition to some travel literature, Hill's 'Herbal' (1756) and Jan Swammerdam's 'Book of Nature' (1758), he obtained the two texts that launched him on a serious study of nature -- Benjamin Stillingfleet's 'Miscellaneous Tracts' (1759), and William Hudson's 'Flora Anglica' (1762). From Stillingfleet's 'Tracts', and especially from the 'Calendar of flora' that was added to the second edition (1762), White learned about the natural calendar, about the dream that natural phenomena, especially the migration of birds and the growth of plants, would provide, through the determination of dates for sowing and reaping, a prognostic for the labours of the husbandman such that reliable harvests would be secured to the benefit of all. In order to keep the necessary records for such a project accurate identification of natural forms was necessary. Previously he had used John Ray's publications as the authority for naming and identification, especially of native fauna, but there was much he had to learn about flora and it was from Hudson that he obtained the Linnaean nomenclature so necessary if he was to acquire the knowledge that the venture required. 
The first fruits of this new, eager stage in White's growth of understanding occurred in the 'Kalendar' for summer 1765 but they were to reach maturity in 'Flora Selborniensis', 1766. This volume, to which he gave the subtitle 'with some co-incidences of the coming, & departure of birds of passage, & insects; & the appearing of Reptiles', was not edited and published until 1911 (by Wilfred Mark Webb, under the title 'A Nature Calendar'), but it convincingly demonstrates one of White's principal strengths as a naturalist -- an openness to enquiry. Although most of the entries are on vegetation, and although the items included embrace those properly contained in both a 'hortus siccus' and a flora, the main focus of the record is on stages of growth. In order to indicate the beginnings of growth White deploys a somewhat elastic vocabulary (plants 'spring', 'sprout', 'shoot', 'emerge', 'peep-out') but when he comes to record flowering, the key stage for the botanist, as for the plantsman and the apothecary, he becomes more precise and establishes a terminology that divides the process into five -- 'buds for bloom', 'begins to blow', 'blows', 'in high bloom', 'going out of bloom'. Use of this finely graded differentiation enabled White to make comparisons across species and sites, and (because of necessary variation consequent on differing soils and aspects) prompted some scepticism about the venture. Nevertheless, although White records phenomena within a territory he had known since childhood, and one no larger than a parish, his observations avoid the dullness of familiarity; on the contrary, there is a freshness of phrase, an edge of enthusiasm, that conveys a continual delight in the natural world. This delight, accumulated in the garden at The Wakes and in the fields and meadows of his native place, was later tested in London by conversation and correspondence with the leading naturalists of the time. White's survival of the procedure was a triumphant vindication of the wisdom to be learned within a parochial territory, and was to lead directly to his principal accomplishment, 'The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne' (1789). 
Excited by the formal knowledge he now possessed of the Selborne flora and fauna, White travelled to London in April 1767 to make a customary annual visit to see two of his brothers -- Thomas, the general merchant and future fellow of the Royal Society (1777), and Benjamin White (c.1725-1794), bookseller and principal of the premier shop in London for volumes on natural history. During this visit he made the acquaintance in May of Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander, who were to leave England the following year with Cook on the 1768-72 circumnavigation, and of Thomas Pennant (fellow of the Royal Society, 1767) who was then working on the second edition of his 'British Zoology' (1st edn, 1761-6). White greatly admired Banks's fortitude and as he followed details of the voyage in the press he derived much enlightenment from sensing, for the first time, the deprivation that men were prepared to endure in the cause of furthering scientific enquiry; however, it was from meeting Pennant that two important consequences flowed for his own development. 
Preparation of a British natural history necessarily required numerous informants, and judging White to be a reliable observer in a part of the country about which he had little personal knowledge (his own home was in Flintshire, north Wales), Pennant invited him to correspond. White took time to weigh this idea but wrote to Pennant on 10 August 1767; this letter, edited and dated 4 August and prefaced by nine specially written putative letters, appeared more than twenty years later as the first 'real' letter in 'Selborne' (1789). If the first consequence of meeting Pennant led to White's discovering he had knowledge to communicate to a specialist in natural history, albeit in private correspondence, the second was to lead directly to public recognition. 
Late in this same year there arrived at Selborne, as a gift from the author (but prompted by Pennant whose perception of White as a useful contributor to the cause of natural history was to be fully vindicated), a copy of a published design for a naturalist's annual notebook entitled the 'Naturalist's Journal' (1767). This journal, devised by Daines Barrington (1727-1800), fellow of the Royal Society (1767), was designed to facilitate at different seasons and across Britain the correlation between meteorological phenomena and the behaviour of flora and fauna. Set within the tradition advocated by Benjamin Stillingfleet of discovering -- to the benefit of husbandry and agriculture -- the natural calendar, this focus on observation and record appealed to White and harnessed his particular skills to a general purpose. Putting to one side the 'Kalendar' that had served him so well for the preceding thirteen years, but which now seemed essentially a private document, he made the first entry in his new journal for Friday 1 January 1768, and thus initiated a pattern of record-keeping that he was to sustain almost daily for over twenty-five years. 
The format of Barrington's design devoted a large, landscape page to each week. After requiring completion of year, location, and soil, columns were available for observation of the weather conditions: thermometer and barometer readings were required, as well as wind direction, measurement of rainfall, and a verbal description of conditions. With these contextual data in place, the observer was then provided with five columns: four of these invited record of trees and fungi, of plants and mosses, of birds and insects, and of fish and other creatures, and the fifth gave opportunity for varied memoranda. For each column there was insistence on precision; for example, the meteorological columns required observations four times daily, and the record of plants and creatures emphasized appearance and disappearance, both concepts being of vital relevance to the purpose of the whole venture. 
Although White rarely completed every requirement of the format, especially over the reiterated instrumental data, he warmed to the purpose and acknowledged the rewards that flowed from keeping such meticulous, incremental records. A typical page of data, particularly in the summer, often includes nearly 100 items, but White soon found the columnar structure of Barrington's design insufficient for his purposes, and within a few years he arranged to have his annual volumes of the 'Naturalist's Journal' interleaved with blank pages. On these pages, in particular from May 1776, he began to record extended comments and descriptions of his observations, many of which were to appear in 'Selborne' (1789) as part of the putative (undated) letters to Barrington. More significantly, and in parallel with the beginning of this process of journal compilation, White began a correspondence with Barrington. After writing to thank Barrington for the gift of the 'Journal', and meeting him in London, first in 1768 but then, for almost a decade, usually annually, White began the sequence of letters that carried his observations of the natural world beyond the confines of his parish and into the rooms of the Royal Society of London and, in later years, to the enduring benefit of posterity, onto the shelves of enthusiasts for the natural scene throughout the world. In large measure this outcome must be ascribed to Barrington's influence on White; his disinterest (professionally he was a judge) and, to use White's terms, his 'candour' and 'affability' appealed strongly, and White responded in kind. Comparison of White's letters to Pennant alongside those to Barrington shows that the former are descriptive, with a focus on information, which was exactly what Pennant could incorporate in his own volumes of natural history; in contrast, the letters to Barrington are relaxed and speculative, and so varied in content that they convey the interests of an author not only at one with the world of his enquiries but also at one with his own nature. 
Both sets of correspondence, however, furthered White's studies. Pennant's absorption in new information led White to reveal that he had a brother John (1727-1780) living in Gibraltar, where he was chaplain, and with Pennant's prompting White encouraged his brother to take up the study of natural history. This the latter did most ably, tutored (and for White's development this was a significant fact) by White himself. It was a new role for White. Previously he had been a student of Miller's gardening knowledge, of Gibson's knowledge of fauna in North America (James Gibson, a contemporary of White's at Oxford, was a naval chaplain at Quebec in 1759), of Stillingfleet's dream of discovering the natural calendar, and of Hudson's 'Flora Anglica', but now he was to become a teacher. He prompted, cajoled, directed, and guided to such good purpose that John White not only initiated a correspondence with Linnaeus but also amassed sufficient materials to prepare, on his return to England in 1772 and during his subsequent office as vicar at Blackburn, Lancashire, a volume on the fauna of Gibraltar. White's enthusiasm for his brother's progress is strikingly indicated by the cargoes of specimens that his brother sent to England. Identification of their many items presented White with some difficulties, but he enlisted assistance from several specialists, William Sheffield and Richard Skinner from Oxford (both of whom visited Selborne), Dru Drury, Lee of Hammersmith, and Pennant himself, and presented some items to the Royal Society (and elsewhere) in the belief that important specimens 'should belong to places where they will be set in natural attitudes and much admired; rather than... be laid up in a box in my study where they will seldom be seen' (Foster, 'Gibraltar correspondence', 499-500). 
And yet, if it is to Pennant's curiosity that credit should be assigned for White's knowledge of a fauna and flora in a countryside so different from Selborne, it is to Barrington that acknowledgement must be given for the impetus and opportunity that were to haul White into the public arena. The keys to this encouragement were two suggestions made by Barrington in 1769 and 1770. The first, to write about the birds of the parish, brought White to a new understanding of his powers and to an articulation of his comprehensive knowledge of Selborne ornithology (letters 1 and 2 in the Barrington sequence in 'Selborne'). The second, to prepare an account of the animals in his neighbourhood, faced the Selborne naturalist for the first time with the idea of publication. For White the idea of pursuing these unsolicited suggestions was daunting and he was able to contemplate a response only with hesitation. Friends (particularly Mulso) and relatives encouraged him, however, and letter by letter with painstaking care he wrote himself into history, literary as well as scientific. 
Certain key stages in his growing confidence can be noted: a decision to publish, if at all, alone and not in concert with Barrington, who had hoped White would collaborate with him on a joint publication; a commitment to local natural history, much emphasized by reading Giovanni Scopoli whose monograph (1769) on the birds of Carniola encouraged him in his belief that the 'more confined yr sphere of observation... the more perfect will be yr remarks' (Foster, 'Gibraltar correspondence', 491); the successful completion, at Barrington's invitation, of monographs for the Royal Society on the house martin ('Delichon urbica'), swallow ('Hirundo rustica'), swift ('Apus apus'), and bank martin ('Hirundo riparia'); detailed discussion with Barrington on the completed volumes of the 'Naturalist's Journal' for 1774 and 1775; the commissioning in 1776 of Samuel Hieronymus Grimm as illustrator for the projected volume (he painted twelve different watercolours of Selborne in twenty-four days); a decision to broaden an account of the creatures of the parish into a volume that would accommodate the antiquities of the parish; and lastly, the arrival at Selborne in 1781 of Mrs John White, widow of White's brother, who accepted on her husband's death White's invitation to live at The Wakes and assume responsibility for domestic matters. The decision to include antiquities extended the time required for the preparation of 'Selborne' by a decade, despite instruction from John Loveday (1711-1789), of Caversham, Reading, in aspects of medieval church history and a considerable contribution made by Richard Chandler (1738-1810) who, as a fellow of Magdalen College, had access to the college records concerning the parish antiquities. 
Mrs White's arrival was significant: The Wakes was the family home and White saw it as such. Encouraged by his sister-in-law he not only recorded in his journal a new appreciation of garden produce and culinary satisfaction, but throughout the 1780s (and later) welcomed to the Hampshire village an increasing number of nephews and nieces, that at his last count in January 1793, totalled sixty-two, including spouses. It was with detailed help from two of them, Mary and Benjamin White (the married elder children respectively of his brothers Thomas and Benjamin, who were active participants in 1785 in Benjamin White's Fleet Street shop for natural history books) that 'Selborne' was printed, and published, on 1 November 1788 (but with 1789 on the title-page, as volumes available in the final months of the year were permitted to carry the date of the following year). 
With his major, one might even say his life's, work published, White now devoted himself to new activities. 'Selborne', reviewed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' by his brother Thomas (who frequently shared White's enthusiasms as a plantsman and observer, and who had already contributed to that journal a sequence of articles on trees, as well as for much of the 1780s a series of monthly meteorological diaries), and in 'The Topographer', brought acclaim and, as well as prompting many gifts from local people of unusual specimens, encouraged new correspondents. Among the latter the most important were George Montagu (1751-1815), author of the 'Ornithological Dictionary' (1802), and Robert Marsham (1708-1797) of Norfolk with whom White pursued an intense correspondence, chiefly on trees, throughout his remaining years. White also enjoyed reflecting on the relation of natural history to the literary tradition (the 'Naturalist's Journal' in its concluding phase is much fuller than at earlier periods with reference to literary evocations of the natural scene), and began to prepare a further avian monograph, on the nightjar, 'Caprimulgus Europaeus'. Before he could find a sponsor for this new work at the Royal Society, however, he made his last entry in the 'Naturalist's Journal' on Saturday 15 June 1793 (and also wrote his last letter, to Marsham); he died quietly at The Wakes eleven days later, on Wednesday 26 June. His funeral, conducted by the non-resident vicar of Selborne, Christopher Taylor, took place on 1 July, and he was buried in Selborne churchyard, at his own wish out of the heat of the sun, near the north wall of the chancel; his grave is marked by a simple stone cut to read 'G. W. 26th June 1793'. 
Except for a number of short items (an account of the poet William Collins; a few brief poems; and contributions to the monthly 'Meteorological diary'), all of which are in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' above the pseudonym V., White's sole publications in his lifetime were the monographs on the 'hirundines', each of which offered something new and original in observation and which appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (vols. 64 and 65), and 'The natural history and antiquities of Selborne, in the county of Southampton, with engravings, and an appendix' (1789), printed in London by T. Bensley for B. White & Son, at Horace's Head, Fleet Street, London. Extending, together with its index, the preparation of which White claimed to be 'an occupation full as entertaining as that of darning socks, tho' by no means so advantageous to society' (Foster, 'Gilbert White', 146), to nearly 500 pages, the quarto volume contains nine plates, all from Grimm's drawings. 
Purporting to comprise three sequences of letters -- those addressed to Pennant and to Barrington forming the natural history portion of the volume, the remainder, unaddressed (although White considered Chandler an appropriate recipient) forming an account of parish antiquities -- 'Selborne' needs to be read with discrimination. In contrast to White's observations of the natural world, notably in the 'Garden kalendar', in 'Flora Selborniensis', and in the 'Naturalist's Journal' across its many annual volumes, all of which offer a scrupulously documented historical record, 'Selborne' is a literary work. In preparing it White became conscious that he was freed from the perceptible rhythms and occasions of the natural world, and the outcome is a volume beset by the vagaries of correspondence, by the sensibilities of social discourse, and by the chances of art. Although the core of the natural history portion of the volume remained the letters White exchanged with Pennant and Barrington, when he came to edit those letters he discovered the need both to modify and to extend his material. Features of this process include the omission from the real letters of much personal detail; the changing of actual dates of writing to imagined dates; the admission into the letters of new observations and incidents taken from his journals; and the adaptation of letters to members of his family, and their deployment, as if the originals were to either Pennant or Barrington. In addition, and in order to make an acceptable volume in both design and length, White not only prepared an introductory sequence of letters, which are given as the first nine letters addressed to Pennant, but also raided his journals for new topics and gathered the results together in many of the later letters in the published sequence to Barrington. 
In choosing to present his observations in the form of letters, White was following the accepted practice of his time. For decades the exchange of letters between scientists had formed the primary vehicle for reporting new observations and for communicating results, just as in literature the epistolary novel was a dominant form in the years of White's maturity and in an earlier age Defoe had shown how to incorporate in a single volume real alongside fabricated letters. To mediate an understanding of the world by means of letters, whether fabricated or real, invited the reader to participate in the writer's own journey of exploration, to share the very motions of his mind, its doubts alongside its certainties, its astonishment in discovery, and, most important of all, the satisfactions obtained from investigative activity itself. 
On White's death his literary papers were passed by his relatives to John Aikin MD (1747-1822), whose first response was to extract previously unpublished material from the journals and issue it as 'A Naturalist's Calendar, with Observations in Various Branches of Natural History' (1795). He then advised publication of White's collected writings in natural history, and this was accomplished in 'Selborne' (1802). This volume, comprising first the republication of 'Selborne' (1789) without the letters on the antiquities, and 'A Naturalist's Calendar' (1795), and second a calendar of natural occurrences and memoranda, parallel to Aikin's 1795 publication, but prepared by W. Markwick of Catisfield, Sussex, was prefaced by a brief memoir of White written by John White, son of Benjamin White, the bookseller. There followed in 1813 the first comprehensive edition of White's published works: letters on the parish antiquities were restored, White's known poems were added, and the first notes on his work, by the Revd John Mitford of Benhall, Suffolk, were included. These notes marked a change in the perception of White's work. At the time of his first communications with Pennant and Barrington, and for a decade or so after first publication of 'Selborne', White's observations, as may readily be confirmed by inspection of Pennant's 'British Zoology' (1776-7), Barrington's 'Miscellanies' (1781), and, for example, W. Bingley's 'Animal Biography' (1805), were valued for their new contributions to natural history. With the assimilation of this knowledge into the scientific literature (a process marked by corrections and additions to published work), one might have expected White's volume to lapse into obscurity. This did not occur: on the contrary, an interest which had initially been focused on factual knowledge was replaced by an interest best described as inspirational. 
Throughout the Victorian period and on through the twentieth century, publisher after publisher issued a distinctive addition to White studies. Full bibliographic detail for these many editions of 'Selborne', almost always of the natural history letters alone, are given in E. A. Martin's 'Bibliography' (1970), but two broad comments can be made. First, the styles of these many editions bear witness to the concerns of the period of publication; this is especially noticeable in the heavily annotated editions of the mid-Victorian period and, in the twentieth century, in the changing style of the illustrations used to accompany the text. Second, as White's work became better known it was elevated into a classic and found a place in any series that claimed to publish the 'best' books, not only in English literature but in world literature as well. This recognition was the culmination of a process initiated by the 1813 edition: as the nineteenth century neared its end the Victorians, under pressure from the urban excesses of economic and industrial achievement and from the implications of Darwinism, increasingly sought solace in the beacons of the past and 'Selborne', in its gentle, quiet, yet elegant and gracious fashion, reassured many. 
Such acknowledgement was in accord with White's own experience as recorded in his 'Advertisement' to 'Selborne'. After specifying a three-fold aim in preparing the volume, he averred that if none of his aims was achieved there was: 'consolation... [that] his pursuits, by keeping the body and mind employed [had], under Providence, contributed to much health and cheerfulness of spirits, even to old age: and [also had] led him to the knowledge of a circle of gentlemen [who] afforded him much pleasing information.' That White's studies granted him both 'pleasing information' as well as cheerful employment is an outcome aspired to by many, but it was an outcome additional to White's declared aims. Of these, the first, to throw 'light upon ancient customs and manners... especially on those that were monastic', met the purpose of many earlier parish histories. What White attempted, however, in 'Selborne' was a new understanding of a history of a parish which, he thought, ought to include the study of natural productions as well as antiquities. It is to this new understanding that White's two further aims relate. The wish to induce 'a more ready attention to wonders of the Creation', was, in fact, his main aim and will be commented on below; another was the wish to 'have lent a helping hand [through his researches] towards the enlargement of the boundaries of historical and topographical knowledge'. At first sight it might be thought this aim was outside the scope of modern natural history, yet it contains, from a scientific perspective, the essence of White's endeavour. 
Sceptical of the accuracy of general natural histories and finding support in Scopoli whose 'Annus primus' (1769) had led White to claim that writers who 'undertake only one district are much more likely to advance natural knowledge than those that grasp at more than they can possibly be acquainted with' ('Selborne', Barrington, letter 7), White placed his focus on the importance of local natural history. Even within a territory as narrow as his own parish and with near a lifetime of observation, he was to reach two conclusions: that 'all nature is so full, that that district produces the greatest variety which is the most examined'; and that 'investigations (where a man endeavours to be sure of his facts) can make but slow progress; and all that one [can] collect in many years would go into a very narrow compass' ('Selborne', Barrington, letter 5). It was with this same belief that he had guided his brother John, at Gibraltar, writing in 1771: 'True naturalists will thank you more for the life & conversation of a few animals well studyed & investigated; than for a long barren list of half the Fauna of the globe. Monographers are the best Nat: Historians' (Foster, 'Gibraltar correspondence', 492-3). While true in behavioural and ecological terms, this applies less to species. White's outright discoveries in terms of the identification of species amount to little, the usual citations being: differentiation of the three English species of leaf warbler, identification of the lesser whitethroat, and discovery of the harvest mouse and the noctule bat. 
But White aimed at 'life and conversation' and it is satisfaction of that aim that illuminates his wish to enlarge 'the boundaries [the understanding] of historical and topographical knowledge' within (and this needs stressing) his native parish. From this perspective White made a contribution at a general level as well as at a particular. In the former category one might adduce the hermaphrodite nature of earthworms, ideas about coloration and sexual selection in birds, notions of territoriality, the comparison of local soils and climates and the effects on husbandry, ideas of microclimates, experimentation with different soils for growing (especially potatoes), bird identification by flight behaviour, and so on; and in the latter category, for his journals and 'Selborne' are delightedly enriched with observations made in his native place of particular occurrences, the first known sighting of an otter, or the itinerant habits of ring ouzel, the felling of a shrew-ash (despite superstitious protests from village believers in its curative powers over cattle), or the discovery of the 'centrum phonicum' for a fine natural echo in the parish. 
This attention on the local ran counter to the spirit of leading contemporaries, many of whom sought the generalization of knowledge, Samuel Johnson, for example, in a vivid floristic image, claiming that the main business of the philosopher was 'to examine, not the individual, but the species [for] he does not number the streaks of the tulip, or describe the different shades in the verdure of the forest' ('Rasselas', 1759). It was precisely White's resistance to generalization, together with his unending flow of rich particularity, that enabled him to fulfil his main aim, that of encouraging his readers to give 'a more ready attention' to the flora and fauna of their daily world. 'Ordinary' observers are much more ready to respond to what is happening in the back garden than to entertain large ideas about general theory, and it is this focus of White's on the everyday, on what is accessible to the curious observer in any age, that is a principal reason for the continuing life of 'Selborne'. 
And yet, although he has had many imitators (Knapp, 'Journal of a Naturalist', 1829, based in Gloucestershire, being one of the closest), nobody has managed to rival the grace and ease of White's writing. In a measure this success must be attributed to his style and personality. Central to this last is a modest acceptance that some aspects of the natural scene are beyond understanding. Such 'fear before God' has delighted readers for more than two centuries, and unites the cabinet (of specimens), the laboratory, and the study, not only with the open field and the leafy canopy of a wooded valley but also with the bare roof ledge outside the window, where pigeons coo, sparrows squabble, or the local robin taps for food. 
White's 'Natural History of Selborne' is open to everyone, for everyone has observed much of what it describes. Writer and reader each share the inheritance of the natural world, and delight in what is given, so that 'Selborne' becomes an expression of universal thanksgiving, treasured by all. 


@@@@@


doc= 29244


White, Henry (1812-1880), historian, born at Reading on 23 November 1812, was the son of Charles White. He was educated at Reading grammar school under Richard Valpy and went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1828. He also studied at the University of Heidelberg, where he obtained the degree of PhD. He married in 1837 Elizabeth King of Boulogne. In the earlier part of his career, after working at Geneva with Merle d'Aubigne for some time, he was chiefly occupied with scholastic work, and published several historical textbooks, including 'Elements of Universal History' (1843), 'History of Great Britain and Ireland' (1849), 'History of France' (1850), and 'Outlines of Universal History' (1853). He also translated Merle d'Aubigne's 'History of the Reformation' between 1843 and 1853. In 1858 he was appointed to superintend the compilation of the 'Catalogue of Scientific Papers' published by the Royal Society, and was engaged in this work until his death. He became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 24 May 1860. For some years he also acted as literary critic to the 'Atlas' during the editorship of Henry James Slack. 
In 1867 White published his most significant book, 'The massacre of St Bartholomew, preceded by a history of the religious wars in the reign of Charles IX'. This was the first English work to argue that the massacre was the result of a sudden decision, and not of a long-prepared conspiracy. Subsequently, in conjunction with Thomas W. Newton he prepared the 'Catalogue of the Library of the Museum of Practical Geology', published in 1878. White died suddenly on 4 January 1880 while on duty in the library of the Royal Society in Burlington House, Piccadilly, London. He was survived by his wife and several children. 


@@@@@


doc= 29245


White, Henry Kirke (1785-1806), poet and essayist, was born on 21 March 1785 at a house in Exchange Alley, Nottingham, the third of the six children of John White ('b'. 1750/51), a butcher, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Neville ('b'. 1755). John White's occupation was an established one in his family, running back to the beginning of the century. Mary White, who became a teacher in 1798 or 1799 when she opened a girls' school, was the daughter of a framework-knitter who had come from Staffordshire to Nottingham to be apprenticed in the trade in 1728, but the Neville family had been yeoman farmers in Staffordshire from the sixteenth century. At an early age Henry Kirke White was sent to a local school run by a Mrs Garrington, who quickly recognized and nurtured his reading ability and other capacities. From here he went to the Revd John Blanchard's school, reputedly the best in Nottingham. Blanchard further reinforced the view that he was a child of exceptional talent. White's schooling was interrupted by his father's need for assistance in his business, which led to a family dispute finally resolved by his eventual removal to yet another local school. When he was fourteen he found employment in the local textiles trade, working at a stocking-loom for about a year, before he found a place to train in the law, at the offices of Coldham and Enfield, town clerks and attorneys. There he began to learn Latin and Greek, which he worked at in the evenings, and extended his studies to include Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese as well as science. He also joined a local literary society at which he practised his skills in oratory. 
White's first literary success is marked by his winning of two prizes in the 'Monthly Preceptor', for a translation of Horace in 1800, and an imaginary tour from London to Edinburgh in 1801. Further prizes followed, and thus encouraged White became a regular correspondent for the 'Monthly Mirror', through which he became acquainted with Capel Lofft, and the magazine's owner, Thomas Hill. Lofft and Hill were both known for their work in supporting the notion of a specifically English canon of poetry, and their influence can be seen in White's early productions for the 'Mirror', under the title of 'Remarks on the English poets'. While there is no evidence to suggest that White was unhappy with his employment, a preference for a career in the church was evident by 1802. Such a move required study at one of the universities, and in order to raise some of the necessary funds, White began work on a small volume of poems that was published in 1803 under the title 'Clifton Grove, a Sketch in Verse, with other Poems'. The volume was dedicated to the duchess of Devonshire, and unluckily described in the dedication as the 'trifling effusions of a very youthful muse', this deference being further reinforced in the preface where White compounded his vulnerability by stating his motive to fund his studies. Such gestures were relatively common at the time, and they invited an equally common response from the critics in the form of ridicule or censure. White was no exception: in the 'Monthly Review' of February 1804, his volume was commended for its effort but damned for its evident failure in 'the difficult art of writing good poetry'. More cutting for White perhaps was the reviewer's exposure of his impecunity and scholarly ambition which also provided the platform for the assertion that should White ever gain the benefits of study 'he will, doubtless, produce better sense and better rhymes'. This volume nevertheless attracted more favourable notice too, most notably from Robert Southey, whose interest in White resulted in some correspondence. 
Having failed to make money out of his poetry, White did not give up his plans to enter university. In fact his determination was strengthened by a deepening of his religious conviction, which had been disturbed for a while around 1801 by an interest in deism. By June 1803, however, White had committed himself to the evangelical movement in the Anglican church, and encouraged by his employers and his acquaintance with local clergy, he received an introduction to Charles Simeon, the famous evangelical at King's College, Cambridge. Simeon secured for White a sizarship at St John's, for which he was advised to prepare by studying for a year with the Revd Lorenzo Grainger, curate at Winteringham in Lincolnshire. In 1805 White progressed to Cambridge and competed for a vacant scholarship in his first term. In order to prepare for the examination White read widely and voraciously, neglecting his health in the process, but he was successful, and in his short time at Cambridge, he became a highly regarded scholar. However, White had been ill for some time with consumption, and the punishing regime he set himself for study exacerbated his illness. He died, unmarried, on 19 October 1806 in his rooms at college, and he was buried in All Saints' churchyard, Cambridge. 
After his death a large quantity of verse and prose was found among White's papers, and this material was given by his family to Robert Southey, who duly compiled 'The Remains of Henry Kirke White... with an Account of his Life' (2 vols., 1807). By 1818 'The Remains' was in its tenth edition, including two American editions, and White's reputation as a promising poet who had died tragically young was firmly established. This volume formed the basis of White's reputation in the nineteenth century, and contains a range of poetry, including sonnets, odes, ballads, and descriptive verse, some religious, and some secular. Byron (a contemporary of White at Cambridge, although they never met) included a portrait of him in 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers' (1809) as a young genius of great potential, killed in part by his own excessive talent. Later, Keats's friend Richard Woodhouse believed that Kirke White was one of the 'lone spirits who could proudly sing/Their youth away, and die' alluded to in Keats's 'Sleep and Poetry' (1817). Although there is little evidence to show that White had any influence of note on the poets of the time, there is no doubt about the fact that the success of Southey's edition ensured that his poetry was widely read. 
The few attempts that have been made in the twentieth century to revive White's reputation have been unsuccessful. White is rarely represented in anthologies or in accounts of Romanticism, despite the considerable merit of his work, and the potential for its recognition as a prime example of provincial writing in the period. Part of the reason for this rests with the still prevalent view that the significance of late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century writing must inhere in its innovative qualities, and thus those writers who are working largely within the polite conventions of the period are not granted the attention so freely given to the Romantics. White's works are characterized by a contemplative mode: his sonnets, odes, and longer descriptive and meditative poems commonly feature the solitary condition and pensive mind, and in this respect they belong to the tradition that runs from Milton through Gray to Wordsworth and Coleridge. What little attention White receives tends to highlight his early promise in the accomplished 'Clifton Grove', but his lyrics, sonnets, and odes also repay interest. Most neglected of all is the limited collection of prose pieces, and the series known as 'Melancholy Hours'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29246


White, James (1759-1799), historical novelist, was born in Dublin. He became a scholar of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1778 and graduated BA in 1780. Nothing is known about his family, or the reasons that brought him to England where he spent the rest of his life. 
White was an accomplished translator, poet, and novelist. The first signs of his enduring interest in public affairs are already evident in his translation 'The Orations of Marcus Tullius Cicero Against Caius Cornelius Verres' (1787), which coincided with the impeachment of 'another provincial governor', Warren Hastings of the East India Company, in which White became involved (Tompkins, 147). This work was followed by a pamphlet entitled 'Hints for a specific plan for an abolition of the slave trade and for the relief of the negroes in the British West Indies' (1788). In this spirited abolitionist tract, White manages to combine his polemical spirit with hard-headed arguments and a wry sense of humour in the vein of Jonathan Swift: if skin colour and facial features are valid criteria for designating human beings as 'a species of traffic' such as 'elephant teeth, wax and leather', he argues, why not have laws 'authorizing all 'dunces' to be exported from time to time and sold in the West Indies?... The kingdom would be disburthened of many able-bodied blockheads, and the duty of exportation would advantage the revenue' ('Hints', 7). White bases his abolitionist thesis on his impressive knowledge of the relevant classical, contemporary, and legal literature. In a coherent and structured way he refutes the main arguments for slave trade one by one, appealing to both the humanity and the common sense of his readers. Fully aware of how hard it would be to convince a 'commercial people', such as the British, to espouse his cause, he took pains to tabulate the costs of importing and maintaining slaves, as compared to converting them into paid workers, and advocated the phasing out of slavery in conjunction with setting up a welfare programme for the benefit of black workers in the British Caribbean ('Hints', 12-27). Some of his proposals spring from a keen sense of patriotism, often bordering on nationalism, and are in line with colonial aims. Nevertheless, his indignation at the savage practice of human trafficking is genuine: 'British brutality has become proverbial', he laments, unafraid to be critical of the laws and institutions that sanctioned it ('Hints', 12). 
White's next two works, 'Conway Castle' (a poem and the only of White's works to have received unfavourable reviews) and 'Earl Strongbow', a Gothic novel, were published in 1789 -- a year that shook France and sent a shiver through Pitt's government in Britain. Both 'Earl Strongbow' and the novels that followed it -- 'The Adventures of John of Gaunt' (1790) and 'The Adventures of King Richard, Coeur-de-Lion' (1791) -- attracted only moderate attention, though 'Earl Strongbow' was hailed by at least one reviewer as a work in which 'the reflections are ingenious and just, not a few of them deep and severe' ('GM', 1790). All three novels bear White's trademark penchant for satire and strong engagement with political issues. While their plots abound with labyrinthine castles, loquacious spirits, and 'very mouldy and mouse-eaten' manuscripts ('The Adventures of John of Gaunt', iv), these novels often read like whimsical parodies of their Walpolian and Radcliffean prototypes. Drollery notwithstanding, White's comments on contemporary political and social issues are hard to miss, and Tompkins suggests that the character of Strongbow is a direct reference to Lord Temple, former lord lieutenant of Ireland (Tompkins, 151). 
In 1792 White published two translations: the 'Speeches of M. de Mirabeau' and 'The History of the Revolution of France', from the work by Rabaut de Saint-Etienne. In his preface to the latter White is overtly critical of the state of affairs in Britain. Though he takes care to emphasize that, unlike France, Britain does not need a revolution, he clearly believes that the French example should be the inspiration for political and social reform at home. 
The bulk of White's works appeared at a time when the surge of violence in France led to widespread fear of insurrection in England, and when Jacobin sympathies, even as moderate as White's, were likely to arouse suspicion. Indeed, among the critics of Pitt's government several became the target of state-employed spies and suffered for their vociferousness. Suspicion, tension, and rumours of conspiracy theories were rife among both Jacobins and anti-Jacobins. In this context it is tempting to ask whether the 'freakish personality' (Tompkins, 146) that White developed towards the end of his life -- the main manifestation of which was the delusion that he was the victim of conspiracies -- might not have had some basis in reality. 
It seems that White's mental decline was triggered by the double blow of financial hardship (for which he blamed London booksellers) and frustrated love for a nameless lady: he hardly ate, and was often seen wandering the streets of Bath (where he had, apparently, some relations) looking increasingly haggard and deranged. In between bouts of insanity, White appears to have written a series of (as yet untraced) 'Letters to Lord Camden on the state of Ireland' which were praised for 'the elegance and strength of the language, the shrewdness of his remarks, and the perspicuity of his arguments' ('GM', 1799, 443) -- further proof of White's lifelong commitment to public affairs. It appears that at some point a small collection was raised for his relief, which White (by all accounts a proud man) accepted only reluctantly. He used the money to retire to the Carpenter's Arms in Wick, Gloucestershire, where he lay himself down in his bed, refusing all food. He lasted only a few days: the coroner's inquest is dated 15 March 1799. His obituaries stated that he was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 29247


White, James (bap. 1775, d. 1820), author and advertising agent, was baptized on 17 April 1775 in Worcester, the third son of Samuel White of Bewdley, Worcestershire, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Willes. He spent 'many of the earliest days of [his] youth' 'in the Neighbourhood' of the Malvern Hills (White, fol. 6). On 19 September 1783 he was admitted to Christ's Hospital on the presentation of Thomas Coventry. At school he seemed something of a dandy: Leigh Hunt recalled 'admir[ing] his handsome appearance, and unimprovable manner of wearing his new clothes' (Hunt, 2.122). White left the school on 30 April 1790, but continued at Christ's Hospital, working as a clerk in the treasurer's office. A friendship with Charles Lamb, begun in their student days, now ripened. By the mid-1790s White was Lamb's 'most familiar friend' ('Life and Correspondence of Robert Southey', 6.286). 
Lamb introduced White to Shakespeare's 'Henry IV' and White, a natural humorist, developed a powerful imaginative identification with Falstaff. He would 'talk you nothing but pure 'Falstaff' the long evenings through' ('Works of Charles and Mary Lamb', 1.229) and occasionally dressed up as Shakespeare's comic hero. He was even known among his friends as Sir John. This fascination with Falstaff culminated in 'Original Letters, &c. of Sir John Falstaff and his Friends... from Genuine Manuscripts' (1796), written with Lamb's assistance. The volume was designed pleasantly to ridicule William Henry Ireland's recent 'discovery' (forgery) of Shakespeare's manuscripts, though Lamb later liked to emphasize the purely literary value of the 'Letters', deriving, he said, 'from the fullness of a young soul, newly kindling at the Shakspearian flame, and bursting to be delivered of a rich exuberance of conceits' (ibid.). 'Letters' was not a success on its first publication (there were, however, several posthumous editions) and appears to have been White's only attempt at authorship. In 1800 he founded an advertising agency in Warwick Square which moved to 33 Fleet Street about 1808. This was, arguably, the first such agency to introduce the idea of writing copy for clients' advertisements. 
White had romantic ideas about the feasting practised in 'Old' England and took over Elizabeth Montagu's role as patron of May day feasts for London's chimney sweepers. He served sausages instead of beef and pudding, acting as head waiter himself: Lamb gives an unforgettable account of these occasions in his essay 'The praise of chimney-sweepers'. White married Margaret Faulder (1792-1864), daughter of Robert Faulder, a bookseller, in 1811, and they had six children. He died at his house in Burton Crescent, London, on 13 March 1820, leaving a sizeable fortune, and was buried in Paddington churchyard. Friends remembered him as a man of unmatched good humour and drollness. In 1822 Lamb wrote: 'He [White] carried away with him half the fun of the world when he died -- of my world at least' ('Works of Charles and Mary Lamb', 2.130). White's advertising agency, subsequently R. F. White & Son Ltd, remained in the hands of his family until the death of his great-grandson, Gilbert White, in 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 29248


White, James (1803-1862), writer, born in Midlothian in March 1803, was the younger son of John White of Dunmore in Stirlingshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Logan of Howden in Midlothian. After studying at Glasgow University he matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 15 December 1823, graduating BA in 1827. He served as curate of Hartest-cum-Boxsted in Suffolk, and on 27 March 1833 he was instituted vicar of Loxley in Warwickshire. 
In April 1829 White married Rosa (1805-1882), only daughter of Colonel Charles Fitzmaurice Hill. They had two sons and five daughters. On her father's death in 1811 Rosa inherited two farms in Bonchurch on the Isle of Wight. A clause in the will prevented the land from being developed. In 1836 James White had this clause revoked by a private act of parliament, thus enabling him to sell off much of the land for building purposes. He resigned his living in 1839 and retired to the Isle of Wight to write. 
White had already written some essays, and between 1845 and 1847 he produced a succession of Scottish historical tragedies, works of some merit, though only moderately successful. Among them were 'The Earl of Gowrie' (1845) and 'Feudal Times' (1847). Another tragedy, 'John Savile of Haysted' (1847), was acted at Sadler's Wells Theatre, London, in 1847. At a later time he brought out several historical sketches of a popular character, written with considerable power of generalization. The best known is 'The Eighteen Christian Centuries' (1858), which reached a fourth edition in 1864. 
White possessed a charming style, and interested his readers by his clearness of thought and his ability in selecting and arranging detail. He was a friend of Charles Dickens, whom he met about 1845 and who thought 'The Earl of Gowrie' 'a work of remarkable genius' ('Letters of Charles Dickens' to White, 24 Feb 1846, in 'Letters of Charles Dickens', 4.505). In 1849 Dickens rented a house at Bonchurch for some months on James White's recommendation to be near him. 'John Savile of Haysted' was dedicated to Dickens. White also translated some of Schiller's works, and wrote a joint biography of Burns and Scott (1858), and various other works. White died in Bonchurch on 26 March 1862, his wife surviving him, and was buried in the churchyard of Bonchurch parish church on 31 March 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 29249


White, Jeremiah (1629-1707), nonconformist minister, is of unknown parents and background. He matriculated as a sizar from Trinity College, Cambridge, in April 1646, graduated BA in 1650, and proceeded MA in 1653. White claimed in his works that he was a fellow of Trinity, but there is no corroborating evidence of this claim. Upon leaving university he became one of the preachers to the council of state and the chaplain to Oliver Cromwell's household. His position with the Cromwells allowed him to befriend Peter Sterry, another of Cromwell's chaplains, and he later wrote a preface to Sterry's 'The Rise, Race, and Royalty of the Kingdom of God in the Soul of Man' (1683). 
White appears to have been something of a romantic regarding women, and this seems to have caused him more than a degree of trouble. A tale is told that while he was chaplain to the Cromwell household he became smitten by Oliver's daughter, Frances. The feeling was mutual and White sought to obtain Frances's hand in marriage. Cromwell was too wily for White and caught White kissing his daughter's hand. In order to save face, White claimed that he was pleading with Frances to intervene for him for the hand of her maid, Katherine. Cromwell, however, was one step ahead of the game and had White and the maid married. Whether this story is true is unverifiable, but love letters in the British Library sent by White to Elizabeth Rogerson of Tunbridge Wells (where he holidayed) in 1686-7 show him to be a hopeless romantic. 
After the Restoration White remained faithful to his former employers, and it was alleged that he was the chaplain to a republican secret society known as the Calves Head Club. The club, if it existed, met annually on 30 January, the anniversary of the execution of Charles I, between 1693 and 1699. Its aim was to revive the memory of the English republic and to celebrate the liberation from Stuart tyranny. Tory propagandists contended that the club would meet in the dining-room of a London tavern and would place an executioner's axe above the door as a symbol that it was in session. The members would eat a meal consisting of calves' heads, which represented the executed Charles I, and pike, which symbolized tyranny. After the meal a copy of 'Eikon basilike' (which was purportedly written by Charles I) would be burnt while the members sang an anti-monarchist anthem holding John Milton's republican 'Defensio populi Anglicani'. The meeting would end with White offering a toast to the former republic from the skull of a calf, the wine symbolizing the blood of King Charles. Although these allegations are probably too fantastic to be true, they do show that tory propaganda singled out White as a republican troublemaker. 
As White had only been a chaplain, he was not ejected from the Church of England in 1662, but he dissented none the less. By 1666 he and his wife, Katherine, had moved to St Albans, where he reputedly lived as the beneficiary of a trust set up by Elizabeth Cromwell, Oliver's recently deceased wife. In 1669 he was noted as preaching in the Hertfordshire town of Elstree and also occasionally at Meeting House Alley, off Queen Street in Rotherhithe. He was acutely aware of the plight of the dissenters and was among the first to compile an account of the sufferings of the nonconformists under the Anglican-Cavalier regime. Calamy contends that some agents of James II offered him a considerable remuneration if he would publish the account as part of James's attempt to undermine the Anglican establishment; White refused these offers, fearing that he would strengthen the Roman Catholic plans of the king. 
Theologically, White was a believer in Origen's doctrine of universal salvation and wrote a posthumously published treatise entitled 'The Restoration of All Things' on the subject. This tract was held in high regard and was reprinted in the mid-nineteenth century by Victorian universalists. He also held to the doctrine of universal toleration, and his 'A Perswasive to Moderation and Forbearance in Love among the Divided Forms of Christians', originally delivered as a union lecture in London, was published posthumously. It argued that the departure from the simple message of the 'Bible' 'into the multiplicity or confusion of carnal and worldly wisdom' (p. xi) was to blame for the tyranny of one sect over another. White counselled forbearance and moderation as the steps to union. 
After the revolution of 1688 and the 'Toleration Act', White resumed his calling as a public preacher. In November 1701 he delivered a sermon on '2 Thessalonians' 4: 14 to the mourners at the funeral of the nonconformist minister Francis Fuller. He was also the assistant to the congregational leader Robert Bragge in the ministry of the gathered church at Pewterer's Hall. He died in 1707 aged seventy-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 29250


White, John (1509/10-1560), bishop of Winchester, was born in Farnham, Surrey, the son of Robert White, a tenant of the see of Winchester. He was the brother of Dr Henry White and of Agnes, who married their cousin Sir Thomas White of South Warnborough. The latter had a sister, Sibill, who was married to a John White thought by some (including the diarist Henry Machyn) to have been another brother of the bishop. While this cannot be ruled out, it is made more unlikely by Bishop John's standing as godfather in 1559 to the son (yet another John White) of John and Sibill; if the two older Johns were brothers then it would have been thought inappropriate for godfather and godson to enter into the spiritual relationship which baptism created when they were already so closely related by blood. 
In 1521, aged eleven, White was admitted to Winchester College as a scholar. He passed on to New College, Oxford, where he was admitted as a scholar on 3 December 1525, and became a fellow in 1527 (his fellowship was vacated in March 1535). During that time he took his BA (admitted 13 December 1529, determined 1531) and MA (23 March 1534). In 1537 he was appointed headmaster of his old school, Winchester College. At Winchester he was noted for his skill in poetry and oratory. He was ordained priest for the diocese of Winchester on 16 April 1541, a few days after his ordination as subdeacon and deacon, but in keeping with the times this had not prevented him already holding certain benefices; he was collated rector of Chilcombe, Dorset, on 14 November 1537, and was admitted canon and twelfth prebendary of Winchester on 28 March 1541, a few days before receiving major orders. He held the latter 'in commendam' with several other benefices and canonries (rector of Cheriton, Hampshire, July 1543; canon of Chichester and prebendary of Ipthorne, 28 March 1550; canon of Lichfield and prebendary of Eccleshall, 4 May 1552), surrendering them only on appointment as bishop. He appears also to have been vicar of Keevil in Wiltshire, though this he had vacated by July 1550. In addition White vacated the headmastership of Winchester College when he was elected its warden in February 1542, a position he vacated about October 1554, several months after his episcopal consecration. At some time during this period he proceeded to the degree of BTh (later incorporated as DTh on 1 October 1555). It was also about 1542 that White became a chaplain to Stephen Gardiner, then bishop of Winchester. 
Through the changes of religion wrought first by Henry VIII then by Edward VI, White seems to have been fairly content to comply quietly, at least up to a point. By his own admission, while headmaster of Winchester College he composed certain verses extolling the king's supremacy, and against the bishop of Rome (with the encouragement of Gardiner), which he taught to his scholars. It would appear that by 1551, about the time of Gardiner's trial, his conservative tendencies were becoming noticeable, to the extent that White was excommunicated by archdeacon John Philpot 'for preaching naughty doctrine' ('Examinations and Writings of John Philpot', 82). About this time also he entered into a controversy with Peter Martyr; White's contribution, a treatise (in verse) on the true presence of the body and blood of Christ in the eucharist, was published as 'Diacosiomartyrion. Id est ducentorum virorum testimonium, de veritate corporis, et sanguinis Christi, in eucharistia, adversus Petrum Martyrem' (1553; 'STC' 25388). 
White's relationship with Gardiner (he had clearly put himself on his bishop's side at the latter's trial) and his known conservatism made him a candidate for early preferment to the episcopal office after the accession of Queen Mary, and he was a member of several commissions for the deprivation and restoration of bishops. On 1 April 1554 White was consecrated bishop of Lincoln by Edmund Bonner, bishop of London, assisted by Cuthbert Tunstall and Stephen Gardiner at the church of the bishop of Winchester, St Saviour's, Southwark. Five other new bishops were consecrated at the same time. He was enthroned by proxy on 28 April, and again in person over 12-13 October. In the following year, on 28 September, he was appointed a commissioner for the trial of Nicholas Ridley and Hugh Latimer. Foxe reports his courtesy and gentleness towards the two reformers, acknowledged in their words to the bishop in the course of their trial. His dealings with other heretics brought before him may not have been so gentle, judging from Foxe's report of the trial of Stephen Gratwick, where he acted more harshly, an approach which comes through in accounts of other later trials in which he had a part. On one occasion Foxe describes White as showing 'gross ignorance and barbarous cruelty' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.374), while at the examination of Richard Gibson in 1557 he is recorded as saying that 'it was no pity to burn a heretic' (ibid., 440). This demonstrates, if nothing else, that White was one of the minority of Marian bishops who took an active and personal interest in heresy trials. It also suggests that he may have had more patience in his dealings with senior churchmen, whom he would have seen as his equals in learning and in ecclesiastical standing, than with the increasing number of lay protestants who were being brought for heresy trials in the reign of Mary. 
It was as a preacher, rather than as a persecutor of heretics, however, that White came to greatest prominence in the Marian period. Soon after Mary's accession White was preaching in London in support of the restoration of processions. He contributed to a set of verses composed by scholars of Winchester College for the marriage of Philip and Mary at Winchester on 25 July 1554, and a number of important sermons followed. He was at Paul's Cross on 18 November, and preached at the opening of parliament on 21 October 1555. Within a month his former bishop and mentor, Stephen Gardiner, was dead, and White preached at the requiem mass sung for him by Edmund Bonner, bishop of London, on 15 November. When Gardiner's body was taken for burial from Southwark to Winchester on 24 February following, it was White who conducted the funeral rites. Along with other bishops he received Reginald Pole at the church of St Mary-le-Bow in London on 25 March 1556, where the cardinal was to be invested with the pallium after his consecration as archbishop of Canterbury. White's election to succeed his mentor Gardiner at Winchester on 15 April probably caused little surprise. Though he received custody of the temporalities of his see as bishop nominate on 16 May, it was a whole year before the appropriate bulls of papal provision were obtained from Rome, and he took full possession of his temporalities only on 19 May 1557. Although he appears to have spent little time active in his diocese, his persecution of heretics (conducted, as with his predecessor, largely from his base at Southwark) continued alongside his preaching career. On at least one occasion he combined the two, on 23 May 1557, according to the diarist Henry Machyn, directing a sermon in St Saviour's, Southwark, against an unnamed heretic who was present in the church. It was in that year that he carried out a visitation of his diocese, acting under a commission of Cardinal Pole. He was at Paul's Cross again on 30 January following. 
The last months of 1558 saw a number of significant and important deaths; not only the queen and her archbishop of Canterbury (both on 17 November) but also several other bishops died around that time. Maurice Griffith, bishop of Rochester, died on 20 November and was buried on 30th; White preached the sermon at his funeral in the church of St Magnus the Martyr, just the other side of London Bridge from his own Southwark church of St Saviour. It was not for that funeral sermon, though, but for the one he gave at the queen's funeral on 14 December that he is best remembered. In the course of his sermon he made either the biggest 'faux pas' of his career, or was subject to the most unfortunate misunderstanding. The main theme of his sermon was to warn against change, and in a passage which probably referred to the preachers of the day he quoted from 'Ecclesiastes' 9: 4, 'better a live dog than a dead lion'. This was taken, perhaps unjustly, as a comparison between the new queen Elizabeth and her recently departed half-sister, and as a result White was placed under house arrest. John Jewel, later bishop of Salisbury, described the sermon (preserved in BL, Sloane MS 1578) as mad and very seditious. 
White was called before the council on 19 January 1559, admonished, and set free. On 31 March he took part in the abortive conference at Westminster Abbey between certain bishops and prelates and a number of protestant divines, and for his opposition to reform was committed to the Tower on 3 April. He is alleged in a number of sources to have threatened to excommunicate the queen, but J. H. Pollen argues that this is not found in any contemporary source but derives from a misunderstanding of the situation by William Allen. On 25 May he was allowed to stand as godfather to his namesake John White in the church of St Bartholomew by the Exchange beside St Anthony's. On 26 June he was deprived of his bishopric after refusing to take the oath of supremacy. On account of his ill health he was released from the Tower into the custody of the keeper of the broad seal on 6 July, and thence the next day to Sir Thomas White, the husband of his sister Agnes. He died of an ague at Sir Thomas's house at South Warnborough on 12 January 1560, and was buried three days later in Winchester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 29251


White, John (fl. 1577-1593), colonist and painter, was apparently of modest Cornish gentry origins. His early and later life remain obscure, owing largely to the commonness of his name. He rose to prominence on the basis of his artistic talent and zeal for American colonization. His watercolour images of Native Americans in the late sixteenth century were exceptional for his era and unsurpassed as a visual record of south-eastern tribal life until the advent of photography. 
White's first voyage to America was probably with Martin Frobisher's expedition of 1577, during which it is believed he produced a drawing of a skirmish between the English and the Thule Inuit at Baffin Island. He is probably the same John White listed as a member of the Painter-Stainers' Company in 1580. 
In 1585 White set out for America as part of the expedition headed by Richard Grenville and Ralph Lane and promoted by Walter Ralegh. He was paired with Thomas Harriot to collect information about the people, plants, and animals of America for the benefit of subsequent colonization efforts. The sympathetic and lively drawings White produced of Carolina Algonquian life, documenting aboriginal settlement patterns, technology, clothing, body decoration, ceremonial life, and subsistence practices, are among the earliest extant images of Native Americans. These images circulated widely as engravings in the first volume of Theodor de Bry's 'America' (1590). Although de Bry's engravings were less naturalistic and accurate than White's originals, the images became ingrained in the European imagination and helped stimulate the colonial enterprise. They also influenced European pictorial representations of Native Americans for centuries to come. 
After White's return from the 1585 voyage his involvement in the promotion of the Virginia colony grew. His stalwart faith in American colonization resulted in Ralegh placing him at the head of a company dedicated to planting a permanent settlement. Ralegh named him governor of the colony, and White took a leading role in raising money and recruiting settlers. With the prospective colonists he set out from Portsmouth in April 1587, but he proved an ineffectual leader and was dominated by the ship's Portuguese pilot, Simao Fernandes, whose real interest lay in privateering. Fernandes left White and the colonists, somewhat against their will, at Roanoke (in present-day North Carolina) instead of at their intended destination on Chesapeake Bay. 
White's brief leadership on land was also beset with difficulties. Although the colony aspired to peaceful coexistence with the native population, prior mistreatment of the latter by Lane's colonists placed relations on a tenuous footing. White's decision to make a show of strength after the murder of one of his settlers backfired when his men inadvertently attacked a party of friendly Croatoans. 
Amid concern over provisions, White's charges convinced him to return to England to lobby for relief, and he was back in Southampton by November 1587. His prompt return to Virginia was thwarted by a variety of circumstances. First, the threat of Spain's armada resulted in the requisitioning of the ships he had intended to take back to Virginia. When White finally set out, in April 1588, he did so with two vessels that were not only smaller than he had hoped but which were dedicated to privateering. The ships were attacked in the course of their activities and forced to return to England. 
It was not until 1590 that White could again raise ships and supplies. After reaching Roanoke in that year he found the colony disappeared and his possessions ransacked. Although evidence suggested the colonists had taken shelter among the nearby Croatoans, bad weather and sailing mishaps forced White to abort his search and return to England. Among the missing colonists were his daughter, Ellinor, and his granddaughter, Virginia Dare, the first child born to English parents in America. 
White settled in Ireland, and wrote Richard Hakluyt a letter in 1593 from his house in Ballynoe, co. Cork. While the details of his later life have bedevilled researchers, a strong case has been put forward that he lived on Ralegh's estate and produced farm surveys for him as late as 1598. A will for a John White, 'late of parts beyond the seas', was proved in 1606, but whether this was the same John White remains uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 29252


White, John (1570-1615), Church of England clergyman and polemicist, was born at Eaton Socon, Bedfordshire, the son of Peter White, vicar of St Neots, Huntingdonshire, and the neighbouring parish of Eaton Socon, and younger brother of Francis White (1563/4-1638), later successively bishop of Carlisle, Norwich, and Ely; three other brothers also became clergymen. White was educated at St Neots grammar school and then admitted a sizar of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 15 February 1586. He was a scholar from Lady day 1588 to Michaelmas 1592, graduated BA in 1590, and proceeded MA in 1593. On 5 July 1592 White married, at Eaton Socon, Anne Sparrowe. The couple had nine children, of whom John, baptized at Eaton Socon in 1595, entered Gonville and Caius College in 1611, and later became vicar of his grandfather's old parish; another son is mentioned by Thomas Fuller as having become a druggist in Lombard Street, London. 
White was appointed vicar of Eccles, Lancashire, and fellow of the collegiate church, Manchester, in 1606, but resigned these in 1609 after being presented by Sir John Crofts to the rectory of Barsham, Suffolk. In 1612 he proceeded DD. A sermon originally delivered at Paul's Cross, 'Anniversary Commemoration of the Kings most Happy Succession to the Crowne of England', was published in 1615, and early that year White was made a chaplain-in-ordinary to James I. 
White was highly regarded as a polemicist against the Church of Rome. He indicated that his writings were pastoral endeavours to 'help the seduced out of their [Catholic] errors and confirm Protestants in the truth' ('Way to the True Church', preface *3). Against the 1605 publication of 'The Treatise of Faith', written by the celebrated Jesuit John Percy (1569-1641), better known by his alias Fisher the Jesuit, White brought out his 'Way to the true church wherin the principal motives persuading to Romanisme are familiarly disputed' (1608). Further editions of this Calvinist defence of the reformed faith were issued in 1610, 1612, and 1616. After subsequent replies by Percy in 1612 and 1614, White again took up his pen against the Jesuit with his 'Defense of the Way to the True Church' (1614). This treatise occasioned William Wright SJ (1563-1639) to publish 'A discovery of certain notorious shifts, evasions, and untruths uttered by M. John White, minister' (1614), and two years later his larger 'Treatise of the Church' (1616). The former president of Douai, Thomas Worthington (1549-1622), also entered the fray in 'Whyte Died Black' (1615). 
In his will White hints at financial 'distresses' suffered at Eccles, 'which I was never able to look through to this day'. This seems to indicate that he was in poverty when he died in Lombard Street, London. He was buried on 28 May 1615 at St Mary Woolnoth in the City, although his will was not proved by his widow until February 1620. In 1624 his brother Francis White published 'The Workes of that Learned and Reverend Divine, John White', containing the polemics, two sermons and an anti-papal work of his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 29253


Bradshaw, John (1575/6-1618), Benedictine monk, was born near Worcester, the third son of John Bradshaw, a citizen of Worcester who 'bore office in that towne... executing... the office of one of the chiefest Magistrates of the towne', and his wife, Anne Warmestrey, through whom he was related to a number of prominent families, including the Crofts of Croft Castle (McCann and Connolly, 244). Both his parents were Roman Catholics. He was educated at the free school in Worcester. The Jesuit Edward Oldcorne was chaplain at Hindlip, near Worcester, and it was most likely through him that young Bradshaw was introduced to Henry Garnett, the Jesuit superior, who sent him to St Omer. On 21 February 1596 he arrived at the English College at Valladolid. The Jesuit superiors recognized his leadership qualities and he was made prefect over his companions. During a dangerous illness in the winter of 1598-9 he vowed to become a religious if his life were spared. Already several English youths in Rome had joined the Italian monks of Monte Cassino and other Benedictine monasteries with the hope of one day returning to England. He was the first of a stream of students to leave the seminary for the monastery of San Benito in Valladolid in April 1599. After a month's postulancy he was sent to the abbey of San Martino, Compostela, where he was received as a novice on 26 May and took the programmatic name of Augustine. In 1600 he was professed with four others (one of them being John (Leander) Jones), who had followed him from the seminary. He then went to the University of Salamanca. On 5 December 1602, in spite of the opposition of the Jesuits, Clement VIII granted formal permission to the English Benedictines, both in Spain and in Italy, to return to their country as missionaries. As soon as the news arrived he set out for England with three others on 26 December and arrived just as Elizabeth was dying. 
Bradshaw had been appointed superior over his companions. He seems to have worked at first in his native county. He is also very likely the White mentioned as a priest haunting Worcestershire and the neighbouring counties. So many young Englishmen desired to join the Benedictines that it was soon evident that steps must be taken to find a spot more accessible than Spain for a monastery in which English subjects could be trained. So in the spring of 1604 he set out again to attend the general chapter of the Spanish Benedictines and lay before his superiors the plan. On his way he called upon the nuncio in Paris, and there it was that most likely his attention was first directed to Douai as a suitable position for the proposed foundation, it being a university town with rich abbeys close at hand. The Spanish abbots agreed to the proposal, and he returned to England with the title of vicar-general over the monks working there. 
During the early part of 1605 Bradshaw was naively engaged in a scheme for purchasing a toleration for English Catholics from the government, high hopes being raised by the accession of James I. Garnett, the Jesuit superior, had lately failed in a similar attempt, and was less sanguine in his views of the government's intentions. When Bradshaw's negotiations proved unsuccessful, he blamed the Jesuits for their failure. 
In the autumn of 1605 Thomas Arundell, first Baron Arundell of Wardour, had taken command of an English regiment in the service of the Archduke Albert against the Dutch, who no longer had the support of England, which had made peace with Spain in 1604. He brought Augustine Bradshaw out of England with him to be chaplain-general of that regiment. Coniers, a Jesuit, also joined the camp at Ostend as one of the chaplains, but he by no means liked being under the command of the Benedictine chaplain-general. All other plans failing, it was determined to get rid of him by procuring the dismissal of Lord Arundell. The regiment was mutinous and riven with factions suspecting each other of being agents of the English government and secretly in league with the Dutch. James Blount, one of the officers, was sent, with recommendations 'to blast his late colonel' at the Spanish court, and succeeded so well that at the end of May 1606 Lord Arundell and almost half of the officers were cashiered, and with them, of course, the chaplain-general. 
Meanwhile Bradshaw was also battling with opposition to the monastic foundation in Douai which he began in 1606 and for which he had enlisted the patronage of the wealthy and influential Philippe de Caverel, abbot of St Vaast in Arras. The many defections to local Benedictines of students at the English colleges at Rome and Valladolid made his project unwelcome to Thomas Worthington, president of the English College, Douai, which was then in a rather parlous condition. Worthington's efforts to get the Benedictine foundation prohibited by appealing to Caraffa, the nuncio in Brussels, and then to Rome, were supported by Robert Persons, who thought the conversion of England would be best secured by a unitary mission under firm Jesuit leadership and that the Benedictine monasteries there, if recovered, should not be restored to the Benedictines, but be at the disposal of the church in general. The local Jesuits also feared that the school the Benedictines intended to open would compete with their own establishment in St Omer. But with his characteristic address and adroitness Bradshaw outmanoeuvred these objectors and by 1609 not only did St Gregory's Priory at Douai, the ancestor of the present Downside community, receive full ecclesiastical and civil authorization, but amicable relations between the principal contenders became normal thereafter. In the thick of these troubles Bradshaw acquired, in December 1605, a former collegiate church at Dieulouard, Lorraine (therefore in French territory), to be a possible refuge in case the Douai scheme came to nothing. Here came to be established the monastery of St Laurence which, at the French Revolution would transfer to England and settle at Ampleforth. 
While engaged in this struggle Bradshaw was able to help the secular clergy. He obtained, from the munificent Caverel, Arras College in Paris as a house of study for the English clergy who were to devote themselves to writing. The house was to be a counter-blast to Chelsea College, lately established for anti-Catholic controversialists by James I. In 1611 Bradshaw founded St Benedict's Monastery at St Malo with the help of Gabriel Gifford, later to be archbishop of Rheims, in order to relieve the pressure of numbers at Dieulouard. 
As vicar-general, Bradshaw was constantly in England superintending the numerous subjects who were working on the mission. In 1614 there were over eighty. Before Persons's death (1610) Bradshaw began his negotiations for a reunion of all English Benedictines into one congregation. Three groups had emerged. The monks from Italy (never more than a dozen) had secured for two of their own men, Edward Maihew and Vincent Sadler, an aggregation to the monastery of Westminster, then represented by its last survivor, old Father Robert (or Sigebert) Buckley. These two, who were joined later on by a third (19 December 1609), therefore represented the historic English Benedictine congregation. Bradshaw's Anglo-Spanish subjects were numerous: they possessed houses and men. The Italians had neither; the old English had only the succession. These two latter parties were desirous of a union, and Bradshaw entered enthusiastically into the project. What would suit the smaller bodies would be for the Anglo-Spanish monks to furnish men, money, and houses, while the others acted as superiors. The incongruity of such an arrangement did not seem to strike Bradshaw, who, on 13 February 1610, signed an agreement of ten articles. His precipitate action was greatly resented by the rest of his brethren, and the monks at Douai appealed to their ultimate superior, the general of the Spanish Benedictines, and Bradshaw was summoned to Spain in 1612. The result was that he was removed from his vicarship as well as from the priorship of St Gregory's, where there was much discontent with his over-strict regime, and John (Leander) Jones was set up in his place. The union with the old English congregation was eventually brought about under more equitable terms. But Bradshaw was as resilient as ever. On his way back from Spain he came to the notice of the famous Capuchin Joseph du Tremblay, Richelieu's 'eminence grise'. The friar was then engaged in his work of reforming certain abbeys, and had lately taken a special interest in the order of Fontevrault. Under his influence the abbess, Louise de Bourbon, with her coadjutor, Antoinette d'Orleans, was desirous of restoring monastic observance in the houses of monks and nuns subject to her rule. Bradshaw was recommended by Tremblay 'as one full of zeal, sanctity, ability, and energy'. He began his work in October 1613, and was so successful that he was called to a like work in the abbeys of Chelles, Remiremont, and Poitiers. He also became engaged in a projected union of the monks of Fontevrault with the English monks at Douai. But, although this would have been of material advantage to the latter, further reflection showed the vicar-general that it would drain the mission of men and be a tax beyond the strength of his English monks. So the matter was dropped, and he was withdrawn. In 1615 he was sent to found a house for English monks in Paris, and for one year presided over its destinies. This evolved into St Edmund's Priory, Paris, whose community later settled at Douai Abbey, near Reading. In 1616, having a well earned reputation for observance, he was sent to reform the Cluniac priory of Longueville, near Rouen, where he died, aged forty-two, on 4 May 1618 and where he was buried. 
Bradshaw was a frank, open-minded man, with a singular winning way, which always made a striking first impression. His generous nature led him into impetuous actions which caused difficulties a more prudent man would have escaped. It is perhaps open to question whether he would have succeeded so well as he did had he not had the help of such men as John Roberts and John (Leander) Jones to supply the deficiencies of his character. 


@@@@@


doc= 29254


White, John (1590-1645), politician and lawyer, was born on 29 June 1590, the second son of Henry White of Rhoscrowther, Pembrokeshire, and Jane, daughter of Richard Fletcher of Bangor. He was descended from a family of wealthy merchants associated with the town of Tenby, and both his father and grandfather served as sheriffs of Pembrokeshire. On 20 November 1607 White matriculated with his elder brother Griffith from Jesus College, Oxford. In 1610 he entered the Middle Temple, where he was called to the bar in 1618. Griffith was sheriff of Pembrokeshire in 1626. 
Probably by this time White had married Katherine, daughter of Edward Barfoot of Lambourne Hall, Essex; they had one surviving daughter, Winifred, who later married Richard Blackwell of Bushey, Hertfordshire. Katherine Barfoot was a kinswoman of the Winthrops, and White himself was associated with a number of puritan colonizing ventures and had interests in the Virginia Company, the Dorchester Company, and also the Massachusetts Bay Company, whose charter he has been credited with drawing up. He acted as counsel for William Coryton when charges were drawn against him for his conduct in the 1629 session of parliament. On 30 August 1631, as a widower, White was licensed to marry Mary, eldest daughter of Thomas Stiles or Style of Little Missenden, Buckinghamshire; the wedding took place on 1 September at St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, a church with a strong puritan reputation. A long-term critic of Arminianism and episcopacy, White was described by the earl of Clarendon as 'a grave lawyer, but notoriously disaffected to the Church' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.264). He was one of the founding members of the feoffees for impropriations, formed with the intention of buying impropriate tithes in order to make better provision for a preaching ministry. Testifying in 1644 at the trial of Archbishop William Laud, White claimed that Laud, while bishop of London, had for these activities attacked him as 'an enemy of the Church, an underminer of religion' (Prynne, 386-7). He had then replied that the feoffees intended only the better maintenance of preachers and that they took pains to ensure the clerics they supported were conformists; he had also offered to remove any of the feoffees and replace them with men approved by Laud. This had been to no avail. In 1632 Attorney-General William Noy filed an information against the group in the court of exchequer, and on 11 February 1633 the court decreed the dissolution of the feoffees and the confiscation of their funds and patronage to the use of the king. 
In the autumn of 1640 White was returned to parliament as the junior member for Southwark with his Middle Temple associate Edward Bagshaw; he is not to be confused with his namesake John White ('c'.1599-1655), MP for Rye. He took the protestation in 1641. As MP for Southwark, White was among the delegation sent on 4 February 1642 to thank local women for their petition for church reform, although 'there was no precedent for a petition from women' (Coates, Young, and Snow, 277). He also chaired a number of important committees including the committee for scandalous ministers and, after Sir Edward Dering was disabled from sitting in the Commons, the committee for printing. White actively supported church reforms and opposed the canons of 1640 as 'utterlie against law', arguing that the so-called 'etc oath' attached to the canons was 'verie dangerous and enacted uniustlie, in which he shewed many particulars' ('Journal', ed. Notestein, 71). In June 1641, during the debate on the first 'Bishops Exclusion Bill', White advocated that bishops should be excluded from parliament, because all their powers, over and above their ministerial authority, were by 'jure humano' and not by divine right. He insisted that the 'Spirituall Monarchy' of the bishops was inclined to return to 'Popery, and the Religion of Antichrist', which he detected in the altar policy of the 1630s, the restraint on preaching about predestination and against Arminian tenets, and the condition of the parish clergy. Eight out of ten ministers, White argued, were 'Idoll, idle or scandalous'. He desired that the powers of the bishops should be reformed and reduced to a 'condition and state agreeable to the word of God' ('A Speech of John White', 1641). On 31 December White was named to the committee to consider treason charges against twelve bishops. In the ensuing debate he accused the bishops and their adherents as 'the greatest and chiefest authors of our miseries... favourers of the Romish and Arminian faction', who had tyrannized the consciences of 'free subjects' in the exercise of their religion and had orchestrated division between 'the Prince and his people, [and] between the Prince and his Parliaments'. He depicted the bishops as agents of the devil and urged the Commons to reduce their powers and to bring the bishops speedily to trial. 
In 1643 White took the covenant and developed the themes of his speeches in his major publication 'The First Century of Scandalous, Malignant Priests' (1643). The work, which earned him the nickname 'Century White', detailed the complaints against negligent, immoral, and 'ceremonious' clergy, which were used by parliament to eject them from their livings. Many of the allegedly 'malignant' priests were also accused of preaching or speaking out against parliament. In the introduction White characterized the sequestered ministers as 'priests of Baal, of Bacchus, of Priapus', who promoted the 'errours of Popery and Arminianism' and were given to 'cursing, swearing, drunkennesse, whoredome [and] sodomie'. He justified the sequestrations because they provided parliament with the opportunity to replace 'scandalous' ministers with 'godly, learned, orthodox Divines', who were 'diligent preachers of the word of God' (sig. A2-4). White reiterated his demands for church reform and declared that the will of God was manifest in the calling of parliament to effect reformation. The first of the ensuing 100 sequestrations from areas under parliamentarian control, especially Essex, Suffolk, and Kent, concerned a case of bestiality from Sussex, and the last concerned the efforts of an Essex vicar to compromise the chastity of the widows in his parish. Sandwiched in between were ninety-eight assorted instances of negligent, alcoholic, Laudian, and royalist ministers. White had single-handedly invented the popular press concept of the 'naughty vicar' and, according to Anthony Wood, his intention to publish a subsequent volume was never realized, because White was persuaded that it would bring scandal to the whole body of the clergy (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.144). 
On 10 June 1642 White had offered $100 to the parliamentarian war effort. That year he was appointed as a lay member of the Westminster assembly of divines. He chaired the committee to consider the assembly's proposals on ordination in September 1644 and introduced the bill for introducing the 'Directory for the Publique Worship of God' to replace the 'Book of Common Prayer'. White was also a member of various committees set up to combat idolatry, including the committee chaired by Sir Robert Harley, which drew up the ordinances of 1643 and 1644 for the demolishing of 'monuments of idolatry and superstition'. He was also actively involved in the trial of William Laud and was a member of the committee appointed to manage evidence against the archbishop. In addition to his evidence at the trial about the dissolution of the feoffees, he related the circumstances surrounding the removal of Edward Bagshaw in 1640 as reader at the Middle Temple following a lecture attacking the temporal powers of the clergy. White's final activities in the Commons were as a manager and reporter at the conference on the peace propositions on 8 November 1644. 
White died on 29 January 1645, survived by his second wife, four of their sons, and four of their daughters. He was buried on 1 February at the Temple Church, London, near the altar, his funeral being attended by members of the House of Commons. According to Wood, his memorial inscription contained the following lines: 'Here lyeth a John, a burning shining light, His name, life, actions were all White' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.146). 


@@@@@


doc= 29255


White, John (1575-1648), clergyman and promoter of colonization, was born on 6 January 1575 in the manor house of Stanton St John, Oxfordshire, the second son of John White (died 1618), yeoman, and Isabel, daughter of John Bawle of Lichfield, Staffordshire. He had four sisters and two brothers, the eldest of whom was Josiah White (1573-1622), rector of Hornchurch, Essex, from 1611 to 1622. The family leased the manor of Stanton St John from New College, Oxford, through the favour of an uncle, Dr Thomas White (died 1588), the warden of New College. Following family tradition, John was educated at Winchester College from 1587 to 1593 and at New College, Oxford. Elected a fellow in 1595 he graduated BA in 1597, and proceeded MA in 1601. Remaining in residence he took holy orders and was appointed rector of Holy Trinity, Dorchester, Dorset, a parish which also incorporated St Peter's, in November 1605. In the following year he married Ann Burges of Peterborough. White was associated with Dorchester for over forty years and if his remaining sermons display a distinct Calvinistic streak he none the less remained a conforming minister of the Church of England, holding traditional views on the nature of divinely appointed authority. Even though he attempted to conduct his religious services within the letter of the law and continued to wear a surplice into the 1640s White became an important figure in the puritan transatlantic network which opposed the religious reforms of Archbishop Laud. His successful attempt to reform Dorchester, a sleepy backwater with something of an unsavoury reputation, eventually won him the title of the Patriarch of Dorchester. 
Following the disastrous fire of 1613, which destroyed more than 170 dwellings, White admonished his Dorchester parishioners to transform their ways, reject mere material success, and help the poor. Supported by the local corporation and consistent voluntary financial contributions from his flock he remodelled the town into a well-ordered, godly commonwealth. At the centre of his plans was the creation of a workhouse, a vocational institution which both educated and put the youth of the town to work producing cloth. From its profits the town created a public brewhouse, completed in 1622, which not only regulated the town's drink trade, but also helped finance future reforms; a free school (of which White became a supervisor); the distribution of charity at Christmas; the repair of public streets; and in 1631 the creation of a town library. Indeed, the practical benefits of White's reforms were particularly evident in 1623 when Dorchester suffered another fire, following which the homeless received speedy relief. On the whole a popular minister he regularly visited his parishioners in their homes, lectured three times a week, and on Fridays publicly worked his way methodically through the 'Bible'. This took him six years, after which he started over again. His programme also transcended the walls of Dorchester itself for in March 1624 he presided over the inception of the unincorporated Dorchester Company, an enterprise aimed at creating a godly colony in America. 
Between 1621 and 1623 the number of fishing ships leaving west country ports for New England increased fourfold and White's scheme suggested planting a fishing station in America to both facilitate the trade as well as spread the Word to Native Americans. Consequently, in 1622, Richard Bushrod, a wealthy Dorchester merchant, obtained in his name and for his associates, a fishing licence from the Council for New England. In 1623 another White associate, Sir William Erle, a member of the Virginia Company, obtained a patent for a plantation and ships were sent over in 1624 and 1625. By 1626, however, it was clear that the Dorchester Company, like many similar ventures, was failing. Despite setbacks a permanent settlement was established at Cape Ann, and some colonists stayed on and eventually moved with their governor, Richard Conant, to Naumkeag, renamed Salem in 1629. 
Together with a few other members of the Dorchester Company, White kept the colonists supplied and looked to his puritan brethren in London for support. By the time of the creation of the New England Company in March 1628 he had become more interested in piety than profit, viewing a future, successful Massachusetts colony as a safe haven for the increasingly persecuted puritan clergy. When the Gorges family challenged the legality of the New England Company's patent another John White (1590-1645), the London lawyer for the Winthrop family, undertook the complex legal business which transformed the New England Company into the Massachusetts Bay Company by royal charter on 4 March 1629. Continuing to play a conspicuous role in the success of Massachusetts, the Patriarch helped finance individual immigration and recruited the west country conforming puritans who left England in the 'Mary and John' in March 1630. On the eve of the more famous Winthrop migration, in April 1630, White signed with other puritan leaders the humble request, a conciliatory document which proclaimed their loyalty to the mother church. It was published in May 1630 and incorporated by White in his model promotional tract 'The Planter's Plea of the Grounds for Plantations Examined'. During the famine of 1631 he managed to keep the fledgeling colony supplied with grain and if his role in this project has often been underrated his activities had not escaped the attention of Archbishop Laud. 
Under White's leadership Dorchester became a leading centre in the resistance to the high-church religious policies of Charles I. White often organized special prayer meetings, petitions, and the collection of funds to support the cause of international protestantism and he was especially prominent in collecting for the Feoffees for Impropriations, a London-based puritan corporation which hoped to transform the Church of England from within by a preaching ministry. Laud viewed all such activities as undermining both church and royal authority and during his campaign to purge the puritan clergy from the pulpit White was increasingly watched after 1630. His opposition to Arminianism, the new ceremonies, and especially to the reading of the 'Book of Sports' (which advocated leisure pastimes on Sundays) in church led to White's papers being seized, his finances being investigated, and in 1635 to his prosecution by the high commission. Although the charges against him were dropped his activities, especially after Dorchester's vocal opposition to the collection of ship money in 1637, were increasingly scrutinized. 
During the final crisis which led to the outbreak of civil war Dorchester became increasingly puritan, its militia refusing to muster in support of Charles's campaign against the presbyterian Scots. When hostilities between the king and parliament finally broke out in August 1642 the town collected $200 to support parliament. Spurred on by White's sermons Dorchester raised forces in its defence and the corporation pledged support for the parliamentary cause. Yet in August 1643 Dorchester ignominiously surrendered without a fight to royalist forces under Lord Caernarvon. White, who had compounded his notoriety in royalist eyes by his election to the assembly of divines, had fled and his study and papers were pillaged by cavalry under Prince Maurice. In a later royalist occupation the brewhouse itself was destroyed by troops under Lord Goring. 
The assembly of divines first met under the chairmanship of William Twisse in July 1643, and during its first week of deliberation White was elected one of two assessors to assist the prolocutor. Charged by parliament to work out a practical religious settlement under the solemn league and covenant with its Scots presbyterian allies, as well as establishing a new form of church government on the basis of scriptural evidence alone, White came to play a leading role in its deliberations. An upholder of the notions of a truly national church he served on two of the assembly's important committees and was appointed minister to St Mary Savoy. He was later appointed rector of Lambeth in April 1645. Although sympathetic to suggested Calvinistic reforms he remained a voice for conservatism within the assembly and usually allied himself with the presbyterians against the growing, more radical independents. On 26 November 1645 he delivered a sermon in Westminster Abbey on the text of 'Daniel' 9: 15 which called for the creation of a fund from church lands to support exhibitions for needy university students, later published as 'The Troubles of Jerusalems Restauration' (1646). In increasing ill health he petitioned parliament to relieve him of his duties in May 1646, and having declined the candidature of the vacant wardenship of New College, Oxford, returned to Dorchester in November that year. 
In the aftermath of the first civil war White no longer commanded the respect within Dorchester he had once enjoyed and his conservatism often brought him into conflict with religious radicals. In a sermon at St Peter's attended by the whole town in March 1647 he warned his parishioners against what he perceived to be the rising tide of heresy, and he later published a tract which instructed them how to continue in a moral, godly life, 'The Way to the Tree of Life' (1647). Up until his death on 21 July 1648 at Dorchester he worked upon his reflections on 'Genesis', later published by his son John as 'A Commentary upon the First Three Chapters of the First Book of Moses called Genesis' (1656). In his will he left the bulk of his small estate to his youngest son, Nathaniel, who served as a captain in the parliamentary cavalry during the civil war. His marriage also produced two further sons and two daughters. He was buried under the south porch of St Peter's on 24 July, and a monument was finally erected to White's memory in 1902. A modest, pleasant man who largely accepted the teachings of the established church, he played an important role, without ever setting foot there, in the successful settlement of puritan Massachusetts. 


@@@@@


doc= 29256


White, John (1826-1891), ethnographer and public servant in New Zealand, one of the eight children of Francis White, a blacksmith, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Angus, was born in Cockfield, co. Durham, on 3 January 1826, and emigrated to New Zealand with his family in 1834. They settled first at the Hokianga, North Island, and in 1851 moved to Auckland. On 13 March 1854 White married Mary Elizabeth Bagnall, with whom he had eight children. His early and continuing interest in the Maori and their customs led to his employment by the government in positions where he came into frequent contact with Maori. His career centred around appointments as official interpreter and agent for the purchase of native lands, and in this latter capacity he was instrumental in purchasing Maori land in Auckland. From 1852 he was gold commissioner at Coromandel, North Island, and between 1862 and 1865 he was resident magistrate at Wanganui. 
White's reputation as an ethnographer and writer of both scholarly and fictional works based on Maori traditions led to his employment from 1879 by the government of New Zealand to compile a complete history of such traditions. These he collected at times by monetary payment and at others by trading European mythology and legends. He died suddenly 'en route' for Whakatane, on the Bay of Plenty, North Island, on 13 January 1891. He had completed six volumes of 'The Ancient History of the Maori', the production of which was helped by neither government cost-cutting nor White's own variable powers of organization. It, and his other ethnographical work, was well received by contemporary scholars. Later commentators have drawn attention to his lack of scholarly vigour, but, as an early commentator on the Maori who based his remarks in large part on first-hand knowledge, helped by fluency in the language, he is undoubtedly important, and his achievements were remarkable. 


@@@@@


doc= 29257


White, John Meadows (1799/1800-1863), lawyer, was born at Halesworth, Suffolk, the younger son of Robert Gostling White (died 1828), a solicitor, and his second wife, Elizabeth Meadows (died 1831); Robert Meadows White, Anglo-Saxonist, was his elder brother. On 17 September 1825 he married, at Halesworth, Anne, daughter of Robert Crabtree, an attorney there; they had many children. White was a partner of his father in Halesworth; he then moved to London, becoming partner of T. Barett in Great St Helen's Street. He was later senior partner of Borrett, White, and Borrett, in Lincoln's Inn. 
White established a considerable reputation and practice as a parliamentary solicitor, specializing in poor-law, tithe, and copyhold business, on which subjects he published pamphlets, notably those of 1829, 1834, and 1835 on poor-law reform, and of 1841 on copyhold enfranchisement. From 1842 until his death he (acting for his firm) was solicitor to the ecclesiastical commission, in which office he was succeeded by his son, Robert Holmes White. He practised in London from 1835 until 1851 in Lincoln's Inn, and from 1851 in Whitehall Place. White died at Weymouth in Dorset on 19 March 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 29258


White, John Tahourdin (1809-1893), classical scholar, born in Selborne, Hampshire, was the second son of John White. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 28 January 1830, was elected an exhibitioner in the same year, and graduated BA in 1834; he proceeded MA in 1839, and BD and DD in 1866. He was ordained deacon in 1834 as curate at Swinnerton in Staffordshire, and was appointed reader at St Stephen Walbrook, London, in 1836. He was an assistant master at Christ's Hospital from 1836 to 1869. He became curate at St Ann Blackfriars in 1837, was ordained priest in 1839, and married on 21 April 1840 Anna Grives, youngest daughter of the Revd William Harrison DD. In 1841 he was appointed curate at St Martin Ludgate, where he served until November 1868, when he was instituted rector by the bishop of London. He resigned the living in November 1890 and died at 25 Cambridge Road, Brighton, on 17 December 1893. His wife survived him. 
White was an able classical scholar, and published many books for use in schools. He was best-known perhaps for his 'Grammar School Texts', a series of editions of Latin and Greek authors. In conjunction with Joseph Esmond Riddle he brought out in 1862 'A Latin-English Dictionary' (7th edn, 1880), founded on Ethan Allen Andrews's translation of Wilhelm Freund's 'Worterbuch der lateinischen Sprache'. Freund's 'Worterbuch' was published at Leipzig between 1834 and 1845, and Andrews's translation at New York in 1852. White and Riddle's dictionary, of which there were various abridgements and adaptations, was largely superseded by that of Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short in 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 29259


White, Joseph (bap. 1746, d. 1814), orientalist and theologian, was born at Ruscombe, Gloucestershire, and baptized at Stroud on 19 February 1746, the eldest son of Thomas White (1724-1804), a journeyman broadloom weaver, and Elizabeth Harmer (1723-1772). He received his earliest education from his father and in one of the Gloucestershire charity schools. He started his working life in his father's employment; his talents and attainments, however, attracted the notice of Joseph Ellis, a wealthy neighbour, who, together with the Stroud physician Dr Samuel Jones, paid for him to pursue his studies at Ruscombe, and afterwards at a school in Gloucester. Their generosity and the liberality of John Moore, a future archbishop of Canterbury, enabled White to enter Wadham College, Oxford, as a commoner on 6 June 1765. In September of that year he was made a scholar of his college and from 1766 to 1773 he held the Hody exhibition for Hebrew. He graduated BA (1769), MA (1773), BD (1779), and DD (1787), and from 1773 he was a fellow of Wadham. At Moore's request he devoted himself to the study of Syriac, Arabic, and Persian, and in 1774 he was elected unanimously to the Laudian chair of Arabic. His command of these languages was clearly demonstrated in his edition of the Syriac Philoxenian version of the gospels, published as 'Sacrorum evangeliorum versio Syriaca Philoxeniana' (2 vols., 1778). This scholarly and accurate work was based on four manuscripts acquired from Mesopotamia by Glocester Ridley, fellow of New College. 
On 17 November 1779 White preached before the university an elegant sermon afterwards published as 'A Revisal of the English Translation of the Old Testament Recommended', and about the same time he was appointed one of the preachers at the Whitehall chapel. From 1780 to 1783 he was occupied in preparing an edition of the Persian text of the 'Institutes of Timur', which was published at the expense of the East India Company in 1783 as 'Institutes Political and Military... by the Great Timour'. The text was accompanied by a translation into English by Major William Davy, then Persian secretary to the governor-general of Bengal. 
In 1783 White was chosen to preach the Bampton lectures the following year and he took as his subject a comparison of Islam and Christianity. He called upon the assistance of Samuel Badcock and Samuel Parr but failed to acknowledge his obligation when the lectures were published in 1784. The lectures, which contained a courteous answer to Gibbon as well as a reply to Hume, met with general approbation in academic and literary circles and established White's reputation as 'one of the ablest vindicators of the Christian doctrines modern times has witnessed' ('GM', 84/1, 627). Largely as a result of this success White was appointed rector of Melton in Suffolk in 1787, whereupon he resigned his fellowship. In 1788 he was presented to a prebend in Gloucester Cathedral, an appointment 'which at once placed him in easy and independent circumstances' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 4.861). It was not until after Badcock's death in 1788 that the assistance that White had received in the writing of the sermons came to light. Eventually, in 1790, he was obliged to publish a statement of his literary debt to Badcock and Parr; his scholarly reputation was somewhat tarnished but it was generally accepted that White had been responsible for the greater part of the work. 
On 31 October 1791 at Prestbury, near Cheltenham, White married Mary (died 1811), daughter of a prosperous grocer, John Turner of Gloucester, and sister of Samuel Turner (1759-1802). He published little over the few years until 1800, when his edition of 'Abd al-Latif's manuscript description of Egypt at the close of the twelfth century appeared under the title 'Abdollatiphi historiae Aegypti compendium'. He had printed the text sixteen years previously but, not being satisfied with it, had presented the copies to Paulus of Jena, who issued the work in Germany. White's edition embodied a translation begun by the younger Edward Pococke but completed by White himself. He planned to follow this with a comprehensive history of Egypt but this proved unsuccessful and his 'Observations on Certain Antiquities of Egypt' (1804) soon became out of date once the modern study of Egyptology began. 
The rest of White's literary work was concentrated on the textual study of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments and earned him in 1804 the regius professorship of Hebrew at Oxford, carrying with it a canonry of Christ Church. Besides various pamphlets, in which he advocated a retranslation of the 'Bible', and proposed a new edition of the 'Septuagint', to be based on the Hexplar-Syriac manuscript then recently discovered in Milan, he published in 1800 a 'Diatessaron, or, Harmony of the Gospels'. In his edition of the 'New Testament' in Greek (1808; often reprinted) he endeavoured to simplify and popularize Griesbach's 'Critical Studies', and his last work, 'Criseos Griesbachianiae in Novum Testamentum synopsis' (1811), contains a summary of the more important results. 
White was an accomplished and versatile scholar who ranks alongside Humphrey Hody, Robert Lowth, and Benjamin Kennicott as one of 'the major Hebraists of the century' (Patterson, 539). In his private life 'he united a degree of roughness with great simplicity of manners' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 4.865). He never recovered from the death of his wife on 25 August 1811 and died, as a result of a paralytic stroke, at his residence in Christ Church on 23 May 1814. He was buried in Christ Church, where there is a monument to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 29260


White, Joseph Blanco (1775-1841), author, was born on 11 July 1775 in the calle Jamerdana, Seville, the eldest of the four children of Guillermo Blanco y Morrogh (1745-1815), a merchant, and his wife, Maria Gertrudis Crespo y Neve (died 1819). He had two sisters and a brother. 
His paternal grandfather, William White, emigrated from Waterford to Andalusia at the beginning of the eighteenth century and established an import-export business in Seville. His father, also William White, adopted the Spanish form of his name, Guillermo Blanco, and married into the lesser nobility: Maria's uncle, Felipe de la Neve, was governor of California and founder (in 1781) of Los Angeles. The family firm went bankrupt in 1769 and though reconstituted was much reduced in scale. 
Blanco grew up isolated from other children, 'with deeply inculcated ideas of gentility'. He inherited his mother's ardent and mercurial temperament and 'a sensibility beyond description'. His father, a reserved and selfless man dedicated to works of practical charity, set his son to work in the office alongside the Irish clerks, but allowed him private lessons in Latin and music. The music master lent him 'Don Quixote', which he 'devoured' in secret, and later in his aunt's library he discovered the works of the enlightened Benedictine Benito Feijoo, which he regarded as having first awakened his critical faculties. Youthful piety, the desire to please his mother, and an eagerness to exchange the drudgery of the counting-house for the pleasures of literary study prompted him to declare his vocation for the priesthood; after some opposition by his Irish relatives he was sent in 1789 to the Dominican college of Santo Tomas. Henceforth he was to be a Spanish clerical gentleman. 
In 1790 Blanco entered the University of Seville, but he learned less from the scholastic course there than from two older students, Manuel Maria del Marmol and Manuel Maria de Arjona, who supervised his philosophical and literary formation. In 1794 he joined a private literary academy founded by his close friends Alberto Lista and Felix-Jose Reinoso for self-education and mutual encouragement in poetry and rhetoric. Under the patronage of the enlightened lawyer J. P. Forner they cultivated an idealistic Christian humanism which was at odds with the anti-intellectual tone of clerical society. The Spanish Jansenist movement, to which they were drawn and which advocated the reform and purification of the church, put down few roots in Seville. 
Although a visit to the more worldly milieu of Cadiz and the first symptoms of 'an amorous temperament' prompted thoughts of escape, Blanco proceeded to ordination as subdeacon in 1796 and priest in 1798. In 1801 he won in open competition the prestigious post of 'capellan magistral' in the Royal Chapel of St Ferdinand. In the following year he underwent a profound crisis of faith brought on not only by intellectual doubts and tensions but also by emotional revulsion from a hierocracy that he now regarded as the enemy of self-fulfilment and social progress. One of his sisters died in her convent that year, and the other, under the influence of her confessor, now entered a penitential order, 'misled from the path of practical usefulness into a wilderness of visionary perfection' (quoted in Murphy, 26). His inner conflict is evident in a sermon preached in the Royal Chapel in 1802, in which the conventional warnings against intellectual pride were less convincing than the objections which, as devil's advocate, he voiced against a spirituality of self-annihilation. 
After three more years in Seville, outwardly conforming to the church while inwardly rejecting it, Blanco obtained leave in 1805 to reside at Madrid. There he abandoned the practice of the priesthood and sought escape in anonymity, in 'the growing persuasion that the world was not under the direction of an intelligent moral agent' ('Examination of Blanco by White', 35). During this period he formed a liaison with Magdalena Ezquaya, who, after his departure from Madrid, bore him a son. On obtaining the sinecure of catechist to the recently established Pestalozzian school, he came under the patronage of its protector Manuel Godoy, the 'Prince of the Peace', whom he eulogized in a celebratory ode (1808). After witnessing the riots that led to Godoy's fall, the entry into the city of Murat's troops, and the rising of 2 May 1808, he escaped to Seville in June to join the patriotic resistance. He was there appointed co-editor of the 'Semanario Patriotico', the semi-official organ of the newly constituted central junta. He took an independent and radical line, urging that resistance to the French should be accompanied by internal reform, and when the junta pressed him to moderate his criticisms he resigned. As the French advanced on Seville in January 1810 he joined the loyal exodus to Cadiz, but there seized the opportunity to extricate himself from his personal impasse by taking ship for England. 
In London, White enjoyed the patronage of Lord Holland, whom he had already met in Seville, and the friendship of the family of Sir John Moore, whose military reputation he had defended (see Thom, 177-8). Within four months he set up a Spanish-language political journal, 'El Espanol', which the Foreign Office encouraged at a discreet distance. In the first number of May 1810 he shocked his friends in Cadiz by attacking the now defunct central junta and calling for revolutionary reform. Under the influence of Lord Holland he subsequently moderated his tone, but his endorsement of the revolution in Caracas later that year, and of the right of the Spanish-American dominions to limited self-rule, provoked the regency government at Cadiz to proscribe his journal and to condemn him as a traitor. He continued to edit and write 'El Espanol' single-handed for four years, arguing for the transformation of the Spanish empire into a free commonwealth of self-governing, though not fully independent, nations united by allegiance to the crown. His proposals for constitutional reform included the establishment of a bicameral Cortes on the British parliamentary model. When the constitution of Cadiz was published in 1812, his sarcastic strictures on its doctrinaire utopianism further alienated him from his former colleagues. After the return of Ferdinand VII to Madrid in May 1814 he concluded the journal in a mood of despair at the polarization of Spain between the forces of reaction and revolution. Eloquent, acute, and prophetic, 'El Espanol' exercised a seminal influence in Spanish America. Its articles were reprinted in Mexico, Lima, Caracas, and Buenos Aires, thereby contributing to the development of a common purpose, and it moved Bolivar's political thought in a Burkean direction. 
In 1812 the Foreign Office had granted White an annual pension of $250, paid (to his chagrin) out of the secret service fund, as a remuneration for his reports on South American affairs. In 1814 the African Association commissioned him to write a pamphlet in Spanish on the slave trade, containing new evidence on the traffic organized from Havana, and this was distributed in Spain in an attempt to move its government towards abolition. His pension helped him to support his natural son Ferdinand, whom he had brought to London in 1813, though it was some time before he publicly acknowledged his paternity. Under the influence of evangelical friends, notably the auctioneer James Christie the younger, he joined the Anglican communion in 1812. Two years later his orders were revalidated by the bishop of London and he took lodgings at Oxford in order to prepare himself for his new role as a clergyman by the study of Anglican theology and Greek. In 1815 he returned to Holland House as tutor to Henry Fox, but the strain of reconciling his evangelical piety with the sceptical ethos which prevailed there, and the agitation induced by Lady Holland's caprices, prompted his resignation in 1817. His theological studies over the next four years brought him to the verge of a breakdown as he struggled with his renascent heterodoxy. He found the unitarian case unanswerable, but could not face the social ostracism which a break with orthodoxy would entail. Seeking escape from his theological impasse in renewed literary activity, in 1821 he accepted Thomas Campbell's invitation to write a series of 'Letters from Spain' for the 'New Monthly Magazine', adopting the punning pseudonym Don Leucadio Doblado ('double white'). With their delicacy of style and colourful subject matter, the works, published in book form in 1822, caught the tide of literary taste and made White's reputation as an English man of letters. He himself attached most importance to the third letter, 'A few facts connected with the formation of the intellectual and moral character of a Spanish clergyman', a bitter denunciation of Catholic priestcraft, which lent itself to exploitation by the opponents of emancipation. The same anti-clerical vehemence is evident in the historical novel 'Vargas: a Tale of Spain', showing the influence of Scott, which he published, and then suppressed, in 1822. 
In 1823 White returned to the Spanish literary arena as editor of 'Variedades', a magazine published in London by Rudolph Ackermann for the Spanish-American market. Besides earning him an annual salary of $300, which helped to pay for his son's education, the work satisfied his sense of mission. Believing that political stability was contingent on the development of enlightened public opinion, he set out to improve the taste and educate the mind of a new Spain which would avoid the errors of the old. Along with translations of Scott and Shakespeare, and sketches of English life, he included extracts from old Spanish chronicles and articles of literary criticism in which he argued that the true golden age of Spanish literature preceded the imposition of a monolithic theocracy by the Catholic kings. It was his most successful attempt to free himself from the strait-jacket of rationalism and to develop a romantic aesthetic based on figurative, rather than literal, truth. The roles of English clergyman and Spanish journalist finally proved to be incompatible and he resigned the editorship in 1825 after a valedictory warning to the Spanish Americans on the dangers of religious intolerance. In the same year he made his debut as an English poet, his sonnet 'Night and Death' being hailed by Coleridge, the dedicatee, as 'the finest and most grandly conceived' in the language (Thom, 1.439). 
In 1825 White was persuaded by Southey that it was his 'duty' to warn the British public of the dangers of granting toleration to Roman Catholics, and to this end he wrote 'Practical and Internal Evidence Against Catholicism' (1825), a portrait of the writer as victim, in which he exposed his own life as a cautionary lesson. At the suggestion of J. D. Coleridge he also wrote a simplified version, 'The Poor Man's Preservative Against Popery' (1825), in the form of 'conversations' with a representative of the working class. These productions dismayed Holland House, while providing the anti-emancipationists with ammunition. In April 1826 he was rewarded when, on the initiative of Edward Copleston, the University of Oxford conferred on him the degree of MA by diploma. He took up residence at Oxford in October 1826 as an honorary member of Oriel College. 
Although Oxford seemed to offer White at last the status and repose he desired, his years there (1826-32) were uneasy and creatively fallow. The university failed to give him useful employment and he came to resent his marginalization. Intellectually he found himself at home in the company of Richard Whately and his fellow Noetics Baden Powell, Edward Hawkins, R. D. Hampden, and Nassau Senior. His friendship with the young J. H. Newman, with whom he shared 'grand and beautiful visions', was of a different order: a meeting of hearts rather than minds. They played the violin together and shared a passion for Beethoven. Under the influence of Whately and Senior, he now modified his political stance, and at the Oxford University by-election in 1829 came out in support of Peel and Catholic emancipation on the grounds of expediency, thereby alienating his former patrons. He was taken aback by Newman's militancy on behalf of the anti-Peel party, and by the discovery that Oxford was not immune from 'odium theologicum'. Increasingly he spent more time in London, first as editor of the short-lived 'London Review' (in which he published Newman's first literary article, on poetry) and then as tutor to Senior's son. Soon after Whately's appointment as archbishop of Dublin in 1832 he accepted an invitation to join him there. 
In Ireland, White led a retired life, tutoring Whately's son and translating Clairaut's 'Elements de geometrie' for use in the Irish national schools, 'in the hope of contributing to the great object of the education of the poor'. In 'The Law of Anti-Religious Libel Reconsidered' (1834) he gave incisive expression to his belief that the law had no place in the defence of religious truth. At Whately's request he re-entered the field of controversy as the anonymous author of 'Second Travels of an Irish Gentleman' (1833), an apologia for protestantism in novelistic form, written as a riposte to Thomas Moore. Privately he was now in fact moving away from protestant orthodoxy towards a non-denominational Christianity. When Whately, fearful of being compromised, sounded a warning note, White left his household rather than sacrifice his 'mental independence'. In January 1835 he moved to Liverpool, where his friend Clemente de Zulueta offered him hospitality. 
White's new spiritual home was within the Unitarian community presided over by James Martineau, though he was personally closer to J. H. Thom, minister at the Renshaw Street Chapel, whom he chose to replace Whately as his literary executor. In 1835 he published what was intended to be his last theological testament, 'Observations on Heresy and Orthodoxy', in which he finally cut loose from church and dogma. It provoked a rift with Newman, whose campaign against Hampden he saw 'in a lurid and hellish light' as a species of inquisition. In a review for the 'British Critic' (January 1836, 204-25), R. H. Froude adopted the deliberate tactic of treating the work as the logical outcome of liberal protestantism in order to cast doubt, by association, on the orthodoxy of Whately and Hampden. 
Whately continued to support White with an annual subsidy of $100, and in 1838 helped to secure for him a queen's bounty of $300. In September 1839 White was visited by his cousin Luke Beck, now in charge of the family firm in Seville, who provided the $1100 needed for the purchase of a captaincy in the 40th regiment of foot for Ferdinand White, then serving in India. The sympathetic company of Beck's young daughter, Maria Ana, moved him to write again in Spanish. Discarding the English persona which he had so long assumed, he wrote some of his finest verse with a new-found freedom and simplicity of style, as well as an unfinished novel, 'Luisa de Bustamante', in which he satirized the pretensions of the English middle class. Scorning the 'via media', he had come to regard moderation as a symptom of the English 'fear of going too far'. Within the Unitarian community he lent his support to the establishment of the Liverpool Domestic Mission, whose programme of non-proselytizing philanthropy commended itself to his idealism. His health, always bad, rapidly deteriorated. In February 1841 he was moved from his cottage in Toxteth Park to William Rathbone's house at Greenbank, where he died on 20 May. His disciple Thom recorded his theological testimony: 'God to me is Jesus, and Jesus God -- of course, not in the sense of divines.' He was interred in the cemetery adjoining the Renshaw Street Chapel. 
White wrote many versions of his autobiography, but the only one that was confessional rather than apologetic, the 'Examination of Blanco by White' (1818), remained unfinished and unpublished. In 1845 Thom published a three-volume 'Life' -- an edition of two different autobiographical memoirs together with extracts from correspondence and journals, heavily weighted towards the subject's later life and theology. It had a catalytic effect, helping to impel some -- notably Newman and W. G. Ward -- over the Roman brink, while moving others, such as A. H. Clough, in a unitarian direction. But the impact was short-lived, and only the sonnet 'Night and Death' survived the eclipse of his fame in England. In Spain the ultra-orthodox polymath Marcelino Menendez y Pelayo included White in his gallery of 'heterodoxos' ('Historia de los heterodoxos espanoles', 2, 1881), praising the style of 'Letters from Spain' (which was not translated into Spanish until 1972) but branding the author as an archetypal apostate and 'deracine'. In the 1970s White was rehabilitated by the emigre scholar Vicente Llorens and the novelist Juan Goytisolo as a precursor of modern Spanish dissidence. 
White spoke English with only the faintest trace of a foreign accent and, according to Dean Milman, was 'peculiarly prepossessing' in conversation. His many close friendships survived his changes of religious allegiance. F. W. Newman described his head as being: 'of a very remarkable shape, like that which is ascribed to South American Indians, very narrow on the level of the eyes, but very lofty above them, and in appearance sloping up, almost like the gable of a house; but the aspect of his eyes was far more Spanish than Irish. (Quoted in Murphy, 231)' Leigh Hunt noted the 'high sensitiveness and intelligence of his expression' ('Autobiography', 1949, 228) and his gentleness of manner, interrupted by sudden outbursts of vehemence. Although White attached most importance to his religious witness, his poetry, criticism, and journalism have outlasted his theology. His most enduring legacy has proved to be his life, read as a paradigm of the struggle to reconcile faith with doubt and reason with imagination. 


@@@@@


doc= 29261


Matthew White (d. 1641). Matthew White was a church musician. Of his parentage, education, and musical training nothing is known. He was admitted a vicar-choral of Wells Cathedral on 30 January 1611 and, already an ordained priest, held in plurality the office of gospeller in the Chapel Royal of James I, singing bass, from 2 November 1613 to 24 September 1614. Thereafter he occurs again as vicar-choral of Wells, and on 18 July 1629, in rare recognition of his superior accomplishments as a composer, he was admitted to the degrees of Mus.Bac. and Mus.Doc. of Oxford University. By 22 September 1635 he had become a vicar-choral of Hereford Cathedral, and by the time of his death held also the office of succentor. By 1640 he had been collated in plurality to the vicarage of the parish of St Nicholas, Hereford. He died before 16 October 1641, when a successor was appointed to the succentorship of Hereford Cathedral, vacant by his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29262


White, Sir Michael (1791-1868), army officer, born at St Michael's Mount, Cornwall, was the third son of Robert White, major in the 27th dragoons, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir John St Aubyn, fourth baronet (1726-1772), of St Michael's Mount. He was educated at Westminster School, and obtained a cornetcy in the 24th light dragoons on 15 August 1804. On 14 May 1805 he was promoted lieutenant. He went to India, and was engaged in active service in 1809 in the campaigns along the Sutlej. On 7 November 1815 he attained his captaincy, and in 1816 he married Mary, daughter of Major Mylne of the 24th light dragoons. In 1817 he was present at the capture of Hathras. He served through the Maratha campaign of 1817-18, and at the siege and capture of Bharatpur in 1825-6. He was promoted major on 10 January 1837, and lieutenant-colonel on 13 December 1839. He commanded the cavalry throughout the Afghan campaign of 1842, accompanying the army under General Sir George Pollock which forced the Khyber Pass, stormed the heights at Jagdalak, defeated the enemy at Tezin, captured the fortified position at Haft Kotal in the pass, and occupied Kabul. After the campaign, on 29 December 1842, he was nominated CB. He served in the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1845-6, under Sir Hugh Gough. He commanded the cavalry at the battle of Mudki on 18 December 1845, when his horse was wounded. At the battle of Ferozeshahr on 21 December, where he commanded a brigade, he was wounded and had his horse killed under him, and at Sobraon he behaved with such bravery that he was nominated aide-de-camp to the queen. He became colonel on 1 April 1846. 
In 1848 the Second Anglo-Sikh War began, and White commanded the 1st brigade of cavalry throughout the campaign. At Ramnagar on 22 November he wisely avoided the Sikh trap which caused the deaths of General Charles Cureton and Lieutenant-Colonel William Havelock. On 13 January 1849 he was present at the expensive victory of Chilianwala, where he protected the left of the infantry, and on 21 February 1849 he took part in the victory at Gujrat. On 20 June 1854 he received the rank of major-general, and on 26 August 1858 was appointed colonel of the 7th light dragoons (hussars). On 31 August 1860 he attained the rank of lieutenant-general, and on 10 November 1862 was nominated KCB. He died at 15 Pembridge Crescent, Bayswater, London, on 27 January 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 29263


White, Sir Nicholas (c.1532-1592), lawyer and administrator, was descended from a notable family of the English pale. His father, James White, steward of James Butler, earl of Ormond, had been poisoned while in London with the earl in 1546. Nicholas owed his early advancement to Ormond's influence: in recognition of James's loyalty, the earl left $10 for the boy's education at the inns of court. A cadet branch of the family was led by another James White, recorder of Waterford, who joined Walter Cowley in a survey of religious houses in 1541 and was granted monastic property in Kilkenny. Nicholas White married twice. Nothing is known of his first wife except her surname, Sherlocke. His second wife was the daughter of Arthur Brereton of Killyon, Meath. 
In 1552 White entered Lincoln's Inn, and he was called to the bar in 1558. His contemporaries at the inn were James Dowdall, later chief justice of queen's bench, the rivals Nicholas Nugent and Robert Dillon, who became in succession chief justices of common pleas, and his younger ally and protege from Waterford, Nicholas Walsh, the last native-born chief justice of common pleas. Nicholas White returned to Ireland and was elected knight of the shire for co. Kilkenny in 1559. On 17 August 1559 he was sent as commissioner by the Irish privy council, along with Francis Cosby, Nicholas Heron, Luke Neterville, and others, to hear a controversy between the lord of Upper Ossory and Edward Butler in Kilkenny. He was justice of the peace for co. Kilkenny in 1563 and in the following year was named recorder of Waterford. The original instructions in 1566 for the inchoate lord president and council in Munster named White as one of the resident members of the first council. Along with other leading lawyers, he was named in the lease of Dominican property in 1567 which became King's Inns in Dublin. On 13 June 1569 he became constable of Wexford Castle, a position which had formerly been occupied by a kinsman of his second wife. White established his estate at White's Hall, near Knocktopher, co. Kilkenny. 
White earned the favour of successive chief governors, and in 1568 he was given the right to travel to England, where he met the queen and her principal secretary, Sir William Cecil, later Lord Burghley. From that time forward he became a key confidant of Cecil and an important commentator on Irish affairs. He had a notable interview with Mary, queen of Scots, at Tutbury in February 1569, details of which he sent to Cecil on his return to Ireland. On 4 November 1568 Elizabeth appointed him seneschal of Wexford and constable of Leighlin and Ferns, replacing the disgraced adventurer Thomas Stukeley. He retained the office until 1572, concluding his tenure with the pursuit of the rebels who murdered his son-in-law Robert Browne. On 18 January 1569 White was granted reversion of the lands of Dunbrody Abbey, co. Wexford, and other leases, to which he added a grant of St Catherine's Priory at Leixlip, which became his Dublin residence, on 28 May. Although he suffered losses to his property during the wars of the Butlers in 1569, he strengthened his estate by acquisitions in Wexford and he successfully controlled the restless Kavanaghs in that county. 
In September 1571 White once again returned to England, with licence to be absent for six months. On the recommendation of the lord deputy, Fitzwilliam, White succeeded Sir Henry Draycott as master of the rolls in Ireland on 14 July 1572, and the lord chancellor was directed to accept a surrender of his lands in exchange for a regrant of them in fee simple. Despite these marks of royal favour, White was viewed by fellow privy councillors in Ireland as suspiciously partisan. Unlike his pliant contemporary Sir Lucas Dillon, White took independent positions in opposition to the dominant English-born faction on the council. The ambitious lord keeper and archbishop of Dublin, Adam Loftus, demanded custody of the great seal upon the death of Lord Chancellor Robert Weston in 1572 and vied with White on several occasions. When Lord Deputy Fitzwilliam chided Sir Edward Fitton for his arbitrary conduct as councillor in 1573, White was Fitton's lone defender. When the dispute over cess arose in 1577 between Lord Deputy Sidney and the gentlemen of the pale, White was almost alone among Irish councillors who took the part of the Old English elite. He wrote to Burghley on 13 June 1577 that he had no intention to impugn the queen's prerogative, and later warned the queen's principal adviser that Sidney had forfeited the support of the pale over their legitimate constitutional claims. Sidney distrusted him as a client of Ormond, and the new lord chancellor, Sir William Gerard, accused White of excessive partiality as a judge in 1578, saying he was 'greatly allyed in the pale by his mariages... a depe dissembler, greatly corrupt and wilfully affected with oute regard of troth or equitye' (LPL, Carew MS 628, fol. 311'v'). 
At the height of the cess controversy in April 1578 White was charged by the attorney-general, Thomas Snagge, with misfeasance in office, and suspended as master of the rolls for failing to certify the writs, patents, and licences from the court of chancery to the exchequer. He forfeited the fees of his office, and the locks to his desk were broken open so the rolls could be inventoried in May 1578. The danger passed when Lord Deputy Sidney was himself recalled, Gerard was forced to explain his manoeuvring in relation to the pale gentry, and White was allowed to plead his case in England before Burghley himself in September, after which he was restored to office. 
The crisis of the cess was unresolved when the perilous rebellion in Munster commenced in 1579 and White worked closely with the successive lords justices Sir William Drury and Sir William Pelham as a veteran official with long experience in the province. None the less, he was now under suspicion as one who consistently favoured the interests of the Old English, and Sir Henry Wallop, the new vice-treasurer in Ireland, blamed him for supporting the cause of the disgraced chief justice Nicholas Nugent, who was precipitately tried and hanged for treason in 1582. Wallop protested against a 'concordatum' sent to Ireland awarding White 1000 marks for his work in chancery after his 1580 trip to England, and he blamed White for failing to apprehend the rebels in Wicklow during the rebellion. 
In February 1581 White demonstrated his independence in council, refusing to sign a letter to the queen regarding Malby's actions in the Munster rebellion since he was away in England during the deliberations of the meeting. Again, on 28 August 1582 White was accused of withholding his signature to conciliar deliberations on the actions of the deputy during the pale rebellion. However, he continued to demonstrate his valuable insights to Burghley in regular correspondence throughout the period, including letters of December 1581 on the miseries of war, the need for temperate government, and his fear that the wild Irish were glad to see the weakness of English blood in Ireland. In a missive of 13 September 1582 White complained of the unfriendly dealings of Lucas Dillon, his erstwhile companion and fellow Irish-born councillor, stating they had been for a long time of 'contrary minds' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/95/95). In spite of his sympathies for the native Irish he was apparently the author of an extraordinary trial by combat in September 1583 in which Teig MacGilpatrick O'Connor and Conor MacCormac O'Connor lost their lives. His usefulness as an Irish speaker and a nominal protestant made White an essential privy councillor for two decades. 
On the arrival of the ambitious new lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, White was granted a knighthood in Christ Church, Dublin, on 21 June 1584. White worked with Perrot to establish the effectiveness of common law rule, though forty-eight of the 181 prisoners in the Leinster circuit were executed in autumn of 1584 in an example of rough justice. In December he went into Connaught to investigate charges of corruption against the former lord president, Sir Nicholas Malby, and on 15 July 1585 he was named a commissioner for the cess in that province. White and Dillon attended the lord deputy in September 1586 to Connaught, a sojourn which the combative new lord president, Sir Richard Bingham, much resented. On 29 November 1586 White wrote to Burghley describing the continual bickering in council between the chief governor and the lord chancellor, Loftus, adding that the newly revived court of castle chamber was busy with accusations against the tyrannical government of Bingham and his lieutenants in Connaught. Chief Justice Robert Gardener complained to Burghley in December that Perrot governed with the aid of a minority of Irish councillors such as White, trampling the rights of council and ignoring the need for consensus, hearing many private causes without recourse to law. In May 1587 the temperamental chief governor quarrelled with the aged marshal Sir Nicholas Bagnal at the council board and struck him. White, who reported the incident thoroughly to Burghley, had recommended a full council hearing for Bagnal's agent from which the beleaguered chief governor would be excluded. By the end of Perrot's regime White was viewed as a minion of the lord deputy who was primarily responsible for a policy of favouritism toward Irish-born servitors. The return of his former adversary Sir William Fitzwilliam as lord deputy in 1588 allowed White's enemies on the council to triumph over him. 
In 1589 White was included on a commission for pacification of the Burkes, who had rebelled against the arbitrary conduct of the lord president, Bingham. The latter suspected the intentions of the commission, but White reported to Burghley that Bingham was not wholly to blame. Within a few months the career of Sir John Perrot was placed in jeopardy by the allegations of treason levied against him in England by an Irish priest, Denis O'Roughan. White was implicated in these charges and Lord Deputy Fitzwilliam moved swiftly to place him under arrest in June 1590, sending him to England two months later despite his illness. He was examined on the charges and committed to the Marshalsea prison prior to his testimony before the court of Star Chamber, at a time when his health was in grave danger. Placed in the Tower of London in March 1591, White appealed to the privy council for a servant to attend him, owing to his age and infirmity. White's inquisition before the high court in 1592 affirmed that Perrot had complained of the queen's reluctance to support his government. His earlier support of the deputy compromised his position and he died in the Tower in the same year as his patron. 
Both Nicholas White and Lucas Dillon died in 1592, and both Irish-born councillors were replaced by English officials, Sir Anthony St Leger becoming master of the rolls. White's views on government were systematically and forcefully pressed on the queen's advisers and may be summed up in his letter of 1574 to Burghley: 'I wish the country were more governed by law than by discretion' (Brady, 280). In a controversy with John Long, archbishop of Armagh, White counselled tolerance in the matter of oaths and religion during the July 1586 session of parliament, noting the preference of the lord deputy for moderation toward the gentlemen of the pale. 
White and his second wife had two sons. Thomas, the elder, was educated at Cambridge University and died in November 1586, while the younger son, Andrew, succeeded to White's estates after completing his education at Cambridge. White also had two daughters, one of whom married Robert Browne of Mulcranan, co. Wexford, leading to White's strong efforts in 1572 to prosecute the rebels who had assassinated his son-in-law. Despite his role as councillor, the Irish privy council in 1573 refused to allow White's writ of appeal for the pardon of Fiagh McHugh O'Byrne and others accused of murdering Browne, declaring 'the graunting of that writ wold renue a blooddie rebellion which withe great travell we have appaysed' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 56, fol. 65'v'). His ongoing attentions to the Dunbrody property led to the intervention of the privy council in England in October 1587 when White was accused of dispossessing William Browne of the profits of the barony. White's other daughter married into the Old English family of Christopher D'Arcy (or Darcy) of Platten, near Duleek, Meath. 
White was closely associated with the career of Sir Nicholas Walsh of Waterford, who followed White to Lincoln's Inn and succeeded him as recorder of Waterford, later becoming chief justice of common pleas (1597). White also kept as wards the sons of leading Munster gentry such as the dispossessed Charles McCarty who sued before the English privy council in April 1590 to regain his property. On 12 February 1593 the privy council authorized White's son to bring his body back to Ireland for burial. After his death the privy council in England remanded a complaint by John Itchingham against the heirs of White (James and Andrew) regarding title to White's property of Dunbrody to common law proceedings in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 29264


Gwyn, Richard (c.1537-1584), martyr and Welsh-language poet, is said in two contemporary accounts of his martyrdom to have been born in Llanidloes, Montgomeryshire, with the surname Gwyn. Knowledge of his life is almost entirely derived from these two accounts -- the Holywell MS and 'Concertatio ecclesiae catholicae in Anglia' (2nd edn, 1588) -- and from the records of his imprisonment and trial. 
Richard Gwyn was aged twenty 'before he did frame his mind to like of good letters' (Holywell MS). He went to Oxford, briefly, and then to Cambridge, where, at St John's, he lived by the charity of the college, and chiefly of Dr Bullock, the master. At university he came to be known as White (the English for Gwyn). Dr Bullock refused to take the oath of supremacy in 1558 and went into exile. Gwyn returned to Wales, evidently about 1562, to Maelor, where he served as a schoolteacher for sixteen years, mainly in Overton and Wrexham. Referring to this period, the Holywell MS says that he was 'of the people generally loved for his diligence in teaching and other good partes known to be in him', and that 'he soe profited by his own private study of good literature, that it was wonder to them that knew him before to see in the man soe great ripeness from soe late a beginning', but 'in his latter time he gave his time wholly to the study of divinity'. He married 'a young girl' of Overton, called Catherine. At the time of his death three of their six children survived (one son, William, sought admission to Douai College in 1598). 
About 1578, persecuted for his recusancy, Gwyn was forced to go into hiding. In 1580 he was captured. The last four years of his life were spent as a prisoner, though in the summer of 1584 he was at times allowed extraordinary liberties by an indulgent gaoler who later was obliged to be his executioner. His court appearances and his trial are well documented in the records of great sessions in Wales and in the two accounts of his martyrdom as, in the latter, are his torture and the wit he displayed in court. At the autumn sessions at Wrexham in 1584 he was found guilty of high treason by a jury 'tales de circumstantibus', and there on 15 October he was hanged, drawn, and quartered. 
Richard Gwyn's poetry was the fruit of his religious conviction. A series of five 'carolau' (poems in a simple, popular metre, meant to be sung) is his best-known work. The 'carols' survive in a dozen manuscripts, and there is evidence that a copy of a printed text (dated 1600, no doubt the product of an illicit press) survived until about 1720, though no copy is now known. Much of the exhortation in the five carols, and their plain language and strength of metaphor sounding a new note in Welsh poetry, might be paralleled two decades later in the similar poems of Gwyn's puritan counterpart, Rhys Prichard; but in each of the carols Catholic doctrine also emerges, sometimes forcibly. The carols probably date from Gwyn's last years: the third, which echoes Robert Parsons's 'A Brief Discours', cannot be earlier than 1580, while the last two date from his time of imprisonment. Also attributed to Gwyn in one of the two manuscripts in which it survives is a 'cywydd' rejoicing in the murder of William the Silent in 1584; this attribution has been questioned. Richard Gwyn was beatified in 1929 and canonized in 1970, the 'protomartyr of Wales'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29265


White, Richard (1539-1611), antiquary and jurist, was born in Basingstoke in 1539, the son of Henry White, who died at the siege of Boulogne in 1544, and of his wife, Agnes, daughter of Richard Capelin of Southampton. In 1553 White entered Winchester College, and he proceeded to New College, Oxford, in 1555, where he was elected a perpetual fellow, a post declared void through his absence in 1564. He took the BA degree on 30 May 1559. A Roman Catholic, White left England in 1560 and moved to Louvain, where he delivered two orations, 'De circulo artium et philosophiae' and 'De eloquentia et Cicerone'. These were subsequently published in London in 1565 under the title 'Orationes duae', with an introduction by Christopher Jonson, headmaster of Winchester College, testifying that White delivered these two lectures to a large audience in the law school at Louvain. White matriculated at Louvain in September 1559. 
In 1563 White went to the University of Padua and delivered further orations; in August 1563 the 'Pro divitiis regum', and, at Pavia on 11 November 1566 an oration 'Pro doctoratu', containing many details of his education and teachers at both Winchester and Oxford, mentioning his Winchester headmaster, Christopher Jonson, his Oxford teacher Thomas Butler, and his teachers at Padua, who included the famous jurist Guido Panciroli. These four orations, with the addition of a fifth, 'De studiorum finibus', were printed as 'Orationes quinque' in Arras in 1596, edited by his son Thomas White. This edition was reprinted at Douai in 1604 with the addition of two further orations. In 1572 White was appointed regius professor of law at Douai, a post he retained for the next twenty years. He became a rector of Douai, and was appointed a count palatine of the Holy Roman empire. White was married twice, first to a lady whose surname was Bonvicta, whose fathers and brothers were senators of Douai. The name of his second wife is not recorded. His works contain references to several children, among them Richard, Thomas, Adrian, Peter, and Mary. 
White is remembered chiefly for his legal and antiquarian writings. An early work, 'Aelia Laelia Crispis antiquum epitaphium' (Padua, 1568; reprinted Dordrecht, 1618), discusses an inscription found in the territory of Bologna. A lengthy volume, 'Ad leges decemvirorum libri in duodecim tabulis notae, institutiones juris civilis in quattuor libris, primam partem digestorum in quattuor libris' (Arras, 1597), is dedicated to Philip II of Spain. The aim of the work is to discuss and comment on the texts that were studied in the first year of a seven-year law degree. The 'Brevis explicatio privilegiorum iuris, et consuetudinis, circa venerabile sacramentum eucharistiae' (Douai, 1609) was written in 1583, and discusses a canon of Pope Clement V concerning relics and the veneration of saints. The books of the 'Historia Britanniae', which appeared in sections in eleven books at Arras and Douai between 1597 and 1607, books one to nine being reprinted together at Douai in 1602, represent White's masterwork. This is a learned, though of course misguided, attempt to justify the truth of the 'British history' as set out originally by Geoffrey of Monmouth, tracing the story of Britain from the time of Brutus the Trojan. There are certain details of the story with which White disagrees, but essentially he was at one with such scholars as John Leland, Sir John Price, and Humphrey Llwyd in accepting the essential validity of the 'British history'. John Selden, too, quotes him as an authority in his notes to Michael Drayton's 'Poly-Olbion' (London, 1612). White assembles an impressive collection of written, antiquarian, and philological arguments to justify his beliefs, and cites numerous highly obscure sources. He was encouraged in his work by Cardinal Baronius, to whom book two of the 'Historia' is independently dedicated. The 'Brevis explicatio martyrii Sanctae Ursulae et undecim millium virginum Britannarum' (Douai, 1610) is reprinted from book six of his 'Historia Britanniae', and discusses the famous legend of St Ursula and the 11,000 virgins. White's scholarly works are a notable instance of the use, unusual at this time, of detailed endnotes to support the arguments in the main body of his text. He died in 1611 and was buried in the church of St Jacques at Douai. 


@@@@@


doc= 29266


White, Richard (1604-1687), Roman Catholic priest, was born in the diocese of Winchester of poor Roman Catholic parents; his father's name was Mark White. He entered the English College at Douai on 13 August 1621 and adopted the alias of Johnson, which he retained for the rest of his life. He graduated in philosophy in 1625 and taught grammar in the college in the following academic year, while commencing his study of theology. On 13 September 1629 he was the main speaker in a public disputation held in honour of Viscount Montagu's visit. He was ordained priest on 23 February 1630 and exactly one month later he was sent from Douai to assist Stephen Barnes as confessor of the English Augustinian canonesses of St Monica's at Louvain, where he arrived on 26 May. He acted in that capacity for twenty years, and for thirty-six years after Barnes's death he was principal confessor to the community. In 1633 he was absent in England on business for a short time, and in 1635, when the town was besieged by the French and Dutch armies, he led most of the community into refuge, first at Ghent and then at Bruges, returning after the siege was lifted. For the last decade of his life he was assisted by George Lynde. In his final few years he was disabled by palsy, and he died in the convent on 12 January 1687. He was buried there. 
Johnson left in manuscript over 100 catechetical discourses, 300 sermons, and numerous treatises, most of which were lost at the time of the French Revolution. One of them, a treatise on the sequence of Pentecost ('Veni sancte spiritus') which survives in several manuscript copies, was printed in 1878 and in a different edition in 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 29267


White, Robert (c.1530x32-1574), church musician and composer, was the son of Robert White (died in or after 1574). By 1572 Robert White the elder was styled gentleman and had inherited or acquired the estate of Swallowfield, near Mannings Heath, Sussex. Nevertheless, he and his family appear to have been established in the London parish of St Andrew, Holborn, in whose church stood an especially fine organ donated apparently by the composer's grandfather and preserved from mid-Tudor iconoclasm by his father. 
Of the younger Robert White's education and upbringing nothing is known, though a training as a chorister in some great London church appears probable. Between 29 September 1555 and Easter 1559 he was appointed a lay clerk of the choir of Trinity College, Cambridge. (The boy named White who was a chorister there during 1554-5 cannot be identified with the composer.) The function of this choir, founded in 1554 under the auspices of Mary I and intended eventually to consist of eighteen singing-men and twelve boys and their master (who was also organist), was to sing in chapel the full round of the Latin Catholic service -- daily high mass and Lady mass and the eight hours services of the office -- plus the commemorative obits of the founders. Because certain of his Latin compositions were to texts stipulated in the college statutes of 1554, it appears certain that White's employment there had begun during Mary's reign. 
In June 1559 White was promoted to the office of master of the choristers, and his accomplishments as a composer were recognized when on 13 December 1560 he was granted the degree of MusB by Cambridge University, conditional upon his composing a communion service to be sung in the university church on the day of conferment; this was duly accomplished. In support of his supplication White submitted his ten years of experience in the study of music; probably he was now approaching the age of thirty. 
However, the Trinity College choir was still incomplete, consisting of but seven men (supplemented by a handful of musically competent fellows and former choristers) and eight boys. Further, by the restoration of the 'Book of Common Prayer' in June 1559, whereby observance was reduced to just three services a day, and also by new statutes devolved on the college in March 1560, the practice of music in the chapel was greatly attenuated. Finally, the appointment in August 1561 of the austerely protestant Robert Beaumont as master of Trinity College effectively spelt the end of elevated music-making in its chapel. On 29 September 1562 White departed to succeed the prominent composer Christopher Tye (c.1505-1571x3) as organist and master of the choristers of Ely Cathedral. This was a relatively conservative and well-endowed institution with a choir of (at this time) sixteen men and eight boys. Moreover, White was married to Ellen, daughter of Tye and his wife, Katherine (died 1574), though whether the marriage took place before or after he entered employment at Ely is not known. Of White's career there nothing is known other than that he had left by 29 September 1566 for appointment (at least by Christmas 1566) to the corresponding office at Chester Cathedral. 
Though remote and poorly endowed, this cathedral maintained a choir of fourteen men and eight boys and their master, and in 1566 the chapter made a determined effort to enhance its provision for music, suppressing two choristerships to make available for the master of the choristers a much inflated annual stipend of $16 13's'. 4died There survive no details of White's exercise of his cathedral duties. However, its musicians were invited to contribute to the annual performance of the celebrated cycle of mystery plays mounted each Whitsuntide by the city guilds; and in 1567 and 1568 White was paid 4's'. by the smiths and cutlers, apparently for his supply of singers, though perhaps also for his personal musical participation, while for their annual feast on 11 November 1569 the cordwainers paid him 4died 'for our songs'. 
At Christmas 1569 White took up the prestigious office of organist and master of the choristers of Westminster Abbey, thus establishing himself as director of a prominent metropolitan choir of twenty-six men and ten boys, at an annual stipend of $17 13's'. 4died His indenture of appointment was agreed and sealed on 3 February 1570. By 1572 his father, evidently by now a widower, had come to live with the family in Almonry Yard; Robert senior made over apparently the totality of his property to his son in return for his keep. 
During November-December 1572 there was obtained for White's use in the abbey church the organ from St Andrew's, Holborn, originally donated to that church by his grandfather and probably by now disused in its parish location. In 1584 the parish churchwarden could only lament how the organs, that 'excellent instrument', now stood in Westminster Abbey, where 'they cannot be bought for any monye so highly they are estemed of for their goodness' (London, Guildhall Library, MS 4249, fol. 232'r'). Except for this episode, nothing is known of White's management and direction of the abbey's choir and music, though it was there that he spent the rest of his short life. 
White was the most conspicuous among the generation of composers immediately preceding William Byrd, who reached maturity contemporaneously with the liturgical reformation and thus had barely completed their apprenticeship as composers for the traditional rite before encountering the obligation to work in a church converted to the ethic and aesthetic of protestantism. To this constraint White's response was to serve in the employment of the reformed church, but to compose music of religious character primarily for the novelty of private performance within the domestic context of the traditionalist home. 
While much less varied in style, White's surviving music almost equals that of Thomas Tallis in quantity, and much of it falls little short in quality. Across a relatively brief creative life barely exceeding twenty years, the development of his compositional approach onward from the style of his earlier 'cantus firmus' works exemplified strongly the contemporary process of evolution towards the high renaissance ideal of fully integrated imitation. However, his early death denied him the opportunity to engage this in the fully mature manner achieved by Byrd. His possession of an elegant combination of suppleness and strictness in contrapuntal technique was his strongest point, compensating for a prevailing severity in his invention of imitative points and for a certain blandness in terms of rhythmic vitality and harmonic fluidity. Moreover, the aesthetic of his period did not yet aspire to that intimate marriage of word and music that would emerge only after his death. 
Most of White's surviving music consists of settings for unaccompanied voices in Latin. A few items are early pieces for the liturgy of the Catholic restoration under Mary. The text of the Marian votive antiphon 'Regina celi letare' was specifically prescribed by the 1554 statutes of Trinity College, Cambridge, for performance as a grace following dinner in hall in Eastertide; 'Libera nos domine' (a responsory from matins of the dead) was suitable for the three obits of special solemnity observed annually in chapel for founders and benefactors; and the psalm 'Deus misereatur' was prescribed for extra-liturgical performance in chapel following the morrow mass on non-festal days under the Latin rite, and following early morning prayers after 1559. 'Regina celi' and White's setting of the liturgical 'Magnificat' are conspicuous for their confident and extrovert celebration of contemporary polyphonic styles based on 'cantus firmus'. 
Although no recusant, White's sympathies lay most probably with the old faith, and in his treatise 'A Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke' of 1597 Thomas Morley included him in a list of composers whose skill in composition he surreptitiously associated with their preservation of Catholic values. White's mature works consist mostly of settings of Latin psalms and of the 'Lamentations of Jeremiah'. For these no place could be found in any service of the 'Book of Common Prayer', and clearly they were conceived for performance in the home, for use as recreation and edification in the households of educated adherents to the values of the old faith. At the time of his death White was owed the considerable sum of $1 10's'. 8died by Edward Paston, a notable recusant and dedicated collector and preserver of music. It is entirely possible that this sum represented money owed by Paston for White's composition of music created in response to specific requests and commissions. 
White's twelve settings of psalms and his settings from the 'Lamentations' exhibit a consistent mastery of polyphonic technique. A disciplined vigour permeates and characterizes such pieces as the third setting of 'Psalm 15', 'Domine quis habitabit'. Meanwhile, in the 'Lamentations' and the more penitential of the psalms (for example, 'Psalm 50', 'Miserere mei deus') an underlying cogency and coherence of construction is combined throughout lengthy compositions with an arresting poignancy and true expressiveness of mood, sometimes dramatically heightened by the calculated interposition of passages exhibiting a homophonic character with chordal orientation. 
Little music by White to vernacular texts has been preserved. For the liturgy of the 1559 prayer book nothing whatever is extant, while as anthems for use following morning or evening prayer only some three or four items survive, of which two have conflicting ascriptions and none is of great distinction. The dozen or so surviving instrumental works, originally for viols and mostly in the form of fantasia or 'In nomine', are likewise entirely competent though not particularly remarkable. 
Morley twice commended White among those whom he considered to be excellent composers, and also listed him among those practitioners whose works he had perused for the authoritative treatment of certain technical points. However, perhaps White's most enduring achievement was his creation of a striking and extensive repertory of vocal music of elevated character for domestic performance. This served as a channel for the transmission of this thitherto predominantly courtly and clerical pastime into the educated gentry and burgess household, so both perpetuating a practice of secular cultivation of art music stretching back to the fifteenth-century carol and preparing and nurturing the ground for the later reception of the madrigal. 
An epidemic of plague struck Westminster during autumn 1574, by which White's family was all but extinguished. On 7 November White, 'sicke in bodye', made his will and on 11 November he was buried in St Margaret's churchyard. Ellen White made her will on 21 November, and letters of administration for both wills were issued on 8 December. Of at least five children, the couple were survived by only two daughters. White's work was often attributed in seventeenth-century manuscripts to 
It is unlikely that either he or William White ['see below'] is to be identified with the Mr White who was the composer of some lightweight catches published by John Hilton and John Playford from 1652 onwards. Indeed, of surviving compositions that are certainly his there remains nothing but two anthems, neither now complete. However, it is a tribute to his contemporary reputation that copyists mistakenly attributed to him music actually by composers of the standing of Robert Parsons, William Mundy, and Robert White. 


Of William White's composition of sacred music there survive one incomplete verse anthem and three full anthems, including the popular 'O praise God in his holiness' once attributed to Robert White. Fourteen pieces for consort of viols, mostly written in free contrapuntal fantasia form but including also two pavans, were copied into numerous early seventeenth-century manuscript sources. These items owed such high regard to their fluency and idiomatic skill, especially in composition in five and six parts. 


@@@@@


doc= 29268


White, Robert (1645-1703), draughtsman and engraver, was born in London and was apprenticed to David Loggan, whose position as the leading line engraver for the print trade he was to inherit. His earliest print was made in 1666 and his last in 1702. His output was huge, and has never been fully documented; George Vertue's list has several hundred plates, to which more should be added to complete the catalogue. 
White's principal activity was as a portrait engraver. He usually engraved these from his own drawings, made from life in black lead on vellum. Many of them survive: thirteen are in the British Museum, and more are in the Huntington Library, California. Among those in the British Museum is a self-portrait made when White was sixteen, which establishes the date of his birth. The drawings are of remarkable quality, and Vertue was particularly impressed by his ability to capture a likeness: 'He ought to be remembered as a singular artist in his way, having so vast a genius in drawing and engraving a face, and make the picture so like the original... that perhaps he has not left his equal in Europe behind him. (Vertue, 6.183-4)' White also engraved frontispieces, book-plates (one was for Samuel Pepys), almanacs, architectural views, processions, and the occasional semi-popular piece to catch public interest in a topical story. Most of the portraits served as frontispieces for books, and were made on commission from publishers: this explains the number of heads of divines in his output. A small number he published himself at his house in Bloomsbury Market, and these could be large and splendid. Among the finest are a dozen plates, mostly large, made after paintings by Godfrey Kneller. Vertue records that White charged about $4 for a small plate, but up to $30 for a large one, but also says that he died poor. It is difficult to understand how this could have happened as he was obviously very successful. However, White's engraving business must have been affected by the rise of mezzotint, and for a brief period from about 1680 to 1683 he took up mezzotint publishing himself. John Chaloner Smith lists nine such plates, one of which (the countess of Arundel) White scraped himself. He was buried on 26 October 1703 at St Giles-in-the-Fields, and his plates were acquired by the publisher John King. The writing engraver John Sturt (1658-1730) was apprenticed to White in 1674. 


White introduced a method of etching the plate before mezzotinting it and frequently finished his plates with the burin, which gives them an unusual sharpness of focus. He also made portrait drawings: the early ones were in black lead (six are in the British Museum), the later ones in crayon. Like his father, White lived in Bloomsbury, where he died on 27 May 1732, aged about forty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 29269


White, Robert (1802-1874), antiquary, son of James White, a border farmer, was born on 17 September 1802 at the Clock Mill, near Yetholm in Roxburghshire, the son of James White and Mary, 'nee' Laidlaw (died 1829). While he was a boy his father moved to Otterburn in Redesdale, where he herded his father's cattle, and attended local schools. He managed to acquire a knowledge of books, with the encouragement of his father's landlord, James Ellis, a former solicitor in Newcastle upon Tyne, then of Otterburn Hall, a friend and correspondent of Sir Walter Scott. He was sent briefly to Jedburgh as trainee millwright, making bobbins for the weaving trade, but returned to work on the farm. In 1825 he found employment in Newcastle in the counting-house of Robert Watson, a plumber, brass-founder, and millwright, at the High Bridge, where he remained until Watson died forty years later. 
At Newcastle, White found time for study and by abstemious living amassed some savings, but his father and brother needed financial help in their farming ventures, leaving little for the purchase of books. His holidays were usually spent rambling on the border with his friend James Telfer the Saughtrees poet, steeping himself in border minstrelsy and gathering knowledge of border life. His first poem, 'The Tynemouth Nun', was written in 1829, and at the suggestion of the antiquary John Adamson (1787-1855) it was printed the same year for the Typographical Society of Newcastle, and enjoyed considerable local popularity. After this he devoted himself to the preservation and reproduction of local legend and song, contributing to many local publications. He was an informant of F. J. Child during the preparation of the latter's work. 
In 1852 White became a member of the Newcastle Society of Antiquaries, to which he contributed a paper on the battle of Nevilles Cross ('Archaeologia Aeliana', 2nd ser., 1.271-303). Encouraged by its reception, he published a volume on the 'History of the Battle of Otterburn' (1857), adding memoirs of the warriors engaged. This was followed in 1858 by a paper read to the Newcastle society on the battle of Flodden (ibid., 3.197-236), and in 1871 by a 'History of the Battle of Bannockburn'. These monographs were rendered valuable by White's intimate acquaintance with local legend, and by his topographical knowledge. He died, unmarried, at his house at 11 Claremont Place, Newcastle, on 20 February 1874. 
In addition to his antiquarian papers, White wrote 'Poems, Including Tales, Ballads, and Songs' (1867), and edited the 'Poems and Ballads of John Leyden' (1858), with a memoir supplementing that by Sir Walter Scott. Several of his songs are to be found in the 'Whistle Binkie' series and in Alexander Whitelaw's 'Book of Scottish Song' (1844). His library of 4400 volumes, rich in the history and topography of Northumberland and the borders, ballads, and chapbooks, was dispersed among his sisters after his death, but in 1942 his great-nephew Professor Sir George White Pickering (1904-1980), regius professor of medicine at Oxford (1956-68), with family help, reassembled the library and presented it to King's College, where it remains in the Robinson Library of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 29270


White, Robert Meadows (1798-1865), Church of England clergyman and Anglo-Saxon scholar, was born on 8 January 1798 at Halesworth, Suffolk, the eldest son of Robert Gostling White (died 1828), a solicitor in that town, and his second wife, Elizabeth Meadows (died 1831). His younger brother was the solicitor John Meadows White. Robert's early schooling was at Bungay under Robert Page, his godfather (1805-1808?), and at Dedham, Essex, under the Revd Haggitts (1808-1813?), and in 1813 he was placed under John Valpy at Norwich, where John Lindley, the botanist, and Raja Sir James Brooke were his fellow pupils. On 26 July 1815 he matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, and in the same year was elected a demy; he graduated BA on 14 December 1819, MA on 28 February 1822, BD on 21 November 1833, and DD on 23 November 1843. He was ordained deacon in 1821 and priest in 1822. In 1824 he was elected a fellow of Magdalen College, and retained his fellowship until 1847. From 1832 to 1840 he acted as a college tutor. On 15 March 1831 he became proctor, and on 23 April 1834 he was chosen Rawlinson professor of Anglo-Saxon, which post he held for the statutable period of five years. 
Anglo-Saxon professors at that time were sometimes defined as 'persons willing to learn Anglo-Saxon'. White, however, was known as a scholar before he was elected to the chair. He had already planned the publication of a Saxon and English vocabulary, and abandoned the project only because it appeared likely to clash with the 'Anglo-Saxon Dictionary' then being prepared by Joseph Bosworth. On giving up this design he turned his attention about 1832 to editing the 'Ormulum', a harmonized narrative of the gospels in verse, preserved in a unique manuscript in the Bodleian Library. This task, owing to other demands on his time, occupied nearly twenty years. In the course of his researches he visited Denmark in 1837, and extended his travels to Moscow, where he was arrested and suffered a short detention for visiting the Kremlin without an official order. His edition of the 'Ormulum' was published in 1852 by the university press, and in the following year an elaborate criticism of it was published in English by Dr Monicke, a German professor. 
In 1839, at the end of his term of office, White was presented to the vicarage of Woolley, near Wakefield, by Godfrey Wentworth of that parish, to whose son William he had acted as tutor. After Wentworth's death White left Woolley, and went to Lord Yarborough at Brocklesby Park in Lincolnshire, where he acted as tutor to the baron's grandsons. In 1842 he was presented to the rectory of Little and Great Glemham in Suffolk by the Hon. Mrs North, Lord Yarborough's sister, and on 29 October 1846 he was presented by Magdalen College to the rectory of Slimbridge in Gloucestershire, which he retained until his death. He died unmarried at Cheltenham on 31 January 1865, and was buried at Slimbridge churchyard, near the chancel south wall. 


@@@@@


doc= 29271


White, Stephen (b. c.1574, d. in or after 1646), scholar and theologian, was born in Clonmel, Ireland. Although the details of his parentage are unknown it appears that he belonged to the mercantile elite which also produced the Jesuit Thomas White, rector of the Irish College at Salamanca, and Peter White, sometime dean of Waterford, who was famed for his grammar school teaching at Kilkenny. Stephen White may have been a pupil at this academy and it was possibly he who was one of the three foundation scholars named in the charter of the newly established Trinity College, Dublin, in 1592. If so he quickly left for the continent, studying first at Lisbon about 1594 and then at Salamanca the following year. There, having attained the degree of BA, he joined the Society of Jesus in 1596. He graduated to teaching philosophy and theology at the college. While on the staff he helped William Bathe, spiritual director of the college, in the compilation of the famous 'Janua linguarum', a highly successful manual of linguistics, first published in 1611. 
In 1606 White moved to Germany to become professor of scholastic theology, first at Ingolstadt (until 1609) and then at Dillingen, where he taught for fourteen years. As a doctor of divinity he lectured a generation of students, including many Irishmen, and supervised a number of doctoral dissertations. His reputation as a theologian burgeoned within the society, and among scholars in Ireland and on the continent. 
The other strand in commentators' admiring assessments emanated from White's achievement as an antiquary and ecclesiastical historian which was to earn him the sobriquet polyhistor. According to his own account he began about 1611 serious study of the history of Ireland, and within a few years produced 'Apologia pro Hibernia adversus Cambri calumnias'. In this work (which remained in manuscript until edited and published in 1849) White aimed to refute the views of the twelfth-century historian Gerald of Wales (Giraldus Cambrensis) in his works 'Expugnatio Hibernica' and 'Topographia Hiberniae'. He displayed therein an impressive knowledge of medieval and contemporary sources for Irish history, especially those which pertained to the Irish church and its saints. 
Evident in the 'Apologia' are signs of the painstaking work of transcription of saints' lives which forms White's main literary monument. Having access to the libraries of many German and Swiss monasteries he made copies of several important manuscripts. Among these were Adamnan's life of St Columba which he made available to the hagiographer John Colgan and Archbishop James Ussher, the Church of Ireland primate. Also transcribed were lives of St Brigid, St Colman, St Patrick, St Erhard, and St Columbanus, copies of which White sent to a number of scholars who were engaged in publishing works on early Irish ecclesiastical history. Although none of his own scholarly research was published his selfless work of furnishing vital sources for other writers was fulsomely acknowledged by them. Ussher paid tribute to White's erudition on a number of occasions, and Colgan praised him handsomely in the preface to his 'Acta sanctorum Hiberniae'. 
When in his mid-fifties White was sent back to Ireland, about 1629, to take up an academic post in the short-lived Jesuit university in Back Lane, Dublin. After the closure of that institution by the authorities in 1630 White spent some years in Jesuit residences in Dublin and Waterford. During his stay in the former he visited Ussher, who gave him access to his library, and he corresponded with Colgan. He devoted himself to teaching and adjudicating on cases of conscience. By late 1641 he had moved to Galway. The proposed publication of the ailing scholar's work was considered by his superiors in the Society of Jesus but they were cautious about approving the printing of such ideologically engaged work in the highly charged politico-religious climate of the 1640s. 
Stephen White died in or after January 1646, and the bulk of his scholarship was lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 29272


White, Sir Thomas (1495?-1567), founder of St John's College, Oxford, was in all likelihood born in 1495 to William White (died 1523), a clothier of Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Kebblewhite of South Fawley, Buckinghamshire. His birthplace has been disputed, but was probably Reading (rather than Rickmansworth), where it is possible that he attended the grammar school in his early years. In 1504 he was apprenticed to Hugh Acton, a prominent member of the Merchant Taylors' Company in London. Acton provided the capital upon which White's own trading ventures were initially founded, and his own later efforts to help worthy young men establish themselves with loans (not dissimilar to a fund for apprentices set up by Acton) were possibly an acknowledgement of his own debt to Acton's charity. With a bequest of $100 from his late master, combined with a portion from his father, he was able to set up his own business in the cloth trade in 1523, after which his fortunes and status grew rapidly. In 1530 he became the first renter warden of the Merchant Taylors'; in 1533 he was senior warden; and he was probably master of the company in 1535, when he was assessed for the subsidy at $1000. As a resident of the parish of St Michael Cornhill, he was elected alderman in 1544, a burdensome office which he initially refused, and it was only after a period of imprisonment in Newgate (during which the mayor ordered his shop to be shut up) that he relented. Shortly afterwards he was one of the aldermen who raised a loan for the war with Scotland, to which he contributed $300. 
White's large-scale charitable provision began in July 1542 with a gift of $1400 to the corporation of Coventry which enabled the purchase of old priory lands. In 1551 the income from this land was secured in the form of interest-free loans for honest and thrifty apprentices from Coventry for forty years after White's death, after which the funds were to be made available in similar loans on a rotating basis to young men from Northampton, Leicester, Nottingham, and Warwick as well as Coventry. In 1545 he similarly bestowed Bristol with a gift of $2000 for the purchase of land, the income from which was likewise directed by a trust established in 1566 which stipulated that sums of $25 should be lent without interest for ten years to young men (preferably clothiers) of twenty-four different cities. It is likely that the cities selected were those involved in the cloth trade, with Bristol being favoured perhaps because of its guild of tailors in honour of St John the Baptist, the patron saint of the Merchant Taylors' Company, and to whom White dedicated the college he later founded. In the meantime he had expanded the scope of his business interests considerably as one of the London merchants responsible for opening up trade with Russia in 1553, and consequently as one of the promoters of the Muscovy Company of merchant adventurers which was granted a royal charter in 1555. 
Having served as sheriff in London in 1547, White was elected lord mayor in August 1553, assumed office amid lavish pageantry in October, and was subsequently knighted. He proved a loyal supporter to Queen Mary, both as a financier and in his capacity as lord mayor. In July 1553 he had been one of those who had met the queen at Newhall, presenting her with a gift of 500 half sovereigns to indicate the good will of the corporation of London. During his mayoralty he sat on the commission for the trial of state prisoners -- notably including Lady Jane Grey and Thomas Cranmer; he received the Spanish envoys concerned with Mary's marriage treaty; he was instrumental in the suppression of Wyatt's rebellion, both through defending the city from the rebels at Southwark Bridge and subsequently through overseeing the commission for their trial as traitors; and he was in office for the eventual reception of Philip II of Spain. After Wyatt's execution he became caught up in Gardiner's measures to dispel rumours that the council had attempted to implicate Princess Elizabeth in the rebellion, and was summoned before Star Chamber for allowing rumour-mongers in the city to remain unpunished. Further mishap was narrowly averted when a bullet landed next to him while he was listening to a sermon at St Paul's, although this was probably a careless gunman's misadventure rather than an assassination attempt as has been alleged. Finally, his mayoralty was characterized by his efforts to reform the excesses of his fellow citizens with sumptuary legislation and proclamations against bowling alleys, morris dancing, games, and interludes. 
On 26 February 1558 White's first wife, Avicia, was buried in the parish of St Mary Aldermary. Very little is known about her: she was a widow with three children when she married White towards the end of Henry VIII's reign, and it is possible that she was related to the Roper family. On 25 November 1558 he married Joan, widow of Sir Ralph Warren, whose two children White remembered in his will. 
Perhaps it was because White never had any children of his own that his benefactions to others were so extensive. The most ambitious of these entailed his foundation of St John's College in Oxford. According to legend his idea to found a college came to him in a dream, which vision directed him to select the former Cistercian college, St Bernard's, as a site. A further source of inspiration may well have been the foundation of Trinity College, Oxford, by his good friend Sir Thomas Pope in March 1554. In May 1555 he obtained a royal licence to found a college comprising a president and thirty scholars. In March 1557 he obtained a new charter, and gave further endowments in this year and again in November 1560. In 1559 he had purchased Gloucester Hall which was intended to house 100 scholars, and in February 1567 he sought to ensure that forty-three scholars would be admitted from London, with preference given to pupils chosen by the master and wardens of the Merchant Taylors'. Despite his bequest of real estate valued at $3634, with his overall outlay estimated at $13,285, the college experienced severe privation in its early years. Suffering diminishing returns from the declining cloth trade, White had been unable to endow the college sufficiently to support his desired quota of scholars, and the college was initially dependent on admitting fee-paying commoners instead of the 'poore Scholars' he had wanted to favour. The stability of the college was further threatened by Elizabeth I's religious policy which resulted in the removal of its first two presidents by 1567 for maintaining papal authority, and the deprivation of twelve fellows between 1567 and 1574. It is likely that White shared their Catholic sympathies up until his death, although this had not precluded his involvement in the establishment of the Merchant Taylors' School (in association with the puritan Richard Hills) in 1561, which had a decidedly reforming emphasis. Troubled by the differences emerging within the fellowship, one of the last letters he wrote to his college exhorted its members to 'love one another as brethren' and to cease strife (Stevenson and Salter, 427). 
Thomas White died on 12 February 1567 at his house in Size Lane, London. As requested in his will, he was buried on 24 or 25 February in St John's College chapel, with a funeral oration by Edmund Campion. His intended gifts to St John's and his wife's jointure remained partly unpaid as a result of his dwindling income, leaving the college dependent on the judicious intervention of his executor, Sir William Cordell, and his widow dependent on the good will of the Merchant Taylors' Company for survival. She died on 8 February 1573. 
Despite the ultimate disparity between his means and his intentions, White's name has been associated with charity for centuries after his death. He was celebrated as one of London's 'nine worthies' by Richard Johnson in 1592, and characterized as the epitome of benevolence in John Webster's 'Monuments of Honour' of 1624. Portraits of him survive in at least seventeen of the cities which benefited from his gifts, although only one (at the Merchant Taylors' in London) was painted in his lifetime. The inscription on a Jacobean portrait at Leicester commemorated him for his 'White name, White gifts, White soul', commending him as a 'White saint in heaven'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29273


White, Thomas (1550-1624), benefactor of Sion College, London, was born in the parish of Temple, Bristol, the son of John White, a merchant of that city. It has often been asserted that he was descended from the Whites of Eaton Socon, Bedfordshire. He attended Oxford University and graduated BA from Magdalen Hall on 25 June 1570, MA on 1 July 1573. Shortly afterwards, on 23 November 1575, he was appointed vicar of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, where his preaching was well received. He appears to have been associated with St Paul's School, attending its yearly 'apposition' as an examiner in February 1577. On 3 November 1577 at Paul's Cross, during a visitation of the plague, White preached against usury and covetousness, especially such excessive indulgence as the use of down beds and the payment of cooks to produce elaborate meals. The plague, he declared, was a judgment: 'London builds apace, beware of blood and iniquity... God shall reckon with you in his rage and give you a taste of his anger, as an earnest penny in this life, of everlasting pains in the life to come' (White, 'A Sermon Preached at Pawles Crosse on Sunday the thirde of November, 1577', 1578, 56-7). 
White received the degree of BTh on 11 December 1581 and proceeded to the doctorate on 8 March 1585; briefly, between 1588 and 1591, he acted as vicar of St Gregory by Paul. A sermon given in this period, just after the defeat of the Armada, shows how his zealous patriotic protestantism could lead to criticism, even of the queen's government: 'Our gracious sovereign did suffer long, and too long, almost before she took the sword in hand, and stood to her defence in the cause of the gospel' (White, 'A Sermon Preached at Pawles Crosse the 17 of November, 1589', 1589, 59). But the conflict came anyway: 'hold you not your peace, but tell it in Spain, and in the islands there about... that as Elizabeth of England lived by the Grace of God... He that is mighty hath magnified her, and holy is his name' (ibid., 62). 
White married twice, but of his first wife only her family name, Fortune, is known. His second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Bovey, a barber-surgeon and citizen of London, died before her husband. Both women were buried in the chancel of St Dunstan's. There were no surviving children. White must not be confused with Thomas White (died 1588), warden of New College, Oxford, from 1553 to 1573, archdeacon of Berkshire from 1557 to 1588, and chancellor of Salisbury Cathedral from 1571 to 1588 -- especially since Thomas White of Bristol also attained high position in the dioceses of Salisbury and Oxford. On 21 April 1590 White was instituted by Archbishop Whitgift to the treasurership of Salisbury (with its annexed prebend of Calne). On 26 April 1587 he was awarded by the queen presentation to the next vacant canonry in Oxford diocese; he was installed in 1592 as canon of the eighth prebend. 
White's many and lucrative benefices and his later status as a single and childless man combined to make him a wealthy individual. Already in 1613 he had built a hospital in his native Temple parish in Bristol and endowed it with $92 per annum. At his death his circumstances made possible generous provision for several causes. His will, drawn up and signed on 20 February 1623, provided for five exhibitions of $8 per year to scholars of Magdalen Hall, and $4 to the principal, to be paid from the revenues of the manor of Langdon Hills in Essex. White provided for a lectureship at St Paul's in London, bequeathed his folio and Latin books to St George's Chapel, Windsor, and donated to the city of Bristol money for the improvement of roads and other municipal purposes. His will is also of interest for the light it throws on White's attitudes to crime. He financed a yearly lecture for: 'the poor prisoners of Newgate [who] may be manacled and sparred in iron chains hand to hand, men by themselves and women by themselves in long iron chains made for that purpose and so by some of their under officers to be brought there the lower way next Newgate... their sight for example to the people and youth their shame to be seen... And for their chains of iron and one docket to be made I give forty pounds.' He states that concerning their execution: 'I would have two ancient honest women to be chosen yearly by the sheriffs of London who together with the executioner only shall strip their body to the end their shame may be covered with such sorry linen as they have... to hide from the people their secrets... for it is a sin and a shame for the multitude to stand at such times to feed their eyes with such woeful sights and this will breed remorse in others to leave thieving. (Sampson, 20-22)' White also founded a professorship of moral philosophy at Oxford, with a stipend of $100 per annum to be paid to the university from the revenues of his manor of Langdon Hills. The lectures thus inaugurated were to be aimed chiefly at undergraduates. In providing for the new foundation, White had offered little guidance as to the content of the course to be offered; accordingly, despite Laudian attempts to impose the teaching of Aristotle, many professors gave sermons, which did little for the reputation of the lecture. 
Much the largest of White's bequests was the $3000 which he provided for Sion College and for an almshouse, to be built close by. White was clearly very anxious that his college should be under the firm control of the bishop of London, and provided for a governing body which included two deans and four assistants under the bishop's presidency. It was on this basis that on 7 March 1626 Sion College received its original charter. Ironically, however, 'Someone at court, possibly Laud himself... seems to have objected that it was derogatory to the Bishop's prestige that he should sit as even the perpetual primus of co-equal presbyters' (Huelin, 63). It appears that this was so unthinkable that the charter was revised to provide for the president's election from the fellows; the bishop would act as visitor. The amended charter was given the royal assent on 6 July 1626, and the college was built on a site acquired in April 1627 at the junction of Aldermanbury, London Wall, and Philip Lane. Its fine library attained a wide reputation. 
White died on 1 March 1624 and was buried in the chancel of St Dunstan-in-the-West. His funeral sermon was given by William Price, first reader of the lecture in moral philosophy. The text, to which other academics added verses, was published in 'Schola moralis philosophiae Oxon in funere Whiti' (1624). A portrait of White, for long in the possession of the Bristol almshouse, was copied and sent in May 1832 to Sion College in London; in 1957 this portrait was restored and hung in the college dining hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 29274


White, Thomas (1592/3-1676), Roman Catholic priest and philosopher, was born into a landowning recusant family as the second son of Richard White (died 1634) of Hutton, Essex, and Mary, daughter of the eminent Elizabethan lawyer Edmund Plowden. His sister Mary married Phillip Waldegrave of Borley, and his elder brother Richard became a proficient mathematician and a fellow of the Royal Society. One younger brother, Jerome, became a Catholic priest; the other, William, left few traces other than a will in which he distanced himself from Thomas's political views. A lifelong Catholic who never saw any reason to renounce 'the religion of our birth and education' (T. White, 'Apology for Rushworth's 'Dialogues'', 1654, 117), White became a secular priest, notorious as leader of the Blackloist faction or cabal of the English chapter, as well as 'a most noted philosopher of his time' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1247). Author of some forty works on theology, politics, and natural philosophy, he achieved the rare distinction of incurring suspicion and disapproval both from his own church, which consigned all his writings to the Index, and from the English parliament, which suspected him (together with Hobbes) of tending 'to Atheism, Blasphemy, or Profaneness' (Southgate, 32). An engraving by Vertue indicates that White was a serious man with a commanding and possibly pugnacious presence, and an eighteenth-century biographical sketch describes him as being of unblemished morals and 'of a middle size; agreeable in conversation, unbyassed in the controversies of life; and affecting a freedom of opinion, which seldom happens without danger' (Dodd, 3.285). This last comment understates the extent to which White was constantly embroiled in controversies: his personal and published writings reveal a man whose greatest pleasure lay in vigorous debates with friends and enemies. 
White's Catholic education and career necessitated extensive European travels and also involved contacts with a succession of continental English colleges. His recusant credentials having been established with a brief incarceration for his faith aged ten, he reached the Jesuit college at St Omer in the Spanish Netherlands by autumn 1605; after graduating in humanities he proceeded in autumn 1609 to Valladolid, Spain, aged sixteen, and then in 1612 to Seville. In August 1614 he went on via Madrid to Flanders, and he completed his theology course at Louvain before arriving at the mother English College at Douai in July 1616. White was ordained as priest at Arras in 1617 and took his degree one year later at Douai. He continued to teach philosophy and theology at Douai until 1623, the year in which he retrieved from England a rib of the recently martyred Thomas Maxfield to serve as a sacred relic at the college. His long-standing, though intermittent, association with Douai was later marked by his appointment as vice-president of the college there in 1650. Meanwhile, in 1625 White was sent as official Catholic agent to Rome, where for four years he maintained lines of communication between the beleaguered English clergy and the pope. In 1630 he reluctantly became the second president of the English College at Lisbon, Portugal, where he established a traditional scholastic curriculum, but, having failed to recruit appropriate theology students from England, he resigned in 1633. That year his name was submitted to Rome as a possible bishop, and ten years later he was proposed as vicar-general. By the early 1640s, however, he was established in Paris as a respected member of the Mersenne circle, and in that cosmopolitan environment he published two major works of natural philosophy: 'De mundo' (1642) and 'Institutiones peripateticae' (1646; translated as 'Peripateticall Institutions', 1657) which shows reciprocal influences with his friend Kenelm Digby's 'Two Treatises' (1644). These essentially synthesizing works incorporated ideas from the current new philosophy within a traditional Aristotelian framework, and with his remarkable accommodation of Copernican heliocentric cosmology and newly revived atomic theory, White was later identified by Leibniz as one who had contrived to 'reconcile Aristotle with modern philosophy' (Southgate, 9). Favourable assessments of 'De mundo' were made by contemporaries including Descartes, and a lengthy critique by Thomas Hobbes, rediscovered and published in 1976, did much to restore interest in White himself. 
During the later 1640s and early 1650s there is evidence for White's presence in London, Lyons, Rome, Douai, various parts of Holland, and Paris, where he was described by John Evelyn as 'a learned priest and famous philosopher' (Southgate, 7). In London again by 1655, he became established as leader of the Blackloist group of Catholic chaptermen, including Kenelm Digby, Henry Holden, Peter Fitton, and John Sergeant. Notorious for their willingness to sacrifice Jesuits and any papal temporal powers in return for religious toleration, these 'Papists of the new Modell' (M. Poole, 'Nullity of the Romish Faith', 1666, 39), denied papal infallibility and repudiated conventional and lucrative beliefs about purgatory. Unsurprisingly, White's doctrines, as expressed in such theological works as 'De medio animarum statu' (1653; translated as 'The Middle State of Souls'), were held in Rome 'in so great a detestation... that neither that of Luther or Calvin was ever in a greater' (Westm. DA, Old Brotherhood archives, 2.67). Nevertheless, the Blackloists continued to dominate the English chapter for many years: White's disciple John Sergeant was installed as secretary from 1655 until he was ousted in 1667 by Rome's replacement, John Leyburn. 
Approached for political advice after Cromwell's assumption of power, White published 'The Grounds of Obedience and Government' (1655). Supposedly a theoretical treatise, this had obvious practical implications at the time: with its provocatively emblazoned republican motto of 'salus populi' and its evident recommendation to accept Cromwell's 'de facto' position, the book was widely regarded as anti-monarchical, and after the Restoration White was repudiated by protestants and Catholics alike. Under attack from all quarters, he was induced to defend himself in an extensive 'Apology', which survives in manuscript (Westm. DA, Old Brotherhood archives, 2.130), but nothing could save him from contemporary distancing or from subsequent historical neglect. 
White's extraordinary intellectual energy in later life is indicated also by his attention to other aspects of philosophy and theology. During the 1650s he enjoyed contacts with men who were to become founding fellows of the Royal Society. Centred on the puritan reformer John Hall, this group included John Wallis, Seth Ward, John Wilkins, Lord Brouncker, Ralph Bathurst, Isaac Barrow, and Pierre Fermat. White acted as a linkman to whom they professed themselves deeply indebted. Stimulated by such company, he published further scientific and mathematical works, including 'Euclides physicus' (1657), claimed as an influence on Leibniz, and 'Exercitatio geometrica' (1658), in which he fails in attempts to square the circle. Theological works include 'Apology for Rushworth's 'Dialogues'', in which he clarifies his detestation of sceptical uncertainty and affirms oral tradition as the ground of Catholic faith; and 'Religion and Reason' (1660) and 'Devotion and Reason' (1661), where he reiterates his lifelong belief in the compatibility of Christianity with the rationality of science. 
White's work in London was interrupted by the imminent restoration of the monarchy. With his life at risk as a result of his political notoriety, he withdrew to Holland in 1659, explaining later that he had heard 'that his majesty's settled resolution was to hang mee if I came into England' (Westm. DA, Old Brotherhood archives, 2.130). Far from lying low, however, he released further theological broadsides. 'Monumetham excantatus' and 'Statera morum' (1660), which contained arguments that even the greatest sinners might be redeemed, provoked a moral outcry even from friends. His long-standing enemy George Leyburn described him at this time as a 'wicked old man... known sufficiently and more than that to the Pope and the whole Roman court' (Burton and Williams, 2.547), a view confirmed by official condemnations in 1655, 1657, 1661, and 1663. Indeed, it was agreed by friends and enemies that White might well have encountered even more opposition had not his convoluted style prevented ready comprehension. By 1662 White was back in London, where he published in 1663 a critique of Torricelli's work on the vacuum, and entered a significant debate on scepticism with Joseph Glanvill. The younger man's promotion (in his 'Vanity of Dogmatizing', 1661) of the fashionable Pyrrhonian philosophy provoked White's 'Sciri, sive, Scepticis' (1663; translated as 'An Exclusion of Scepticks' (1665), where he insisted on the possibility of humans attaining absolutely certain truth; their continuing debate highlighted essential incompatibilities between their respectively 'modern' and 'ancient' positions. Until his own death in Drury Lane on 6 July 1676 White persisted, too, in heated philosophical debates with Thomas Hobbes. White was buried on 8 July in the old St Martin-in-the-Fields, and his will confirms earlier claims that he never had social aspirations or saved money: he left $10, together with any 'wearing apparel and other goods in their house at my death', to John and Mary Gregson, with whom he had been lodging in Drury Lane, 'for the care they have had of me while I lived with them' (Berks. RO, Barrett/Belson MS Q26/2). The residue consisted of arrears from an annuity bequeathed by Kenelm Digby: that was to be held in trust for John Sergeant, who would keep Blackloism alive until his own death in 1707. 


@@@@@


doc= 29275


White, Thomas (1628-1698), bishop of Peterborough and nonjuror, was born at Allington, Kent, the son of Peter White, who died shortly after Thomas's birth. Records of his university career record the family as of 'plebeian' rank; his mother may have been a kinswoman of a local gentry family, the Brockmans of Beachborough, and may have gone to live with them after her husband's death. White was educated for three years at Wye School under the mastership of Mr Surety-on-high (or Suretonhie) Nicholls. He was then admitted sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, at the age of fourteen, on 29 October 1642, graduating BA in 1647. His life during the interregnum remains obscure. Despite the confusion caused by so common a name, it is clear that he was neither the lecturer of St Andrew's, Holborn, who wrote an account of the conversion of a Muslim in 1658 (died 1672), nor the rector of St Mary-at-Hill, London (died 1682), who both shared his name. However, he appears for certain at the Restoration, when his successful petition of 6 July 1660 to the king for presentation to the vicarage of Newark-on-Trent, occupied by an 'intruder', won the support of no less a person than Gilbert Sheldon. He held the Newark living until 1666, when he assumed the rectorship of All-Hallows-at-Fenn, London, which he kept until 1679, when he took up the rectory of Bottesford in Leicestershire, which he held until 1685; he also became rector of Stepney in 1681. 
The elevation of White's career profile from the parochial to the diocesan level was signalled with his promotion as archdeacon of Nottingham (1683-5). In the year that he took up the archdeaconry, and typifying his closeness to the high tory reversionary interest around James, duke of York, he was created DD of Oxford on 4 June 1683 -- even though he was primarily a preacher -- a 'very eloquent' one, according to Evelyn ('Diary of John Evelyn', 383) -- and a diocesan administrator rather than a scholar. However, White was chaplain to York's protestant daughter, the Lady Anne, and the conferment, fully supported by the tory grandee Ormond, took place amid a triumphalist tour of the York family to tory Oxford. White's next move upwards was made when the tory cast of ecclesiastical and episcopal appointments devised as a deliberate strategy during the tory reaction was continued and capped by his consecration as bishop of Peterborough on 25 October 1685. Typifying his energy and reformist drive, in 1686 he carried out for Archbishop Sancroft a metropolitical visitation of the Lincoln diocese belonging to the allegedly negligent Bishop Thomas Barlow, finding the clergy of that diocese immoral and negligent and the lay linchpins of the parochial system, the churchwardens, 'hardened in their foolish obstinacy' (Spurr, 193). 
Dedicated churchman and committed tory royalist as he was, White was soon to be confronted with the fatal dilemma presented to such as him by James's adoption, markedly from 1687, of toleration: he 'could not but remember how vehemently the King had declared against toleration and said he would never by any counsel be tempted to suffer it' (Western, 186-7); he took particular umbrage at the threat to the church from indulgence to the dissenters, for he saw little danger from 'popery' (ibid., 230) and had, indeed, taken part in the administration of the London diocese of Bishop Henry Compton, suspended in 1686 for his refusal to suppress Catholic preaching in the city. It was James II's second declaration of indulgence, offering civil and religious rights to non-Anglicans, but required to be read from the pulpits of the very Church of England whose specially protected status it endangered, that impelled White to lead other prominent Anglican malcontents -- and above all those of the high tory Yorkist grouping around Sancroft -- in resistance to the declaration, beginning with a meeting of leading clerics at the Temple in London on 12 May 1688. White's prominence in the campaign was flanked by the role of Bishop Francis Turner of Ely who, with White, was co-ordinating information between 12 and 18 May on the overwhelming clerical refusals of the reading order and also of rejection of it by nonconformist chiefs; he was also supported by the enthusiasm for the resistance of his dean at Peterborough, Simon Patrick, who, on 17 May, drew up a list of ministers who would not read the declaration, which schedule White took to Sancroft. The following day the recalcitrants drew up a final version of a petition to the king and, in the evening, the seven episcopal leaders of opposition took it to James, who was astonished at the disobedience of his commands by the Anglican clerics whose protestations of total obedience to royal authority he had taken at face value. 
On 27 May in a summons to appear before the king in council the names of White and Turner, along with that of Sancroft, were highlighted among those of the other presenters of the offending petition. The examination was followed by imprisonment in the Tower on 8 June and trial on a charge of seditious libel on 29 June, leading to acquittal on the 30th. 
On 24 September, in what was, no doubt, an attempt at a placatory strategy on James's part, White, with Sancroft and seven other bishops, was invited by the earl of Sunderland to confer with the king. Following Orange's landing he and William Lloyd (1627-1717) of St Asaph were involved with the tory politicians Rochester and Clarendon in plans to petition the king for a parliament intended to prevent bloodshed, and on 17 November White signed such a petition; remaining at the central steerage of events, he was one of a small group who managed -- initially, at least -- to persuade Sancroft to join a meeting of peers held in London so as to manage the situation in December 1688, and in January of the new year he was at the archbishop's in discussion of 'the present state of the publique' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 896). He is said, somewhat improbably, to have authored -- but certainly did not take -- the new oath of allegiance to William and Mary, yet despite his refusal he continued to be allowed early in the new year to speak in committees of the Lords. In March his political campaign in defence of the interest of his church took a new tack when he promoted comprehension of protestants within a broad national establishment of religion. However, his status as a leading nonjuror resulted in his displacement from his episcopate, which Evelyn reported on 16 April 1691. 
In the remainder of the 1690s White played a part in the attempted creation of a nonjuror Church of England, hosting a consecration of a new nonjuring bishop (nominated by the exiled James II) in February 1694 ['see also 'Nonjuring bishops]. He was also rumoured to have composed a statement made by the Jacobite conspirator Fenwick protesting his loyalty to James along with his refusal to countenance violence against William. Following White's death in London on 29 May 1698 his funeral and burial at St Paul's on 4 June provided an opportunity for nonjuring Anglicans to commemorate a martyr both to divine right principles and to defence of the church against a king. He was a generous benefactor of Newark and of the poor of Peterborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 29276


White, Thomas (1830-1888), journalist and politician in Canada, was born in Montreal on 7 August 1830, the son of Thomas White, a leather merchant, and Dorothea Smeaton. His father came from co. Westmeath in 1826, his mother from Edinburgh. He was educated at Montreal high school, began his working life in his father's business, and ended up in journalism, joining the staff of the official 'Quebec Gazette' in 1852. In 1853 he married Esther Vine, of Quebec City; they had seven daughters and three sons. That same year the couple moved to Peterborough, Canada West, where, with his brother Richard, White conducted the 'Peterborough Review'. After studying law for four years he returned to journalism in 1864, and with his brother took over the Hamilton 'Spectator', founded eighteen years before. In 1870 they bought control of the Montreal 'Gazette', the leading Conservative newspaper in Canada. Well-written and vigorous, it became the basis of White's growing importance in the ranks of the Conservative Party. An example of the 'Gazette's' style is its comment on Edward Blake (17 April 1880), just before Blake became leader of the Liberal Party: 'Mr Blake differs with everybody but Mr Blake and he does not always agree with him'. 
In January 1874 White stood for an Ontario seat in the Canadian House of Commons but was defeated by six votes; the same ill luck dogged him in two Quebec by-elections in 1874 and 1875, but finally in 1878 he was elected for Cardwell, an Ontario constituency. The Conservative government of Sir John A. Macdonald had made a mess of the administration of the north-west, which led to the north-west rebellion of 1885; after it was over White was appointed minister of the interior to tidy things up. 
White was remarkable. The pity is he had not been given the portfolio years before. He worked like a Trojan to understand and to remedy. One western MP said, 'We trusted him, for he had no purpose to serve save that of the country'. That could well be his epitaph. After three strenuous years of work and travel across the Canadian west, he succumbed to pneumonia in Ottawa on 21 April 1888. His death stunned parliament. He had been like a son to Sir John Macdonald. Sara Jeanette Duncan said in the Toronto 'Week' (26 April 1888), 'men turn over the memories of his kindly deeds, his painstaking service, his upright behaviour...'. There are upright men in politics. Thomas White was one. 


@@@@@


doc= 29277


White, Walter (1811-1893), librarian and writer, was born at Reading on 23 April 1811, the eldest son in the numerous family of John White (1779-1863), upholsterer and cabinet-maker. He was educated at two local private schools, one of which was kept by Joseph Huntly, father of the founder of Huntly and Palmer's biscuit manufactory. At fourteen White left school to work alongside his father, spending much of his leisure in reading and in the study of French, German, and Latin. In 1830 he went to Derbyshire and Staffordshire, where he married Maria Hamilton; they raised a daughter and three sons. The family settled briefly at Reading, but in hopes of a better life sailed for the United States in April 1834. White plied his trade in New York and Poughkeepsie but without improving his circumstances, finding the cold winters hard to endure. His daughter died during this time. His account of the emigrant's life, 'A working man's recollections of America', was published in the first volume of 'Knight's Penny Magazine' in 1846. 
The family returned to Reading in May 1839 where White rejoined his father's business, but in October 1842, still tempted by prospects of a better life elsewhere, he left his family in Reading and went to London. He took employment as secretary to Joseph Mainzer, a music teacher, and accompanied Mainzer to Edinburgh when the latter was a candidate for the chair of music at the university. While in Edinburgh he met a variety of learned and self-educated men, visited libraries and attended lectures, including those delivered to the working classes by James Simpson. Simpson wrote him a glowing letter of introduction to Charles Weld, assistant secretary to the Royal Society, then located at Somerset House, Westminster, who offered him the post of attendant in the society's library. 
White started work there on 19 April 1844 at an annual salary of $80, his first task being to check the library shelves, which revealed many missing books. From there he became involved in the process of cataloguing and in 1858 he directed the boys hired to compile a catalogue of contents of all natural science periodicals in the library. This volume was published in 1867, the first of the series which eventually covered the century from 1800 to 1900. The boys employed on this lengthy task included Henry White (died 1880), a distant relative, and one of White's own sons, Alfred Hastings White. When Weld resigned in 1861 White was promoted to assistant secretary at a salary of $300 and entitled to lodgings at Somerset House. He was increasingly employed to service and take minutes for the society's various committees, and became acquainted with the many eminent men who attended and who lectured at the society. 
At the end of 1845 White's wife left him and he was obliged to dispose of the family house in the Old Kent Road. Only his eldest son remained with him; another son, Henry, became a sailor. During this time White wrote extensively for 'Chambers's Edinburgh Journal' -- some 200 articles between 1844 and 1849 -- and for other serials. In 1850 he began the holiday walks which furnished new material: the narrative of his first month's excursion in Holland was published as 'Notes from the Netherlands' ('Chambers's Edinburgh Journal', 15, 1858), but later expeditions, to Mont Blanc, the Tyrol, eastern Germany, and Bohemia, and, closer to home, Northumberland, Yorkshire, Shropshire, and London, were published as books. Age and ill health obliged him to resign at the end of 1884. In gratitude for his long continued and valuable service he was granted a life pension of $350, equivalent to his current salary. He lived at 18 Grove Road, Lambeth, London, until his death there on 21 July 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 29278


William White (bap. 1571, d. 1634), composer, was baptized at St Nicholas, Durham on 17 May 1571, the son of Miles White. Probably he is to be identified with the boy named White who sang as chorister of the choir of Durham Cathedral from 1580 to 1587, and until 1590 continued his education at the King's School. By 28 April 1603 he was a lay clerk of the choir of Westminster Abbey, but at least by the early 1630s had returned to Durham. In London he was a friend of the composer Thomas Tomkins, whose dedication to him of the madrigal 'Adieu, ye city-prisoning towers' in 1622 may perhaps have marked White's return to the north. At the end of the seventeenth century a local historian recollected him as 'a celebrated doctor' resident in Elvet, Durham. White died probably in Durham, and was buried on 11 February 1634. 


@@@@@


doc= 29279


White, William (bap. 1604, d. 1678), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 21 June 1604 at Witney, Oxfordshire, the fifth child of Henry White (died 1631), who was possibly a fuller. He entered Wadham College, Oxford, matriculating on 13 July 1621, graduated BA on 25 February 1625, and proceeded MA on 25 June 1628. He became master of Magdalen College School in 1632, and vicar of Wargrave, Berkshire, thanks to Archbishop Laud, in 1637. At Magdalen School he taught Greek well and 'framed Latine sentences in the belly of each other, as he phrased it' (Stanier, 103). In 1648 the parliamentary commissioners ejected him, but Bishop Brian Duppa of Salisbury procured him the rectorship of Pusey, Berkshire, which he kept 'by the favour of his Friends, and the smallness of its Profits' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.618). In 1662 his former pupil Thomas Pierce, now president of Magdalen, made him also rector of Appleton, Berkshire. 
As Guilielmus Phalerius, White wrote a brief teaching manual, 'Ad grammaticen ordinarium supplementa' (1648), and a tract urging church unity, 'Via ad pacem ecclesiasticam', (1660). A third small book, on doctrine 'Paraphrasis... catechismi Anglicani' (1674), is ascribed to him by his pupil and biographer William Fulman. White died at Pusey, 'a little after midnight before Saturdaie Jun. 1. 1678' (Fulman); he was buried there on 5 June. His punctiliousness appears in his will, dated 26 October 1677: his daughter and heir Elizabeth Pusey, wife of Robert Pusey, was instructed to give Cornelius Yates, vicar of St Mary's, Marlborough, Wiltshire, and Yates's successors $5 annually so long as they catechized their parishioners and advocated the order of family prayers White specified. The dean of Salisbury was to ratify this. White left the vicars his books and papers on condition that his marginalia be favourably construed and that his diaries, kept since 1628, all be burnt. The Marlborough Vicars' Library, which includes books given to White by Henry Hammond, is now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Nothing is known of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 29280


White, Sir William Arthur (1824-1891), diplomatist, the son of Arthur White, who was in the British consular service, and Eliza Lila, daughter of Lieutenant-General William Gardiner Neville, was born in February 1824 in Poland; both his parents were Irish. He was educated at King William's College, Isle of Man, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his staunch Roman Catholicism prevented him from taking a degree. He entered the consular service unusually late, already aged thirty-three, on 9 March 1857 as clerk to the consul-general at Warsaw. He frequently acted as consul-general, and on 9 January 1861 he became vice-consul, again acting as consul-general for the greater part of 1862 and 1863. Here, with strong Polish sympathies, he nevertheless managed to avoid offending Russia during the Polish revolution of 1863. On 9 November 1864 he was appointed consul at Danzig, where he also acted for six months in 1866 as Belgian consul, and during the war of 1870 took charge of French interests. While at Danzig he married, in 1867, Katherine, daughter of Lewis Kendzior of Danzig; they left an only daughter, Lila Lucy Catherine Mary (later Lady Abinger). White's wife was 'a lovely and genial lady who for twenty-five years never faltered at his side' (Edwards, 265). 
On 27 February 1875 White was transferred to Serbia as British agent and consul-general. This post at last gave him some scope for employing the knowledge which for many years past he had been acquiring, and laid the foundation of his great influence in dealing with Eastern nationalities. Within a few months of his arrival in Serbia the Eastern question entered an acute phase, and in June 1876 the Serbians, following the lead of Herzegovina, declared war against Turkey. Their defeat was followed by the conference at Constantinople in December 1876. There Lord Salisbury was assisted by White, and was deeply impressed by his knowledge and ability. This link with Salisbury enabled him to move from the consular to the diplomatic service. 
In 1877 White returned to Serbia; he was transferred to Bucharest in July 1878 and appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary on 3 March 1879, though he did not present his credentials until Britain recognized Romania in February 1880. On 18 April 1885 he was nominated envoy-extraordinary at Constantinople, and was at once brought face to face with a question of first importance -- the legality of the annexation of Eastern Roumelia to Bulgaria in defiance of the treaty of Berlin of 1878. Russia took the ground that the treaty must be upheld at all costs. White's obstructive diplomatic tactics contributed directly to the consolidation of Bulgarian nationality, and the Bulgarians were not slow to recognize this. Early in 1886 he was specially thanked by the government for his action. He was created CB on 21 March 1878, KCMG on 16 March 1883, GCMG on 28 January 1886, GCB on 2 June 1888, and sworn of the privy council on 29 June 1888; he was made an honorary LLD of Cambridge University on 17 June 1886. 
On coming into office in 1886, Lord Salisbury appointed White to the embassy at Constantinople; on 11 October he was confirmed as special ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary, and was the first Roman Catholic to achieve this rank in the British diplomatic service since the Reformation. White's years as ambassador were of unusual importance, for it was from his diplomatic conversations that the first and second Mediterranean agreements of March and December 1887 may be said to have derived. Defence of the straits and partnership with Germany and the triple alliance were the bases of White's approach to the Eastern question. His memorandum of 25 July 1887 set out Britain's cautious support for Turkish railway expansion into Asia Minor under British control, though his efforts to build a railway through the Kaulla concession led to financial disaster (Smith, 112-31). White welcomed German involvement in this railway building, and was subsequently much criticized for allowing the growth of German influence in the Ottoman empire. By the time of his retirement in 1891 his close links with Salisbury had weakened, for the latter had begun to abandon the policy of propping up the Porte. 
White left Constantinople on 24 December 1891 and, returning via Berlin, caught a chill and died at the Kaiserhof Hotel there on 28 December. He was buried in the Roman Catholic church of St Hedwig, Berlin, on 31 December. His wife survived him. White was a hard worker with none of the usual relaxations of the diplomatist (sport, food, and cards) (Edwards, 260-61). He had what his biographer called 'a certain superficial roughness which his enemies sometimes mistook for asperity of character' (Edwards, 264). 


@@@@@


doc= 29281


Whitefield, George (1714-1770), Calvinistic Methodist leader, was born on 16 December 1714 at The Bell inn, Southgate Street, Gloucester, the youngest of the six sons and one daughter of Thomas Whitefield ('bap'. 1681, died 1716), proprietor of the inn, and his wife, Elizabeth (1681?-1751), daughter of Richard Edwards and his wife, Mary, both of Bristol. 
George Whitefield (pronounced Whitfield) was baptized at the church of St Mary de Crypt, Gloucester, on 25 December 1714. When he was aged two his father died, and in 1722 his mother married Capel Longden, 'an unhappy match' ('George Whitefield's Journals', 39). Whitefield was enrolled in Gloucester Cathedral school, aged eleven. A year later he entered St Mary de Crypt School, priding himself on his elocution, memory, and speech making. Devoted to reading plays and to acting, he often dressed and performed the part of a woman. Through his stepfather's mismanagement The Bell fell into hard times, and after a year or so Whitefield left school to assist with menial tasks. By the late 1720s his mother had separated from Longden and moved from The Bell. At about the age of four Whitefield had contracted measles, the cause of his lifelong squint. Mercilessly teased, on one occasion he repeated the words of the psalm: 'But in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them.' He liked 'to imitate the ministers reading prayers' and even composed sermons (ibid., 38). He re-entered St Mary de Crypt School, and received his first communion on 25 December 1731. 
On 7 November 1732 Whitefield matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford. As a servitor, the lowest rank of undergraduates, he performed servile tasks, which continued throughout his Oxford years. Through Charles Wesley, in the summer of 1733 he joined a group practising self-denial, lengthy devotions, and meticulous self-examination. This 'Holy Club' of 'despised Methodists' was led by John Wesley ('George Whitefield's Journals', 46). 'Whole days and weeks' were 'spent in lying prostrate on the ground', and Whitefield ate 'the worst sort of food' (ibid., 52-3), neglected his appearance, and became obsessed with the devil. Seriously ill following a severe 1735 Lenten fast (when he experienced his inner conversion), Whitefield recuperated in Gloucester. He returned to Oxford in March 1736 and assumed the leadership of the Holy Club, the Wesleys having departed for Georgia. He faced his examination on 14 May and received his BA two months later. 
'Fully persuaded it is His will that I should take Orders' (Whitefield, diary, BL, Add. MS 34068), Whitefield was ordained deacon on 20 June 1736 in Gloucester Cathedral by Bishop Martin Benson. The following Sunday he preached his first sermon, in St Mary de Crypt. The next month he covered pastoral duties at the Tower of London and walked through the streets in his gown and cassock, with people crying out, 'There's a boy parson' ('George Whitefield's Journals', 77). His first London sermon was at St Botolph without Bishopsgate, on 8 August, and for two months he preached at the Tower on the theme of the new birth. By this Whitefield meant a total change of heart, an inner regeneration wrought solely by the action of the Holy Spirit. This experience, in no way dependent upon traditional religious observance, would result in a faith vitally felt. During November and December he officiated at Dummer, Hampshire. He had corresponded with the Wesleys and late in 1736 determined to follow them to Georgia. In the spring he deputized for the vicar of Stonehouse, Gloucestershire. Most of 1737 was devoted to preaching charity sermons for Georgia, especially in Bristol and Bath, then in London for four months from late August; Whitefield generally preached nine times a week and wrote that he was forced from foot to coach in order 'to avoid the hosannas of the multitude' (ibid., 89). During this period he collected $1000 for English charity schools and $300 for Georgia. The effectiveness of these collections induced most parish clergymen 'to open their pulpits to him, which otherwise they were unwilling to do' (Hutton, 183). However, these sermons were not charitable towards them. In his first publication -- his subsequently most widely distributed sermon, 'The Nature and Necessity of our New Birth in Christ Jesus, in Order to Salvation' (1737) -- he castigated fellow clerics for presenting only 'the shell and shadow of religion' (Tyerman, 1.81). He unequivocally maintained that anyone who did not accept the necessity of a new birth would be 'thrust down into Hell' (Thomas, 26.384). This theme remained central. 
Whitefield sailed for Georgia in February 1738. On stopping at Gibraltar, he preached frequently and attended a Roman Catholic service, which he considered 'wholly given to idolatry' ('George Whitefield's Journals', 128). Amply supported by the colony's trustees, who had authorized him to minister, he arrived in Georgia on 7 May 1738. Inspired by the Halle Orphanage in Germany, he laid plans for a similar institution, returning to England after four months. He energetically solicited moneys and secured the trustees' approval for the orphanage. With their support he was ordained priest by Bishop Benson at Christ Church, Oxford, on 14 January 1739. However, Whitefield's outspoken criticisms of clergymen increased. At St Margaret's, Westminster, supporters physically obstructed the appointed preacher and installed Whitefield in the pulpit. He arrived in Bristol in February, where negative reports from London caused most churches to be closed to him. Two months earlier he had initiated correspondence with Howell Harris, whose example in Wales of open-air preaching perhaps inspired Whitefield now to follow suit. He began by preaching on Kingswood Hill, near Bristol, on 17 February. First hearers were colliery miners, but soon massive crowds came from surrounding areas. Raising money for the orphanage, he also solicited collections for a school for Kingswood miners' children, and laid its foundation-stone on 2 April. 
In March 1739 Whitefield wrote to John Wesley that he 'must come and water what God has enabled me to plant' (3 March 1739, 'Works of John Wesley', 25.605). Wesley followed Whitefield's example by preaching in the fields and agreed to assume the Kingswood work. After Whitefield's departure Wesley preached against predestination, stating that believing it 'made God worse than a devil' (Thomas, 27.300). A Calvinistic orientation, not evident in Whitefield's early ministry, had now become central to his thinking. His adherence to predestination set him directly at odds with Wesley, who immediately published his sermon 'Free Grace', condemning it. The theological divide publicly opened was never bridged and, especially in this formative period of Methodism, seriously damaged their personal relationship. Whitefield was in London from May to August. Finding churches closed to him, he preached in the open air, regularly on Kennington Common and at Moorfields, taking collections for the Georgia orphanage and frequently preaching for two hours. He claimed attendances as large as 80,000. However many attended, they were numerous and at least curious. John Byrom wrote in June that 'Mr Whitefield is the chief topic of conversation' (J. Byrom, 'Private Journal... of John Byrom', ed. R. Parkinson, 2 vols., 1857, 2(3).246). 
By 1739 writing was central to Whitefield's strategy, and before he was twenty-five he had published forty-six sermons. To promote and finance his work he also began publishing journals of his ministry, and seven volumes appeared from 1737 to 1741. Together with two more describing his earlier life, their self-assurance was remarkable. Beginning with the observation that he, like Christ, had been born in an inn, they stated that 'God has set His seal to my ministry' ('George Whitefield's Journals', 207). 'The account of my infant years was wrote by the will of God' (Whitefield to J. Wesley, 8 Nov 1739, 'Works of John Wesley', 25.699). Regarding a 1737 London sermon, his 'Journals' recorded that 'thousands and thousands of prayers were put up for me. They would run and stop me in the alleys, hug me in their arms, and follow me with wishful looks' ('George Whitefield's Journals', 92). This confidence he also announced to correspondents. 'I am sure I have received angelic blessings.... The inhabitants are vastly affectionate towards me and are ready to pull out their eyes to give me' (Thomas, 26.382). 
In return, followers assured Whitefield that he was a 'faiverite of heaven' or that it would be 'no crime to fall down & worship you' (Library of Congress, Whitefield MSS 2.30, 2.38). One 'used to follow him as he walked the streets, and could scarce refrain from kissing the very prints of his feet' (Jackson, 2.58). However, what to Whitefield's followers was evidence of his God-inspired ministry, to detractors appeared an ego of wide girth. He already had kindled a fierce flame of opposition. His 'Journals' prompted a sermon in St Paul's Cathedral, where it was wondered if there had ever been 'such a medley of vanity, and nonsense, and blasphemy jumbled together?' (Tyerman, 1.288). He heard himself strongly attacked in a sermon by Joseph Trapp, which precipitated a prolonged and bitter exchange in the press. Trapp called the 'Journals' blasphemous and Whitefield himself besotted either with pride or madness. Whitefield preached and published against Trapp, 'my poor peevish adversary' ('Works', 5.157), stating that he was no Christian but a servant of Satan. Of the 200 anti-Methodist publications appearing in England during 1739-40, 154 were aimed at Whitefield, triggered by his open-air ministry, his condemnation of the preaching and theology of parish clergymen, and his denouncing Oxford as a 'harlot' (ibid., 1.80). 
Whitefield had previously received some support from bishops, yet by 1739 they were revising their opinions. Benson wrote six months after ordaining him priest to caution against acting contrary to that ordination's purpose: settled service in a Georgia parish. Whitefield replied that if bishops rejected him and fellow Methodists, God would furnish their authority. When the bishop of London, Edmund Gibson, published a pamphlet criticizing his claims of divine guidance and his judging of others, Whitefield responded in print, labelling Anglican clerics as lazy, non-spiritual, and pleasure seeking. Rejecting any ecclesiastical authority controlling his actions, he had concluded six weeks after his ordination as priest that 'the whole world is now my parish' (Thomas, 27.91), apparently antedating by a month Wesley's similar statement. 
Accompanying Whitefield to America in 1739 was a wealthy layman, William Seward, acting as fund-raiser, business co-ordinator, and publicist. He had orchestrated a barrage of printed support in England, including paid newspaper advertisements purporting to be news articles. On Whitefield's first American preaching mission, Seward now furnished newspapers and booksellers there and in Britain with constant material, including copies of Whitefield's writings. All this firmly focused the image of an exuberant trans-Atlantic revival. Seward sent a poem to colonial newspapers, the first stanza of which ran: '
Whitefield, the great the pleasing Name, 

Has all my soul possest, 

For sure some Seraph from above 

Inspires his Godlike Breast. 
(Trefeca MS 3174)' Whitefield, also, sent publicity to printers. Of himself, he wrote: 'Great and visible effects followed his preaching, almost wheresoever he went.... There was never such a general awakening, and concern for things of God known in 'America' before' ('Works', 1.179). 
For fifteen months Whitefield preached from New England to Georgia. As in England, he aimed attacks primarily at Anglican clergymen, publicly portraying them as God's persecutors. He told Americans that Bishop Gibson knew 'no... more of Christianity, than 'Mahaomet', or an Infidel' (Stephens, 2.307) and advised them 'since the Gospel was not preached in the church, to go and hear it in the meeting-houses' ('George Whitefield's Journals', 444). In Charles Town, South Carolina, the bishop of London's commissary, Alexander Garden, who had been highly supportive in 1738, now wrote to Gibson of his determination to put a stop to 'the fascinating Gibberish of Young Geo' (Kenney, 85). When he suspended him from the Anglican ministry, Whitefield rejected Garden's authority and joined in publishing a letter denouncing all South Carolina's Anglican clergy, for which he was arrested and granted bail. He challenged Commissary Archibald Cummings to a public debate in the press, after Cummings had announced Pennsylvania's Anglican churches henceforth closed to his preaching. His Philadelphia admirers then, in 1740, erected a building for his preaching. Publicly denouncing ministers sent by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, to colonial Anglican clerics he became 'the Noisie Mr. Whitefield' (Hall, 36). He fell to traducing divines long dead, publishing in 1740 against the works of two of Anglicanism's revered seventeenth-century authors. Whitefield wrote that John Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury, had no more been a true Christian than had Muhammad. In a separate publication he attacked Richard Allestree's 'The Whole Duty of Man', one of Anglicanism's most popular spiritual tracts, which on at least one occasion Whitefield had his followers cast 'into the Fire, with great Detestation' (Stephens, 2.320). He published these attacks widely in America and in England, and the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, which had furnished him religious books for America, ended its support. Whitefield was ironically a godsend to colonial non-Anglicans. Facing increasing opposition from English bishops, he turned the ecclesiastical tables, attacking colonial Anglicans and cutting his clerical cloth to suit America's predominant Calvinist dissenting ethos. He claimed it likely that he would 'be set at nought by the Rabbies of our Church, and perhaps at last be killed by them' (Seward, 71). 
Whitefield's arrival coincided with several local American awakenings. By the time he left, his itinerating had provided the sharpest spur in creating a general Great Awakening. In Pennsylvania he supported the revivalist Presbyterian ministers William and Gilbert Tennent, and his preaching caused a major split in that denomination. In the autumn of 1740 he made his first visit to New England, where five people were trampled to death in a Boston Congregational church in the crush to hear him. Crowds followed him everywhere and, as in England, he was the chief topic of conversation. At the invitation of the Congregational minister Jonathan Edwards he preached at Northampton. Although struck with the power of his sermons, Edwards was deeply disturbed by his unqualified appeals to emotion, his openly judging those he considered unconverted, and his demand for instant conversions. Edwards addressed him forcefully in private, but Whitefield refused a discussion. Shortly after Whitefield's departure, Edwards delivered a series of sermons containing but thinly veiled critiques of his preaching techniques, warning against over-dependence upon a preacher's eloquence and fervency. 
Whitefield's presence throughout mainland America from 1739 to 1741, and the hearty acclaim and opposition it produced, contributed directly to the expansion of colonial printing. Before arriving in America, Whitefield had published well over 100 imprints in England. The number of American publications nearly doubled from 1738 to 1741, the majority attributable to his presence, and each year from 1739 to 1745 American publishers produced more works by Whitefield than by any other writer on any subject. He struck up a business relationship with Benjamin Franklin. Serving as his main American publisher, Franklin reaped highly lucrative rewards, and many other colonial printers profited. According to a supporter, Whitefield had 'made 'Sermons', once a 'Drug', a 'vendible Commodity'' (J. Smith, 'Character, Preaching, &c. of... Whitefield', 1740, 16). 
Whitefield's plan for a Georgia orphanage was central to his preaching, and on 25 March 1740 he laid the first brick for what he called Bethesda, 10 miles from Savannah. Although appointed as its parish minister, he did not reach Savannah until January 1740, over fourteen months after arriving in America. He at once informed the trustees that he was giving up the post, though it had been the basis of their support. When they revoked his authority to serve as minister, he insisted on sole control of the orphanage. During 1740 he even kidnapped children and laid claim to their personal possessions. This brought him into sharp conflict with Georgia's founder, James Oglethorpe, who had them removed from Bethesda. When the trustees asked Whitefield to submit financial accounts, he replied that he would never feel obliged to do so. Meanwhile, with Seward's substantial financial contribution he purchased 5000 acres in Pennsylvania, ostensibly to establish a school for black people but also as a bolt-hole for English Methodists if they faced persecution. This project, to be called either Nazareth or English Town, never materialized. On departing for England in 1741, he left Bethesda's supervision with James Habersham, who had accompanied him to Georgia in 1738 and had remained in the colony. Whitefield took an energetic line with children. During the 1738 crossing he beat a four-year-old boy until he recited the Lord's prayer and tied up another until he repeated a psalm. One of the trustees' objections to his control of Bethesda was that 'a wrong Method' was taken with the children, who 'are often kept praying and crying all the Night' (Coleman, 271). 
Whitefield had become the most famous person in America but faced serious difficulties upon his return to England in March 1741. He was more than $1000 in debt for Bethesda. Seward, having given a staggering $10,000 for Whitefield's projects, was dead and had left no legacy but a substantial debt, for which Whitefield was under threat of arrest. His assault on Tillotson and 'The Whole Duty of Man' had lost him the support of many followers and had resulted in a huge number of hostile publications. Moreover, his London open-air preaching now attracted decidedly fewer hearers. He had left England as the leader of the new-birth movement, but Wesley now assumed that role. Whitefield wrote bitterly, accusing him of undermining his work and proceeded to preach against him, claiming that Wesley's attacks on predestination had alienated 'very many of my spiritual children', some of whom sent 'threatening letters, that God will speedily destroy me' ('Works', 1.256-7). During his absence in America their theological conflict had taken on a cutting edge, reflected in their sharp exchange of transatlantic letters. Whitefield had printed in both America and England 'A Letter to... John Wesley: in Answer to his Sermon Entituled, Free-Grace' (1741), which Wesley considered a 'treacherous' action whereby Whitefield had made himself 'odious and contemptible' (Wesley to Whitefield, 27 April 1741; 'Works of John Wesley', 26.60-61). Whitefield's remaining London followers in the spring built at Moorfields a large wooden 'tabernacle', close to Wesley's chapel. Wesley travelled widely to counter Whitefield's preaching, publicly shredded a copy of Whitefield's 'Letter', and published extensively against predestination. Whitefield took a leading role in the production of 'Weekly History', the first Methodist magazine. A mouthpiece for Calvinism, it was also a commercial venture, including advertising from evangelical tradesmen. For Whitefield, 'the devotion and business of a Methodist go hand in hand' (Whitefield, 'Sermons', 654). 
Whitefield re-established his relationship with Howell Harris, securing his service at the Tabernacle. Harris stood in awe of Whitefield -- 'I am not worthy indeed to wipe his feet' (Trefeca MS 618) -- an attitude material in securing Whitefield a wife. While in America, Whitefield proposed marriage by letter to Elizabeth Delamotte of Kent, and her refusal dealt him a severe blow. Intent on finding a wife, he focused on a widow, Mrs Elizabeth James, 'nee' Burnell ('c'.1704-1768), already affianced to Harris. At her Abergavenny home she told Whitefield of her love for Harris. Whitefield, replying that he would not be jealous, persisted. A broken-hearted Harris assured the protesting bride that she would be a support to Whitefield's work and officially gave her away when she and Whitefield married on 14 November 1741 in Capel Martin, Caerphilly. Whitefield rejoiced that his wife, about ten years his senior, 'would not, I think, attempt to hinder me in [God's] work for the world' ('Works', 1.363). 
Before he married Whitefield had made his first tour in Scotland, from July to October 1741, the first of fourteen visits. Ralph and Ebenezer Erskine, leaders of the breakaway Associate Presbytery, had constantly urged him to come, but upon arrival he discovered that this sect claimed a Christian monopoly and insisted he preach only in their churches. When he refused, they fell upon him mercilessly, branding him a sorcerer, 'a poor, vain-glorious, self-seeking, puffed-up creature', 'a limb of AntiChrist; a boar, and a wild beast' (Tyerman, 2.11). He returned to Scotland in the spring of 1742, and during five months his most notable appearances were at Cambuslang and Kilsyth, where revivals had been initiated. He preached three times on his first day at Cambuslang, writing that the physical outcryings 'far out-did all that I ever saw in 'America'' ('Works', 1.405) and that people 'are carryd out by Scores as Dead people out of the fi[e]ld' (Trefeca MS 571). Here, as in America, Whitefield participated in conducting communion services after Presbyterian and Congregationalist forms. While in Scotland he took collections to help pay Bethesda debts. That, and the hysteria of many of his open-air preachings, induced the publication in Edinburgh and Glasgow of seven bitter attacks. 
In addition, Whitefield frequently preached in south Wales, usually accompanied by Harris. In 1743 he was appointed at Watford moderator of Calvinistic Methodists in Wales and England. In the autumn Philip Doddridge, holding mixed opinions of Whitefield -- 'a very honest tho a very weak Man' who 'certainly does much good & I am afraid some Harm' (Nuttall, 705) -- preached at the Tabernacle and invited Whitefield to preach at his Northampton Academy. Doddridge received criticism from fellow dissenters, including Isaac Watts. On 4 October 1743 Whitefield's wife gave birth to a son in London. He baptized him at the Tabernacle and announced that God destined John as a noted preacher. Four months later she and the baby stopped at Gloucester. At the inn where Whitefield had been born his son died; he was buried on 8 February 1744 in the church where Whitefield had been baptized. 
After publishing several further controversial pamphlets, Whitefield, with his wife, departed in the summer of 1744 for what proved his most lengthy American visit. In Boston he faced considerable opposition. Soon after his arrival thirteen pamphlets were published, ten of them highly critical. Two were by the officials of Harvard and Yale. Despite friendly treatment and invitations to preach in 1740, when he published his 'Journal' in 1741 Whitefield had criticized both their education and Christian commitment, lamenting the lack of zeal of New England's Congregational ministers. Faced with their opposition -- 'how different from what once they were' ('Works', 2.72) -- he claimed that a conspiracy had been mounted. When he left Boston in 1740 Whitefield had induced Gilbert Tennent 'to blow up the divine fire' he had 'lately kindled there'; 'Surely our Lord intends to set 'America' in a flame' (ibid., 1.220-21). Tennent and another of Whitefield's clerical followers, James Davenport, had done just that, with New England experiencing fearful religious and social turmoil, necessitating the intervention of civil authority. Many claimed that what Whitefield set in motion had led directly to the break-up of New England's orderly parish system, communities, and even families, and most ministers were determined to prevent a fresh burst of disruption. One group proclaimed that 'religion is now in a far worse state than it was' before his preaching ('Declaration of the Association of the County of New Haven', 1745, 6). 
A leading Pennsylvania Presbyterian minister, George Gillespie, a former supporter, now issued 'Remarks upon Mr George Whitefield, Proving him a Man under Delusion'. Revivalist activity generally had subsided significantly, and Whitefield bemoaned the fact that 'nobody goes out scarcely but myself' ('Works', 2.103). Sobered by the level of opposition, he published 'A Letter to the... President and Professors... of Harvard' (1745), which admitted that some of his earlier actions and words had been immature and extreme. However, he saw no reason to implicate himself in the course of events: his 'fire' had been pure, he wrote; it had been corrupted by the 'wild-fire' of others (ibid., 2.73). Attempting to re-establish his reputation in New England, he preached in April 1745 to Massachusetts troops before their campaign against the French at Louisburg, opining that 'Canada is to be given us' (Christie, 267). When news of the Jacobite defeat at Culloden arrived the following year he preached and published 'Britain's Mercies, and Britain's Duty'. Printed both in America and Britain -- as were nearly all his productions -- this stated Methodist loyalty to the crown. 
Still finding that 'many ministers and the heads of the people' in New England 'would not bear' his ministry ('Works', 2.93), Whitefield focused on southern plantation provinces (in South Carolina, Alexander Garden again announced his dismissal from the Anglican priesthood). Whitefield's base was the home of the extremely wealthy Baynard family at Bohemia Manor, Maryland. He wrote that 'favour is given me in the sight of the rich and great... [I] sometimes think I shall never return to 'England'' (ibid., 2.83). Still deeply in debt for Bethesda, he increased efforts to secure donations from well-to-do supporters. James Habersham having departed Bethesda in 1744, Whitefield often left Elizabeth there to supervise its fabric, copy letters, and serve as press agent. Zeal for Bethesda led to a fateful course of action. Whitefield published in 1740 a criticism of slaves' treatment in the southern colonies and occasionally preached to slaves. However, as early as 1738 he had desired an ending of the trustees' prohibition of slavery in Georgia, and the abortive 'school' for black people in Pennsylvania was actually planned as a slave institution. In 1747 his local supporters Hugh and Jonathan Bryan purchased for him in the neighbouring slavery stronghold, South Carolina, Providence Plantation, stocked with slaves as income for Bethesda. He now wooed leading planters, who contributed nearly $300 for the purchase of further slaves. In 1750 the trustees sanctioned slavery, and Whitefield developed a fulsome defence of the institution, claiming its full scriptural justification. 'As for the lawfulness of keeping slaves, I have no doubt' (ibid., 2.404). Over the coming years he added to his stock of slaves, with preaching tours focused on raising money for that purpose. 'Blessed be God for the increase of the negroes' (ibid., 3.211). Whitefield had emerged as perhaps the most energetic, and conspicuous, evangelical defender and practitioner of slavery. 
Despite stating that he might remain in America, by 1748 Whitefield had returned to England, attracted by the countess of Huntingdon's desire that he become her personal chaplain. The day of his London arrival, 5 July, 'fearing to offend the Countess' (T. Beynon, 201), he presented himself; on 1 September she made the appointment official. Before he left America it was observed that he had 'become exceeding stately, relishing only the Company of the greatest' (Candler, 52). After he began preaching at the countess's London salon services, a supporter noted that he 'preaches more Considered among persons of a Superior Rank who frequent your Ladyship's Lodgings' (Huntingdon MS B46). 'The prospect of catching some of the rich in the gospel net is very promising', wrote Whitefield. When he and the countess were in London he preached twice a week at such gatherings. He was deferential to a fault, telling her that her conduct was 'truly god-like'. 'Tears trickle from my eyes, whilst I am thinking of your Ladyship's condescending to patronize such a dead dog as I am' ('Works', 2.220, 238; 3.120). He added his position as her chaplain to his title in subsequent publications and refashioned aspects of his ministry to meet her approval. Admitting that many of his English converts had been guilty of 'real madness and ranticism' (T. Beynon, 208), he became far more circumspect towards clerical opponents. He had told others 'of all the scriptures, promises, dreams and providence that have been given him as to his being made Bishop' (ibid., 41) and now, probably encouraged by her, considered this remarkable notion a near certainty. When a bishop accused him of perjury, Whitefield's restrained reply stated that 'the relation in which I stand to the Right Honourable the Countess of H---- ' made him 'desirous to clear myself from such an imputation' ('Works', 2.271). He said that he highly esteemed bishops of the Church of England because of their sacred character. When also in 1749 he was severely attacked in print by another bishop, the disarming subtitle of Whitefield's rejoinder was: 'Wherein several Mistakes in some Parts of his [Whitefield's] past Writings and Conduct are acknowledged'. To a correspondent he wrote: 'Alas! alas! In how many things have I judged and acted wrong... I have been too bitter in my zeal' (ibid., 2.144). His level of publishing subsided dramatically. During the first fourteen years of his ministry English and American publishers issued his works at an average rate of about twenty-five a year, but from 1750 the annual output declined to about three. Revising his 'Journals', he removed what he considered offending passages. However, he stated that the changes should not be considered 'express retractions' (Huntingdon MS B46) and did not publish the revision until 1756. When asked if it were 'true that Whitfield has recanted?' Lady Townshend replied: 'No, Sir, he has only canted' (H. Walpole to Horace Mann, 3 May 1749, Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.52). 
Before his 1748 return Whitefield spent three months in Bermuda, preaching frequently and collecting $100, some of which he sent for the personal support of Elizabeth, whom he had left in America. Her return to England over a year later coincided with growing hostility between Harris and Whitefield. She and Harris also fell into bitter confrontation. The complicated relationship between the three contributed to Whitefield's dismissal of Harris from the Tabernacle. Harris said that Whitefield's 'preaching hurts christians' and that he 'is now against our Saviour' (T. Beynon, 259, 277). The breach was never healed. Lady Huntingdon's immediate purpose being their conversion, Whitefield initiated correspondence with several members of the aristocracy. He boasted of his new position, not least to Wesley. Since the early 1740s, they made occasional valiant efforts to patch their torn relationship for the sake of Methodist unity; however, they remained deeply divided theologically, and the fabric was beyond repair. Wesley could not forget Whitefield's published claim that 'Infidels of all Kinds are on your Side of the Question' ('Letter to Wesley', 22). Even though at Whitefield's request Wesley preached his London funeral sermon, he in the end concluded that Whitefield had constantly ill-treated him and that the division had been caused by 'Mr. Whitefield himself' (Wesley to Thomas Maxfield, 14 Feb 1778, Wesley, 'Letters', 6.304). 
Chaplain to the countess of Huntingdon, Whitefield gave up his nominal leadership of the Calvinistic Methodists, intending to keep 'myself free from societies' ('Works', 2.172). However, he was not free of his London Tabernacle, the affairs of which were at a low state. During his American absence vast numbers of members, and several preachers, had left to join the Moravians. Early in his ministry he was influenced by this church and had often used Moravian terminology in his preaching, such as 'the Bleeding God, Agonizing God, Dying God' (T. Beynon, 13). Now he condemned them and in 1753 published a pamphlet attacking their leader, Count Nicholas Zinzendorf, together with their worship practices, and accused them of obtaining vast sums of money dishonestly. Previous close supporters, Moravian leaders were now livid. James Hutton, his former London printer, called Whitefield 'a Mahomet, a Caesar, an imposter, a Don Quixote, a devil, the beast, the man of sin, the Antichrist' (Benham, 579-80). John Syms threatened to make public Whitefield's most secret affairs. Six months after his return in 1748 he observed that where before 20,000 people would come to hear him in the open air, now there were not more than a hundred. He redoubled his efforts and during 1750 pursued a punishing regime in London and many areas of England and Scotland, ending the year confined to bed. 'My continual vomitings almost kill me, and yet the pulpit is my cure' ('Works', 2.345). Largely through Lady Huntingdon's generosity a new Tabernacle was erected on the spot of the old and opened on 10 June 1753. Also that year he opened a chapel in Bristol, again with Lady Huntingdon's financial backing. She also provided substantial sums for his personal use, and in London he lived in some comfort. 
After a brief journey to Georgia and South Carolina from October 1751 to April 1752 to extend his land and slave holdings, two years later Whitefield returned to America, taking twenty-two English children to Bethesda. Most of the ten months of this visit were again spent in the south, although he also visited New England and the middle colonies. During the summer of 1754 he received an honorary MA from the College of New Jersey, which he used in publications in a manner suggesting that it was an Oxford degree. On returning to England in the spring of 1755, he published vivid accounts depicting Holy Week processions in Lisbon, where he had spent a month on his outward journey. 
Whitefield had long desired to position himself in London's West End, close to its theatres, and late in 1755 he was offered the use of the dissenters' Long Acre Chapel. The incumbent of the parish, St Martin-in-the-Fields, attempted to put a stop to Whitefield's services there. Frequent disturbances were made outside the chapel, and in April 1756 he received three anonymous letters threatening his life. These commotions persuaded him of the need for his own building in the area, and in November he opened his second London chapel, in Tottenham Court Road, designed for a higher class of auditor than the Tabernacle. Three years later, much extended, Tottenham was the largest nonconformist church building in Britain and probably in the world. Although a similar residence was built, he and Elizabeth continued to live at the Tabernacle house. During the Long Acre unrest, Whitefield published 'A Short Address to Persons of All Denominations, Occasioned by the Alarm of an Intended Invasion' (1756). Violently anti-French, it stated that 'British arms were never more formidable, than when our soldiers went forth in the strength of the Lord; and, with a 'Bible' in one hand, and a sword in the other, cheerfully fought under His banner' (Tyerman, 2.370). The usually hostile London 'Monthly Review' found that Whitefield 'here makes good use of the influence he has acquired over the common people' (ibid., 2.371, n.). It also was a diatribe against Roman Catholicism. Certain that they had sent the threatening Long Acre letters, he railed against papists who, he said, had 'massacred, in cold blood', 'tens of thousands of innocent, unprovoking Irish Protestants' a century earlier. Now 'popish priests' were again planning to murder protestants (ibid., 2.371). He carried this message to Scotland in the autumn. The following summer, 1757, again preaching there, Whitefield attended the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, which he highly commended, and then proceeded to Ireland, which he had visited in 1738 and 1751. Now, in the open air in Dublin, he spoke out against Roman Catholicism and was attacked by 'hundreds and hundreds of papists' who wounded him severely and smashed his portable pulpit. Taking refuge in a coach, he rode 'in gospel triumph through the oaths, curses, and imprecations of whole streets of papists' ('Works', 3.208). It was his final visit to Ireland. 
Throughout his ministry Whitefield was especially vigorous in condemning public amusements of all kinds: musical concerts, dances, card playing, and the theatre. On one occasion he upbraided an eminent dissenting minister for singing in a London tavern a song in praise of old English beef. Towards the end of 1759 Whitefield preached a sermon threatening London theatregoers with damnation. This was reciprocated with a vengeance by numerous satirical productions, based on the premise that Whitefield was himself a consummate actor. As early as 1746 he was introduced as the adulterous Doctor Preach Field in the production of Charles Macklin's 'A Will and No Will'. Now in 1760 he was treated by the leading theatrical satirist, Samuel Foote. In 'The Minor' Whitefield was called Squintum, occasioned by the severe squint in his left eye. Squintum was thenceforward the satirist's usual appellation suggesting that Whitefield focused on the carnal while gazing heavenward. By September 'The Minor' had graced stages as far afield as Newcastle and later crossed the Atlantic. 'The Spiritual Minor' (1763) and 'The Hypocrite' (1768) followed, and Whitefield was the target of most of the satirical writing directed against the Methodist movement. He was harshly handled by novelists in Fielding's 'Joseph Andrews' (1742) and 'Tom Jones' (1749), and in Smollett's 'Humphry Clinker' (1771). Richard Graves, who had graduated with Whitefield from Pembroke College, portrayed him in 'The Spiritual Quixote' (1772), where the preacher Wildgoose uttered quotations from Whitefield's publications. A satirical print by Hogarth, 'Credulity, Superstition and Fanaticism' (1762), sold widely. 
Whitefield was of average height, with fair complexion and small, dark-blue eyes. As a young man slender, by the late 1750s he had become decidedly corpulent (a change vividly portrayed in his portraits). In 1761 and 1762 he was severely ill and sought medical advice in Bath, Edinburgh, and the Netherlands. 'I am weary', he wrote, 'of the world, of the church, and of myself', and believed that 'a voyage would brace me up' ('Works', 3.283, 271). In all, he spent perhaps two years of his life at sea and was, in his own words, 'an amphibious itinerant' (JRL, PLP 113.1.20). In 1763, after over eight years' absence, Whitefield was anxious to visit America. Added to distress at satirical attacks was weariness with overseeing his two London chapels. Their management he left to laymen, with instructions not to 'consult me in any thing, unless absolutely necessary', adding that he could not 'bear the[ir] cares' even when in London ('Works', 3.290, 326). 
Most of Whitefield's American visit from 1763 to 1765 was spent in Philadelphia, New York, and Boston, where he received thanks for collecting funds in England after a Boston fire in 1760. A further mending of fences was indicated by an invitation to preach at Yale. After reaching America in September 1763, it was sixteen months before he arrived at Bethesda. In 1757 he had instructed his agents to send away most of the orphans. 'I pity them, but they must blame their parents... I am determined to take in no more than the plantation will maintain, till I can buy more negroes' ('Works', 3.211). It became clear that he had all along viewed Bethesda as a prospective college; at the end of 1764 he petitioned Georgia's authorities to that effect. He also produced accounts of his financial stewardship, similar to those frequently published over the years. 
Back in England, on 6 October 1765 Whitefield preached at the opening of Lady Huntingdon's Bath chapel. During his final decade the bulk of his publications were devotional, including prefaces to a new edition of Samuel Clarke's annotated 'Bible' (1759) and to Bunyan's collected works (1767). There were two exceptions. In 1763 he issued a rebuttal to a publication against Methodism, though in it he repeated contrition for much contained in his 'Journals'. The other was his final pamphlet. When six students at St Edmund Hall, Oxford -- with whom he had been closely involved -- were expelled in 1768 for Methodistic practices, he published 'A Letter to the Reverend Dr Durell, Vice-Chancellor', disingenuously denying connection with the students but protesting at their treatment. That summer he made his last journey to Scotland, reporting that he was 'in danger of being hugged to death' ('Works', 3.371). He raised collections for Indian education in New England. His wife died of a fever on 9 August 1768 and was buried in a vault at the Tottenham chapel. After their 1744-8 stay in America, where she suffered four miscarriages, she never accompanied him on his travels, remaining at the Tabernacle house. Whitefield reported that 'none in America could bear her' (T. Beynon, 16), while she said that she had been 'but a load & burden' to him (Trefeca MS 1535). It was observed after their 1748 return that she was refusing to submit to him, and that his treatment of her left much to be desired. She concluded that she was 'altogether unfit & unworthy' to be his wife (JRL, PLP 113.2.2). Cornelius Winter, who latterly lived with them, reported that Whitefield 'was not happy in his wife', though he 'did not intentionally make his wife unhappy'. However, 'her death set his mind much at liberty'. Winter also reported that in general personal relationships Whitefield 'was impatient of contradiction'. Once, when his sharpness drove to tears someone trying to please him, he 'burst into tears, saying, 'I shall live to be a poor peevish old man, and every body will be tired of me'' (Jay, 81). 
Whitefield preached at the opening of the countess of Huntingdon's Trevecca College in Wales on 24 August 1768, as he did at the opening of her Tunbridge Wells chapel on 23 July 1769. He abruptly left for America in September 1769, arriving at Bethesda in December. In spite of objections from ministerial colleagues, who said that since all his collections had been solicited for an orphanage he was not free to transform Bethesda, Whitefield had pursued his plans for a college. Unsuccessful in securing a royal charter, he received a more favourable response from the governor and council of Georgia. He left Georgia in April 1770, preaching in Philadelphia, New York, and New England, there making outspoken common cause with American patriots. As early as 1764 he announced in Boston: 'O poor New England! There is a deep laid plot against both your civil and religious liberties' (C. Bridenbaugh, 'Mitre and Sceptre', 1962, 244). Critical of the 1765 'Stamp Act', the following year he wrote: ''Stamp Act' repealed, 'Gloria Deo'' (Gillies, 248). He notified New Englanders that he would 'serve our civil as well as religious Interests' (S. Adams, 'Writings of Samuel Adams', ed. H. Cushing, 4 vols., 1904-8, 1.26). He attended the House of Commons in 1766 to hear Benjamin Franklin's presentation of colonial grievances and wrote a letter, published in America, praising his performance. (However, their relationship ended in 1769 on a sour note, when Franklin made clear his rejection of Whitefield's religious prescriptions.) In a farewell sermon to his London chapels, setting out on his seventh and final journey to America, Whitefield seemed to burn his British bridges: he denounced 'the great mischiefs the poor pious [Boston] people suffered lately through the town's being disturbed by the [British] soldiers' (Whitefield, 'Sermons', 712). 
Although there were frequent references to vomitings during the 1740s and 1750s, probably during 1760-61 his 'constitution... received its material shock' (Jay, 36). He was described, at the age of fifty, as 'an old, old man' ('Journal of John Wesley', 5.150). Cornelius Winter said that, following each time of preaching, as soon as 'he was seated in his chair, nature demanded relief, and gained it by a vast discharge from the stomach, usually with a considerable quantity of blood', before he could speak (Jay, 26). Wesley described him early in 1769 as sinking towards death. Whitefield often expressed the desire to die in the pulpit and after arriving in New England in August 1770 preached almost daily for the next two months. Following a two-hour open-air sermon he died at the age of fifty-five at 6 a.m. on Sunday 30 September 1770, in the house of the Presbyterian minister of Newburyport, Massachusetts, apparently from angina pectoris. The funeral was in the Newburyport church on 2 October, and he was buried beneath the pulpit. His death cemented his relationship with America. To New Englanders he had been a 'real patriot' (N. Whitaker, 'Funeral Sermon', 1771, 34). Another put it in verse: '
When his Americans were burden'd sore 

... Unrival'd friendship in his breast now strove: 

The fruit thereof was charity and love 

Towards America. 
(P. Wheatley, 'An Elegiac Poem', 1770, 6)' Five years later several American patriot soldiers entered Whitefield's crypt, cut off small pieces of his garments, and carried them as amulets into battle against British troops. Whitefield, who spent nine of his ministry's thirty-four years there, had become an American icon. 
Whitefield bequeathed sums to friends and family members totalling nearly $1500. Questions concerning the source of his personal wealth dogged his memory. His will stated that all this money had lately been left him 'in a most unexpected way and unthought of means' (JRL, PLP 113.1.23). However, much earlier he had lodged $1000 for his wife if predeceasing her and had personally contributed $3300 to Bethesda. He willed everything in Georgia to the countess of Huntingdon, including 4000 acres of land and fifty slaves, commissioning her to pursue his college plan. However, at his death Bethesda still bore a debt of $1235, and soon it lay in ruins. Despite the enormous total of $16,000 expended, only 180 children had at various sporadic times been resident since its founding. Whitefield's most faithful London lay supporter was astonished at the accounts and concluded 'that Mr Whitefield was not directed from above' with Bethesda, 'as no good ever came from it either in spiritual or temporal' (Huntingdon MS A1/8/5). 
Franklin attended one of Whitefield's open-air preachings, determined not to contribute to the orphanage, yet found himself turning out his pockets owing to the eloquence of the appeal. Whitefield, denouncing the theatre, was a consummate actor, bringing drama and novelty to countless people. He preached on perhaps 18,000 occasions, and many sermons were perfected by constant repetition. Preaching without note or sermon plan, never stumbling at a word, with constant anecdotes (at which he excelled), and even humour, he utilized his arresting voice and oratorical skills, set off with gestures and vivid part-playing. Towards the close of a sermon he occasionally donned a black cap after the manner of a condemning judge, proclaiming, 'sinner, I must do it; I must pronounce sentence upon you'. He would then, 'in a tremendous strain of eloquence, recite our Lord's words, 'Go ye cursed,' not without a very powerful description of the nature of the curse' (Jay, 24). When describing Peter's bitter weeping, Whitefield would catch a fold of his gown to wipe away tears. One ardent attender at Tottenham Court Road was 'agreeably entertained with his manner of preaching' but could not 'discern any difference between Mr. Whitefield's preaching and seeing a good tragedy' (Jackson, 5.225). Another observed that he 'could play well on an instrument.... But I did not understand him, though I might hear him twenty times' (ibid., 1.13). In Pennsylvania a German woman who understood no English was blessed merely by his gestures, looks, and voice. Franklin praised his voice and dramatic timing, so 'that without being interested in the Subject, one could not help being pleas'd with the Discourse' (B. Franklin, 'Autobiography', ed. L. W. Labaree, 1964, 180). Men such as Lord Chesterfield held similar views. 
A further aspect of Whitefield's preaching was tears, a homiletic hallmark. He also expected them from hearers, since tears were his litmus test for judging effect. Wesley commented that often when preaching Whitefield's ''head [was] as waters', and his 'eyes as a fountain of tears'' (Tyerman, 2.617). Winter said that 'I hardly ever knew him to go through a sermon without weeping... sometimes he exceedingly wept, stamped loudly and passionately, and was frequently so overcome, that, for a few seconds, you would suspect he never could recover' (Jay, 27-8). The former slave Olaudah Equiano observed that he 'sweat[ed] as much as I ever did while in slavery' (P. Edwards, ed., 'Equiano's Travels', 1989, 92). Samuel Johnson believed that Whitefield 'would be followed by crowds were he to wear a night-cap in the pulpit, or were he to preach from a tree' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.79). However, though frequently veering from dramatic bathos to condemnation, he was at times capable of careful and compelling antithesis. 
'I never in my life knew any person so much idolized by some, and railed at by others' ('Calendar', ed. Nuttall, 4.265). This contemporary observation crisply poses the problem for historical evaluation. The first biography, John Gillies's 'Memoirs' (which contains Whitefield's account of his Bermuda visit and portions of the now lost manuscript journal of his later years), appeared less than two years after Whitefield's death, specifically to spike continuing negative images of his ministry, not least concerning financial affairs. Gillies simultaneously published his 'Works', the first three volumes containing 1465 of Whitefield's letters, to which, as editor, he made alterations of substance and style. That the originals of only a few have survived, together with a limited number of others, has presented historians with severe difficulties. Recent writing has focused on specific aspects of his career, such as his 'acting' or his contribution to an expanding consumer economy. Those attempting biographies, from Gillies on, have done so from a non-Anglican viewpoint and have painted with a hagiographic brush. While sometimes admitting his frequent lack of judgement, they have exonerated him by emphasizing his genius as a preacher. However, there is no adequate corpus of printed sermons (a total of seventy-nine, of which fifty-seven were published by Whitefield), and their general quality has always disappointed even his most ardent admirers. Moreover, it is accepted that without his 'voice and motion' his printed sermons convey 'but a very faint idea' (Jay, 30). While it is impossible to gauge the lasting impact of his sermonic power upon the multitudes who heard him, a number of ministers were in no doubt that by it they had received their own experiences of conversion, and many were induced to attempt to emulate his preaching. In many ways a puritan redivivus, George Whitefield re-energized the Calvinist message. Throughout his ministry, and since, the debate over his character and his contribution to Christianity has continued; yet for more than a generation his robust ministry and compelling passionate proclamation of the necessity of a new birth made him the eighteenth century's most sensational preacher in Great Britain and America. 


@@@@@


doc= 29282


Whitefoord, Caleb (1734-1810), wine merchant and diplomatist, was born in Edinburgh, the natural son of Charles Whitefoord (d. 1753), an army officer descended from a titled Ayrshire family. He was educated at John Mundell's school in Edinburgh, showing great skill in classics, and at Edinburgh University, where he matriculated on 3 March 1748. His father wanted him to become a minister in the Church of Scotland, but Caleb disliked this idea, and in 1750 he was taken instead to London and apprenticed to Archibald Stewart, an eminent wine merchant in Buckingham Street. He travelled on business to Portugal and France and acquired a love for the London theatre and for the company of men of letters. An inheritance from his father enabled him to set up a partnership in the wine trade in 1754 with Thomas Brown, a young merchant who shared his convivial tastes, at 38 Craven Street, where Benjamin Franklin would become their neighbour and friend. The firm prospered and Whitefoord found time to engage in humorous and political journalism. His 'New Method of Reading Newspapers' (1766) greatly amused the usually critical Horace Walpole and also found favour with Oliver Goldsmith and Samuel Johnson. The government hoped he might write a pamphlet on the Falkland Islands question in 1771, and it was Whitefoord who recommended Johnson for the task. 
On Franklin's proposal Whitefoord became a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in 1762 and was active in its proceedings for the remainder of his life, serving as a committee chairman and a vice-president. Through his friendship with Joshua Reynolds he became involved in the affairs of the Royal Academy after its foundation in 1768. He collected pictures by old and modern masters and was himself an amateur artist, whose portrait of Franklin was admired by its subject. 
Whitefoord's friendship with Franklin earned him both historical importance and contemporary fame. When an end was sought to the war with the American colonies in 1782, Whitefoord was chosen by Lord Shelburne to go with Richard Oswald to France and act as an intermediary between Franklin and the British government. He served for a year as secretary to the commission that concluded peace with the United States and though Oswald had promised to lobby on his behalf for some financial recompense he received no payment until 1793, when he was granted a pension of $200 a year. 
In 1790 Whitefoord moved to the Adelphi, first to John Street and then to James Street, where his friend Isaac Disraeli, who he proposed as a member of the nearby Society of Antiquaries, also had an apartment. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1784 and of the Society of Antiquaries in 1791. He spent much time at Hanworth with Mary Sidday (1775-1852), with whom he had a son, Charles, in 1797 and whom he married on 21 January 1800. Five more children followed: Maria ('b'. 1802), Caleb ('b'. 1805), who became rector of Burford, Oxfordshire, twins Charles and Harriet ('b'. 1807), and John (1809-1892), who became a magistrate in Tasmania. In 1805 he purchased a large house in Argyll Street (no. 28), a turning off Oxford Street, and in the same year he helped to found the British Institution. 
Whitefoord was described by J. T. Smith as 'a slight built man and much addicted when in conversation to shrug up his shoulders. He had a thin face, with little eyes' (Smith, 'Book', 114). His dandified and old-fashioned style of dress noted by Smith was recorded in Wilkie's painting, 'The Letter of Introduction'. His death on 4 February 1810 at his Argyll Street home was caused by a sudden illness that took only two days to prove mortal. He was buried on 9 February in the churchyard of St Mary's, Paddington. His widow remarried on 25 July 1812; her second husband was John Lee. She died on 18 May 1852. 
A memoir in the 'European Magazine' described Whitefoord as one of those men of 'easy, good natured, social disposition, that... have always seemed 'necessary links' of the great chain that binds Society together' ('European Magazine', 163). His one weakness was a failure to apply himself to any one sphere of creative endeavour. He preferred to work behind the scenes and his significance lies not merely in his famous flurry into international diplomacy, but in his long years of voluntary work, both institutionally and personally, in promoting the arts and letters of his country. 


@@@@@


doc= 29283


Whitefoord, Charles (d. 1753), army officer, was the third son of Sir Adam Whitefoord, first baronet (died 1727), and his wife, Margaret (died 1742), only daughter of Alan, seventh Lord Cathcart, and Elizabeth Dalrymple, daughter of James Dalrymple, first Viscount Stair. He entered the Royal Navy in 1718, but despite passing his lieutenant's examination he could not gain a commission. His cousin, John Dalrymple, second earl of Stair, seems to have been responsible for his education at the French academy of Angers and also for his entry into the army in 1720, possibly as a quartermaster in the Inniskilling dragoons. 
In 1728 Whitefoord purchased an ensign's commission in the 31st foot commanded by his uncle, Charles Cathcart, later eighth Lord Cathcart. In 1729 he was appointed adjutant to Colonel William Blakeney commanding the regiment in Cathcart's absence. In 1733 he was promoted lieutenant and in 1737 captain. On 13 July 1738 he transferred to the Royal Irish regiment of foot stationed in Minorca. Here he became fat on 'three meals a day and no exercise', and 'I am become an Assembly man, play at quadrille with the ladies, go to Church on Sundays, but then I swear most intolerably the rest of the week' ('Whitefoord Papers', 11). War with Spain saw him commissioned a captain in a marine regiment on 14 January 1740 and then on 4 April a major in the American regiment. In July 1740 he was made aide-de-camp to his uncle, now Lord Cathcart, the commander of all the British forces in America, who died in December 1740. Whitefoord joined the expedition against Carthagena in March and April 1741. He was promoted on 27 April 1741 to lieutenant-colonel of the 5th marines. Between July and November 1741 he served in Cuba. Upon his return to England he was stationed in Chatham, where by 1743 he had rented a house. 
Whitefoord was in Edinburgh when the 1745 Jacobite rising broke out and immediately offered his services to Sir John Cope, spending much of his time trying to secure adequate supplies for the troops. At the battle of Prestonpans on 21 September 1745 Whitefoord gallantly maintained his position with the artillery after his gunners had fled, and was saved from death by Alexander Stewart of Invernahyle, a Jacobite officer. Whitefoord was sent as a prisoner to Perth and subsequently paroled. After Culloden he repaid the compliment to Stewart by appealing to the duke of Cumberland to spare the fugitive Stewart, who was eventually pardoned by the 'Act of Indemnity'. In later life Stewart related the story to Walter Scott, for whom it was 'one of those anecdotes which soften the features even of civil war... equally honourable to the memory of both parties' (Scott, introduction, 386), and became the basis for the 'mutual protection afforded by Waverley and Talbot to each other, upon which the whole plot depends' (ibid.) in Scott's novel 'Waverley', Edward Waverley's role being based upon Whitefoord, and Talbot's upon Stewart. 
Whitefoord was a key defence witness at Cope's court martial over the debacle at Prestonpans, which led to the general's acquittal. Following disbandment in November 1748, he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 5th fusiliers in September 1751, stationed in Ireland. In November he succeeded as colonel of the regiment, but he died at Galway on 2 January 1753. He left a son, the diplomat Caleb Whitefoord, and a daughter, Charlotte, both described in his will as his 'natural' children (BL, Add. MS 36596, fol. 345), which suggests that he never married. Caleb was left all his bonds, bills, and debts in order to pay legacies which included $200 to Charlotte and $500 to his 'worthy friend', Charles Schaw Cathcart, ninth Lord Cathcart. 


@@@@@


doc= 29284


Whitehall, Robert (bap. 1624, d. 1685), poet, was baptized on 18 March 1624 at Amersham parish church, Buckinghamshire. He was the only son of Robert Whitehall (1584-1658), a clergyman who held in plurality the benefices of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford (January 1616 to January or February 1629), and Addington, Buckinghamshire (September 1616 onwards), and his first wife, Bridget Watkins ('bap'. 1603), of Amersham, whom he married there on 12 June 1623. Whitehall's mother died soon after childbirth, and was buried at Amersham on 28 July 1624. Her husband remarried and had seven further children; he was buried at Addington on 1 October 1658. 
A king's scholar at Westminster School under Richard Busby, Whitehall became a member of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1643, gaining his BA on 2 November 1647. On 10 May 1648 he refused to submit to the parliamentary visitation with the words, 'As I am summoned a Student of Christ Church, my name itself speaks for me, that I can acknowledge no Visitation but K. Charles', rendered into the couplet '
My name's Whitehall, God bless the Poet, 

If I submit, the King shall know it. 
(Gutch, 'History', 2/2, 583)' He was expelled on 7 July 1648, and probably retired to his father's rectory. He subsequently submitted to the authority of the parliamentary visitors, and with the support of Richard Ingoldsby, the regicide and MP for Buckingham, was appointed to a fellowship at Merton College in 1650. He was awarded his MA on 18 November 1652, appointed 'terrae filius' in 1655, and qualified as MB on 5 September 1657 (a licence dated 21 June 1665 allowed him to practise). In response to a letter from Henry Cromwell dated 22 June 1657, the college authorities gave permission for Whitehall 'to give instruction in the University of Dublin' (Brodrick, 94), but there is no record that he did so. On 19 October 1670, probably with reference to the presbyterian-royalist plot led by Sir George Booth in August 1659 to restore the monarchy, he wrote to Joseph Williamson MP, the keeper of state papers and secretary to Lord Arlington, to seek compensation for having been 'worsted in spirituals of 250'l'. a year, and in nearly 1,000'l'. by the Cheshire misadventure' ('CSP dom.', '1670'). In 1671 Whitehall was sub-warden of Merton College. 
Whitehall's contemporary at Merton, the unamiable Anthony Wood, dismisses him as a 'pot poet' and 'no better than a meer Poetaster and time-serving-Poet' (Gutch, 'History', 2/2, 583; Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.596). Much of the surviving 'oeuvre' consists of well-crafted verse addresses in Latin or English to figures as varied as Oliver Cromwell (1654), Richard Cromwell (1657), Prince Henry, Edward Hyde (1660), the king (1660, 1679), the queen mother (1661), and Catherine of Braganza (1662). These were printed either separately or within the volumes of loyal verses produced by members of Oxford University, where, reflecting his local repute, they were generally accorded by the university printer, Leonard Lichfield, a prestigious position at the end of the collections. Four substantial, if overblown, poems justify the accolade of minor poet: 'The Marriage of Armes and Arts, July 12. 1651' and 'Urania' (1669) are crammed with learned references, and 'The Coronation' (1661) and 'The English Rechabite' (1680) are well paced and engagingly boisterous. Whitehall's exchanges with the artist Mary More, though, reveal a less deft touch (BL, Harley MS 3918): both in 'The woman's right proved false' (his prose rebuttal to her polished essay challenging male authority) and in his verses (separately printed in 1674) following her gift to the university of her 'drawing' of Thomas More (actually Thomas Cromwell), his tone is patronizing and misjudged. His lines generated not only a spirited reply from the donor, in which she cast aspersion on the sexual preferences of the 'Fellow and Batchelour', but also, anonymously, 'A Reproof to R. W.' (Portland MS PwV, 504). Whitehall's only full-length work is his appealing 'Hexastichon hieron' (1677), a book of 258 emblems on biblical subjects accompanied by verses. Twelve copies only were printed by Lichfield and then 'richly bound' for presentation, probably to attract patronage; recipients included the king and the young son of John Wilmot, second earl of Rochester, for whom it may have been 'chiefly composed' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.597). 
Whitehall provides a unique glimpse of Rochester as an undergraduate at Wadham College between 1660 and 1661; the don 'absolutely doted' on him and 'pretended to instruct the Count... in the art of Poetry' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.490). On 1 January 1667 the genial Whitehall sent him with his portrait a Hudibrastic verse epistle; this describes the author's florid appearance, incidentally supporting Wood's comment, 'following the trade of drinking as he was wont, [he] gained to himself a red face' (Wood, 'Modius salium', 25), and reveals his practice of lending Rochester, for 'night rambles... as protection from proctorial interference', his own academic gown; this the undergraduate '
daggled through this towne 

To keepe vp discipline, and tell vs 

Next morning where you found good=fellows. 
(Needham, vi, 44)' Whitehall and Rochester contributed to the volumes of university verses addressed to the king and queen mother in the early 1660s. Although Wood alleges that Whitehall penned Rochester's three poems, they differ significantly in tone; while Whitehall, and even another contributor, Walter Blandford, the warden of Wadham, may have added polish, there is 'nothing in them that might not have been composed by a clever boy of thirteen' (Pinto, 9) and the case for Whitehall's authorship is further weakened by the attack on physicians in Rochester's poem to the queen. The poems were 'unquestionably printed as Rochester's with his knowledge and consent' ('Complete Poems of John Wilmot', 155) and appeared posthumously in the 'authorized' 1691 edition of Rochester's poems. 
Whitehall died a bachelor on 8 July 1685 and was 'buried the next day in the south part or Isle' of his college chapel (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.597); there is a commemorative stone in the ante-chapel floor. 


@@@@@


doc= 29285


Whitehead, Charles (1804-1862), writer, was born in London on 4 September 1804, the eldest of the seven children of a City wine merchant, possibly the Joseph Whitehead listed in contemporary trade directories as the proprietor of wine and brandy vaults in Tottenham Court Road. The details of his early life are exceptionally obscure, and nothing is known of his education. After some time as a clerk in a commercial house he embarked on the hazardous career of a professional author. In 1831 he published 'The Solitary', a lengthy meditative poem whose implacable melancholy was partly occasioned by the drowning of one of his three brothers. This first work attracted favourable notice but few purchasers. 
Whitehead married Mary Ann Loomes on 29 October 1833. During the 1830s he contributed widely to magazines (among them 'The Monthly', 'The Court', and 'Bentley's Miscellany') and to such annuals as 'Friendship's Offering' and 'Amaranth'. He was also, for some eight years, a reader for Bentley and, from 1836, editor of Chapman and Hall's 'Library of Fiction'. Of his more substantial works from this decade, 'The Lives and Exploits of English Highwaymen, Pirates and Robbers' (1834) is essentially an updated revision of earlier compilations by other hands, but 'The Autobiography of Jack Ketch' (1834) adroitly parodies the vogue for 'Newgate' fiction while simultaneously generating its own macabre comedy. A blank verse historical play, 'The Cavalier', was produced at the Haymarket Theatre, London, in September 1836 and was revived in 1840, 1850, 1856, and 1868. 
By the end of the 1830s, then, Whitehead had established himself on the London literary scene (among other affiliations, he was a member of Jerrold and Blanchard's Mulberry Club) and in 1841-2 he produced his masterpiece, 'Richard Savage', a novel based on the career of Samuel Johnson's early friend. The eponymous narrator, vain and unreliable, presents a disturbing study in obsession, and Whitehead skilfully contextualizes his protagonist's deepening paranoia in a credible reconstruction of eighteenth-century Grub Street. 'Richard Savage' is a major achievement, but it had no real successor. 'The Earl of Essex', an impenetrably stilted historical romance, enjoyed only moderate sales on its first appearance in 1843, and of the magazine pieces collected in 'Smiles and Tears' (1847) only a few dark confessional tales (such as the Poe-like 'Narrative of John Ward Gibson') rise above the level of hack work. 'The Life and Times of Sir Walter Raleigh' (1854) owes more to scissors and paste than to scholarship. 
Whitehead's work was neither prolific nor popular enough to ensure a regular income and as early as 1836 he was petitioning the Literary Fund for relief, an application repeated in 1837, 1843, 1852, and 1854. Constantly in debt and in fear of bailiffs (in 1843 he was being housed and supported by his sisters), his mental and physical health deteriorated, and in 1852 he confessed that 'now-a-days I am a bad hand at writing against time, being excited and highly nervous' (Hodder, 357). Finally, on 13 November 1856, he and his wife left England to start a new life in Australia, arriving in Melbourne on 17 March 1857. 
Whitehead rapidly became a contributor to various colonial journals, including 'The Examiner' and the 'Melbourne Punch'. He may, briefly, have edited the journal 'My Note Book', which began, in 1858, to serialize his new novel 'Emma Latham', but he was, once again, unable to write himself out of poverty. His mentally-ill wife died at Yarra Bend Asylum on 21 August 1860. Whitehead himself drifted into chronic alcoholism (a tendency which perhaps began in England) and, after appearing in a police court 'charged with lunacy, caused through drink' (Turnbull, 20), he was eventually admitted to the Immigrants' Home for the destitute. He died of hepatitis and bronchitis at the Melbourne Hospital on 5 July 1862 and was buried in a pauper's grave. 
Whitehead is remembered chiefly as the author invited by Chapman and Hall to write the letterpress for a series of illustrations by Robert Seymour, and who suggested that they approach Dickens instead (a suggestion which resulted in 'The Pickwick Papers'). There appears to be no solid evidence for this story, and Whitehead, with characteristic misfortune, has thus survived only as the subject of an apocryphal anecdote. He deserves a better fate, for he was able to harness his brooding, depressive imagination (suicide is a recurrent motif in his work) to produce, in 'Richard Savage', a novel of compelling power. 


@@@@@


doc= 29286


Whitehead, David (c.1492-1571), evangelical preacher, is said by Anthony Wood to have been a native of Hampshire, where the Whiteheads had some landed property. The same source reports that he is also said to have been educated at Brasenose or All Souls, Oxford, and, though his name does not appear in the defective registers of the period, there is evidence to suggest that during the early years of Henry VIII's reign he spent some time in Oxford, where he may also have been an Augustinian friar. Sir Henry Billingsley, then a student and later a collaborator with Whitehead in literary ventures, is reported to have developed his taste for mathematics from studying with Whitehead at Oxford. Whatever the truth of this, it is clear that during Henry's reign Whitehead became increasingly associated with a group of scholars and clerics sympathetic to the gospel. He is said to have been a chaplain to Anne Boleyn; later he was tutor to the young Charles Brandon, second duke of Suffolk. As a member of the party of reform in London he was peripherally involved in the affair of Anne Askew. After Anne's arrest in March 1546 she was examined by Bishop Edmund Bonner, who offered to summon men she esteemed as learned and of good judgement: Edward Crome, David Whitehead, and John Huntingdon. After Anne's destruction on 16 July some sixty protestants fled the city, Whitehead among them. 
With the accession of Edward VI, Whitehead's close association with the evangelical party was turned from a liability into an asset. With the death of Charles Brandon in 1551 he retained his place in the household as chaplain to the duchess of Suffolk, a staunch supporter of the regime. He was also marked out for special service by a protestant leadership increasingly admiring of his talents. In 1549 he was one of three divines (with Thomas Leaver and Roger Hutchinson) delegated by Cranmer to the difficult task of effecting the conversion of the protestant radical Joan Bocher. Bocher proved obstinate and was ultimately burnt, one of only two to suffer this fate during the reign. In November 1551 Whitehead was one of a number of protestant divines called to take part in a formal debate on the doctrine of transubstantiation at the house of William Cecil. His presence, alongside Robert Horne and Edmund Grindal, among the young reformers ranged against the conservative champions, John Feckenham, John Young, and Thomas Watson, is an indication of his place in the Edwardian inner circle. The following year Whitehead was first on a list of those whom Cranmer named in a letter to William Cecil as suitable for raising to the episcopal bench as archbishop of Armagh: 'I take Mr. Whitehead for his good knowledge, special honesty, fervent zeal and politic wisdom to be most meet' (Strype, 2.670). Whitehead shared the general reluctance to serve in Ireland and on this occasion refused the promotion; but the reign of Edward VI drew to a close with Whitehead on the verge of episcopal office, having been nominated to the see of Rochester. 
Soon after Mary's accession Whitehead fled to the continent; he was one of 175 who sailed with John a Lasco from Gravesend on 17 September 1553. Whitehead was in the smaller vessel which reached Copenhagen on 3 November; the exiles were soon expelled by order of the king on refusing to subscribe to the Lutheran confession. They then made their way to Rostock, where Whitehead pleaded their cause before the magistrates, whose Lutheran requirements they failed to satisfy, and they were compelled to leave in January. A similar fate befell them at Wismar, Lubeck, and Hamburg, but they found a refuge at Emden in March. Here a separate English congregation was established, but Whitehead seems quickly to have decided not to settle in the northern town. He was not named as one of the leaders of the congregation, as his seniority and closeness to John a Lasco would otherwise have made almost certain; and he was not among the thirty or more Englishmen who took up the invitation to enrol as citizens of Emden. Meanwhile an attempt was being made to found a church of English exiles at Frankfurt, and on 2 August 1554 an invitation was sent to Whitehead and other exiles to join the church there: 'on 24 October came Maister Whitehead to Franckford, and at the requeste of the congregation he took the charge for a time and preached uppon the epistle to the Romans' ('Works of John Knox', 4.12). 
Whitehead was one of those who wished to retain the use of the English prayer book of 1552, and in the famous 'troubles' at Frankfurt took the side of Richard Cox against John Knox. After the expulsion of Knox (26 March 1555) Whitehead was chosen pastor of the congregation. On 20 September he and his colleagues wrote a letter to Calvin to justify their proceedings against Knox, and repudiating the charge of too rigorous adherence to the prayer book and using 'lights and crosses'; their ceremonies, they pleaded, were really very few, and they went on to attack Knox's 'Admonition' as an 'outrageous pamphlet' which had added 'much oil to the flame of persecution in England' (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 755 ff.). In February 1556 Whitehead resigned his pastorate, being succeeded on 1 March by Robert Horne; the cause is said to have been his disappointment at not being made lecturer in divinity in succession to Bartholomew Traheron. He remained, however, at Frankfurt, signing a letter to Heinrich Bullinger on 27 September 1557. 
On Elizabeth's accession Whitehead returned to England, preaching before the queen on 15 February 1559, taking part in the disputation with the Roman Catholic bishops on 3 April, and serving as a visitor of Oxford University, and on the commission for revising the liturgy. As a senior figure among the returning exiles, a former nominated bishop, and, furthermore, one who had championed the prayer book abroad, Whitehead could have relied on nomination to one of the most senior posts in the new church, and indeed he figures on every one of the lists drawn up by William Cecil of possible bishops. There is a persistent tradition that he was offered first the most senior position of all, as archbishop of Canterbury, though given Matthew Parker's closeness to the queen this seems unlikely. Instead he was marked out at one point for Salisbury; on Cecil's first list of bishops, dated June or July 1559, Whitehead appears third behind only William Bill and Parker. 
Cecil's plans, however, now ran into an unexpected obstacle: the refusal of many of the nominated bishops to take positions if their incomes were to be further ravaged by the depredations anticipated under action expected to follow the 1559 'Act of Exchanges'. Whitehead's objections were of a different order: he steadfastly refused all office, including the plum post of the mastership of the Savoy, preferring instead the life of the roving preacher. On 17 September 1561 he wrote to Cecil acknowledging his obligations to him, but lamenting the necessity he was under of refusing the living he offered. 'So that whether he had any spiritualities of note conferr'd on him is yet doubtful, he being much delighted in travelling to and fro to preach the word of God in those parts where he thought it was wanting' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.396). Whitehead's pursuit of personal purity was not widely admired among his fellow church leaders and after his death the puritan leader John Field would write of him 'as a man that would have all well first, and then he would labour that all should be well' (Collinson, 46). His friends among the foreign exiles, however, remained faithful. In August 1562 Whitehead was one of three English divines, along with fellow exiles Robert Crowley and Miles Coverdale, consulted by the Dutch church in London over the problems caused by Adriaan van Haemstede. He is reported by Whitgift to have frequently deplored the excesses of some ministers, but his own leanings were puritan, and on 24 March 1564 he was sequestered for refusing to subscribe. Francis Bacon, who calls Whitehead a 'grave divine... of a blunt stoical nature', and says he was 'much esteemed by Queen Elizabeth, but not preferred because he was against the government of bishops', also relates that the queen once said to him 'I like thee better because thou livest unmarried', to which Whitehead replied: 'In troth, madame, I like you the worse for the same cause' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 7.163). Richard Hilles, however, in announcing Whitehead's death in June 1571, stated that 'he lived about seven years a widower... but very lately, before the middle of this year, he married a young widow when he was himself about eighty' (Robinson, 'Zurich Letters', 1.242). An engraved portrait by Crispijn de Passe is given in Henry Holland's 'Heroologia' of 1620 (173). 
Fuller mentions Whitehead's 'many books still extant' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.411), but with the exception of some discourses printed in Whittingham's 'Brieff Discours of Troubles at Frankfort' (1575) they have not been traced either in print or in manuscript. In 1568 there appeared an edition of Peter Martyr Vermigli's 'Most Learned and Fruitfull Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Romanes', translated by H. Billingsley, which is described as having been 'perused' by David Whitehead (STC 24672). The ascription to Whitehead of the translation of George Ripley's 'Medulla alchymiae' contained in Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1480/3, fols. 9-15'v', remains uncertain. 


@@@@@


doc= 29287


Whitehead, George (1637-1724), Quaker leader and writer, was born at Sunbiggin in the parish of Orton, Westmorland, in 1637, the son of poor farmers. He attended the free school at Blencoe, Cumberland, and when he was fourteen rejected the presbyterianism of his parents. At some point during the next eighteen months he was converted to Quakerism by George Fox, whom he first heard preaching at Henry Ward's house at Sunny Bank, Grayrigg, about 8 miles to the south-west of Sunbiggin. Whitehead was active as a Quaker proselyte in disputes with the local clergy until 1654. He then moved south and evangelized through Yorkshire and Lincolnshire into East Anglia and Kent, principally with the Quaker Richard Hubberthorne, but also at times with Fox, John Stubbs, John Rous, and Alexander Parker. Despite his youth, Whitehead was notable as a leader in clashes with clergymen, claiming that God enabled him to identify false syllogisms. 
In December 1654 Whitehead endured the first of many periods of imprisonment for the sake of his faith. Having spoken against a sermon at St Peter's Church, Norwich, he was examined and imprisoned for eight weeks; this was followed by a further spell of three weeks in prison in March 1655 when he visited Quakers imprisoned in Norwich Castle. In July he was committed for trial at Bury St Edmunds after defending a paper affixed to the church door of Bures, Suffolk, by another Quaker, Richard Clayton; he was held for three months. On refusing to pay a fine, Whitehead was imprisoned and was released in October 1656 only following direct appeals to Oliver Cromwell, including one by Mary Saunders, a servant of the Cromwell family. Over the following months Whitehead endured harsh physical punishment: he was set in the stocks in Saffron Walden and was publicly whipped at Nayland. 
Whitehead's first two works, 'Davids Enemies Discovered' and 'Cain's Generation Discover'd', both attacks on Jonathan Clapham's defence of psalm singing, were published in 1655. These marked the beginning of a redoubtable publishing career: by the time of Whitehead's death, over 100 separate printed items had appeared. Most were controversial works, but some were spiritual testimonies, epistles, and printed sermons. (Sermons of his were also included in the Quaker collections of sermons 'Harmony of Divine and Heavenly Doctrines' of 1696 and 'The Concurrence and Unanimity; of the People called Quakers' of 1711.) 
In 1657 Whitehead made a visit home to Westmorland, by way of the west of England, and was reconciled with his parents (his mother and sister eventually became Quakers); he is also said to have met the Quaker schismatic James Nayler at Great Strickland, although the latter's imprisonment from 1656 to 1659 casts doubt on this. While in the north Whitehead also made successful proselytizing journeys into Northumberland, visiting Newcastle, Berwick, Alnwick, and Holy Island. On his return south he was imprisoned for more than four months at Ipswich on the evidence of a clergyman with whom he had talked on the road south; while imprisoned, he wrote an open letter, 'To the inhabitants of Ipswich, both teachers and people', which does not seem to have been published. His repeated encounters with the law from the mid-1650s onwards helped him amass a vast legal knowledge, which proved especially helpful in defending himself against charges of vagrancy and disturbing religious services. At Ipswich, for example, he caused a sensation in court by pointing out the illegality of the accusation he faced; however, on this occasion he was returned to gaol and freed only following the death of Cromwell in September 1658. Notwithstanding such setbacks, it was to Whitehead that the responsibility fell for showing Friends how to assert their rights in law, something readily observable in the relish with which Whitehead produced many protracted published accounts of his legal battles. 
Whitehead later remarked that although there was much 'Pulpit-Noise against us' the Friends 'had some Respite and Ease from open Persecution... after 'Richard Cromwel' was set up for 'Protector'' (Whitehead, 144). During the hiatus between the collapse of Richard Cromwell's regime and the return of Charles II, Whitehead held public disputes on 29 August 1659 with the Cambridge divine Thomas Smith (who argued that he was a heretic) and on 15 September with the universalists Thomas Moor and John Horn at King's Lynn; both encounters were recorded in pamphlet publications. Similar disputes took place at Fulham and Bluntisford. In the first month of the Restoration, Whitehead had to be protected from a mob in Peterborough by some of John Lambert's soldiers quartered in the town. Charles's proclamation against conventicles led to Whitehead's imprisonment for sixteen weeks in Norwich Castle, where in March 1661 he almost died of ague and fever. Later in the same year he appeared before parliamentary committees and the bar of the House of Commons, with Hubberthorne and Edward Burrough, to protest against anti-Quaker legislation then being drafted by parliament. The three were imprisoned in Newgate; only Whitehead survived the incarceration. 
Whitehead spent most of the next decade in prison. On his release from Norwich Castle in 1661 he was again immediately active, this time leading protests against oaths (especially the oath of allegiance). In July 1664 he was arrested for preaching at a Quaker meeting in Surrey and imprisoned at Southwark; while incarcerated he was also accused of involvement in the Westmorland Kipper-Rigg plot of 1663-4. In October he was one of forty-five arrested at a meeting at the Bull and Mouth, London, and was imprisoned in Newgate. When not in prison he lodged with the Quaker Rebecca Travers in London and was active in the city, holding meetings on transport ships at Gravesend and visiting prisoners during the great plague. 
The summer of 1670 was an eventful time for Whitehead. On 13 May 1670 he married at the Peel meeting of Quakers in Clerkenwell; his wife, Anne Whitehead (c.1624-1686), was the daughter of Thomas Downer, vicar of Charlbury, and the widow of Benjamin Greenwell (who had died in Newgate in 1665). An early convert to Quakerism and a prominent preacher, Anne was considerably older than George, who later described her as 'like a Tender Mother' to him (Whitehead, 322). They apparently had no children. In June and July 1670 the city authorities seem to have mounted a sustained campaign against the Quaker meeting in Gracechurch Street. Whitehead was arrested and examined several times; on each occasion he protested that the actions of the meeting had not been illegal under the terms of the 'Conventicle Act'. 'I desire you would not go about to ensnare us, for the Law was not made to make Men Transgressors, but to punish them where it finds such', he warned one of the judges (Besse, 1.414). In spring 1672 he and Thomas Moor negotiated with Charles II a royal indulgence for the release of almost 500 prisoners, not all of them Quakers and many of them dissenters who were in fact enemies of the Friends. This was the first of Whitehead's many interviews with Charles II; in 1673, for example, he pleaded with the king for Fox's liberation from Worcester gaol. 
Although Whitehead still toured the countryside preaching and attending meetings -- he preached at Erith, Huntingdonshire, in April 1676 -- the 1670s saw him otherwise settled in the capital, working as a grocer in Houndsditch. When he was arrested with Thomas Burr at a meeting at Norwich in March 1680 and imprisoned, a certificate, signed by two London common councilmen, two churchwardens, and a constable among others, was issued testifying that Whitehead had been a resident of the parish of St Botolph without Bishopgate in London for about ten years; he was 'in Good Repute, and is esteemed a man of a Competent Estate' and 'hath demeaned himself peaceably in his Conversation' (Whitehead, 417). The certificate was never read at the ensuing trial but both men were nevertheless discharged in July. Whitehead's relative youth, his presence in the Quaker movement since the earliest days, and the death of most of the prominent founding Friends by the 1670s meant that he was effectively the most important Friend in the capital by this date. He helped arbitrate in the so-called Wilkinson-Story controversy that threatened the movement in the 1670s, and was also a key figure in the weekly meeting for sufferings which was established by London Quakers in 1676 and eventually became the 'executive committee' for the movement as a whole (Ingle, 257). Although undoubtedly a resolute follower and close associate of Fox (he had attended Fox's marriage to Margaret Fell in October 1669), Whitehead possessed a patient temperament which was highly effective in dealing with internal dissent and acted as a useful counterbalance to Fox's singular approach. 
Whitehead continued to meet Charles II: in January 1680 he presented evidence to the king about how the Friends were confused with Roman Catholics. The following year he was part of a group that attempted unsuccessfully to persuade Charles to free Quakers imprisoned at Bristol. Undaunted, he kept the king informed of the sufferings of Friends in the provinces at meetings in February 1682 and February 1683, defended Quaker language and dress policy in April 1683, and denied Quaker complicity in the Rye House plot in August. The succession of James II in 1685 did not impede Whitehead's access to the monarch: he was impressing on James the extent of Quaker imprisonments and distraints at meetings with the king in early 1686. By June that year Whitehead had helped secure from James warrants for the release of Quaker prisoners and relaxations of the economic and other judicial penalties and prejudices against Quakers. The following April, James issued a declaration of indulgence (granting liberty of conscience) after a further series of interviews in which Whitehead played a major role. Whitehead's conferences with the crown, however, did not mean he was not still subject to arrests and imprisonments for his activities. In 1682-3 he had goods seized to the value of $40 following non-payment of fines for breaching the 'Conventicles Act'; in August 1683 he was arrested for preaching at Westminster; and in August 1684 alone he had $32 worth of goods seized, was arrested for preaching at Southwark, and was convicted following an arrest at a meeting in White Hart Lane, resulting in imprisonment in Newgate for ten days. 
The death of his wife, Anne, on 28 July 1686 prompted Whitehead to publish a collection of personal testimonies to her memory, 'Piety Promoted by Faithfulness' (1686). Two years later he married Ann Goddard, a shopkeeper in Whitechapel and the daughter of Captain Richard Goddard, a clothier; the ceremony took place at Devonshire House on 19 July 1688. Whitehead later described her as 'an ingenious and careful Wife' (Whitehead, 323). They had only one child, who died at birth. The change of monarch at the end of 1688 presented further opportunities for Whitehead's skills as a lobbyist, allowing him to secure the passing of the 'Toleration Act' in 1689. However, further petitioning was needed in order to gain legal recognition of the fact that, since Quakers refused to take oaths, they were exempt from most of the benefits of the act: namely, rights to take legal action, prove or administer wills, and take up freedoms in cities and corporations, and, in some places, electoral rights. Following the deaths of Fox in 1691 (at whose funeral Whitehead was one of five Quakers who testified) and another leading Quaker, Stephen Crisp, in 1692, Whitehead became the acknowledged leader of the Quaker movement. He continued his campaign for toleration, with his comparison of the Quakers to the tolerated Dutch Mennonites moving William III to such an extent that the king ordered the release of another wave of Quakers from prison. Whitehead was also principally responsible for the 'Affirmation Act' of 1696, a compromise over the issue of oath-taking that in itself offended many Friends, who then implicitly directed much of their criticism at Whitehead. (The issue was not resolved until twenty years later, when parliament finally legislated an acceptable form of affirmation.) Whitehead also succeeded in having the Friends exempted from an act requiring that every dissenting preacher buy a licence for 20's'. a quarter. 
In addition to his lobbying activities, Whitehead promoted the Quakers in print. In a series of tracts between 1699 and 1712 he defended the principles of the Friends several times, usually against hostile attacks. His health began to fail in 1711 but he continued to address successive monarchs on behalf of the Friends: Queen Anne, George I, and even the future George II. Whitehead died on 8 March 1724 and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Bunhill Fields on 13 March. His monthly meeting issued a testimony celebrating him as an 'Elder worthy of double honour' (Beck, 120). Whitehead's own account of his life up to 1711 (the bulk of which concerned his activities before 1689) was published posthumously in 1725 as 'The Christian Progress of that Ancient Servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, George Whitehead'. The early twentieth-century Quaker historian William Braithwaite was unimpressed by Whitehead's leadership, describing him as 'cautious and pedestrian... the embodiment of worthy and drab respectability, devoid of genius, and of little humour' (Braithwaite, 177-8). However, as a legal expert and someone who was evidently skilled at gaining, maintaining, and exploiting effectively access to no fewer than seven monarchs, Whitehead was crucial to the development, establishment, and recognition of the Quaker movement. 
John Whitehead ('c'.1630-1696), a Quaker preacher and writer from Yorkshire, does not seem to have been a relation. 


@@@@@


doc= 29288


Whitehead, Hugh (d. 1551), prior then dean of Durham, was a Benedictine monk of Durham Cathedral priory by 30 March 1499, when he was ordained deacon. He was made priest on 18 December 1501. From that year he was a student at Durham College, Oxford. After seven years' study counted there and two elsewhere (doubtless in his own cloister) he supplicated BTh on 15 January 1509, being admitted on 14 March. He proceeded DTh on 4 July 1513. He was proxy for the prior of Durham Cathedral at the provincial chapter of the black monks on 2 July 1509. He became the prior's chaplain in 1511, and from then until 1515 he was warden of the Oxford cell. He held the major obediences of terrar and hostillar in the priory from 1515 to 1520, and was elected prior on 3 January 1520. He was an enterprising administrator, having licence from the absentee Bishop Wolsey to exploit the mineral wealth of Weardale. During the final years of the priory the monks were generous in grants of leases and advowsons, and co-operated in the surrender of their cells (subordinate houses). Whitehead was nevertheless bold enough to refuse Henry VIII a lease for a client in 1538. He is said to have been present as the shrine of St Cuthbert was destroyed in 1539. The house surrendered on 31 December that year; Whitehead was named dean of the successor secular chapter in the charter of foundation, of 12 May 1541. Over half his former monastic colleagues were accommodated in the new cathedral body; while their interest predominated, life in the close at Durham was uneventful. 
In the last year of his life Whitehead was caught up in treason charges intended to unseat the conservative Bishop Tunstall. The privy council had in August 1550 investigated a report that 'great quantitie of treasure' had been taken to the dean's house ('APC', 3.102). In May 1551 Whitehead was summoned to London and examined by a committee of councillors. On 3 November he was bound in 200 marks to appear before them again on the first day of the following term; but by 8 November he had died in London. He was buried in the church of Holy Trinity Minories, London. His kinsmen Thomas and Hugh received what goods he left in London. Whitehead owned a number of books which survive (including an old breviary, BL, Harleian MS 4664), some of which he gave to his fellow monks. 


@@@@@


doc= 29289


Whitehead, James (1812-1885), physician, was born at Oldham, the son of John Whitehead and his wife, Betty, whose surname may have been Bradbury. John Whitehead had a wide reputation in the district as a herbalist and dealer in simples, and it was his great ambition that his son should take up medicine as a profession; thus after working as a boy in a cotton mill Whitehead attended the Marsden Street school of medicine in Manchester, and was afterwards apprenticed first to Mr Clough of Lever Street, Manchester, and subsequently to Mr Lambert of Thirsk. On 11 September 1834 he became LSA and on 15 December 1835 he took his MRCS. He was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons after examination on 14 August 1845, and he graduated MD at the University of St Andrews in 1850. In 1859 he became MRCP (London). 
In 1836 Whitehead visited France and Germany; he remained in Paris for two years, learning French and visiting the hospitals of that city. On his return to England in 1838 he began to practise as a general practitioner at 123 Oxford Street, Manchester, and in 1842 he was appointed demonstrator of anatomy at the Marsden Street school of medicine. In the same year he moved to 133 Oxford Street and married Elizabeth ('b'. 1820), daughter of Thomas Hayward Radcliffe of Bank House, Clitheroe. Her untimely death, of puerperal peritonitis, at twenty-four, on 20 September 1844, was a terrible blow to him, and influenced the future course of his career. Because of the nature of his wife's death Whitehead determined to devote his attention to the diseases of women and children; in order to further this aim, in conjunction with Dr A. Schoepf Merei, a Hungarian refugee, he took a house in Stevenson Square and opened the Clinical Hospital and Dispensary for Children. The hospital rapidly grew into the Manchester Clinical Hospital for Women and Children, which opened in 1856 with fifty-six beds and an attached convalescent home. As well as giving much of his time to this hospital Whitehead was lecturer on obstetrics at the Royal School of Medicine, and for fifteen years he acted as surgeon to St Mary's Hospital for Women and Children. In 1851 he moved to 87 Mosley Street, Manchester, where he conducted an extensive and lucrative practice until his retirement in 1881. 
One of the most distinguishing features of Whitehead's career was his success in cases of sterility, a problem which he discussed in the monograph 'On the Causes and Treatment of Abortion and Sterility' (1847; published in America, 1848). Other published works include 'On the Transmission from Parent to Offspring of some Forms of Disease' (1851) and 'Notes on the Rates of Mortality in Manchester' (1863). Jointly with Merei he published the first 'Report of the Clinical Hospital, Manchester' (1856), and, under the pseudonym of Philothalos, 'The Wife's Domain' (1860). He also contributed many excellent papers to various medical journals. 
When he retired from practice Whitehead left Manchester to live at Fairlands, an estate he had purchased in Sutton, Surrey. He died there on 3 April 1885 of oesophageal cancer, and was buried in Ardwick cemetery, Manchester, in the vault which contained the remains of his wife. 


