@@@@@


doc= 29290


Whitehead, John (c.1630-1696), Quaker minister and preacher, was born in the Holderness district of Yorkshire. About 1648 he joined the army and was subsequently stationed at Scarborough Castle. Influenced by his parents, he was attracted to puritan ministers and often had 'secret breathings and longings after God', but he eventually concluded that he lacked 'living faith' ('Life and Writings', 3). When William Dewsbury came to Scarborough about 1652 he convinced Whitehead to become a Quaker. A man of modest education, Whitehead believed that God's 'secrets were with me; for the Spirit as a key opened his treasure and shewed me that which was from the beginning' (J. Whitehead, 'A Small Treatise', 1661, 5). He accompanied Dewsbury to Malton, Yorkshire, and began preaching in December 1652. After leaving the army the following summer, he and Thomas Thompson preached on the Yorkshire moors. At Stokesley he challenged the Baptist William Kaye to demonstrate whether he had an unmediated calling from Christ, whether ministers had received tithes in gospel times, and whether he could disprove Quaker tenets. Kaye published an account of the dispute in 'A Plain Answer to the Eighteen Quaeries' (1654). With Dewsbury, George Fox, and James Nayler, Whitehead contributed to 'Several Letters Written to the Saints' the same year. 
Undaunted by confrontation, Whitehead preached in Lincoln Cathedral in November 1654 and had to be rescued from irate worshippers by soldiers. While incarcerated in Northampton in 1655 he wrote 'The Enmitie between the Two Seeds' (1655) as well as epistles exhorting Friends to withstand persecution and suffer patiently. Following his release he preached in Northamptonshire and Buckinghamshire, and then went to east Yorkshire, where he addressed 'A Reproof from the Lord' (1656) to professing Christians in the Hull and Beverley area, accusing them of pursuing earthly wisdom. With George Whitehead and George Fox the younger he refuted the views of John Horne and Thomas Moore in 'A Brief Discovery of the Dangerous Principles' (1659). 
As hostility against Quakers intensified, Whitehead was physically attacked at York in January 1660. With thirty-five others he signed 'This to the King and his Councel' (1660), protesting the disruption of Quaker meetings in Northamptonshire. For refusing to take the oath of allegiance he was incarcerated at Aylesbury in January 1661, and in May he published 'A Small Treatise', denouncing compulsory worship; it included a postscript by his fellow prisoner Isaac Penington. 
On 24 April 1662 Whitehead finished 'A Manifestation of Truth' (1662), in which he defended Quaker principles from Viscount Saye and Sele's attack in 'Folly and Madnesse Made Manifest' (1659). Arrested on 8 July on suspicion of holding a conventicle near Lincoln, Whitehead, then of Owstwick, Yorkshire, refused to take an oath and was recommitted to Lincoln Castle. In 'For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts' (1662) he defended Quakers from charges of sedition and implored God to 'break' the adversaries' 'teeth... that thy Flock may not be meat for them' (p. 6). In 'An Expostulation with the Bishops in England' (1662) he urged prelates to reform their own church. Quakers who had lapsed in the face of persecution were admonished to return in 'The Case of such Professors' (1662). 
On his return to Yorkshire, following his release in April 1663, Whitehead was briefly detained and his books and letters were seized at Hull in July. By November 1664 he was in gaol at Spalding, Lincolnshire, from where he wrote an epistle encouraging Friends to adhere to their ideal of simplicity, later printed in 'A Tender Visitation' (1664). With George Whitehead and others he signed an epistle by Farnsworth in May 1666 warning Friends not to distribute scandalous or divisive books, and in August he and Ellis Hookes, working through the master of requests, persuaded Charles II to release Fox from Scarborough Castle. 
As sectarian controversy continued Whitehead contributed a postscript to Thomas Rudyard's 'The Anabaptists Lying Wonder' (1672), and when Baptists attacked him in 'The Quakers Subterfuge' ('c'.1672) he responded in a postscript to Robert Ruckhill's 'The Quakers Refuge' (1673). Ruckhill and Whitehead were assailed in Thomas Grantham's 'The Baptist Against the Quaker' ('c'.1673), and Grantham recounted his debate with Whitehead at Sleaford, Lincolnshire, which dealt with the sacraments and Christ's post-resurrection body, in 'Christianismus primitivus' (1678). William Penn included Whitehead's declaration against the Quaker dissident John Perrot in 'Judas and the Jews' (1673). In 1675 Whitehead and John Hall drafted an account of the persecution of Yorkshire Friends for submission to Charles and parliament, and the same year Whitehead wrote an epistle to 'Balm from Gilead', a collection of Quaker testimonies. When the Popish Plot was under investigation, Whitehead and Thompson asked the assize judges at York on 24 March 1679 which Quakers had been accused of being Jesuits. 
At some point before 1682 Whitehead married Elizabeth, with whom he apparently had two sons and a daughter. As a trustee for charitable property, he left for London in May 1682 to deal with a suit in chancery involving a legacy of $200. Stopping to preach at Sutton, Lincolnshire, he was arrested, accused of being a Jesuit, and imprisoned. At the assizes on 31 July he produced certificates attesting to his good behaviour, including one from the vicar and churchwardens at Swine, Yorkshire, where he had moved in 1669. Because he refused to take the oath of allegiance, the grand jury indicted him and he was returned to prison. There he wrote 'A General Epistle' (1682), warning Anglicans to beware of an accommodation with Catholics. At his trial on 7 March 1683 he was found guilty of 'praemunire'. His family moved to Fiskerton, near Lincoln, in 1683, perhaps to be closer to him. He enjoyed limited freedom, for he was at a Quaker meeting in July 1684 when JPs fined those in attendance. Some time after October 1684 he was discharged, but he and nine others were apprehended at a meeting in Devonshire House, London, on 11 February 1686. He was fined 13's'. 4died, but refused to pay and remained in Newgate until 2 June. 
During the last decade of his life Whitehead served as clerk of the Lincolnshire quarterly meeting and continued to travel as a public Friend (minister). In 1691 he was one of thirteen Friends Fox designated to supervise the publication of his journal and other writings. After two or three years of poor health Whitehead died at Fiskerton on 29 September 1696 and was buried at Lincoln on 1 October. A short, thick-set man, he was praised by George Whitehead (to whom he was unrelated) as 'a man of a solid and sound judgment' ('Life and Writings', 279). Lincolnshire Friends described him as 'a nursing father, tender and affectionate, apt to teach' (ibid., 281). His stature in early Quaker history was attested to by Penn in the preface to Whitehead's 'The Written Gospel-Labours' (1704). 


@@@@@


doc= 29291


Whitehead, John (1739/40-1804), physician and biographer, was born, apparently in Dukinfield, Cheshire, one of at least three sons of 'humble' and allegedly Methodist parents, though they appear to have belonged originally to the dissenting chapel in Dukinfield until joining the Moravians in 1738. Whitehead was brought up as a weaver but received a classical education, probably at the Moravian school in Dukinfield. He was converted in the early 1760s by Matthew Mayer, a leading Methodist local preacher. He became a local preacher and did some teaching, but from 1764 to 1769 he was an itinerant Methodist preacher. With Wesley's encouragement he spent some of his time at Wesley's Kingswood School to improve his Latin and Greek and had hopes of becoming a master there. 
After marrying Ann Smith, Wesley's housekeeper at Bristol New Room Chapel, on 25 July 1769 he ceased to be a travelling preacher because of his wife's health. He then set up business on credit in Bristol, first in the tobacco trade, then as a linen draper, but was unsuccessful and had to compound with his creditors. Methodist friends subscribed to send him to Staines, near London, as a schoolmaster where he joined the Society of Friends under his wife's influence. With Quaker support he set up a successful boarding-school in Wandsworth. The leading Quaker physician, John Coakley Lettsom, advised him to study medicine, and the Quaker brewer David Barclay paid him a life annuity of $100 to travel with his son on the continent. He entered as a medical student at Leiden on 16 September 1779 and graduated MD on 4 February 1780. On 19 January 1781 he became a physician at Lettsom's London dispensary. He was admitted LRCP on 25 March 1782 but in 1784 failed on a technicality to secure election as physician to the London Hospital, despite Quaker support. He acquired a post at the Bethlem Hospital but also had a private practice, probably chiefly among the Methodists. He was Wesley's physician and attended his deathbed, and Wesley thought highly of his skill. 
In 1784 Whitehead rejoined the Methodists as a local preacher, though it is said that in 1790 he offered to resume itinerating if Wesley would ordain him as a superintending minister, but the offer was ignored. In 1791 he preached Wesley's funeral sermon, sales of which raised $200 for Methodist funds. 
Wesley left his papers to Thomas Coke, Henry Moore, and Whitehead, to deal with as they thought fit. As a response to John Hampson's controversial life of Wesley (1791), Whitehead was commissioned to write what was advertised in a broadsheet entitled 'Proposals' (6 July 1791) as 'a full accurate and impartial life' of Wesley. Very soon, however, Whitehead fell out with Coke and Moore and other preachers, and an acrimonious verbal and pamphlet warfare ensued. The main disputes were over three issues. First, what should be paid to Whitehead for the work, and what to the Methodist fund for preachers' pensions. Second, who should own the copyright -- for (at least in Whitehead's view) connexional possession of copyright would allow for censorship of his work. Third, since Whitehead insisted on keeping Wesley's papers until he had completed the biography, his fellow executors complained that this prevented them from fulfilling Wesley's will that they should decide jointly on disposal of the papers. Whitehead contended that his main concern was to secure copyright to avoid censorship. It was a fear that may well have been justified, despite his critics' claim that they merely wished to keep the copyright to increase the benefits for the charity. In addition, Whitehead also expected to be paid for his work, and the terms he demanded certainly increased in the course of the controversy. His detractors claimed that they had assumed Whitehead was working for the benefit of the preachers' fund, though they soon offered a fee. The dispute over copyright went to law, but the proceedings were stayed and the London Society paid costs of over $2000. Meanwhile, Whitehead was removed from the list of preachers and lost his membership of the society, though he was restored in 1797. 
The dispute was complicated and aggravated by the fact that it became part of wider and deeper disputes within Methodism. These included power struggles between the conference, made up of travelling preachers, and chapel trustees and local preachers, as well as between the conference and the trustees of Wesley's publications -- an important source of Methodist finance. Methodism was also divided on ordinations and sacraments, and Whitehead blamed Wesley's ordinations on pressure from ambitious preachers. He was supported by laymen opposed to the conference. 
To damage the prospects (and profits) of Whitehead's book, the preachers hastily commissioned an official biography of Wesley by Coke and Moore (1792) and circulated the Methodists vigorously to buy it. Whitehead's biography appeared in two volumes (1793, 1796) and included a life of Charles Wesley. The book was not commercially very successful, being reprinted only once (1806). Yet, despite its prejudices, it is superior to most nineteenth-century biographies of Wesley. It is noteworthy that Moore in his 'Life of Wesley' (1824-5), despite criticizing Whitehead, frequently quotes him without acknowledgement, and both drew on Hampson. Hampson's and Whitehead's critical appraisals of Wesley's character remain valuable. 
Apart from the Wesley biography and controversial pamphlets about it, Whitehead published two medical works, as well as attacks on A. M. Toplady's Calvinism (1775) and on Joseph Priestley's materialism (1778). Evidence is lacking for a clear view of Whitehead's character, but consciousness of his humble origins may have sharpened his evident pride in his status as a literary and professional man and his disdain for what he saw as the inferior culture of the Methodist preachers. No record of his appearance seems to have been preserved. He appears to have been twice married: certainly to Ann Smith, already noted; but his will of 1804 names his wife as Mary, and mentions a son who had predeceased him. He died at his residence, Fountain Court, Old Bethlem, London, on 7 March 1804 and was buried in Wesley's tomb behind City Road Chapel, London, on 14 March 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 29292


Whitehead, John (1860-1899), ornithologist, was born at Colney Hatch Lane, Muswell Hill, Middlesex, on 30 June 1860, the second son of Jeffrey Whitehead, stockbroker, of Newstead, Wimbledon, Surrey, and his wife, Jane Ashton Tinker. He was educated at Elstree, Hertfordshire, and at the Edinburgh Institution, where he developed an interest in natural history. He developed a weakness of the lungs, and was compelled to winter in the Engadine in 1881-2, and in Corsica in 1882 and 1883, when he began collecting, and discovered a bird new to science. On his return to England he prepared for a collecting trip to Mount Kina Balu, North Borneo, which lasted from October 1884 to August 1888. He brought back examples of many new animals, including forty-five new species of birds. The results of this trip are fully set forth in his 'Exploration of Mount Kina Balu' (1893). 
In December 1893 Whitehead set out for the Philippines. He made nine different trips in those islands, and discovered on Mount Data the first known indigenous mammalian fauna, returning to England in 1896. In January 1899 he started for the Philippines again, intending to complete his researches there; but the war between the United States and Spain put an end to the plan, and, after waiting a few weeks at Manila, he sailed for Hong Kong, and thence set out to explore the island of Hainan. The expedition was, however, attacked by fever. Whitehead struggled back with difficulty to the coast, and died at the port of Hoihow (Haikou) on 2 June 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 29293


Whitehead, Paul (1710-1774), satirist, was born on St Paul's day, 6 February 1710, in Castle Yard, Holborn, London, and baptized on 17 February at St Andrew's, Holborn, the youngest son of Edmund Whitehead, a prosperous tailor, and his wife, Elizabeth. According to early biographers Paul was educated under a clergyman in Hitchin, Hertfordshire, then apprenticed to a mercer in the City, but, not liking that trade, studied law at the Temple while writing occasional political squibs. His name cannot now be traced in the records of any of the inns of court, nor can any early squibs be identified, but he was apprenticed in 1724 to John Wheatly, a painter-stainer. 
Whitehead's first notable satire, 'The State Dunces' (June 1733), in heroic couplets, was inscribed to Pope and indebted to 'The Dunciad' (1728-9), but in so far as Whitehead raises his sights to take in bishops, politicians, and, above all, Walpole, he anticipates Pope's 'New Dunciad' (1742). Robert Dodsley bought the copyright for 10 guineas, prompting Johnson, who had a low opinion of Whitehead, to insist on no less for his 'London' (1738). 'The State Dunces Part II' (1733) is probably not by Whitehead, whose next anti-Walpole satire was 'Manners' (February 1739), which attacks the government and praises Frederick, prince of Wales, and opposition politicians around him. The House of Lords decreed that 'Manners' was scandalous and ordered the author and publisher (Robert Dodsley) into custody. Whitehead decamped and Dodsley was not further prosecuted: 'the whole process was probably intended rather to intimidate Pope than to punish Whitehead' (Johnson, 3.180-81). Whitehead's politics and stance of proud, honest independence were close enough to Pope's for the two men to be attacked together in the anonymous 'Characters: an Epistle to Alexander Pope Esq. and Mr Whitehead' (March 1739), perhaps by Thomas Odell (1691-1749). Whitehead achieved more public notice when, on 9 March 1741, he and Esquire Carey, surgeon to the prince of Wales, organized a mock Masonic procession along the Strand. The joke was repeated in the following year and in both years was the subject of satirical prints. 
In 1735 Whitehead had married Anna (died 1768), only surviving child of Sir Swinnerton Dyer (1688-1736), of Spains Hall, Finchingfield, Essex. Edward Thompson states that she brought him $10,000, but, if this is so, Whitehead did not see the money for some years because it seems that he was imprisoned for debt in the mid-1740s. He befriended the improvident theatrical manager Charles Fleetwood (died 1747) and not only wrote a pamphlet on his side during the manager's dispute with the Drury Lane actors in 1743, but co-signed Fleetwood's bond for $3000. Fleetwood defaulted and retired to France; Whitehead could not or would not pay and was imprisoned in the Fleet. The date and length of his incarceration are not known, though Thompson writes of 'many years' ('Poems', vi-vii). 
Whitehead extended his Popeian vein of poetry with 'The Gymnasiad, or, Boxing Match' (June 1744), a brief mock epic dedicated to the pugilist John Broughton (1705-1789) and tricked out with an introduction and copious notes by 'Scriblerus Tertius'. Whitehead returned to political verse satire with 'Honour' (June 1747), directed against the former patriots, once praised by Pope, who supplanted Walpole and then proved no less corrupt than he was. Two later verse satires attack physicians: 'The Battiad' (September 1750), on Dr William Battie (1704-1776), written in collaboration with Moses Mendes and Dr Isaac Schomberg, and an 'Epistle' (November 1755) to Whitehead's friend Dr Thomas Thompson which abuses the many doctors who disagreed with Thompson's treatment of the prince of Wales in his last illness. This poem is redeemed only by some relaxed self-reflexive passages reminiscent of Pope's 'Imitations of Horace'. 
Whitehead's verse became less political but he remained a spokesman for the opposition under the patronage of George Bubb Dodington (died 1762). At the Westminster election in May 1750, one of the most fiercely contested of the century, he wrote songs, handbills, and other electioneering material for the prince of Wales's candidate, Sir George Vandeput. When Alexander Murray, another supporter of Vandeput, was imprisoned for contempt of parliament in 1751, Whitehead wrote a fierce pamphlet on his behalf. His last opposition writings were two pamphlets supporting Admiral Byng in October 1756 and 'Ministerial Influence Unconstitutional' (April 1761). Less creditably, it is alleged, he edited in 1748 the blackmailing memoirs of a courtesan and was paid 'in kind' ('Phillips, Teresia Constantia', 'DNB'). 
It seems that by the 1750s Whitehead had come into his wife's fortune for they now lived at Colne Lodge on the north side of Twickenham Common, a cottage improved into 'an elegant dwelling' by his friend the architect Isaac Ware (Hawkins, 336). Whitehead's other artistic friends included the painters George Lambert and Francis Hayman, and the actors John Beard, for whom he wrote songs, and William Havard (died 1778), whose tombstone was carved with verses by Whitehead. Presumably it was at this prosperous period that Whitehead's portrait was painted by Gainsborough; the painting is lost, but it was engraved by J. Collyer for Whitehead's 'Poems and Miscellaneous Compositions' (1777). It conveys an alert humorous expression and portrays the long nose that gave Whitehead some resemblance to Frederick the Great of Prussia. Sir John Hawkins, who was Whitehead's neighbour from 1759, recalled that he was friendly and kind-hearted but his conversation was 'desultory, vociferous, and profane'; he retained to the end of his life his youthful habit of swearing, he did not go to church, and was suspected of atheism. Hawkins said that Anna Whitehead was 'homely in her person, and little better than an idiot' but her husband treated her with tenderness, 'hiding, as well as he was able, those defects in her understanding, which are oftner the subjects of ridicule than of compassion' (ibid., 335-6). 
From the 1750s, perhaps as a relief from his homely wife, Whitehead was one of the scandalous Franciscans under their mock prior Sir Francis Dashwood (1708-1781). He became steward and secretary of this famously lewd and blasphemous society, and in Charles Churchill's 'The Candidate' (1764) was denounced as 'Paul, the aged', a brothel door-keeper who chalks the score 'behind a door' (l. 698). Churchill attacked Whitehead also in 'The Ghost', 3 (1762), 'The Conference' (1763), and 'Independence' (1764), provoked, not by prudery of course (in view of Churchill's own tastes and associates), but by hatred of a political turncoat who had accepted government places. Through Dashwood's patronage Whitehead was appointed secretary to the treasurer of the chamber at $800 p.a. in July 1761, and obtained another sinecure as deputy wardrobe keeper to the king in May 1763; Dashwood also gave him an annuity. Churchill's further 'casus belli' was that Whitehead was a long-standing friend of William Hogarth: he had praised Hogarth in 'Honour' (1747) and was probably the author of 'Pug's Reply to Parson Bruin' (July, 1763), an answer to Churchill's savage 'Epistle to William Hogarth'. 
Whitehead wrote very little during the last twenty years of his life. His last pamphlet, in 1768, was on the feud between the four men who had recently bought the patent of Covent Garden theatre from his friend John Beard. Anna Whitehead died childless in 1768. Suffering a long painful illness that his doctors could not diagnose, Whitehead made his will on 20 October 1774. Most of his estate, worth about $3000, was divided between his widowed sister Sarah Hutchings (executrix), a nephew and three nieces, and his wife's cousin Elizabeth Dyer. (His elder brother Charles, born in 1705, was dead.) Whitehead's last bequest was his heart to his patron Dashwood, now Lord Le Despencer, with $50 for a marble urn in which it could be placed in Dashwood's mausoleum at West Wycombe. In his last days he burnt many papers: perhaps acts and epistles of the Franciscan fraternity. He died at his lodgings in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, at 7 a.m. on 30 December 1774. His will was proved on 4 January 1775, the day most of his corpse was buried beside his wife at Teddington, Middlesex. The urn containing the heart was ceremoniously deposited in the mausoleum at West Wycombe on 16 August 1775 and was stolen by a tourist in the following century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29294


Whitehead, William (bap. 1715, d. 1785), poet and playwright, was baptized on 12 February 1715 at St Botolph's Church, Cambridge, younger son of Richard Whitehead ('bap'. 1673, died 1730), baker, of Cambridge and his wife, Mary (died 1742). His father had aspirations beyond his means, including a good education for William, and with the patronage of Henry Bromley, Cambridgeshire MP (later Lord Montfort), William entered Winchester College in 1728. This was the first of several acts of patronage to benefit Whitehead, who inherited his father's social aspirations without his incapacity to manage his finances. His father died in debt before William had completed two years at Winchester. It was only through his mother's determination to sustain the bakery business that he was able to continue his education. 
At Winchester, Whitehead demonstrated an early interest in theatre and poetry. He acted in school productions, started writing verse, and in 1733 won a prize of 1 guinea from Lord Peterborough, for a poem on Peterborough himself, the subject set by Peterborough's friend Pope when they visited Winchester together. Pope was sufficiently impressed to employ Whitehead to translate the first epistle of 'Essay on Man' into Latin verse. It seems likely that Whitehead's admiration of Pope was enhanced, greatly influencing his own poetic style, which favoured the polished couplet and wit. By mid-century, when he was poet laureate, this dependence on the style of the past made Whitehead seem old-fashioned. 
Whitehead hoped to gain a place at New Hall, Oxford. When he failed to do so, he returned to Cambridge in 1735, and successfully applied for a Pyke scholarship to Clare College. This was a scholarship founded by Thomas Pyke (a baker) in 1720, funding orphan sons of Cambridge bakers for two places at Clare. Whitehead entered the college with a reputation as a poet and social skills well beyond his humble origins. He readily made friends with members of noble families, such as Charles Townshend (1728-1810), and contributed verse to university publications, including the congratulatory verses printed in 1736 on the prince of Wales's marriage. He graduated BA in 1739 and was made a fellow in July 1742, taking his MA in the following year. Whitehead's first independent publication was 'The Danger of Writing Verse' (1741), reportedly 'highly approved by Mr Pope' ('Poems', 3.34). The piece reflects something of Whitehead's philosophy, which allowed him to accept patronage very readily: '
Say, can the bard attempt what's truly great, 

Who pants in secret for his future fate? 

Him serious toils, and humble arts engage, 

To make youth easy and provide for age; 

While lost in silence hangs his useless lyre, 

And though from Heav'n came, fast dies the sacred fire. 
(ibid., 'Poems', 2.57)' During his fellowship Whitehead published 'An Essay on Ridicule'; 'Ann Boleyn to Henry VIII' (1743); 'Atys and Adrastus'; and 'On Nobility' (1744). Already his dependence on classical and other literary sources is evident, and always acknowledged by Whitehead. 'Ann Boleyn' was based on her letters to Henry published in 'The Spectator' (no. 397); 'Atys and Adrastus' was modelled on a story from Herodotus' 'History'. Whitehead was studying at this time for the church, following the example of his elder brother John, when in 1745 he was recommended to the earl of Jersey as tutor to his son, George Bussy Villiers (1735-1805). Whitehead accepted the post, which involved also teaching a young friend of the family, Humphry Stephens, and moved to the earl's London home. By the following year he decided against the church, and thus had to resign his fellowship at Clare, which required him to become a clergyman. 
Once settled in London, Whitehead started writing plays. His first major piece was 'The Roman Father', a tragedy based on Corneille's 'Horace', performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, on 24 February 1750. The play was a tremendous commercial success: it was reprinted frequently after its first publication in 1750, adapted by Whitehead for revival in 1767, and even translated into French; and it brought Whitehead into contact with Garrick (though he had already written a flattering poem to the actor on his appointment as patentee at Drury Lane), who played the leading role. This was the beginning of an association lasting over twenty years. Most commentators have, however, preferred Whitehead's second tragedy, 'Creusa' (1754), dedicated to George Bussy Villiers, although it was less popular on stage. This play was based on the 'Ion' of Euripides. Horace Walpole claimed: 'it is the only new tragedy that I ever saw and really liked' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.79). Again Garrick took a leading role, and Robert Dodsley, who published all Whitehead's earlier work, on the strength of 'The Roman Father''s success paid him 100 guineas for sole rights. In 1754 Whitehead published 'Poems on Several Occasions', in which he included 'The Roman Father' and an interesting blank verse piece, 'The Sweepers', which reflects a concern for the socially dispossessed who sweep the streets of London. 
In the summer of 1754 Whitehead was required to accompany his pupil and a friend (George Harcourt, Viscount Nuneham) on a tour of Germany and Italy. He returned to England in 1756, and published 'Epistles' (1757), inspired by his travels. The continental tour had been his last office as tutor to Lord Jersey's son, but the family wished to ensure his continued comfort. Lady Jersey had used her influence while Whitehead was abroad to gain for him in 1755 the salaried positions of secretary and registrar to the Order of the Bath. Whitehead was also invited to live with the Jerseys as a companion. He accepted this offer, feeling he served a useful role looking after Lady Jersey whose health was failing. She died in 1762, the earl seven years later, at which point Whitehead insisted on moving to lodgings in London, remaining a constant visitor to both Middleton (the family's country seat in Oxfordshire) and Nuneham (the country home of Lord Harcourt), as well as a welcome guest on a daily basis in the Jerseys' London home. 
In 1757 Whitehead, rather by default, was appointed poet laureate. On the death of Cibber the position was offered as a sinecure to Thomas Gray, who declined it, believing it to be a demeaning role. Whitehead's terms of employment required two odes annually, one for the new year and one for the king's birthday. He was paid $100, a significant sum, but, when set beside the $200 paid to the composer who set them to music, a reflection of the inferior status accorded the laureate. In a contemporary judgement William Rider asserted that: 'with regard to the 'Birthday Odes'... it seems probable that they will never reach posterity' (Rider, 23). They did not. However, Whitehead does shine by contrast with his immediate predecessors and he was not without admirers among his contemporaries, including Mason, Gray, and Horace Walpole. Whitehead brought to the odes a genuinely patriotic spirit rather than a sycophantic attitude. He loved his nation and respected the king as a symbol of that nation. His verses are seldom banal, usually dignified, and often written with assurance. They reflect the national desire for peace in the face of strife in Europe and rebellion in the American colonies. 
In 1758 Whitehead published 'Verses to the People of England', in his laureate vein, seeing the role of the poet to 'wake with verse the hardy deed'. His next major piece for the theatre was to move in a different direction: romantic comedy. 'The School for Lovers' was produced at the Theatre Royal on 11 February 1762. Again Whitehead is derivative, drawing on a prose work by De Fontanelle. He Anglicizes the setting and characters, and obviously had to accept some suggestions of Garrick, as the play was published with Whitehead's prologue 'as it was intended' in which he comments that 'He shifts no scenes to dazzle and surprise' ('Poems', 1.207), alongside the prologue 'as spoken by Mr Garrick': '
Change you shall have; so set your hearts at ease; 

Write as he will, we'll act it as you please. 
(ibid., 1.209)' Although this might suggest tensions between them, Garrick and Whitehead remained on the best of terms. Garrick's opinion of the play was 'Humbug for Nine Nights' -- a comment made in a letter written on the ninth night of the performance while he was offstage between the prologue and act II ('Letters of David Garrick', 1.355). However, he recognized Whitehead's dramatic potential, and trusted his judgement enough to make him his reader of new plays. Garrick was also to come to Whitehead's defence when he was attacked by Charles Churchill: 'still I cannot get it into my Mind that Your Attack upon 'him', is a justifiable one' (ibid., 2.366). Churchill had been bitterly satirical at Whitehead's expense in 'The Ghost', book 3: '

'Dullness' and 'Method' still are one, 

And 'Whitehead' is their darling Son 

' and in later pieces. This was in reaction to Whitehead's 'A Charge to the Poets' (1762), in which he pompously speaks to his fellow poets 'As bishops to their clergy give their charge' ('Poems', 2.292), urging them to avoid contention among themselves; to write only when inspired, not for profit; and to remain immune to extremes of criticism or praise. In 'A Pathetic Apology for All Laureats', written for private circulation and published posthumously by Mason, Whitehead allows a little of his well-controlled irritation to become apparent: '
Each evening post and magazine, 


'Gratis' adopts the lay 'serene'. 

On their frail barks his praise or blame 

Floats for an hour and sinks with them; 

Sure without envy you might see 

Such floundering immortality. 
(ibid., 3.97)' Although Garrick defended Whitehead, he was wary of the publicity, and Whitehead's last major play, 'A Trip to Scotland' (1770), was dedicated to Garrick (who did not take a part) and published anonymously. Whitehead describes the work very aptly as a 'whimsical trifle' ('Poems', 2.3). In 1774 Whitehead acknowledged authorship when he published 'Plays and Poems' in two volumes. This collection did not reproduce all of Whitehead's laureate pieces, several of which were added in a third volume (1788) containing Mason's memoir, which forms half of this volume. Whitehead continued to produce his laureate odes each year until his death, and he also published anonymously two separate moralistic fables, 'Variety' (1776), 'a tale for married people', and 'The Goat's Beard' (1777). Both went through several editions. His last ode, in response to the recent peace treaty with America, was to offer a 'prophetic truth': '
Trust the Muse: her eye commands 

Distant times and distant lands: 

Through bursting clouds, in opening skies, 

Sees from discord union rise; 

And friendship bind unwilling foes 

In firmer ties than duty knows. 
(ibid., 3.110)' Whitehead never married. In this matter he demonstrated his characteristic practicality, admitting in a letter to Lord Nuneham in 1763 that, although he desired marriage, 'a moderate precarious income has but little allurement... it would be madness to think of raising a family without a prospect of at least a tolerable provision' (Harcourt, 7.240). Whitehead had used the profits from his plays to discharge his father's debts. He lived instead for the families he had given his life to serving, as mentor and friend. He died at his home in Charles Street, off Berkeley Square, London, on 14 April 1785 after a short illness brought on by a cold. In his will he left his books to one former pupil, Lord Jersey, and the rest of his estate to his executor, the other pupil, Humphry Stephens (later General Stephens). He was buried in South Audley Street Chapel on 20 April. 
Whitehead is essentially of minor status as a writer, but he is marked out from many of his fellows for his moderation and good taste, his easy humour, and his common sense. He rose considerably in society, but never forgot his origins: '
My education rose above my birth, 

Thanks to those parent shades, on whose cold clay 

Fall fast my tears, and lightly lie the earth. 
('Poems', 2.172)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29295


Whitehurst, John (1713-1788), maker of clocks and scientific instruments, and geologist, was born on 10 April 1713 at Congleton, Cheshire, the eldest child of John Whitehurst ('b'. 1687), maker of watches and clocks, and his wife, Mary. He had an enquiring mind and encouraged by his father he developed an early interest in local geology. After a rudimentary education he was apprenticed to his father. Upon completing his apprenticeship he travelled to Ireland to extend his knowledge but found it unsatisfactory for one determined to become eminent in his business, so returned to England and settled in Derby, possibly as early as 1735. Initially Whitehurst was unable to trade in the town as he was not a freeman, but following the construction and donation of a turret clock for the new guildhall he was made a burgess in 1737. By 1745 he was sufficiently well established to marry, on 9 January, Elizabeth, the elder daughter of the Revd George Gretton and his wife, Mary, and she was able to assist her husband by correcting his writing. Their only child died at birth. 
At his premises at 24 Irongate, Whitehurst established a sound reputation as a clockmaker with a series of well-made but unremarkable domestic clocks and more innovative turret clocks. Some of his turret clocks were fitted with deadbeat escapements and temperature-compensated pendulums (of the Ellicott type) which were unusual features on turret clocks of that period. The temperature compensation depended on the differential expansion of different metals with changes in temperature and it was probably to obtain this information that Whitehurst constructed a pyrometer in 1749. By 1758 he had met and become a member of the influential group of philosophers and entrepreneurs who formed the Lunar Society of Birmingham, to their mutual benefit. Whitehurst supplied one of the members, Matthew Boulton, with clock movements, which were mounted in Boulton's ormolu cases. In 1771 he supplied Boulton with two more elaborate astronomical clocks, the dials of which had been designed by James Ferguson (1710-1776) whom Whitehurst had met when he was lecturing in Derby. He also made a tidal clock for another friend and member of the Lunar Society, Benjamin Franklin. 
Whitehurst was consulted widely on mechanical and hydraulic problems and in 1772 he installed what appears to be the first hydraulic ram for raising water, at Oulton Park in Cheshire. His consultancies involved much travelling which enabled him to extend his geological studies over a wider area, partly with a view to finding useful minerals but also to satisfy his curiosity about the formation of the earth. By this time Whitehurst had extended his range of products to include scientific instruments, many of which evolved from those which he originally made to carry out his own experiments. He is known particularly for his barometers, and for scales and weights. Whitehurst supplied assay balances and weights for Matthew Boulton's laboratory at Soho and when the latter was finally successful in his parliamentary petition for the establishment of an assay office in Birmingham the balances and weights are believed to have been supplied by Whitehurst. This may have been one of the factors which influenced the duke of Newcastle to secure Whitehurst's appointment in the following year to the newly established office of stamper of money weights to the mint. The duke was already conversant with Whitehurst's other work as he had constructed two turret clocks and a complete plumbing and heating system for the duke's seat at Clumber Park. As the stamper of money weights Whitehurst received a salary of $200 per annum with an additional $20 for the expenses of an office, which he established at his friend Ferguson's house in 4 Bolt Court, off Fleet Street in London. 
Initially Whitehurst divided his time between Derby and London but by 1779 he was almost permanently resident in the capital, occupying the house of the deceased Ferguson. From that time his business in Derby was run by his wife's cousin, James Wright, and then by his nephew John, the son of his brother James. In 1778 he published the results of his geological researches in 'An Inquiry into the Original State and Formation of the Earth', although the work had been substantially completed some years earlier. This book led to his election to the Royal Society in the following year. The importance of this work lies in the 'Appendix on the strata in Derbyshire' rather than his fanciful speculation on the formation of the earth; in the appendix he identifies the volcanic origin of the basalts and also hints at the orderly sequence of strata, one of the great geological generalizations. Both topics are alluded to in the portrait which Wright of Derby painted four years later. William Hutton met him in 1785 and in his 'History of Derby' (1791) described Whitehurst as 'near six feet high, straight, thin, and wore his own dark-grey bushy hair; he was plain in his dress, and had much the appearance of a respectable farmer' (W. Hutton, 294). 
In addition to attending the meetings of the Royal Society, Whitehurst played an active part in the scientific life of London which centred on the taverns and coffee houses. In particular he attended the meetings convened by Smeaton at the Queen's Head tavern which were the precursor to the Institution of Civil Engineers. In 1774 when the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce offered an award for the best solution to the problem of producing a natural standard of length (one which depended on a law of nature) Whitehurst was one of the judges. The award was given for an ingenious but flawed method of measuring the effective length of a pendulum beating seconds. When the contestant failed to develop his idea Whitehurst proceeded to do so, disregarding the advice of William Nicholson who in his 'Journal of Natural Philosophy' later described him as 'an ingenious mechanic and worthy man but possessed of very little science' (Nicholson, 31). Whitehurst published his results in 1787 as 'An Attempt towards Obtaining Invariable Measures of Length'. Whitehurst was also involved in the ventilation of the wards at St Thomas's Hospital about 1784 and his 'Observations on the Ventilation of Rooms on the Construction of Chimneys and on Garden Stoves' was published posthumously in 1794. 
Whitehurst's wife died in 1784 and Whitehurst himself died at 4 Bolt Court on 18 February 1788, possibly from cancer of the colon. He was interred seven days later at St Andrew's burial-ground, Gray's Inn Lane, London. In his will he left his premises at Derby to his nephew John, who was succeeded in turn by his son John. The Whitehurst business ceased with the latter's death in 1855, although it continues in spirit as John Smith & Son, a firm formed by Whitehurst apprentices. 


@@@@@


doc= 29296


Whitelaw, James (1749-1813), benefactor and writer, was born in co. Leitrim and educated at Trinity College, Dublin, which he entered in July 1766, becoming a scholar in 1769 and graduating BA in 1771. He studied for the church, and after his ordination became tutor to the earl of Meath, who presented him with the living of St James's, Dublin. Soon after he obtained the more remunerative living of the city's St Catherine's parish. Whitelaw was deeply interested in the condition of the poor who lived in his immediate neighbourhood. His response was the establishment of several charitable institutions, the most useful of which was the Meath charitable loan, founded in 1808, which proved of considerable service to the weavers of the Coombe district during periods of hardship. Due in large part to Whitelaw's efforts, in 1804 the trustees of the Erasmus Smith Fund allocated $2000 for the foundation of a school in the Coombe, at which poor children were given free education. He was subsequently appointed one of the governors of the charter schools of Ireland. 
Whitelaw was also an active writer on Dublin life and its history. In 1798 he undertook a census of the city, the results of which he published in his 'Essay on the Population of Dublin in 1798' (1805). Epidemic diseases were then frequent in Dublin, but, undeterred by the fear of infection, he personally inspected every house in the city and questioned nearly every inhabitant. Hitherto the extent of the population had been a matter of conjecture, with calculations clearly underestimating the level of overcrowding in many dwellings. In one house alone, for example, Whitelaw discovered 108 people. The government ordered the results of his inquiry to be printed, while the original papers were deposited in Dublin Castle. In 1805 he was made one of the members of the commission to examine the conduct of the paving board of Dublin. He received from John Law, bishop of Elphin, the valuable living of Castlereagh, which he was allowed to hold jointly with that of St Catherine's. 
Whitelaw's second major publication was the two-volume 'History of the City of Dublin' (1818), written in collaboration with John Warburton, keeper of the records in Dublin Castle. Both men died before the work was finished, and it was completed by the antiquary Robert Walsh. Whitelaw's other studies are 'Parental Solicitude' (1800?); 'A System of Geography', of which the maps only (engraved by himself) were published; and 'An Essay on the Best Method of Ascertaining Areas of Countries of any Considerable Extent', published in the sixth volume of 'Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy'. Whitelaw died in Dublin on 4 February 1813 from a fever contracted while visiting impoverished parishioners. His widow, about whom no further details are known, subsequently received a government pension of $200 p.a. 


@@@@@


doc= 29297


Whitelocke, Bulstrode, appointed Lord Whitelocke under the protectorate (1605-1675), lawyer and politician, was the eldest son of Sir James Whitelocke (1570-1632), judge, and his wife, Elizabeth (1575-1631), daughter of Edward and Cecily Bulstrode of Hedgerly Bulstrode. He was born in Fleet Street, London, on 6 August 1605, at the home of his mother's uncle, Sir George Croke. The second of seven children, only he and two sisters survived childhood. 
Much of what is known about Whitelocke is drawn from his own writings; he kept a diary, which begins autobiographically with a record of his birth and early years, before turning into yearly, then daily records of his public and private life. He gave another version of events up to 1660, in 'Annales of his own life dedicated to his children'. At Whitelocke's baptism, at St Dunstan-in-the-West on 19 August, his unpredictable uncle and godfather, Edmund Whitelocke, announced that the baby's name was Bulstrode; offering Elizabeth when asked for an alternative, he said he was resolved the boy should have one of his mother's names. Taught by his mother, Whitelocke was reading by the age of four and at seven was sent to boarding-school during his father's brief imprisonment. About 1614 he was sent to Eton College, but about 1615 transferred to Merchant Taylors' School. He led a gang of boys in street-fighting against boys from St Paul's School and 'many a blacke eye and bloudy nose was had among them' before the twelve-year-old Whitelocke acted as 'ambassador' in an 'Ambassy for peace' arranged by the masters (a foretaste of the future) and gave them an oration, in Latin, on the miseries of civil war and the benefits of peace. In 1619 he went to St John's College, Oxford, and was taught philosophy and logic by the president, William Laud, and by his tutor, Philip Parsons, but was prevented from taking his degree by an accident. Unable to afford a horse for hunting, he followed on foot; on one occasion he injured his leg and lay in a meadow near Islip for about two hours until taken by coach, in 'unspeakable torment', to his parents' home at Fawley Court near Henley-on-Thames. 
In 1622 Whitelocke entered the Middle Temple. He developed an ambition to go on the grand tour but his father persuaded him to explore his own country first and he followed the judges' circuits, being handsomely entertained, studying legal cases, and visiting places of interest. Through his father's influence, he was returned an MP for both Stafford and Boroughbridge in 1626, choosing to represent the former. The following year he was called to the bar and undertook another tour, of the west country and Wales, including visits to Stonehenge, Old Sarum, Maiden Castle, Sandfoot Castle, Penzance, Land's End, Glastonbury, and Wookey Hole by candle-light. At twenty-three, he was chosen master of the revels at the Middle Temple by his colleagues. When the formal revels began, attended by courtiers and others, he entertained lavishly and by Christmas was deeply in debt. He dared not tell his father and his only escape was to earn money as a barrister. He made $152 16's'. in one year on the Oxfordshire circuit and, by 1632, was appointed recorder of Abingdon and counsel for the corporation of Henley. That year his legal fees brought in $310 11's'. and, with an allowance from his father of $400, he cleared his debts. In 1630 his marriage had been arranged to the charming but unstable Rebecca Benet 
(Bennet; 1609-1634)
, daughter of alderman Thomas Benet, sheriff of London. Their only child, James, was born in 1631. Whitelocke's mother died the same year and his father the next and, in obedience to a clause in his father's will, he had an impressive monument to them erected in Fawley church. His inheritance left him well off, and he lived at Fawley Court with his family. He was put in charge of the music for a royal masque, 'The Triumph of Peace', to be presented by the inns of court in the banqueting hall, Whitehall, for Candlemas 1634. He composed a coranto in collaboration with Simon Ive; Queen Henrietta Maria said she could not believe such a lively tune was by an Englishman, and Whitelocke claimed that it remained popular for the next thirty years. 
Early in 1634 Rebecca Whitelocke's condition deteriorated; she became violent and was placed in the care of a doctor who claimed he could cure her, provided no one visited her for about six months. Greatly distressed, Whitelocke left for France with a friend. Two innkeepers' wives showed concern for the sad young Englishman; he was guarded in his record as to what this implied, but wrote to a discreet friend in England, asking him to send 72 yards of coloured ribbon 'for a lady to whom I am much ingaged' (Longleat, Whitelocke MSS, vi, fol. 93). Friends in England kept in touch, including his close friend at the time, Edward Hyde. Dr Bartlett wrote that Rebecca's condition improved until her mother insisted on seeing her and talking to her in private, after which Rebecca stopped eating. She died on 9 May. Mrs Benet announced that she would petition for custody of her grandchild and for profits from Whitelocke's estate to be paid to her, until it was known whether he was still alive. He immediately returned to England, shrewdly defeating a plot by French sailors to throw him and his companion overboard and keep their luggage. 
Whitelocke wrote that he was now a new beginner in the world. He was twenty-nine, a single father, and owner of a large estate. William Cooke, a tenant farmer, told his young landlord bluntly that he was entertaining too lavishly, his belongings were being sold in Henley market, and the house needed a good wife to look after it. He mentioned Frances Willoughby (1614-1649), daughter of William, third Lord Willoughby of Parham, and niece of the dowager countess of Sunderland, who was staying with her aunt at Hambleden. Whitelocke found a pretext for calling on the countess. He claimed he was so far from thoughts of wooing that he went in shabby clothes with untrimmed hair and beard, but when Frances Willoughby appeared it was love at first sight. The courtship developed with the countess's approval, and that of three-year-old James, who called Frances his lady. Soon Whitelocke was summoned to London, charged by the council with being 'disaffected to the church' because of his refusal, as recorder of Abingdon, to take action against nonconformists. Back in Fawley he called on Frances but during his absence her uncle and trustee, George Manners, earl of Rutland, had announced that his niece could not marry a commoner. The couple exchanged secret notes, and arranged an elopement. They were married in Fawley Court chapel, then were driven to The Ship in Fleet Street for their honeymoon. London society rallied round, eventually Frances's family became reconciled, and from 1 August 1635 the couple actually stayed with Rutland at Belvoir Castle. At first they delighted in the grandeur, but they soon grew weary of great feasting and ceremony and went home. They enjoyed fourteen years of happiness together and brought up six daughters and three sons. Whitelocke later expressed amazement that, with no political training, Frances could give such wise advice, and he claimed that there was never a cross word between them. 
Whitelocke began to be recognized at the Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire assizes. As chairman of the quarter sessions in Oxford, he spoke in support of the temporal courts against the encroachments of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and gained local popularity by resisting the extension of Wychwood Forest and supporting John Hampden's opposition to the second ship-money writ of 1635. In 1640 he was elected to the Long Parliament for Marlow. Reluctantly he accepted chairmanship of the select committee to prepare the impeachment of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford. He drafted the bill ensuring that the Long Parliament could not be adjourned or dissolved without consent of both houses and joined in proceedings against illegal decrees by convocation. He spent some time with Frances and their children at Fawley Court, and at Abingdon quarter sessions. Early in 1642 he was appointed a deputy lieutenant of Buckinghamshire and of Oxfordshire but accepted military posts with misgivings. In the Commons he favoured the joint authority of king and parliament over the militia and spoke against raising an army, stressing the miseries of civil war. He urged parliament to send propositions of peace to the king. In the summer of 1642 he found people around Fawley terrified at the prospect of parliament raising an army. They were arming themselves and he did so too. In August he and others wrote to the speaker, warning of plans to implement the king's commission of array at Watlington to secure recruits for the royal army. He and a troop of horsemen attacked, capturing some royalists. He advised Lord Saye to garrison Oxford before the king's army did so, but his advice was ignored and in due course royalists seized the city. Other royalist troops under Sir John Byron captured Fawley Court and despite orders not to plunder they ravaged the house, breaking open chests, burning books, and lighting their pipes on Whitelocke's manuscripts. Yet Whitelocke refused to see either party as wholly in the right or in the wrong and worked continuously to promote peace. He was appointed governor of Henley garrison; later, in 1644, he declined the command of the forces of the associated counties of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire. In 1643 he was chosen as one of parliament's commissioners to carry propositions of peace to the king in Oxford. In his account of their stay in the city and of the negotiations, he recorded that he thought Charles showed ability and judgement, but trusted other people's judgement more than his own, causing him to change his mind overnight. Attending parliament again, Whitelocke moved with his family to Highgate. He was there when he heard that his property, The Bell inn, Henley, had been set on fire, and that parliament's soldiers, garrisoned at Phyllis Court, another estate of his near Henley, had plundered the place although he was a parliament man, 'butt bruitish soldiers make no distinctions'. In the Commons he often wore a long coat like a cassock, causing MPs to call 'in Drollery... Mr Deane, Mr Deane'; Cromwell called him that 'in mirth'. By September 1644, with no rents from his plundered estates and earning no legal fees, Whitelocke had to sell his coach and horses. 
In November 1644 Whitelocke was once again sent to the king by parliament, to arrange for fresh peace talks. After waiting four hours in the cold, apparently on Headington Hill, the commissioners were allowed to enter Oxford. Dirt and stones were thrown at their coaches; they were abused as rogues, traitors, and rebels, and were lodged in a squalid inn. Despite the commissioners' safe conduct their servants were attacked by two royalist officers, whom Whitelocke and Denzil Holles managed to disarm; the governor duly imprisoned the offenders and placed a guard at the door. The commissioners read parliament's propositions to the king, who said he would consider them. Next day, casually encountering Whitelocke and Holles, the king asked them to write down, unofficially, what they thought he should answer. Embarrassed, they wrote (in an assumed hand) that he should go to parliament immediately, but instead, he wrote expressing his desire for peace. In December 1644, at Westminster, Whitelocke and Maynard were summoned by the earl of Essex to a private meeting, attended by the Scottish commissioners and others wishing 'to rid Cromwell out of the way' as a contentious 'incendiary'. The two lawyers firmly opposed bringing this charge unless adequate proof were available. Late in January 1645 he joined in the attempt to negotiate a treaty at Uxbridge, where accommodation was even worse than in Oxford. He was sent to parliament on 17 February to report on the difficult negotiations but with parliament unable to find any solutions to avert an impasse the talks broke down. In July Whitelocke and Holles were accused by Thomas Savile, earl of Sussex, of high treason because of their private dealings with the king in Oxford. Both were cleared of the charge and told that they could, if they wished, prosecute Savile (by then in the Tower) for damages. By May 1646 Whitelocke was on very good terms with Cromwell. A year later he spoke against parliament's plans to disband the New Model Army, arguing that a victorious army, unemployed, was liable to assume power over its leaders. In this he opposed Holles, against whom the army once more brought accusations relating to the 1644 contacts with the king, in which Whitelocke had also been involved. In the meantime, having recovered his Fawley estate, Whitelocke moved his ever-growing family to Phyllis Court, attending more to his legal business than to parliament. He had been appointed attorney to the duchy of Lancaster and in March 1648 the Commons voted him a keeper of the great seal, for one year, at a salary of $1000. 
Whitelocke kept busy in his judicial post during the army's seizure of power at the end of 1648, though in late December he and his colleague Sir Thomas Widdrington did discuss with Cromwell the future of the nation, and worked on plans for a compromise settlement between army and parliament. On 23 December he was appointed to a committee of thirty-eight to prepare charges against King Charles. He never attended it: he had spoken in the Commons against the trial and 'resolved to hazard all, rather then to goe contrary to his conscience'. On 30 January 1649, the day of Charles's execution, he 'stayed all day att home, troubled att the death of the King this day, & praying to God to keep his judgements from us'. On 14 February he was appointed to the new council of state, but avoided giving approval of recent events, which was at first required of members. He opposed the abolition of the House of Lords but was compelled to draft the bill enacting it. He tried to refuse appointment as a commissioner of the great seal of the Commonwealth; the Commons rejected his excuses and he defended his decision to continue on grounds of 'necessity' and the need to preserve the course of the law. 
On 16 May 1649 Whitelocke's wife Frances died; he was distraught. After he returned to work, sometimes in tears, he was put in charge of the late king's rare books and medals in St James's Library. In November 1649 he denounced proposals to expel lawyers from parliament, and took part in law reform (including the conduct of legal proceedings in English). He was a constant defender of the common law and his profession. By 1650 friends had begun to introduce him to eligible widows, but he would only consider marrying somebody who would be kind to his ten children. Within days of the February funeral of Rowland Wilson MP, friends suggested Whitelocke should approach his childless widow, Mary (died 1684), daughter of Bigley Carleton, a London grocer, but he thought it too soon. In April 1650 her chaplain, the Independent minister George Cokayn, brought them together in London and in June the couple met at the home of Cokayn's parents at Cotton End, Bedfordshire, and the courtship began. Mary said she liked Whitelocke's honesty in saying that his money and estates must go to his ten children, while if he and Mary had children she must support them from the fortune left to her by Wilson. On 5 August they rode to Bromham church and were married secretly and on 5 September they were married again, in Hackney church, the speaker and other MPs attending the ceremony. Mary was as tender towards her ten stepchildren as if they were her own, but was in some ways more indulgent than an 'own Mother'. Her first child, Samuel (for whom she later wrote 'Advice to her son Samuel'), was born on 30 May 1651; four more sons and two daughters followed. 
In September 1651 parliament sent Whitelocke and three others to congratulate Cromwell on his victory at Worcester against the future Charles II. In November, when Cromwell asked him to support a relative's case in chancery, Whitelocke said he could only follow his conscience and heard later that Cromwell had expected more compliance. The same thing occurred when Cromwell consulted him about the settlement of the nation, as a republic or a modified monarchy; Whitelocke favoured mixed monarchy. In June 1652 he was offered the profitable post of commissioner for the government of Ireland but refused it, believing Cromwell and others wanted him out of the way. Walking in St James's Park in November Whitelocke chanced to meet Cromwell, who respectfully asked his opinion on the state of the country. Whitelocke said that the army was too powerful while many MPs were corrupt, with nobody to control them. Suddenly Cromwell asked 'What if a man should take uppon him to be King?' Whitelocke rejected the idea, saying that Cromwell had as much power as a king, without the title, but that if there were to be a monarch Charles Stuart, king of the Scots, was now so weak that he would accept any terms. Cromwell's manner changed. In April 1653 Whitelocke opposed plans to dissolve the Rump Parliament. In Cromwell's speech at the forced dissolution he was reported as 'looking sometimes and pointing upon particular persons' including Whitelocke, 'to whom he gave very sharp language, though he named them not' (R. Blencave, ed., 'Sydney Papers', 1825, 140). In August 1653 Whitelocke was named as ambassador-extraordinary to Queen Kristina of Sweden. Mary, who was pregnant, begged him not to go, interpreting the appointment as a punishment for having confronted Cromwell, for refusing to judge the king, and for championing the law and the people's rights. His mission was to secure a treaty of amity and the freedom of the Sound. In November he sailed for Sweden with six ships, some ninety-seven men, three laundry-women, and a coach and horses. They landed in Goteborg and on 30 November, with local saddle-horses and wagons, the convoy set off for Uppsala, to be greeted ceremoniously on 20 December. Whitelocke's charm and diplomacy worked well with the young queen. He recorded their conversations in direct speech, including Kristina's confiding in him her decision to abdicate, and his attempt to dissuade her. They became friendly enough to joke and tease each other. Whitelocke negotiated a treaty of amity, which has never been revoked, and was knighted by Kristina. Other matters were postponed for future negotiation. Cromwell, meanwhile, was proclaimed lord protector. Whitelocke and his retinue left Uppsala in May 1654, travelling home via Germany. At a party in Hamburg he was taken very ill. His doctor suspected poison. After nearly being shipwrecked Whitelocke's vessel anchored near Gravesend on 30 June. He disembarked the next day and joined his family in Chelsea, to an emotional welcome, after eight months' absence. 
Cromwell welcomed his return and, two days later, greeted Whitelocke in Whitehall with a show of affection. On 14 July Whitelocke took the oath as a commissioner of the new great seal. He was elected for Buckinghamshire in the first protectorate parliament, which met on 3 September 1654. He reported to the house on his embassy, and was voted $2000 to cover arrears. After Cromwell summarily dissolved parliament on 22 January 1655 Whitelocke was approached by the Leveller John Wildman, inviting him to join in a conspiracy against Cromwell, but although he thought the conspirators' declaration on liberty and justice was sound he refused to take part. Cromwell instructed the keepers of the great seal to endorse an ordinance to reform chancery, which he and his council had prepared. Whitelocke and Widdrington objected, claiming that only parliament had authority to alter matters of law. They were dismissed on 8 June, losing a substantial part of their income. Conscious that they had exercised liberty of conscience, Cromwell recompensed them, on 2 July, by renewing their appointments as commissioners of the treasury, at $1000 a year each. Later that month Whitelocke was appointed, with two others, to welcome the Swedish ambassador, who came to negotiate a trade agreement, which was duly concluded. A member of the committee for trade and navigation, Whitelocke was consulted by Cromwell on foreign affairs. In the second protectorate parliament, which assembled on 17 September 1656, he was again returned for Buckinghamshire. On 27 January 1657 Speaker Widdrington was too ill to take the chair and the house appointed Whitelocke to take his place. He described it as the most difficult, troublesome employment he had ever experienced. Friends said he kept them to the point in debates and dispatched more business than in all previous weeks. He was cordially thanked by the house, and paid $500. Ironically, in view of his earlier advice, Whitelocke was appointed chairman of the committee presenting 'The humble petition and advice', asking the protector to take the title of king. Cromwell refused. At a second attempt he appeared to be amenable, then changed his mind since it might cause mutiny in the army. About this time he often consulted Whitelocke and others behind closed doors. After three or four hours they would relax, and he and Whitelocke would smoke their pipes. Whitelocke welcomed the freedom conferred by the adjournment of parliament from 26 June 1657, but started suffering from kidney stones. On 10 December he received a writ of summons to the protector's new upper house as Lord Whitelocke, and he reported his refusal of Cromwell's offer of a viscountcy. Whitelocke had protested in vain at the suppression of Christmas worship by soldiers, arguing that this was contrary to liberty of conscience. 
Cromwell died on 3 September 1658, his son Richard succeeding as lord protector. Whitelocke was often consulted by Richard Cromwell (whom he refers to by his first name) and wrote of Richard's behaving discreetly and better than was expected. At the old protector's funeral, on 23 November, Whitelocke was one of twelve pallbearers. Unsolicited, Richard reappointed him a keeper of the great seal. By May 1659 the regime had collapsed and army officers took it on themselves to invite back members of the Rump of the Long Parliament, without a king, a single person, or House of Lords. Whitelocke was elected a member of the new council of state, but lost his commissionership of the great seal, and refused the post of a commissioner to mediate peace between Sweden and Denmark, at their negotiations over the Sound. Thomas Scott, the regicide, hinted falsely that Whitelocke was corresponding with Charles II or one of his ministers. In July and August, as president of the council, Whitelocke received reports of insurrections, including that of Sir George Booth, in Lancashire and Cheshire, which was suppressed; he received a letter begging him to spare the rebel's life, which he did. On 13 October the discontented army expelled parliament and Whitelocke was sent for by the council of state to face the officers. To avoid bloodshed, it was agreed that parliament would not sit, the general council of officers would provide for preservation of peace, and a new form of government would be devised. The officers chose Whitelocke, with twenty-two others, to govern under the title the committee of safety. He consented, believing this was better than to have soldiers governing with the sword. He was chosen, with five others, to plan a form of commonwealth government, and was appointed keeper of the great seal. By the end of November he sensed that George Monck intended to restore the king; he wanted Monck checked but was ignored. Instructed by the council of officers, he sealed a proclamation, in December, summoning a parliament for 4 January, without a king or House of Lords, but when the officers tried to stipulate election methods and MPs' qualifications, he insisted it would be contrary to his oath to seal such writs. 
Restoration being inevitable, Whitelocke was asked to urge Fleetwood to send someone trustworthy to the king to negotiate reasonable terms, rather than allow Monck to arrange an unconditional restoration. Charles Fleetwood, the commander-in-chief, asked Whitelocke whether he would go and Whitelocke agreed, but shortly afterwards Vane and Desborough made Fleetwood change his mind. The Rump Parliament reassembled yet again on 26 December, with Monck's support. Whitelocke knew he would meet with hostility, having served on the committee of safety, and stayed away. A note from Speaker Lenthall reminded him of his duty to attend but when he did so he found some former friends were very reserved. There was talk of sending him to the Tower. Disguised in a long coat, on the snowy evening of 30 December he rode out of London with a servant of Samuel Wilson (Mary's brother-in-law). Soon Whitelocke pulled off the road to put on a periwig, as further disguise, and they made their way to Hunsdon House, Hertfordshire, home of William Willoughby, where he arrived without warning but was welcomed and protected. On Whitelocke's instructions, Mary returned the great seal to the speaker, who commended the action. She wrote to her husband through Willoughby, reporting, on 10 January 1660, that parliament was planning to consider the case of MPs who had served on the committee of safety. He returned to London but decided it was too dangerous to appear in parliament. Mary brought him news of events, and on 24 January he was summoned to attend the house in a week's time, or be fined $20. He was undaunted, but hoped Monck's expected arrival might alter parliament's plans, which it did. On 18 February Monck indicated that he favoured the readmission of MPs excluded in 1648. Despite this, Whitelocke expected to be arrested. 
On 1 May 1660 Charles II's declaration of Breda was brought to parliament, granting free pardon to all who applied within forty days, apart from any whom parliament might except. The king entered London ceremoniously on 29 May 1660. In June Whitelocke wrote an impressive defence of his political record -- he was in jeopardy from people he had opposed in court or parliament, who now wanted revenge. Monck, a former friend whom he had helped, asserted (with others) that, under the second exception of the 'Act of Pardon and Oblivion', Whitelocke should be disabled from ever again holding office. Whitelocke visited Monck, who acknowledged that they had been friends but said that Whitelocke's telling the common council that he, Monck, was planning the Restoration might have ruined the whole enterprise. Whitelocke obtained a certificate, addressed to the Commons and signed by several royalists, confirming acts of kindness he had done for them when they were in trouble and he in power. But there were demands for money: the earl of Berkshire, whose daughter had been imprisoned by order of the committee of safety, demanded $500; if the money was not forthcoming, he would persuade the Lords to have Whitelocke excepted. Thomas Napper, Whitelocke's former clerk and later a royalist colonel, fulfilled his promise to help Whitelocke in return for past kindnesses and arranged an interview with the king in June 1660. This went well; Whitelocke restored the treasures from the royal library, telling the king he could have sold the fifth-century 'Codex Alexandrinus' for $4000 overseas, but saved it for his majesty. This valuable introduction appeared to be a friendly gesture, but the following year Napper came for his reward, expecting at least $500. Whitelocke paid $250, which was accepted disdainfully. In parliament Whitelocke's pardon was carried by fifty voices in June 1660; he wished to have this confirmed under the great seal but had to send the chancellor (former friend Ned Hyde) a 'present' of $250, plus 'fees' totalling $37 18's'. 8died 
In July 1660 Whitelocke and his family moved to a house in Coleman Street, returning sometimes to Fawley Court. He was in the country in January 1661 when news came of the Coleman Street riot, led by the Fifth Monarchist Thomas Venner. Soldiers raided his Coleman Street house and enemies told the king, falsely, that Whitelocke lived in Coleman Street to advise the 'fanatics'. Some days later, Charles announced that Whitelocke was unfit to serve as a governor of Sutton Hospital. In due course Whitelocke moved to Chancery Lane, closer to his Middle Temple chambers; he also purchased Chilton Lodge, near Hungerford, with Mary's money. Unsolicited, he had decided to write a treatise for King Charles, entitled 'Whitelockes notes uppon the kings writt for choosing members of parliament' (published posthumously in 1766). He handed the work, one volume at a time, to the chancellor who told him, on receiving the second of three volumes in April 1661, that the king was very pleased with the first. In March 1663 the king sent a message asking Whitelocke to write his opinion on the royal prerogative in matters ecclesiastical (following parliament's rejection of his first declaration of indulgence). There was no suggestion of payment, but Whitelocke had welcomed Charles's promise, at Breda, to allow freedom of conscience. By 25 March he finished 'The kings right to graunt indulgence in matters of religion'. Although his monthly earnings were small, in December 1663 he sealed the lease on a large house in Fleet Street, giving up the one in Chancery Lane. 
Whitelocke's diary entries grow shorter from this time, with references to family illnesses and discontent. Although suffering from kidney stones, dropsy, and piles, he continued his legal work. Prince Rupert consulted him in June 1671 on his rights as constable of Windsor Castle, saying that an opinion in Whitelocke's hand would satisfy the king. Fees from clients are noted monthly in the diary, ranging from 5 shillings for a servant, to $20 on one occasion, but usually 10 shillings or $1. In June 1675, ill though he was, he earned $5. In July, the month in which he died, he entered two fees of 10 shillings. In the last ten years of his life, with a restricted income from rents and fees, and with some of his children at home young enough to be grandchildren, he still spent money improving his land. Active as ever with his writing, besides his diary, which he continued until a week before he died, he wrote fair copies of sermons he preached to the family. He sometimes attended the local church before conducting a conventicle at Chilton Lodge, which was open house to outsiders wishing to attend; the church sometimes sent a spy. He often preached, as did the popular Independent minister, George Cokayn. A young client, the Quaker William Penn, sometimes came to hear Whitelocke, sometimes to preach himself. Years later Penn published 'Quench not the Spirit' (1711), a selection of Whitelocke's sermons, describing him as 'one of the most accomplished Men of the Age' and quoting his definition of religion as 'the Work of the Spirit of God in the Hearts and Souls of Men'. Whitelocke died on 28 July 1675, a few days before his seventieth birthday, and was buried, as he wished, unostentatiously in Fawley church on 6 August. The pleasures and concerns of family life weave in and out of his public life, in his diary and 'Annales', but were expunged by the editor of 'Annales', Arthur Annesley, earl of Anglesey, when publishing them as 'Memorials of the English Affairs' in 1682. An edition of 'The Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke, 1605-1675' was published in 1990. 
A 'trimmer', who swam with the tide, or a man who spoke up for law and freedom of conscience? Whitelocke was despised by some historians down to the late twentieth century. Thomas Carlyle labelled him 'Dryasdust', 'our Pedant friend' who showed 'occasional friskiness; most unexpected, as if the hippopotamus should show a tendency to dance'. Charles Morton, editing the first edition of Whitelocke's 'Journal of the Swedish Ambassy' (1772), described him as 'a man of sense, learning, integrity, spirit, temper... and knowledge of the world'. Sir Charles Firth in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' considered his work was 'greatly overestimated by Whig writers'. Whitelocke emerges from his own records as highly intelligent, musical, flamboyant, with a good opinion of himself, very loving, refusing to toe a party line if he thought it was wrong, and consistently a staunch defender of freedom. 


@@@@@


doc= 29298


Whitelocke, Edmund (1565-1608), courtier, was born on 10 February 1565, in the parish of St Gabriel Fenchurch Street, London, the son of a merchant, Richard Whitelocke ('c'.1533-1570), and his wife, possibly named Joan ('c'.1528-1607), daughter of John Colte and widow of another merchant, named Brockhurst, who had left her a 'competent estate'. The eldest of four boys, the youngest being the future judge Sir James Whitelocke (1570-1632), Edmund was aged five when his father died of pleurisy in Bordeaux. His mother preserved and invested the legacy left by his father for their sons' education, despite her third marriage, to another merchant, Thomas Price, 'a notable unthrift'. Her sons learned Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, music, dancing, 'and to write fair' ('Liber famelicus', 6). Edmund Whitelocke was sent to Merchant Taylors' School, then in 1581 to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA. He was admitted about 1585 to Lincoln's Inn, where he 'spent his time among to[o] good cumpanions', and in 1587 'betoke himself to travail into foreyne kingdoms... to redeem his mispent time', visiting numerous universities and learning languages ('Liber famelicus', 8). The governor of Provence made him captain of a troop of infantrymen stationed in Marseilles, then in Grenoble. Whitelocke failed to keep in touch with his family for nearly twelve years. 
After his return to England, Whitelocke's wit and sophistication ensured that 'he grew into great goodliking of many Englishe noblemen' ('Liber famelicus', 8) and he spent the rest of his life at their expense, notably with Roger Manners, earl of Rutland, who frequently housed him. In 1601 he was arrested and charged with high treason for involvement in the earl of Essex's plot. His account of events was set out in a long letter dated 11 February sent to Robert Cecil, secretary of state. He claimed that on 8 February he had gone in search of Rutland, finding him with a party of gentlemen at Essex House, where 'he willed me to attend him... presuming, as the... rumour of the whole company was, that they went for the ending of some private quarrel, I went with him' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.40-1). Learning that this was not the case, Whitelocke abruptly left the conspirators and hid in the house of a 'citizen of good repute' (ibid.). In spite of this he was arrested, imprisoned, and charged, but as no evidence was found against him he was committed to the custody of his brother James and soon afterwards was discharged. 
Whitelocke's next misadventure occurred as a result of his friendship with Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, whom he supported in a quarrel with Sir Francis Vere in 1602. On 4 November 1605, the eve of the Gunpowder Plot, Whitelocke chanced to dine at Syon House with Northumberland and the earl's distant cousin, Thomas Percy, 'the principal agent in that treason'. Imprisoned once more, he was again released with no evidence against him. For the rest of his life he lived 'with most dependancye upon the erl', who awarded him $40 per annum, later increased to $60. He had permission to visit Northumberland, imprisoned in the Tower until 1621, 'and so passed his time in mirthe and good companye' ('Liber famelicus', 9). At some point he also became the confidant of Robert Radcliffe, fifth earl of Sussex, and stayed in his house, New Hall, in Essex. In 1602 it was reported that the earl, who was living with one of the countess's former gentlewomen, 'hyres Capt Whitlocke, with monie and... suites' to tell the Countess 'howe he buyes his wench a wastcote of 10$, and puts hir in hir velvet gowne... It is conjectured that Capt Whitlocke... hath incited the E[arl] to followe this sensuall humour... as he did the E[arl] of Rutland' and that as 'a shuttlecock' he 'flyes up and downe from one nobleman to an other; good for nothing but to... help them to loose tyme' ('Diary of John Manningham'). Whitelocke died at New Hall from a stomach disorder about 24 August 1608 and was honoured by burial in the Sussex family vault at St Andrew's Church, Boreham, Essex, on 5 September. In a letter of 20 September Dudley Carleton wrote that 'capt. Whitlock,... is so lamented by all bo[o]n companions as yf the world had not bin worthy of him'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29299


Whitelocke, Sir James (1570-1632), judge, was born on 28 November 1570, a twin and the youngest of four sons of Richard Whitelocke ('c'.1533-1570), a London merchant, and his wife, possibly called Joan ('c'.1528-1607), previously widow of one Brockhurst and daughter of John Colte of Little Munden, Herefordshire. His eldest brother was Edmund Whitelocke (1565-1608). Their father died trading in France three weeks before the twins' birth. While his brothers pursued adventurous lives (William was killed serving with Sir Francis Drake, while Richard travelled abroad as a merchant), James undertook an ambitious study regime in the face of family financial difficulties and his mother's remarriage on 5 November 1571 to Thomas Price, which proved unhappy. Rich detail of his early life and his career is contained in his 'Liber famelicus' or family book, which also offers unusually candid insights into early Stuart law and politics. 
Admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1575, Whitelocke won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, from where he matriculated in July 1588 and where he later became a fellow. His recollections of Oxford suggest the importance of lay, humanist ideals for his education. His college tutor, Rowland Searchfield, subsequently bishop of Bristol, stressed the study of 'logique and the artes, but above all of historye' ('Liber famelicus', 13). Yet he also developed friendships at Oxford with men who were later at the forefront of an Arminian design for the church, including William Laud and John Buckeridge, then fellows at St John's. Having embarked on study for the degree of bachelor of civil laws, its lacklustre formal curriculum led Whitelocke to exploit provision for absences from college in order concurrently to study common law. He entered New Inn in 1590 and progressed to the Middle Temple in March 1593, but gained the BCL on 1 July 1594 and remained a fellow at St John's until 1598. As a student in Oxford and London he struggled financially and undertook work for St John's and as a solicitor to make ends meet. His studious character and an active role in the educational life of the inns presaged his call to the bar on 24 October 1600. 
On 10 September 1602 Whitelocke contracted what was to be a long and happy marriage to Elizabeth (1575-1631), daughter of Edward Bulstrode of Hedgerly Bulstrode, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Cecily Croke. They had seven children, of whom four -- Mary, Joan, Dorothy and James -- died in infancy; Elizabeth, Cecilia, and Bulstrode Whitelocke (1605-1675) survived. The marriage also provided a house in Fleet Street, a point of entry into the Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire gentry, and valuable professional connections in the bride's uncles John Croke, then judge in Wales and recorder of London, and George Croke, then a bencher at the Inner Temple. In 1606 Whitelocke became recorder of Woodstock, a few miles north of Oxford. Associations developed in the university led to legal work as steward of St John's, Eton College (from 1610), steward of the lands of Westminster Abbey (also from 1610), and the courts baron preserving the liberties of St Martin's-le-Grand in the City (from 1617), and to annual retainers from bishops John Buckeridge, Richard Neile, and John Howson. In London, Whitelocke gained the patronage of Sir Francis Bacon, Sir Julius Caesar, and Sir Lionel Cranfield, moving between the courts of king's bench, chancery, requests, wards, Star Chamber, and constable. This, coupled with assize work centred on Oxford and assisted by the patronage of Sir David Williams and Sir George Croke, ensured that Whitelocke's income grew steadily. From 1607 he purchased properties near Whitechurch and Witney, Oxfordshire, while renting Clewer House near Windsor. Between 1616 and 1620 he strained his resources to buy $9000 worth of property, most notably the manor of Fawley Court, Berkshire, on the Thames 40 miles west of London. 
While in London, Whitelocke extended his intellectual interests through involvement with the Society of Antiquaries, preparing papers on topics such as 'Antiquity, use and cermony of lawful combats in England' and other matters of native custom. The collapse of the society in 1607 mirrored Whitelocke's own uneasy negotiation of common and civil law jurisdictional rivalries. He was elected MP for Woodstock in 1610, and served on a variety of parliamentary committees deploying his legal knowledge. He assumed a highly visible role in the debates on impositions prompted by 'Bate's Case' (1606), providing a famous declaration of parliamentary rights which, it has been argued, cut to the heart of constitutional tensions between royal and parliamentary power. Seeking consensus over general principles of taxation, Whitelocke's claim that 'the power of the King in Parliament is greater than his power out of Parliament, and doth rule and control it' ('State trials', 2.482) was never intended to be controversial, but unwittingly contributed to a new language of politics that emerged after his death, in part through its publication in 'A Learned and Necessary Argument to Prove that each Subject hath a Propriety in his Goods' (1641). In separate legal briefs challenging the jurisdiction of a royal commission into navy corruption (1609) and the jurisdiction of the court of earl marshal (1613), Whitelocke drew himself into a collision course with the Howard family and the lord chancellor, Lord Ellesmere, drawing censure and imprisonment from the crown. On the order of the privy council he was imprisoned from 18 May to 13 June 1613, obtaining release through a personal petition to the king for clemency. Outside parliament, for the four years until his death Ellesmere stymied Whitelocke's political ambitions, earning the latter's criticism that he was 'the greatest enemye to the common law that did ever bear office of state in this kingdome' ('Liber famelicus', 53). Whitelocke was not cowed but continued his opposition to impositions as MP for Woodstock in 1614: his notes challenging the crown over this issue were burned by the king's order following parliament's 'addled' and abrupt dissolution. 
Throughout his career Whitelocke monitored factional influence on legal appointments, privately criticizing -- but ultimately accepting -- the growing influence of George Villiers. In 1616 he resigned from a lucrative clerkship of enrolments in the court of king's bench as the now Viscount Villiers wrested control of the office. In 1618 Whitelocke was promoted in a contested election for the recordership of London, backed by a merchant faction, but was rejected by the king in favour of Robert Heath, preferred candidate of Villiers the new marquess of Buckingham. Buckingham appears to have borne no grudge against Whitelocke, appointing him to commissions of the peace for Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire in 1617 and 1618. 
In 1619 Whitelocke was made a bencher of the Middle Temple and autumn reader. Choosing the thirteenth chapter of Henry VIII's statute on benefices, he addressed the contentious issues of patronage, non-residence, and plurality, mounting a moderate appeal for the rights of crown and clergy. The reading was widely copied. The following year he was appointed recorder of Westminster and St Martin's-le-Grand (23 May), was created serjeant-at-law, and on 29 October 1620 he was knighted. He resigned his stewardships at Westminster Abbey and at St Martin's-le-Grand on 4 May 1621. He sat again in the 1621 parliament as MP for Woodstock, but was largely absent, concentrating instead on judicial duties. With Buckingham's support, in June 1620 Whitelocke had been appointed chief justice of Chester. Over four years he administered justice in the county palatine of Chester and those border counties within the jurisdiction of the council in the marches of Wales. While financially lucrative (yielding over $1000 per annum), Whitelocke's relations with William Compton, earl of Northampton, president of the council, were poor and led in October 1624 to his removal from Chester to a puisne judgeship in the court of king's bench. He rode the Oxford circuit in 1625, the midland circuit in 1625, the northern in 1627 and 1628, and returned to the Oxford circuit from 1629 until the year of his death. He left his recorderships at Westminster and St Martin's-le-Grand on 8 December 1628. His relations with the crown were strained when Charles I, seeking revenue to fight in Europe, revoked and reduced his circuit fees from 1625 to 1628, to Whitelocke's considerable unhappiness. In this period Whitelocke was also drawn into constitutional test cases which damaged his legal reputation. In the 'Five Knights' case' (1627) Whitelocke supported the crown's right to imprison subjects without providing explicit cause, but also asserted the subject's right to legal redress through writ of habeas corpus. In 'Eliot's case' (1629) Whitelocke initially resisted crown attempts to impose conditions for bail, but then acquiesced in royal demands for security of good behaviour. Stressing the 'supereminent' power of the crown, Whitelocke dismissed John Eliot's claim for parliamentary privilege from prosecution, accusing him of 'sowing sedition to the destruction of the commonwealth' ('State trials', 3.308). Only a spirited defence of these actions by his son, Bulstrode, prevented parliament from posthumously denouncing and fining Whitelocke. 
While his wife was regarded a puritan, Whitelocke adopted a more moderate Calvinist stance, wherever possible avoiding judgment of those high-church clerics who supported him throughout his career. The Arminian vision of his friends put this approach under strain in the 1620s, as Buckeridge and Laud gathered multiple livings to themselves, leading Whitelocke to defend Buckeridge's pluralism to posterity in the 'Liber famelicus', but to challenge Laud's retention of a college parsonage on behalf of St John's in 1621. In 1628 Whitelocke upheld Bishop Neile's expulsion of Peter Smart from Durham Cathedral for preaching against high-church ceremonial. In 1629 he avoided the king's order to the judges of king's bench to release Jesuits arrested at Clerkenwell College, pleading absence from court during crucial parts of the hearing. In 1631 Whitelocke was openly criticized by junior Arminian clerics at the consecration of his private chapel; Bulstrode Whitelocke later suggested that his father privately thought William Laud 'too full of fire, though a just and good man', and worried that his 'want of experience in state matters, and his too much zeal for the Church, and heat, if he proceeded in the ways he was then in, would set this nation on fire' (BL, Add. MS 37343, fol. 201'v'). 
Whitelocke's life was dominated by his ambition to leave a tangible legacy to his family through professional achievement. Despite a 'grave' concern for his children, it is clear that he found time to 'sport' and sing with them; Bishop John Williams remarked that 'no subject in Christendom had better musicke then Judge Whitelocke had in his house' ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 44-5, 51, 65). His son remembered him as a man 'full of witt and pleasantness especially att meales, and as there was occasion his discourse was mixed with excellent learning' (ibid., 66). Predicting his own passing upon the death of his wife on 28 May 1631, Whitelocke retired from public life to settle the details of his estate, leaving Fawley Court and $4500 as well as plate and household goods to his son, $2500 for Cecilia's marriage portion, $10 a quarter to his married daughter Elizabeth, and $100 to build a monument to his wife and himself (which survives) in the south transept of Fawley church. He died on 22 June 1632. 


@@@@@


doc= 29300


Whitelocke, John (1757-1833), army officer, was the son of John Whitelocke, steward to John, fourth earl of Ailesbury, and his wife, Sarah Liddiard (died 7 June 1809). He was educated at Marlborough grammar school and Lewis Lochee's military academy in Chelsea, London, sponsored by Lord Ailesbury. He joined the 14th foot as ensign on 14 December 1778, by the influence of Viscount Barrington, recently secretary at war, and was soon appointed adjutant, and promoted to lieutenant on 28 April 1780. In 1782 the regiment went to Jamaica, and there about 1783 he married the daughter of William Lewis, a planter, of Cornwall, Jamaica. Her brother, Matthew Lewis, was office keeper at the Colonial Office. 
Whitelocke's promotions came through influence more than military expertise. Yet he had real administrative abilities; it was very unusual for an ensign to be made adjutant in his first year of service, but he was successful. His early aristocratic sponsorship was complemented by useful connections in the political and administrative system of the army, but he was also an able administrator. Jamaica's diseases provided plenty of opportunities for advancement for the survivors, and, with influence, this ensured promotion. Whitelocke moved to the 36th foot as captain in 1784, and as major to a new battalion of the 60th four years later. Back in the West Indies he was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the 13th foot in 1791. 
Whitelocke first saw action in September 1793 when, with the local rank of colonel, he was sent to St Domingue (Haiti) with his own regiment reinforced by other troops. He had only 700 soldiers, but succeeded in seizing Jeremie, and advanced along the southern peninsula of the island towards the capital, Port-au-Prince. It was a complex campaign, for the French planters were divided over their response to the revolution in France, the black slaves were rebellious, and yellow fever attacked Whitelocke's men. He was reinforced in February 1794, and at the second attempt captured Tiburon and directed the storm of Fort l'Acul, which opened the way to Port-au-Prince. Superseded in overall command, he led the attacking column which took the capital in June. 
He was sent home with dispatches, and on 1 September 1795 was promoted colonel of the 6th West India regiment; he returned, as a local brigadier-general, to the West Indies, where he was employed on administrative duties in Jamaica. He returned to Britain in 1798 to be brigadier-general in Guernsey, was promoted major-general in June 1798, and was appointed lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth in May 1799. 
This was a remarkable rise (ensign to general in twenty years). At Portsmouth he again had administrative duties, but for those of a more martial nature he had no aptitude: he was remembered in one exercise directing regiments into collisions and swamps, then leaving subordinates to sort things out. Yet he also successfully administered a recruitment drive for the fencibles, and calmed disputes between touchy officers. It was thus reasonable that he should be made inspector-general of recruiting in November 1804. He rose to lieutenant-general in October 1805. 
Whitelocke's career, rapid promotion, and post as inspector-general were all the result of adhesion to the Pitt regime, and the fall of Pitt's government in 1806 rendered him vulnerable. The new prime minister, Lord Grenville, was keen on retrenchment, and the new secretary of state, William Windham, had his own ideas about recruiting. The news of the capture by an unauthorized British force of Buenos Aires, and then of its recapture by the Spaniards, was therefore seen as an opportunity to remove both Whitelocke and his office. 
Several reinforcing expeditions were sent to the River Plate, of which one, commanded by Brigadier-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, captured Montevideo. Whitelocke was appointed to command all forces, and to act as governor of the province that he was expected to conquer, on 24 February 1807. He reached Montevideo on 10 May 1807 and had to wait for a month before the final reinforcement arrived. He used the time to organize an administration, among other things starting a dual-language newspaper as a vehicle for the new government. 
Whitelocke's chief of staff, Major-General John Leveson Gower, had even less experience of combat than Whitelocke, but he devised a plan for the conquest of Buenos Aires which Whitelocke adopted. Gower, of the family of the marquesses of Stafford, was socially much above Whitelocke, and, closeted with him on the voyage south in the frigate 'Thisbe', he persuaded Whitelocke to accept the plan. The other commanders under Whitelocke were fighting men: generals Robert Craufurd and Samuel Auchmuty and admirals George Murray and Charles Stirling had between them fought in most continents and many battles; as a group they emphasized Whitelocke's martial deficiencies. He was not unimaginative, and he could see the difficulties in attacking Buenos Aires: a population of 70,000 and a grid layout of streets, where each block of buildings was a solidly built minor fort. He walked round Montevideo one day with Craufurd, pointing out such buildings and commenting on their strength. And yet he kept to Gower's plan, which ignored all this, and asked no one else for advice. 
One small reinforcement from England failed to arrive, but Admiral Murray contributed 220 seamen, and British merchants were enrolled as a militia to help defend Montevideo. Whitelocke concentrated all available troops into the assault force, landing at Ensenada de Barragon, 32 miles from Buenos Aires, with 8500 men, on 28 June. Whitelocke divided his force into three, and these forces marched on the city, but lost touch with each other. Colonel Mahon's group was left east of the city; the division under Gower and Craufurd drove off a defending force at the outskirts of the city; the third, under Whitelocke, arrived a day later. Whitelocke's behaviour was foul-mouthed and hectoring, and alienated many; he was clearly nervous and uncertain. 
The approach march took five days, and used up most of the soldiers' supplies. After a day's rest, Whitelocke revealed his (that is Gower's) plan: each regiment would advance along one or two of the parallel streets as far as the waterfront, at which point it was assumed that the assault would be successful. None of the more experienced soldiers raised objections. Some soldiers were ordered to advance with unloaded muskets, and in one case Gower even ordered them to remove their flints; two corporals with axes accompanied each column. These measures were copied from Auchmuty's successful assault on Montevideo, and were intended to facilitate the reduction of strong points, but the circumstances were now different. 
The assault began at first light on 5 July, with thirteen columns advancing simultaneously. The outermost columns, two regiments under Auchmuty on the west and half the 45th under Major Jasper Nichols on the east, established themselves at strong points, respectively the plaza de Toros and the Residencia. In the centre a weak column of dismounted dragoons made no progress at all. Between these, however, there was much fighting and a series of comprehensive British defeats. Craufurd with the light brigade was driven to take refuge in the church of San Domingo, where, surrounded and attacked by sharpshooters and artillery, he was compelled to surrender. Half of the 45th under Colonel Guard suffered a similar fate, even more quickly. Both columns of the 88th had to surrender before reaching the waterfront. The 36th had to retreat out of the city to join up with Auchmuty; he also took command of the 5th, which did reach its objectives. In all, the resistance was much fiercer than the British had expected -- better supplied, better armed, and more persistent. Many Spaniards in the houses were bypassed by the marching columns, and then emerged to attack the columns in the rear. A well-served and numerous artillery blocked the streets behind barricades. 
Whitelocke knew nothing of this, for he remained all that day at his headquarters. He neither sought nor was given information until next day, when he received a demand for surrender from the Spanish commander, Santiago Liniers. He then went to Auchmuty's post and discovered the bad news. Of his force about 1200 were casualties or missing, and the Spaniards held 1800 prisoners. Whitelocke had about 5400 men available, divided into four widely separated groups. A proposal to bombard the city into surrender, using guns from the fleet, was made, but Whitelocke rejected it: he feared it would endanger the prisoners, but it was also clear that it would have failed -- landing anything from the ships was extremely difficult, and it would have been impossible to keep men and guns supplied. Sheer distaste for the idea was another element. 
The only alternative was to give up the attack. Once that was decided -- with the concurrence of Auchmuty, Gower, and Murray -- the whole British position in the Plate area unravelled. Montevideo was untenable alone, and the Spaniards held the prisoners, both those in Buenos Aires and the 71st foot from the previous year, as hostages. Whitelocke had the moral courage to agree to the complete evacuation of the Plate in exchange for the prisoners and supplies for the voyage home. The organization of the forces for evacuation then brought out Whitelocke's administrative skills, and the troops were recovered and dispatched on time. 
Whitelocke returned to England on 7 November 1807, and in January 1808 he was court-martialled at Chelsea. The government had changed again, and his former friends were back in power, but it had been the opposition's expedition. The court martial took seven weeks, and Whitelocke faced four charges covering poor diplomacy, military incompetence, and negotiation of a shameful surrender, each barely relevant to what had happened. He was found guilty and was cashiered. His fault lay in taking on a task beyond his capacity, for which those who appointed him should have shared the blame. It was also a task, in all probability, beyond the capacity of the British forces. All of those who recorded their impressions remarked that holding the Plate area against the wishes of the inhabitants was impossible: they wanted either Spanish rule or independence; a British conquest would have been extremely unpleasant, and ultimately a costly failure. Whitelocke's surrender and evacuation permitted the army to be returned to Britain to fight the real enemy, Napoleon. Many of Whitelocke's regiments went to fight in Spain later in 1808. Nevertheless he had shown himself incompetent. 
Whitelocke made no further effort to justify himself. He lived latterly at Clifton, near Bristol, and died, aged seventy-six, on 23 October 1833, at Hall Barn Park, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, the seat of his son-in-law, Sir Gore Ouseley, who had married his eldest daughter. He was buried in the west aisle of Bristol Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 29301


Whiter, Walter (1758-1832), philologist and literary scholar, born at Birmingham on 30 October 1758, was at King Henry VIII Grammar School, Coventry, for ten years, under Dr Edwards, where Robert Bree MD was a fellow pupil. He was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, on 19 June 1776 as sizar, and graduated BA (1781) and MA (1784). On 4 April 1782 he was elected a fellow of Clare, probably on account of his reputation for classical and philological knowledge. He lived in his rooms in college from 1782 to 1797. Richard Porson was one of his closest friends, and often wrote notes on the margin of Whiter's books. Porson in 1786 added some notes of his own and of Whiter to an edition by Hutchinson of Xenophon's 'Anabasis'. These were issued separately from Valpy's press in 1810, and George Townsend added them to his edition of 1823. 
Whiter was ordained priest in 1783, and was presented by his college in 1797 to the rectory of Hardingham in Norfolk; he held the benefice until his death. His clerical role did not inhibit his lively spirits. Baron Merian, in a letter to Dr Samuel Butler of Shrewsbury School, writes: 'I pity Whiter. A great etymologist, perhaps the greatest that ever lived. A genius certainly, but it seems, like most eminent artists, dissolute' (S. Butler, 'Life and Letters', 1896, 1.186). Every year on 23 April, the day of St George (titular saint of Hardingham church), it was his harmless practice to collect his friends at a picnic under a beech on a hillock called St George's Mount, and to claim from each of them an appropriate poem in Latin or English. A specimen of his verses on one of these occasions is in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (86/1, 1816, 542-3). 
Whiter's first published work was 'A Specimen of a Commentary on Shakspeare' (1794), containing notes on 'As You Like It' and 'an attempt to explain and illustrate various passages on a new principle of criticism derived from Mr Locke's doctrine of the association of ideas'. Its contemporary reception was limited and critical. 'Such reviews as do exist, while agreeing on the commendation of Whiter's extreme learning, find his views too eccentric and his claims too inflated to make his book of any permanent value' (Whiter, 'Specimen of a Commentary', xxxi). It therefore went unnoticed by Coleridge, Hazlitt, and the Victorian critics. Only in the twentieth century was Whiter's perceptive treatment of trains of ideas and image clusters given its due, and seen to anticipate the work of such Shakespearian critics as Caroline Spurgeon and W. H. Clemens. 
Whiter's other works include the first part of 'Etymologicon Magnum' (1800), a universal etymological dictionary on a new plan, in the preface to which he enlarged on the value of the Romani language. These views and his word-speculations interested George Borrow, who made his acquaintance and introduced him, as understanding some twenty languages, into 'Lavengro' (1851). Jeffrey wrote two articles on the 'Etymologicon Magnum' in the 'Monthly Review' (June and July 1802), assigning to Whiter 'much labour and shrewdness, with a considerable share of credulity'. Whiter also produced the 'Etymologicon universale, or, Universal Etymological Dictionary on a New Plan' (vols. 1 and 2, 1822; vol. 3, 1825). These three large quarto volumes were printed partly at the cost of Cambridge University Press. The first volume was originally issued in 1811, and the preface to the first volume in the collected edition of 1822-5 retained the date 15 May 1811. In this work Whiter set out that 'consonants are alone to be regarded in discovering the affinities of words, and that the vowels are to be wholly rejected; that languages contain the same fundamental idea, and that they are derived from the earth'. Baron Merian styled it 'splendid, a very fine book indeed' (S. Butler, 'Life and Letters', 1896, 1.185) but modern lexicographers have found the etymologies unpersuasive. In 'A Dissertation on the Disorder of Death, or that State called Suspended Animation' (1819), Whiter tried to show how the apparently dead should be treated with a view to their restoration to life. In the advertisement at the end he announced a series of essays to be called 'Nova tentamina mythologica, or, Attempts to unfold various portions of mythology by a new principle', but these were never printed and are now, with other manuscripts of Whiter, in the Cambridge University Library ('CUL Cat. of MSS', 4.521, 543-4). Whiter died at Hardingham rectory on 23 July 1832, and was buried in the churchyard on 30 July, a large railed-in tomb being erected to his memory. A bust of him was placed in the library at Clare College but is now lost without trace. 


@@@@@


doc= 29302


Whiteside, James (1804-1876), judge and politician, was born on 12 August 1804 at Delgany, co. Wicklow, the second son of the Revd William Whiteside and Anne, 'nee' Robinson. Shortly after Whiteside's birth his father moved to Rathmines, near Dublin, where he died in 1806. Mrs Whiteside was left in narrow circumstances, but she was devoted to her children, and James was indebted to her for much of his early education. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1822, and graduated BA; he proceeded MA in 1832. He had entered Gray's Inn in London in Hilary term 1828, but the following year he entered as a law student at the Inner Temple. He was called to the Irish bar in Easter term 1830. Whiteside spent his first year studying law in the chambers of Joseph Chitty, and on commencing legal practice he joined the north-east circuit. He married, in July 1833, Rosetta, daughter of William Napier of Belfast, and sister of Sir Joseph Napier, sometime lord chancellor of Ireland. 
From 1831 Whiteside's progress at his profession was rapid, and he was made a queen's counsel in 1842. He rapidly gained a reputation for forensic advocacy, and his speech in defence of Daniel O'Connell (in the 1843 state trials of the principal members of the repeal movement) placed him in front of all his contemporaries at the Irish bar. Shortly after the O'Connell trials Whiteside's health obliged him temporarily to relinquish his profession. He visited Italy, and was later to publish a three-volume work, 'Italy in the Nineteenth Century' (1848), as well as a translation of Luigi Canina's 'Indicazione topografica di Roma antica' as 'Vicissitudes of the Eternal City' (1849). 
After returning to active work, Whiteside acted as leading counsel for the defence of the Young Ireland leader, William Smith O'Brien, and his fellow prisoners in the state trials at Clonmel in 1848, O'Brien having been arrested in the wake of a failed peasant uprising in Ballingarry. Three years later, in 1851, he entered parliament as Conservative member for Enniskillen. In 1859 he was chosen as one of the representatives of Dublin University, and held this position until his elevation to the bench. Whiteside's striking talent as a speaker made him a valuable accession to his party in the House of Commons, and it is said that when there was battle expected in the house, Lord Derby would say to him 'Now Whiteside, where's your shillelagh?' (Hogan and Osborough, 212). On the formation of Derby's first administration in 1852 he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland, his brother-in-law Joseph Napier being attorney-general. He was in the same year elected a bencher of King's Inns. Whiteside himself was to fill the office of attorney-general from 1858 to 1859, in Derby's second government, and in 1858 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. 
During the Liberal administration (1859-66) Whiteside was in opposition; but, despite the claims of his profession, he was able to devote much of his time to his parliamentary duties and took an eminent part in the counsels of the Conservative opposition. He attained a high position in the House of Commons, where his eloquence, wit, and geniality made him popular with all parties. In 1861, on his return to London after the marvellous speech in the celebrated Yelverton case -- when he represented Maria Theresa Longworth, in the most famous of all his forensic efforts -- Whiteside received a remarkable compliment, being greeted with general cheers as he entered the House of Commons for the first time after the conclusion of the trial. 
Having proceeded DL at Dublin University in 1859, Whiteside received from Oxford University the honorary degree of DCL in 1863. 
On the return of Lord Derby to office in 1866 Whiteside was again appointed attorney-general. Shortly afterwards he accepted the office of chief justice of the queen's bench in Ireland, on the retirement of Thomas Langlois Lefroy, though it seems that he felt slighted at not having been offered the Irish lord chancellorship. The latter office was generally considered rightfully to be his, but his association with the extreme tory and protestant wing of the Conservative Party would not allow Derby thus to elevate him, since the prime minister wished to form a broad-based Irish executive. Whiteside served as lord chief justice for ten years, but the last of these were clouded by ill health. He died at Brighton on 25 November 1876 and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 
Whiteside's talents were rhetorical and forensic rather than judicial. Although he brought to his high position great personal dignity and the charm of a singularly attractive personality, he was not very successful as a judge because he was not strong in law. This deficit was countered by a strong reliance on Mr Justice James O'Brien, a quiet, unpresuming man, deeply learned in the law. Indeed, Whiteside was once heard saying to a colleague, 'Yours is, my dear friend, a most gentlemanly judgment, but O'Brien says it's not good law, and we can't risk it' (Ross). 
Whiteside is thus best remembered for his advocacy, rather than for his judicial pronouncement. He was unapproached in point of eloquence by any of his contemporaries, and his powerful personality, at once winning and commanding, gave him an almost unexampled pre-eminence. His forensic style has been described as 'impetuously burying facts and law under a golden avalanche of discursive eloquence'; and his parliamentary oratory was thus praised by Lord Lytton in his poem, 'St Stephen's': '
Still Whiteside's genius charms both foes and friends, 

So headlong force with sparkling fancy blends, 

As torrents flash the more their rush depends. 

' Whiteside was of course a most influential political figure, but his reputation was really forged through legal advocacy, and his remains one of the most brilliant names in the annals of the Irish bar. 


@@@@@


doc= 29303


Whitfield, Henry (1590/91-1657), minister in America, was the son of Thomas Whitfield, an attorney and owner of the manor of East Sheen and West Hall, Mortlake, Surrey, and of his wife Mildred ('nee' Manning). He matriculated from New College, Oxford, on 6 June 1610, aged nineteen, but there is no record of his having received a degree; nor is there any evidence for Cotton Mather's assertion that he studied at the inns of court after leaving Oxford. He was ordained and inducted as rector of St Margaret's, Ockley, Surrey, in 1618 and ministered there until 1638. In 1618 he married Dorothy (died 1669), daughter of Thomas Sheafe, Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Wilson; they had children. 
Whitfield was noted for his charity and hospitality, and was a supporter of protestant unity. In 1631 he was one of the signatories of a testimonial given to John Durie in support of his efforts for reconciliation of protestant churches. He may have been the Henry Whitfield who proceeded BD from Cambridge early in 1632: such a degree would certainly fit with his evident learning and his standing in scholarly and clerical circles. In the spring of 1633 he hosted a conference called to persuade John Cotton and Thomas Hooker to compromise their objections to church practice so that their ministry would not be lost to the English church. Among those joining Whitfield, Cotton, and Hooker were Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nye, John Davenport, and William Twisse. Philip Nye's manuscript account of the meeting does not survive, but the gist of it can be reconstructed from manuscripts in the Hartlib papers. The tables were turned during the debates, with Cotton and Hooker persuading their friends, or some of them, of the idolatrous nature of some of the disputed church ceremonies and that under the changed circumstances of the day conformity was no longer an option. Goodwin, Nye, and Davenport quickly demonstrated their nonconformity. Whitfield retained his parish responsibilities for a time, but found it increasingly difficult. In the mid-1630s letters seized in the studies of John White and John Stoughton seemed to implicate Whitfield in what the government suspected was a clerical underground seeking to undermine the church. He was author of 'Some Help to Stir up to Christian Duties' (1636). 
Whitfield resigned his living, sold his estate, and migrated to New England in 1639, taking a number of parish families with him at his own expense. His was the first ship to sail directly from England to the new colony of New Haven. While crossing the Atlantic Whitfield and a group of his fellow emigrants drew up a covenant which became the foundation of their new town. Whitfield, who had substantial means, purchased land on behalf of the township from the local Native Americans. Initially identified by its Indian name, Menumkatuck, the town was renamed Guilford in 1643. Whitfield served as the pastor of the Guilford church for eleven years without pay. In 1643 the Guilford congregation formally gathered itself in the New England fashion and officially chose Whitfield as pastor and John Higginson as teacher. Cotton Mather reported that Whitfield's preaching style was very much like that of Richard Sibbes, and that 'there was a marvelous majesty and sanctity observable in it', and that he frequently visited 'the particular families of his flock, with profitable discourses on the great concerns of their interior state' (Mather, 1.593). 
In 1650 Whitfield, discouraged by the New England wilderness and encouraged by letters from English friends, left Guilford and returned to England, where he resumed his ministry at a parish in Winchester, Hampshire. He retained an interest in New England affairs, however, and particularly in the mission to the Indians. Whitfield knew of John Eliot and his missionary efforts, and on his return to England Whitfield's ship had been forced to put in at Martha's Vineyard; there he had observed and been impressed with the missionary work of Thomas Mayhew jun., listening both to Mayhew and to the tales of Indian converts, and in England he became a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England. Mayhew urged him to tell the story of the missions in England and in 1651 Whitfield published 'The Light Appearing More and More towards the Perfect Day', which related in great detail the work of Mayhew on the islands off the Massachusetts coast. The work also included letters of John Eliot describing his efforts. It was dedicated to parliament in a preface signed by John Owen, Philip Nye, Thomas Goodwin, and other congregationalists. Whitfield encouraged his successor in Guilford, John Higginson, to learn the local native dialect and to preach to and catechize the tribes. He continued his support for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and was involved in the publication of 'Strength out of Weakness' (1652) and further reports in 1655. He died at Winchester in September 1657. 


@@@@@


doc= 29304


Whitfeld, John Clarke- (1770-1836), organist and composer, son of John Clarke (died 17 Sept 1802) of Malmesbury, Wiltshire, was born on 13 December 1770 at Gloucester, and adopted by letters patent in 1814 the family name of his mother, Amphillis (died 10 Nov 1813), daughter of Henry Whitfeld of The Bury, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire. 
After a musical training at Oxford under Philip Hayes, in 1789 Clarke obtained the post of organist in the parish church of Ludlow, and the following year he married. In 1793 he took the BMus degree at Oxford, and in 1794 he succeeded Richard Langton as organist and master of the choristers at Armagh Cathedral for three years. In 1795 he was awarded the honorary degree of MusD at Dublin University, and in March 1798 he was appointed choirmaster of St Patrick's Cathedral and Christ Church, Dublin. His earliest glees and sonatas were written and partly published in Ireland; but the unsettled condition of the country at length induced him to resign his posts, and after returning to England, he settled at Cambridge, where he became the organist and choirmaster of Trinity and St John's colleges from 1799 to 1820. He dedicated his three volumes of 'Services and Anthems' (1800-05) to the masters and fellows of the two colleges. 
In 1799 Clarke was granted the degree MusD Cambridge 'ad eundem' from Dublin, and in 1810 he was incorporated DMus at Oxford. In 1821, on the death of Charles Hague, Clarke-Whitfeld, as he had become, was appointed professor of music at the University of Cambridge, a post which he held until his death. To allow more opportunity for composition he retired to the nearby village of Chesterton, where he set to music many of Sir Walter Scott's verses. He also worked equally industriously on the poems of Byron and Joanna Baillie, and set their words to music in some hundred songs and partsongs. About 1814 he published two volumes of 'Twelve Vocal Pieces', for which original material was contributed by these and other poets. 
From 1820 to 1832 Clarke-Whitfeld was organist and choirmaster of Hereford Cathedral, and in this capacity he was frequently asked to conduct or to play the piano at the Three Choirs festivals. At the Hereford festival of 1822 he produced his oratorio 'The Crucifixion', and at that of 1825 its continuation, 'The Resurrection' (published in 1835). He resigned in 1832 after an attack of paralysis and died at Holmer, near Hereford, on 22 February 1836. A mural tablet recorded his burial in the bishop's cloisters, Hereford Cathedral. He was survived by his wife, Susannah, who died on 18 April 1845, aged seventy-two. 
Clarke-Whitfeld's work was well adapted to his times and popular. He did valuable pioneering work in editing the scores of Purcell, Arne, and Handel, and his collections of 'Favourite Anthems' (1805) and 'Single and Double Chants' (1810) were compiled with good judgement. 


@@@@@


doc= 29305


Adam Whitford (1623/4-1647), student and soldier, matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 10 December 1641, aged seventeen. Caught up in the civil war, and apparently serving as a soldier, he did not graduate BA until 4 August 1646, after the surrender of the Oxford royalist garrison. He died in the city on 10 February 1647 and was buried the same day in Christ Church Cathedral. His brother James survived to be commissioned ensign in the earl of Chesterfield's regiment of foot in 1667. Rachel Whitford married James Johnstone, laird of Corehead, and Christian Whitford married William Bennett of Bains. 


@@@@@


doc= 29306


Whitford, David (1626-1674), army officer and scholar, was the fourth son of Walter Whitford (d. 1647), bishop of Brechin, and Anne (died in or after 1660), daughter of Sir John Carmichael and great niece of the regent, James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. John Whitford and Adam Whitford ['see under 'Whitford, Walter (d. 1647)] and Walter Whitford (b. c.1617, d. in or after 1691) were his elder brothers. He was educated at Westminster School, where he was elected a queen's scholar on a royal warrant dated 21 March 1640. Two years later, aged sixteen, he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford; he graduated BA on 30 March 1647. On the outbreak of the civil wars he espoused the king's cause and took up arms as a member of the garrison at Oxford. It is said that in consequence he was deprived of his studentship by the parliamentary visitors in 1648, and returned to his native land, although his name does not appear in the published edition of the visitors' register. He became an officer in Charles II's army which invaded England in 1651, and fought at the battle of Worcester. He was wounded, taken prisoner, carried to Oxford, and then conveyed to London, where his friends' importunity obtained his release. 
Edward Bysshe, abstentionist MP for Bletchingley in Surrey and intruded garter and clarenceux king of arms, relieved Whitford from straitened circumstances following his imprisonment. The Scot was found employment as an usher teaching Greek at the school in Whitefriars, near Fleet Street, run by the Catholic poet James Shirley. Some complimentary verses penned by Whitford prefaced Francis Goldsmith's 'Hugo Grotius his Sophompaneas' in 1652. In 1654 he published Latin translations of three works by Bysshe on the work of various armorial scholars. In 1655 he published 'Musaei, Moschi et Bionis', selections from Theocritus's 'Eidyllia' in Latin and Greek dedicated to Bysshe, and republished in 1659. In November 1658 a David Whitford of Ashton, Northamptonshire, gentleman, was entered as a student of the Inner Temple, and although it seems unlikely to have been the Scot, there is no way of knowing for sure. Whitford wrote, possibly as early as 1652, an appendix, entitled 'Montrose Redivivus', which appeared in George Wishart's 'Compleat History of the Wars in Scotland', published in 1660. 
On the restoration of Charles II Whitford was reinstated to his Oxford studentship by the visitors, but, finding himself disabled from holding it by the college statutes, he petitioned the king in December 1660 to grant him a dispensation. He was created MA on 14 January 1661. In 1666 he was commissioned chaplain in the regiment of foot under the command of Lord George Douglas. Afterwards he was chaplain to John Maitland, duke of Lauderdale, and in 1672 he officiated as minister to the Scottish regiment in France. In 1673 he was appointed rector of Middleton Tyas in Yorkshire. He died suddenly in his chambers at Christ Church on 26 October 1674, and was buried on the following day in the south transept of the cathedral, near his brother Adam. 


@@@@@


doc= 29307


John Whitford (d. 1667), Church of England clergyman, was a graduate of Glasgow University. Having been ordained deacon in London on 30 January 1641, through the influence of Archbishop Laud he was instituted on 10 February to the rectory of Northamptonshire. On 31 May 1642 at Blisworth he married Judith ('c'.1626-1707), daughter of John and May Marriott of Ashton. In 1645 he was ejected, and took refuge with his father. He was reinstated at the Restoration, and on 5 July 1661 received a grant of $100 in compensation for the loss of his books and other property. He died at Ashton on 9 October 1667 and was buried there; his widow died on 5 March 1707. His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 29308


Whitford, Richard (d. 1543?), Bridgettine monk and author, probably came from near Whitford in Flintshire. According to his will (previously attributed to an uncle of the same name) made in 1511 before he entered Syon Abbey, he had lands in Flintshire and in Lancashire which he left to his sister's son, John Edwards. Nothing else is known about his parentage, family, early life, or education until he is recorded as a questionist at Cambridge University in 1496-7. From 1498 to 1504 he was a fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge. In 1498 he was granted leave of absence to accompany William Blount, fourth Lord Mountjoy (died 1534), to study abroad and that same year Whitford was admitted BA by Paris University and proceeded MA in 1499. While in Paris Whitford and Mountjoy became friendly with Erasmus who accompanied them back to England that summer. Whitford returned to Queens', was incorporated MA at Cambridge and became dean of chapel, junior bursar (1500-01) and senior bursar (1501-2) of his college. The only hint about his life between leaving Queens' and entering Syon Abbey, probably about 1511, comes from William Roper's life of Sir Thomas More, repeated by Nicholas Harpsfield (Roper, 8; cf. Harpsfield, 16). They told how More went to see Richard Fox, bishop of Winchester, and then fell into conversation 'with Master Whitford, his familiar friend, then Chapleine to that bishoppe, and after a Father of Syon', but no documentary evidence has been found to confirm that Whitford was Foxe's chaplain. 
The next glimpse of Whitford comes from Thomas Bedyll, one of Thomas Cromwell's agents, charged with securing the submission of the brethren of Syon to the 'Acts of Succession and Supremacy'. On 21 July 1534 he reported: 'I handled Whitford... in the garden bothe with faire wordes and with foule, and shewed him that throughe his obstinacy he shuld be brought to the greate shame of the world for his irreligious life, and for his using bawdy wordes to diverse ladys at the tymes of their confession, whereby (I sayed) he myght be the occasion that shrift shalbe layed downe throughe England: but he hath a brasyn forehed, whiche shameth at nothing. (Wright, 49)' Again, on 28 August Bedyll reported from Syon that 'one Whitford preached -- one of the most wilful -- and said nothing of the King's title', declaring that he had little learning and was a great railer ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 1090). However, Whitford remained at Syon until its suppression in 1539 and received one of the higher pensions of $8 a year. There is no evidence as to where he spent the last years of his life; tradition places him in the Mountjoy household. According to the Syon martyrology (BL, Add. MS 22285, fol. 55'v') he died on 16 September, almost certainly in the year 1543 since his pension ceased to be paid on 3 October 1543. 
Whitford's donation to the brothers' library at Syon, was comprehensive but commonplace: classical authors predominated, especially Cicero, scholastic works by Lombard and Lyre, sermon collections by Bromyard and Gisland, and two spiritual compendia, Busti's 'Mariale' and the 'Rosetum exercitionum spiritualium'; less predictable was Petrus Crescentius's 'De agricultura' and the only trace of humanist interest was the 'Cornucopia' by the fifteenth-century Italian scholar and papal secretary Nicolaus Perottus. Yet his scholarship and critical acumen were approved by two of the most learned men of his day, for Erasmus asked Whitford to judge between his and Thomas More's responses to Lucian's 'Pro tyrannicida' (printed in Paris, in 1506, and dedicated to Whitford). 
Whitford was sensitive to English style, making new translations of St Augustine's rule and St Bernard's 'Golden Epistle' which had been brought to him 'in englysshe of an olde translacyon, rugh and rude'. He also pointed out that works might be attributed to men like St Bernard to enhance their authority. Much of his published work was translation: Augustine's rule with Hugh of St Victor's commentary (1525, 1527), the Syon version of the Sarum martyrology (1526), and works attributed to saints Bernard and Bonaventure, Isidore, Chrysostom, and Bernard Sylvester; lengthy quotations from scripture, the fathers, and classical authors were also embedded in his works. Although he has been credited with the popular sixteenth-century translation of Thomas a Kempis's 'Folowynge of Chryste', that attribution seems to be the consequence of the inclusion by the printer, Robert Redman, of a different version of 'The Golden Epistle' 'nat of the translation nor edicion of this auctor' in his 'Werke of Preparacion... unto Comunion' (1531?) accompanied by the statement 'it is in some bokes imprynted in the later ende of the boke called in latyn Imitatio Christi that is to say in Englisshe the folowyng of Christe' (Whitford, 'A Werke of Preparacion', sig. G2'v'). Nor is it likely that Whitford was the translator responsible for 'A Looking Glace for the Religious', because its author, Ludovicus Blosius (died 1566), was considerably younger than him. 
Whitford was well aware of the benefits of print. He was repeatedly asked to copy 'A Dayly Exercyse and Experyence of Dethe', but found the task 'very tedyouse: I thought better to put it in print' (Whitford, 'A Dayly Exercyse', sig. A1'v'). He had his works printed in the same format so that they could easily be bound together. But writing at a time when Lutheran texts in English were beginning to circulate and finding one included among his works displacing his own, he repeatedly warned his readers to beware anonymous publications. He added his name to his works not out of pride but for accountability, and the references to his sources that pepper the margins of his works were probably included for the same reason. Because he wrote in English and had his works printed they travelled far beyond the confines of Syon, into other cloisters and into lay households. 
Most of Whitford's subjects were quite traditional, but written with a keen appreciation of the dangers and needs of the church on the eve of the Reformation. His substantial treatise on the religious life, 'The Pype or Tonne of the Lyfe of Perfection' (1532), also provided a strong defence of that life against Lutheran detractors. His 'Dayly Exercyse and Experyence of Dethe' (1534?, 1537, 1538?) was better structured, more practical, and more positive than traditional 'ars moriendi' books. But it was his 'Werke for Housholders' (1530?, 1530, 1531?, 1531, 1533, and twice in 1537) and related 'Werke of Preparacion or of Ordinaunce unto Comunion or Howselyng' (1531?, 1537, 1537?) that broke new ground and established him as the devotional best-seller of the 1530s. Here he turned his attention to the needs of devout lay people and placed the onus for religious instruction, good behaviour, and daily prayer with the householder, as later protestant writers such as Thomas Becon (died 1567) and the recusant 'Manual of Prayers' were to do. Although Whitford's expectations of lay piety were perhaps rather unrealistic he did recognize some of the practical problems of crowded household conditions and sought to make his instructions and meditations adaptable to various needs. Although doctrinally conservative, Whitford's works suggest the way in which the English church was adapting to the changing world of the sixteenth century before it was overtaken by the Reformation. 


@@@@@


doc= 29309


Whitford, Walter (d. 1647), bishop of Brechin and Church of England clergyman, was the son of Adam Whitford of Milntown (latterly Milton Lockhart), and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir James Somerville of Cambusnethan, Lanarkshire. His father had been accused of involvement in January 1576 in a conspiracy against the regent, James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. Walter was educated at Glasgow University, where he graduated MA in 1601, and afterwards acted as regent. On 10 May 1604 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Paisley, and on 3 December 1608 he was presented by James VI to the parish of Kilmarnock, Ayrshire. In 1610 he was translated to Moffat, Dumfriesshire, where he was admitted before 8 June. In 1613 he was nominated to the commission of the peace for Annandale, and was involved in several of the family feuds with which the county abounded. Some time in the earlier 1610s he married Anne (died in or after 1660), fourth daughter of Sir John Carmichael of that ilk (c.1542-1600), and great-niece of Morton. They had five sons, John ['see below'], Walter Whitford (b. c.1617, d. in or after 1691), Adam ['see below'], David Whitford (1626-1674), and James, and two daughters. 
On 27 June 1617 Whitford signed the protestation to parliament in support of the liberties of the kirk. However, on 15 June 1619 he was nominated a member of the court of high commission, and on 30 August following became a pluralist when he was constituted minister of Failford in Ayrshire by the king. In March 1620 he received the degree of DD from Glasgow University, and on 4 August 1621 he was confirmed in his ministry by act of parliament. In 1623 his commission as justice of the peace was renewed, and he was appointed convener of the stewartry of Annandale. In the same year James proposed to translate him to Liberton in Edinburghshire, but failed to carry out his intention. On 25 October 1627 Whitford was appointed one of the commissioners nominated by the king for taking measures against papists, which on 21 October 1634 was expanded into a high commission to cite and punish all persons dwelling in Scotland concerning whom there were unfavourable reports. On 9 December 1628 he was presented by Charles I to the subdeanery of Glasgow; a dispute as to the crown's right of patronage prevented his taking possession until 1630. On 21 October 1634 he was nominated to the commission for the maintenance of church discipline. 
On 15 September 1635 Whitford was consecrated as bishop of Brechin as successor to Thomas Sydserff, apparently on the recommendation of the earl of Stirling. The see was not rich, and it was proposed at one time that it be joined with the abbacy of Arbroath -- a matter with which Archbishop William Laud was charged at his trial as an instance of his meddling in the property rights of the laity. Whitford continued to hold the Glasgow subdeanery 'in commendam' until 1639, when he conveyed his titles to James Hamilton, third marquess (afterwards first duke) of Hamilton. On 16 April 1635 he was created a burgess of Arbroath. Whitford used his episcopal authority to support the liturgical changes which Charles I had introduced. The new service book was very unpopular, and in 1637, when Whitford announced his intention of reading it, he was threatened with violence. Undeterred he ascended the pulpit, holding a brace of pistols, his family and servants attending him in arms, and read the service behind closed doors. On his return he was attacked by an enraged mob, and escaped with difficulty. 
In February 1638 Whitford was one of the Scottish privy councillors who upheld the royal proclamation declaring opposition to the new prayer book treasonable. His obstinate imposition of the novel liturgy within his diocese and the kingdom at large roused intense feeling against him, and towards the close of the year, after his palace had been plundered, he was compelled to fly to England, and was harried all the way. In October 1638 Sir Archibald Johnston of Warriston had been advised to see to it that, when Whitford was at Edinburgh, 'in some private way, some course may be taken for his terror and disgrace if he offer to shew himself publicly' (Stevenson, 114). On 13 December 1638 he was deposed and excommunicated by the Glasgow assembly, whose authority, in common with the other Scottish bishops, he had refused to recognize. He was accused before the assembly of moral turpitude and closet papistry. On 23 August 1639 he and his fellow prelates drew up a protest against their exclusion from parliament. 
On 28 December 1640 Whitford was living in London in great poverty, but on 20 February 1642, as a recompense for his sufferings, Charles presented him to the rectory of Walgrave, Northamptonshire, where he was instituted. In 1645 he was brought before the committee for plundered ministers and sequestered for having demonstrated 'great disaffection to the parliament and the proceedings thereof', both in private and in public, as well as discouraging his parishioners from giving their assistance to the Westminster regime 'in this defensive war' ('Walker rev.', 286). The compounding committee was subsequently instructed to see to his ejection from the town and parish. In spite of his sufferings at the hands of the Long Parliament, it is notable that, when he died in 1647, he was buried with honour on 16 June in the middle aisle of the chancel of St Margaret's, Westminster. 
In 1660 Bishop Whitford's widow petitioned for a yearly allowance out of the rents of the bishopric of Brechin in consideration of the sufferings of her family in the royal cause. Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 29310


Whitford, Walter (b. c.1617, d. in or after 1691), royalist army officer, was the second son of Walter Whitford (d. 1647), bishop of Brechin, and his wife, Anne (died in or after 1660), daughter of Sir John Carmichael. Described by one contemporary as 'tall, corpulent, full-faced, with long brownish black hair' ('Pepys MSS', 266), Whitford fought as a colonel on the side of the king in the civil war. He was briefly held prisoner after the battle of Naseby in 1645, and on the overthrow of Charles I took refuge in Holland. In 1649 Isaac Dorislaus, who had taken an active part in the trial of the king, was appointed English envoy in Holland and reached The Hague on 29 April. Among the royalist exiles and followers of Montrose a scheme was laid to murder the new envoy, with the knowledge of the Portuguese ambassador and the blessing of his English confessor. On the evening of 12 May, as Dorislaus was sitting down to supper at the Witte Zwaan, six men burst into his rooms, and while some of them secured his servants, Whitford, after slashing him over the head, passed a sword through his body, and said, 'Thus dies one of the king's judges' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.667). Many royalists received the news of the murder with satisfaction, and even the cautious Sir Edward Nicholas described the assassination as 'the deserved execution' of 'the bloody villain' (Carte). The murderers made their escape with the assistance of the Portuguese ambassador, and Whitford successfully reached safety in Brussels. He rejoined Montrose to serve on his last Scottish expedition of 1650. With the surrender of his garrison at Dunbeath after Montrose's defeat at Carbisdale (27 April) Whitford was sentenced to be beheaded on 8 June with Sir John Urry, Sir Francis Hay, and other royalist officers. While being led to execution he exclaimed that he was to die for his part in killing Dorislaus. The authorities were anxious not to be seen to defend Dorislaus's deeds by executing Whitford on such a pretext and, having obtained confirmation of his part in the assassination, 'the council thought fit to avoid the reproach, and so preserved the gentleman' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.121). He was issued with a pass to leave the country on 25 June. Whitford was then protected by the earl of Derby, and was sheltered on the Isle of Man, where he avoided the attentions of the parliamentarian governor, who had been ordered to arrest him. By August 1656 he was at the court of Charles II and two years later was back at The Hague with the intention of killing another English diplomat, George Downing. Downing later complained to John Thurloe of the difficulty in securing Whitford's arrest and that he eventually departed for Muscovy 'in a ship loaded with ammunition' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 7.429). Whitford was forced to enter Russian service, though his family was awarded a small pension in 1662, and their coat of arms was altered on the king's orders. He had returned to England in 1663, when he petitioned for money to enable him to rejoin his wife in Russia, as part of the embassy of the earl of Carlisle. He was in England again by July 1666, when he petitioned for the post of town-major of Hull, and subsequently petitioned in 1670 for a pension to prevent his family from starving, stating on both occasions that he was disabled from active military service by his many wounds received in the royalist cause. He served as a lieutenant in the Scots foot guards under the earl of Linlithgow but was dismissed as a papist in 1673. In 1685 he was awarded a pension by James II and continued to be regarded with suspicion in Scotland, where he became a target for the anti-Catholic mob the following year. Bishop Burnet claimed that he died in 1686 following a deathbed rejection of Catholicism, and a recantation for his part in massacres committed in the service of the duke of Savoy in the 1650s (Burnet, 3.115), but Wood correctly noted that he was still living in Edinburgh in 1691 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1018), from where, destitute and infirm, he had issued one last petition to the Scottish privy council in 1690, pleading for support. His son Charles was principal of the Scots College at Paris in 1714. 


@@@@@


doc= 29311


Whitgift, John (1530/31?-1604), archbishop of Canterbury, was the eldest son of Henry Whitgift of Great Grimsby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Anne Dynewell. Uncertainty surrounds the date of his birth, some sources quoting 1533, but as he himself recorded that he had reached his sixtieth year in 1590, 1530 or 1531 seem likelier dates. The Whitgift family held land in the township of that name on the Yorkshire-Lincolnshire border, and a number of them achieved local distinction; John's father became a prosperous merchant in his adopted town and an uncle, Robert, became abbot of the Augustinian house at Wellow, Lincolnshire. 
It was this uncle who is said to have been an important influence on the young John, taking responsibility for his education at Wellow before sending him to the celebrated St Anthony's School in London, where he lodged with an aunt, the wife of a verger at St Paul's. There is a tradition that, while there, John fell out with his aunt and the canons of St Paul's for refusing to attend mass, and he was returned to the family home in Grimsby. Thereafter John, on the advice of his uncle, by this time dispossessed of the dissolved monastery at Wellow, was sent to Queens' College, Cambridge, but his evangelical leanings led him to migrate to Pembroke where Nicholas Ridley was master. Whitgift matriculated from Pembroke in May 1550 as a pensioner, and was tutored by John Bradford who, like Ridley, was later to suffer martyrdom under Mary. Whitgift was made scholar and 'Bible' clerk before graduating BA early in 1554. 
Whitgift's scholarly accomplishments secured election to a fellowship at Peterhouse on 31 May 1555 and, despite his adherence to protestantism, he remained there throughout Mary's reign, proceeding MA in 1557 and quietly fulfilling college duties with the support of the master, Andrew Perne, who dissuaded Whitgift from following his fellow protestants into exile. During the royal visitation of the university by Cardinal Reginald Pole in 1557 Perne, as vice-chancellor, protected his protege from scrutiny and thereafter the two men established a friendship which lasted until Perne's death in the archiepiscopal palace at Lambeth on 26 April 1589. 
Following the accession of Elizabeth I, Whitgift was ordained deacon at Ely on 7 July 1560 and priest later that year; he soon established a reputation as a preacher after a sermon at Great St Mary's, Cambridge, in which he denounced the pope as Antichrist, a subject to which he was frequently to return. The returned exile Richard Cox, now bishop of Ely, made Whitgift one of his chaplains in 1560 and, in the same year, collated him to the rectory of Teversham, Cambridgeshire. Whitgift remained at Peterhouse and proceeded BTh in 1563, when he was also appointed Lady Margaret professor of divinity. In his first lecture he once again identified the pope as Antichrist. This appointment placed Whitgift in an influential position both within the university and the fledgeling church, and his lectures and strong anti-papal stance commended him to some of the more radical young protestants in the colleges, but he opposed them and sided with the college heads in the dispute over the electoral procedures for the vice-chancellorship in 1564. In the following year, however, he revealed his sympathy with the churchmanship of the more radical dons by adding his name to that of the vice-chancellor and others, including his mentor Matthew Hutton, under a letter to the chancellor, William Cecil, on 26 November asking that the order for the wearing of surplices in college chapels be withdrawn. Whitgift had already been named as one of those who had kept the surplice out of Peterhouse chapel and belonged to a moderate group who considered that enforcement of the vestments would deprive the university of many able young scholars. 
The letter to Cecil was not well received, and the order was upheld, but the following months seem to represent a watershed in Whitgift's career. Despite his initial objections, Whitgift was soon persuaded of the rightness of government policy and preached in defence of the surplice, thereby establishing early in his career that high regard for hierarchical authority in matters of church order which throughout was to set him at odds with his more radical fellow Calvinists. This shift in position brought him to the notice of Cecil, and preferment followed; he was made a university preacher on 10 June 1566 and on 5 July following his salary as Lady Margaret professor was increased from 20 marks to $20 in recognition of the esteem he was held in by the university for his preaching, which had also begun to attract royal notice. Whitgift proceeded DTh in 1567, taking as his subject once again the proposition 'That the pope is Antichrist'; later that year he was made regius professor of divinity. Already, in April, being by then senior fellow at Peterhouse, he had been elected master of his old college, Pembroke College, in succession to Matthew Hutton, but he only remained there for three months before transferring on 4 July to the much better endowed mastership of the royal foundation of Trinity College. 
Trinity had a radical fellowship, and when Whitgift arrived his own commitment to the defence of royal policy was still questioned in some quarters. Within three years conflicts with those fellows, and in particular with Thomas Cartwright, were to prove a defining moment in the post-Reformation English church. More immediately, however, college and university business occupied his energies. The college statutes were revised so that the chapel readers were no longer required to attend in the midsummer vacation, and the number of scholars to be admitted annually from Westminster School was restricted to two in order to allow the master and fellows greater discretion in the support of other worthy scholars. Whitgift was soon active within university affairs, intervening unsuccessfully on behalf of Roger Kelk for the mastership of St John's in 1569 and, in the same year, serving on a commission of inquiry into the activities of the religiously conservative provost of King's, Philip Baker. His talents and energy were beginning to be noticed further afield; his preaching had attracted the attention of the queen, who called him her 'White-Gift', and he was part of a commission of inquiry into a dispute between the citizens of Leicester and their preacher in 1567. Whitgift was rewarded by appointment to the third prebendal stall at Ely on 5 December 1568. 
This preferment may have influenced Whitgift's decision to resign his professorship in October 1569. He was succeeded by William Chaderton, Lady Margaret professor, but it was the appointment of Thomas Cartwright to this chair that sparked off controversy. In spring 1570 Cartwright delivered lectures on the first two chapters of 'Acts' in the course of which he set out a broadly presbyterian form of church government as the only model authorized by scripture and the primitive church. This amounted to a call for the abolition of episcopal government and received significant support among the younger Cambridge scholars, drawn by Cartwright's learning and rhetorical skills. No public response to these views was produced at this time, but a complaint against Cartwright was made to Cecil by Chaderton on 11 June. The university's fierce divisions on the issue during the summer were characterized in a famous meeting of senate on 29 June in which the supporters of Cartwright vetoed every name proposed for election to its headship, and the vice-chancellor, John May, responded by vetoing the grace required for the award of Cartwright's DTh. 
Petitions and counter-petitions landed on Cecil's desk throughout July and he offered Cartwright a conference in Michaelmas term. Whitgift wrote to Cecil on 19 August objecting to this and, following the disturbances of the summer, stressing the need for a new set of statutes for the university. Subsequently drawn up by Whitgift with the help of a few others, including his old friend Perne, these reduced the role of the regents and produced a more oligarchic structure, which effectively placed the government of the university more firmly in the hands of the vice-chancellor and the heads of houses. The statutes quickly received the royal assent on 25 September, and Whitgift's leading role in this matter is perhaps best demonstrated by his election to succeed May as vice-chancellor in early November. By that date the conferences with Cartwright had taken place, but no agreement had been reached, and Whitgift used his new authority to proceed more vigorously against him. On 11 December Cartwright was summoned to the vice-chancellor's consistory court, which met in the master's lodge at Trinity, presented with a list of articles based on his lectures and, under the terms of the new statutes, ordered to recant his opinions: this he refused to do and was deprived of his chair and forbidden to preach in the university. Cartwright withdrew to Geneva, probably in the company of Walter Travers, who was removed from his fellowship at Trinity about this time, and thereafter the points at issue between him and Whitgift moved beyond the confines of Cambridge. Whitgift remained busy within the university for another seven years; Trinity grew in numbers and distinction under his assiduous care so that it rivalled St John's, but it was a care which, in the eyes of opponents such as Giles Wigginton, seemed overbearing and oppressive. Whitgift was a regular attender at hall, sharing commons with the students, and was a conscientious teacher and preacher. 
That preaching now also took place at Lincoln, where Whitgift had been elected dean on 19 June 1571, and where he spent time each summer, receiving a faculty from Archbishop Matthew Parker in October permitting him to hold both posts, and any other benefices, in plurality. The Lincoln appointment may have been in anticipation of a move from Cambridge where the continuing battle with Cartwright's supporters was proving divisive. Cartwright's return to Cambridge in 1572 disturbed the college once more and in September Whitgift removed Cartwright from his fellowship on the formal, if tendentious, grounds of the latter's failure to take priests' orders, a decision that brought protests from some members of the college, and provoked in turn a threat of resignation from the master. On 28 September six of his fellow heads of house appealed to Cecil, now Lord Burghley, on Whitgift's behalf, asking the chancellor for some public acknowledgement of his contribution to the governance and intellectual life of the university. 
In the same year Whitgift began to play a more public role in the church. He acquired the prebendal stall of Nassington at Lincoln and another at Lichfield Cathedral, exchanged the living of Teversham for a Lincolnshire one at Laceby, and was returned as a representative of the diocese in the lower house of convocation, where he was chosen prolocutor (that is, president). At this time the church was convulsed by the storm that broke over the 'Admonition to the Parliament', and its polemical consequences were to occupy much of Whitgift's time, and that of his old adversary Cartwright, in the following years. The university continued to make heavy claims on him: he served another term as vice-chancellor in 1573 and was one of the commissioners appointed to visit St John's in 1576, when he also wrote to Burghley requesting that effective steps be taken to prevent the sale of fellowships and scholarships. By that date his public defence of the religious settlement had made it clear that he was going to be a key figure in the future of the English church and that episcopal preferment beckoned; unsuccessfully recommended by Parker for Norwich in 1575, he was nominated to Worcester on 24 March 1577 and enthroned by proxy on 12 May, resigning the mastership of Trinity in June. This promotion owed much to Whitgift's successful, if troubled, mastership, which left the college in good shape financially and intellectually -- a fact acknowledged by his successor John Still and one that has been lost to sight in more general histories beneath the disputes with Cartwright and the highly coloured account of Trinity under Whitgift provided by Giles Wigginton in 1584. Yet it was the dispute with Cartwright that thrust Whitgift into national prominence more quickly than would have otherwise been the case, and which was to have far reaching consequences for the English church. 
With the calling of parliament in April 1571 the debate about further reform of the church had moved from Cambridge back to the capital, but the introduction of a bill to remove 'popish abuses' from the prayer book led to a breakdown of relations between the bishops and the puritans, and an episcopal preaching campaign was launched from Paul's Cross against the proposals in the bill. Parliament was dissolved and the bishops demanded from some of the leading radical clergy subscription to the articles of religion, recently given statutory force in parliament. A new parliament was called for May 1572, by which time Cartwright had returned from Geneva. Two London ministers, John Field and Thomas Wilcox, prepared a pamphlet addressed to parliament setting out the desirability of establishing a fully reformed presbyterian church order and adding a list of popish abuses remaining in the English church, which represented a satirical and vituperative attack on the bishops. The tract, incorporating both elements, was considered inflammatory by some radicals and was not published until June. By that time the queen had confiscated a bill 'concerning rites and ceremonies' and, effectively stifling further parliamentary debate, ordered that no matters of religion should be discussed by parliament before they had been approved by the bishops and the lower house of convocation, of which Whitgift was president. 
The 'Admonition to the Parliament', an appeal to the public in the guise of a letter to parliament, was the most outspoken protestant criticism of the Elizabethan settlement to appear by that date, and divided the puritans themselves. Its pithy, scurrilous style gave it notoriety and made an immediate impact, drawing a reply from Paul's Cross by Thomas Cooper, bishop of Lincoln, as early as 27 June, and it reached its third edition by August. At about this time Whitgift was entrusted with the task of replying to the 'Admonition', which he took on with some urgency. In a letter of September informing Archbishop Parker of Cartwright's removal from his fellowship, Whitgift declared that he had completed his refutation and had most of it in fair copy, sending the full text to the archbishop in the following month. By that date the authors of the 'Admonition' had been identified and imprisoned. Yet before Whitgift's work could be published 'A Second Admonition to the Parliament' appeared, penned by his Cambridge adversary Cartwright, in which a fuller account of the presbyterian discipline was set out. Whitgift's 'Answer' to the 'Admonition' was published, probably in November 1572, and an augmented edition, containing a section addressing Cartwright's 'Second Admonition', appeared in February 1573. 
The frenetic rate of publication was continued by Cartwright, whose 'Replye to an Answere of Dr Whitgifte' appeared in April 1573. This full exposition of the Reformed position reinvigorated radical support but brought strong reaction from the government. A proclamation ordering the surrender of the 'Admonition' and other books was issued. Bishops were required by the privy council to act more firmly against nonconformist clergy and, in December, a warrant was issued for Cartwright's arrest, forcing him into exile once again. Encouraged by Parker, Whitgift devoted much of this year to an extensive response to Cartwright, answering him point by point in his 'Defense of the Aunswere to the Admonition Against the Replie of T.C.' which appeared in 1574. On 26 March 1574 he preached the new year sermon before the queen at Greenwich, setting out his defence of episcopal government; it was published later that year. Other supporters of Cartwright entered the debate with Whitgift at this time, but the major response came from the exiled Cartwright himself, in 1575 and again in 1577, to neither of which Whitgift replied. 
These years between 1570 and 1575 were crucial to the developing character of the Elizabethan church, and Whitgift's views were to prevail with the queen and with authority; the points at issue between him and his opponents at this time therefore need some consideration. Behind the polemical tone of the controversy it is worth locating points of agreement: both Whitgift and his opponents shared a Calvinist theology and, in matters of ecclesiology, they each recognized the importance of theological scholarship and the central role of scripture in defining the nature of the church. In the climate of the early 1570s they each sought to locate their position between what they saw as the corruptions of the Roman church on the one hand and the excesses of Anabaptism on the other, both of which evils they identified among the views of their opponents. Behind these common protestant assumptions what was at stake was the true nature of the English church and, in the course of the debate, two conflicting views emerged of the Christian community and of its relations with social and political power. For Whitgift the importance of maintaining the distinction between the visible and the invisible church was crucial and it was wrong to try to conflate the two: the invisible spiritual government of the church belonged to God, but 'The visible and external government is that which is executed by man and consisteth of external discipline and visible ceremonies practised in that church that containeth in it both good and evil' ('Works', 1.183). This important passage illustrates two key elements in Whitgift's position: first he envisioned the church as comprising both good and evil, thereby differing from Cartwright, who postulated a closer relationship between the visible church, the godly, and the invisible, the elect, and was of the view that the ungodly were not full members of the church and should be firmly excluded from the sacraments. Whitgift's more inclusive definition led on naturally to his second point, for it was precisely because the church contained both good and evil that external discipline was necessary. That discipline was to be provided by the Christian magistrate and therefore 'must be according to the kind and form of government used in the commonwealth' (ibid., 2.263). This moved the earlier debate between the bishops and the puritans on to rather different ground; the dispute over whether ceremonies and church discipline were things indifferent, adiaphora, or scripturally ordained remained central but, whereas earlier defenders of the establishment had generally defended the prayer book and episcopacy on essentially pragmatic grounds, Whitgift now postulated a view of church-state relations that removed any distinction between the church of Christ and the Christian commonwealth, in which the queen, as supreme governor, should 'govern the church in ecclesiastical affairs as she doth the commonwealth in civil' (ibid., 2.264). The settlement of 1559 and the royal supremacy were thus inextricably linked, and this became the cornerstone of subsequent defences of the establishment against criticism from the puritans. It was an argument, however, written in a defensive mode, and Whitgift's lengthy tract lacked the emotional appeal of Cartwright's work; particularly on the question of the church's role in edification, which the puritans described as the building of Christ's kingdom in the community but which Whitgift saw as the growth of understanding in the individual. Thus, while Whitgift laid the foundation for the later theoretical work of Richard Hooker, the style and emphasis of the 'Defense' did little to win over his opponents. It did, however, receive the endorsement of the queen and of most of the privy council. 
The new bishop was enthroned by proxy on 12 May 1577 and left Cambridge the following month. The diocese to which Whitgift was preferred was a known centre of Catholic activity, and almost immediately he was required to report, with his fellow bishops, on the state of his diocese and the surrounding area, describing it as 'much warped towards popery' (Strype, 'Whitgift', 1-166), with seminary priests active in gentry households. In all thirty-nine Catholics were listed in his report on Worcester, including members of well-established families such as the Throckmortons, Blounts, Talbots, and Heaths. The political clout of these families was considerable and the county continued to cause problems to the bishop, who engaged in public conference with prominent Catholics in 1582 and also sought to gain control over the right of nomination to the county bench. His concern with recusancy stretched beyond the diocese itself for he was almost immediately appointed vice-president of the council in the marches of Wales and, in the absence in Ireland of the president, Sir Henry Sidney, he was the crown's principal official in the region. In this capacity Whitgift fulfilled a number of responsibilities, dealing with musters, investigating charges of treason, and handling factions within the council itself. Recusancy, however, remained his chief concern. In the first eighteen months of his vice-presidency the council carried out a vigorous campaign against Catholics and in particular against the group of well-connected gentry attending mass at Plasnewydd, the home of John Edwards, and those attending pilgrimage at the celebrated shrine at St Winifred's Well. Edwards was imprisoned early in 1579 and in June the council was given a general commission to inquire into the state of the Welsh dioceses and to pursue recusants. Whitgift sought a commission for himself and the Welsh bishops, as he did not trust the local magistrates to act against their Catholic neighbours, but on the return of Sidney in 1580 his policy was modified. 
One of the principal weapons of the reformed clergy against Catholicism was preaching, and this was a responsibility that Whitgift took seriously. His first biographer and comptroller of his household, Sir George Paule, portrayed Whitgift at Worcester as the ideal protestant bishop who 'never failed to preach upon every Sabbath-day: many times riding five or six miles to a parish church, and after sermon come home to dinner', a practice which he continued at Canterbury where 'No Sunday escaped him in Kent, as the gentlemen there can well witness' (Paule, 57). According to Paule, Whitgift's style was grave, comely, and plain, virtues also regarded highly among the puritans and, notwithstanding the literary conventions behind this account, Whitgift's preaching activity placed him in a tradition of pastoral episcopacy which his views on episcopal authority have tended to obscure. Whitgift also sought to secure a preaching ministry in his cathedral and diocese and in 1578 was granted by the queen the right of appointment to vacant cathedral posts. This proved of only modest value, but he did appoint two of his former colleagues at Trinity, Godfrey Goldsborough and Gilbert Backhouse, to canonries, and Goldsborough as archdeacon of Worcester. Within the diocese Whitgift was a strong defender of episcopal rights, in particular with regard to his estates. After protracted negotiation, he was granted relief from first fruits for the bishopric, and by careful management he reduced the arrears of his tenants; he returned the rent-corn of two valuable manors, at Hallow and Grimley, to the see, paying $300 to protect the rights of his successors, and he also secured the title to his residence at Hartlebury Castle, though this continued to be a source of dispute for some time. This careful management had important consequences for the social and political authority of the church in the region, enabling Whitgift to provide hospitality in a way that his role in local politics required but which his predecessors had failed to do. Outside Worcester he was called upon to intervene in neighbouring dioceses, drawing up new statutes for Hereford Cathedral and heading a commission inquiring into disputes between William Overton, recently appointed bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and the dean and chapter and citizens of Lichfield. In both cases the cathedrals established lectureships as a result of Whitgift's actions. Both these commissions date from 1583, by which time it was clear that Whitgift was the preferred successor to the suspended archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Grindal. Indeed, one of those commissions was issued in Grindal's name, as provincial, and Whitgift had already been active on the national scene, particularly during the parliament of 1581, when his central role in drawing up the bishops' response to the articles for reform of abuses in the church presented by Sir Walter Mildmay suggests that his advancement to Canterbury was widely anticipated. By 1583 the vacuum in the leadership of the church caused by Grindal's suspension meant that the question of resignation was raised once again, but before the archbishop, now blind and frail, could complete the formalities he died, on 6 July 1583. On 14 August Whitgift was nominated his successor and on 23 October he was enthroned as primate. 
The prospect of Whitgift's elevation had already aroused concern in puritan circles and among their sympathizers in the privy council, and they were not to be disappointed. Before his enthronement Whitgift, with other bishops, including John Piers of Salisbury and John Aylmer of London, had prepared a schedule of articles 'touching preachers and other orders for the Church', which received royal approval and were issued to the dioceses on 29 October. These orders amounted to a comprehensive platform of reform, including stricter proceedings against Catholics and non-attenders at church, a survey of the qualifications of the parochial ministry, and closer scrutiny of the quality of candidates for ordination; this programme would have commanded the support of most protestants, but a further clause demanding that all clergy subscribe to three articles aroused opposition. Two of these articles, one endorsing the royal supremacy and another stating that the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' were agreeable to the word of God, were unexceptional to all but the tenderest of consciences, but the second article, which stated that the 'Book of Common Prayer' and the orders of bishops, priests, and deacons contained nothing contrary to the word of God, and that clergy should use the prayer book and no other in public worship, reopened all those points of difference between the puritans and the bishops that had been largely overlooked in the previous six years. The demand for widespread subscription to such a comprehensive endorsement of the prayer book, made public in Whitgift's Paul's Cross sermon on 17 November, in which he inveighed against the disobedience of papists, Anabaptists, and 'our wayward and conceited persons', was bound to alienate not only the radicals but many moderate nonconforming clergy in the provinces. 
Whitgift was the prime mover in this policy, and enjoyed the unwavering support of the queen, if not of many of her ministers. The imposition of the 'three articles', as they came to be known, met with resistance throughout the province. The clergy of the Chichester diocese were the first to be asked to subscribe and twenty-four ministers were suspended for refusing: similar responses were received throughout the first half of 1584; some sixty ministers each from the puritan strongholds of Norfolk and Suffolk, seventeen in Kent, twenty-three in Lincolnshire after discussion with the bishop, and in Leicestershire over 300 were recorded as making a limited subscription, suggesting some sort of accommodation. Accommodation there had to be, for Whitgift's articles had revived the dormant organizational powers of the radicals, and in particular those of John Field: meetings of clergy were held in the counties and petitions sent to the privy council, other petitions came from town corporations and from sympathetic gentry in the shires, while prominent protestant scholars, including the venerable John Foxe, argued against rigid subscription when the Catholic threat was increasing. Eventually, in June, Whitgift bowed to the advice of Burghley and of Sir Francis Walsingham and was persuaded to accept conditional subscription from those clergy who did not seek to disturb the peace of the church. In the end only nine ministers, including Field, suffered deprivation for refusing to subscribe. The price, however, was a renewed sense of solidarity among the puritan clergy which created an organization prepared to confront Whitgift on his own terms, as they did in 1584-5 by producing their own surveys of the condition of the provincial clergy in response to the official one. 
Thwarted in his attempt at a comprehensive discipline of the church, Whitgift sought to separate the moderates from the radicals by proceeding against the recalcitrant: the weapon chosen for this strategy was the ecclesiastical commission, which had been renewed in December 1583. In May 1584 Whitgift produced a list of twenty-four articles, encompassing the three articles objected to earlier and directed specifically against puritans, which the accused had to answer under the oath 'ex officio mero'. This was a procedure in civil law previously used against recusants, the legality of which was vigorously contested by common lawyers. The use of this oath, which required defendants to promise to answer questions before knowing what those questions were, provoked further petitions to Whitgift and led to a widening rift between the archbishop and his erstwhile supporters in the privy council, most notably Burghley, who objected to the 'Romish style' of the new articles. On 20 September a majority of the council wrote to Whitgift and Aylmer complaining of irregularities in proceedings against the godly ministers in Essex. 
This troubled year ended with Whitgift writing a lengthy account to the queen in defence of his actions, and with the calling of parliament, which quickly informed Whitgift and the government of the depth of resentment that his policies had caused in the country. Events abroad, the assassination of William of Orange in Delft and the episcopal reaction in Scotland which saw many Scottish presbyterians withdraw to England, fuelled that resentment with insecurity. Conferences of ministers took place in the provinces and sent delegates to London where Field's organizational powers kept up the pressure, lobbying at parliament was backed by masses of paperwork and by prayer and fasting in the country. Successive bills for reform of the ministry were presented immediately parliament met, but it was on 14 December that the puritan campaign began in earnest when, despite the queen's prohibition on debate about religion, further bills were introduced, including a bill in the Commons requesting the adoption of the Geneva prayer book, recently published in translation by Robert Waldegrave, and the implementation of a presbyterian system of discipline. This was presented to the Lords a week later but, although sympathetic to some of the complaints, they reminded the lower house of the royal prohibition and deferred their answer. This decision was delayed until 22 February, after the Christmas recess, when Burghley answered on behalf of the government reiterating the queen's desire to refer all matters of religion to the bishops and convocation rather than to parliament. Whitgift followed Burghley, answering the Commons' bill point by point at great length and (at least according to Robert Beale, clerk of the privy council) in intemperate language. Whitgift's uncompromising words in defence of episcopacy and the rights of the church angered the Commons, who were preparing a reply when, on 27 February, the queen made her support of the bishops absolutely clear at an audience where Whitgift and representatives of the two houses of convocation came to offer her the clerical subsidy. Wherever the blame for the shortcomings of the church lay, the queen was determined that the remedy lay with the bishops and renewed her prohibition on parliament discussing religion. Despite this the Commons introduced another bill which occasioned a confrontation between Whitgift and the earl of Leicester in the Lords before the session ended on 29 March. 
The eighteen months since his nomination had proved a bruising time for the new archbishop who, although he could count on the support of Elizabeth, found his relations with erstwhile supporters on the council severely strained. Throughout these months Whitgift recognized that the issues at stake were essentially the same as those in the earlier conflict with Cartwright, but Cartwright's name, despite the latter's continued exile at Middelburg, came to encapsulate in Whitgift's mind the character of the opposition he faced to a degree that rendered his arguments the more uncompromising and suggested that, for him, there was something more than a matter of principle at stake. Indeed, one contentious issue at this time involved another of Whitgift's former adversaries at Trinity, Walter Travers. Despite not having episcopal orders, Travers was reader at the Temple Church in 1584 when the mastership fell vacant. His candidature was supported by Burghley and some of the benchers, but Whitgift opposed the appointment and in 1585 secured the post for Richard Hooker. The benchers responded by making Travers the afternoon lecturer so that, according to one contemporary, each Sunday the pulpit proclaimed Canterbury in the morning and Geneva in the afternoon. Whitgift was called upon to adjudicate this debate, which he did in March 1586 by revoking Travers's preaching licence. By then Cartwright had returned from exile and Whitgift had on 2 February become a member of the privy council. 
Whitgift's elevation to the council was secured during the absence of his chief opponent, Leicester, in the Low Countries. This was a significant appointment, and testimony to Whitgift's standing with Elizabeth, who did not give any other archbishop such a promotion. Its immediate effect was to increase the archbishop's authority, in a formal sense at least. Having seen the effect of clandestine presses in the puritan campaigns of 1584-5, he secured an order from Star Chamber in June 1586 placing control of printing and the press in his hands and those of Bishop Aylmer. This order empowered them to fix the number of printers and, through the Stationers' Company and the ecclesiastical commission, to determine what could be published, adding the punitive sanctions of confiscation and destruction if any illicit presses were discovered. 
Meanwhile Leicester's disastrous campaign in the Netherlands, and the implication of Mary, queen of Scots, in the Babington plot in the summer of 1586, diverted attention temporarily from the problem of nonconformity to the international Catholic threat. A new parliament was summoned to deal with the queen's safety, and at its opening in October, Whitgift was one of three commissioners appointed to deputize for Elizabeth while parliament discussed the fate of her cousin. The issue was not resolved until the execution of Mary on 8 February 1587. Discussion then centred on the financing of Leicester's campaign until, on 27 February, Antony Cope rose to present a 'bill and book' for reformation of religion, a programme that represented the culmination of a carefully planned operation. For the previous two years Walter Travers had been editing the 'Book of Discipline', a comprehensive statement of the ideal form of reformed worship and church government along Genevan lines adapted to the needs of a national church. Manuscript copies of the work had been circulated to conferences of ministers in the provinces for approval and comment, and this was the book to which Cope's bill referred. Cope and other radical MPs were imprisoned in the Tower by the time the government gave its response on 4 March. That response, given by three ministers, included a speech from Whitgift's ally at court, Sir Christopher Hatton, which revealed the close co-operation that had emerged between these two and Hatton's chaplain, Richard Bancroft, in combating puritan claims, an alliance that signalled that the establishment was about to move on to the offensive in its engagement with the puritans. Convocation attacked the bill and book, but parliamentary attempts to curb Whitgift's use of the 'ex officio' oath against puritan clergy were stopped only by the queen's veto, perhaps procured by Whitgift, which was couched in terms that brooked no compromise. Henceforth redress in matters of religion was to be strictly limited to the clergy. 
Whitgift's victory in parliament only served to shift the arena of conflict: from parliament to the printing press, from the press to the provinces, and from the provinces to the courts. None of these shifts enhanced Whitgift's reputation, then or thereafter. That there was widespread, organized, puritan activity in some counties commanding the support of significant sectors of the local gentry had become clear during the parliamentary debates, but the failure to bring about reform by statute and the deaths of Leicester and other key figures in 1588 left a mood of angry frustration which spilled over into extremism. This became apparent in October 1588 with the publication of 'The Epistle of Martin Marprelate', the opening salvo in a scurrilous press campaign from the underground press of Robert Waldegrave. The appearance of this satire, which began with a criticism of Whitgift for failing to answer Thomas Cartwright's volumes of 1575 and 1577, was soon followed by others as the press moved around the country, and the archbishop, 'that miserable, and desperate caytiffe wicked John Whitgift, the Pope of Lambehith' ('Theses Martinianae', 1589, epilogue), was one of the chief targets of Marprelate's pen, in company with bishops Aylmer of London and Cooper of Winchester. Lampooned as 'the Canterbury Caiaphas' in reference to his use of the high commission against godly ministers, Whitgift took on direction of the search for the offending press, endorsed Bancroft's plan for a literary response in kind to the satires, and pursued the offending authors and printers, once found, through the high commission and Star Chamber. 
Meanwhile parliament met once again on 4 February 1589, and with Hatton now lord chancellor and moderate puritans uncertain of the wisdom of Marprelate's campaign, Whitgift and his chaplain Bancroft moved on to the attack. Bancroft's sermon at Paul's Cross on 9 February, published the following month, set out a confident defence of episcopacy 'per se', distinguishing the English church from other protestant churches, and in particular the Scottish church, and dismissing the puritans as false prophets, likening them to earlier sectaries. An attempt in the Commons to challenge Whitgift's proceedings in the high commission as contrary to common law got nowhere, and the only debate allowed concerned an abortive bill for the removal of clerical pluralism and non-residence, in which Burghley and the archbishop found themselves in opposition. The furore caused by the 'Marprelate' tracts gave Whitgift the opportunity to pick off those whom he considered to represent the radical presbyterian leadership, especially after the discovery of the press in August 1589 revealed information about the clandestine clerical classis meetings in the midlands. As a result of the evidence he now had, Whitgift pressed home a case against his old foe Cartwright and eight other ministers, first in the high commission and then in Star Chamber. Scores of clergy were hauled before the commissioners in the winter of 1589-90, but the balance of power in the council and in the country had shifted so much that these events and the subsequent trials aroused less opposition than the subscription campaign of 1584. What Whitgift sought was evidence of seditious conspiracy on the part of the accused, but all nine -- four from Warwickshire, including Cartwright, three from Northamptonshire, one from Staffordshire, and a roving Devon preacher -- refused the 'ex officio' oath, effectively blocking proceedings in the high commission. All except Cartwright were therefore deprived of their livings, degraded from orders, and imprisoned in the summer and autumn of 1590, Cartwright joining them at the end of October. 
While this case was progressing another presbyterian, John Udall, was also tried, for his authorship of the 'Demonstration of Discipline', which the commissioners deemed a felony, committing the case to the assizes. In July the case was heard, the assizes being held at Whitgift's manor of Croydon, and at a later trial at Southwark in February 1591 Udall was sentenced to death, subsequently commuted to exile, but he died before the sentence could be carried out. In October 1590 Whitgift's personal involvement in the campaign brought a rebuke from Burghley, who advised him not to join the tribunal interrogating Cartwright in order to avoid any suspicion of personal rancour. During the winter of 1590-91 the imprisoned leaders kept in contact with their supporters, who organized petitions on their behalf, and in the spring it was decided, allegedly by Whitgift and Hatton, to transfer the case to Star Chamber. The trial began on 11 May, but the evidence for conspiracy remained difficult to uncover and the ministers put up a stout defence. The Hacket conspiracy of July changed matters, providing circumstantial evidence of contacts between the imprisoned ministers, especially Cartwright, and the lurid events that ended in William Hacket's execution for treason. 
The death of Hatton in November removed Whitgift's greatest ally, but by this date his position in the council was so secure that he was able to ensure the succession of Sir John Puckering, the prosecutor in Star Chamber, as lord chancellor. The charge of conspiracy remained unproven but the spirit of the opposition was broken and by the end of the year a way out of the impasse was being sought. In January five of the prisoners were granted bail on signing a submission admitting that their meetings had been offensive to the queen and the council, but Whitgift still proved intransigent, especially in the matter of Cartwright, and at the end of February required another humiliating submission which the prisoners refused to sign. In April a new set of interrogatories were presented by the council which offered a way forward. The replies to these were sufficiently accommodating to permit partial relief by way of house arrest, and over the summer many of the prisoners returned to their homes, though under strict conditions. Cartwright was required to appear before the judges at any time within twenty days' warning being given. 
There is no doubt that the puritans saw Whitgift as the chief protagonist in the cases made against them and it is clear both from correspondence with Burghley and his actions in early 1592 that he was intransigent in his opposition. The depth of that opposition was to be revealed in the parliament of 1593. Whitgift preached the sermon at its opening on 19 February, and he and his supporters so dominated proceedings that a Commons bill designed to combat Catholic recusants was transformed into an act, which (exceptionally in Elizabeth's reign) was directed at protestant sectaries, making them liable to banishment. This did not happen without an acrimonious struggle. In the contest between the Commons and Whitgift the separatists Henry Barrow and John Greenwood, who had been under arrest since 1588, were tried under the act against Catholics of 1581 and condemned to death for printing seditious works. Despite Burghley's remonstrations with Whitgift on their behalf, they were executed on 6 April, contemporary reports blaming the malice that the bishops had towards the Commons. Shortly afterwards John Penry, active in the 'Marprelate' campaign, followed them to the scaffold. Whitgift's policy had begun as an attempt to remove the puritans from influence in the church through the normal processes of ecclesiastical administration; when this proved impossible he shifted his tactics, attempting to break the presbyterians by a rigorous prosecution of the leaders through the prerogative courts. By the summer of 1593 he had broken their organization and driven them underground, but in so doing he had made few friends. 
Whitgift was a convinced Calvinist in matters of doctrine, and his early career had been made expounding that characteristically Calvinist identification of the pope with Antichrist. The disputes of the 1570s and 1580s centred not on doctrine but on matters of worship and discipline, but the boundaries between these categories were porous. This became evident in 1587 in the dispute between William Whitaker, the strongly Calvinist master of St John's College, Cambridge, whose election had been forced through by Whitgift and Burghley in the face of determined opposition from some of the fellows. One of their number, Everard Digby, was a Neoplatonist whose view of human capabilities was directly at odds with the world view of Calvinists like Whitaker, who denounced him as a papist and sought to remove him from his fellowship. The charge of popery was not supported by Whitgift, but Whitaker prosecuted Digby for several breaches of college statutes. Notwithstanding Digby's wilful defiance of the master and Whitgift's earlier support for Whitaker, the archbishop urged a compromise which involved the temporary reinstatement of Digby to his fellowship. What was essentially a matter of doctrine to a Calvinist like Whitaker was a 'thing disputable' to a Calvinist like Whitgift. Yet, when central doctrines, such as predestination and assurance, were openly discussed in Cambridge, as they were between 1595 and 1597, the gap between these positions narrowed considerably, without closing entirely. 
On 29 April 1595 a sermon preached in the university church by William Barrett, fellow of Caius, denied the possibility of assurance of salvation to the ordinary believer, and asserted that human sinfulness, not God's will, was the source of reprobation. Thereby advocating a sublapsarian rather than a supralapsarian position on predestination, Barrett was mounting a direct attack on the form of Calvinism dominant in the university and associated with Whitaker and others. Such views were not new, and were similar to those of the Lady Margaret professor of divinity, Peter Baro, but the sermon marked a raising of the stakes. Whether this showed the anti-Calvinists taking the offensive, or whether the sermon was a defensive response to a sermon on atonement delivered from the same pulpit by Whitaker two months earlier, is unclear; but as an offensive tactic, it was ill-judged. Barrett was forced to recant by the heads of houses, and a petition signed by fifty-six dons demanded further action against him. Barrett appealed to Whitgift, presenting himself as the victim of a puritan plot, but the heads countered in a letter accusing Barrett of popery and stressing the encouragement that would be given to papists if he went unpunished. This letter set out the stark choice between popery and reformed purity as one that transcended national concerns, and contained no acknowledgement of the autonomous traditions of the English church which had recently been given theoretical justification by Richard Hooker. Whitgift accused the heads of disregarding his authority, as archbishop, in such matters, and criticized their appeal to the authority of Calvin over that of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' in determining the doctrine of the English church. Faced with Whitgift's anger the heads appealed to Burghley, and then used the good offices that existed between Whitaker and the archbishop to explain their actions. Although he might disagree about the grounds on which action should be taken against Barrett, the heads were confident that, doctrinally, Whitgift was on their side and, having seen Barrett's answers to articles posed by him in September, the archbishop admitted that he agreed with them on all points except one, that concerning the granting of assurance to all the elect. The archbishop made it clear, however, that it was his authority that counted in these matters, and that orthodoxy was enshrined in the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' before, in the end, he issued a general condemnation of Barrett's views, requiring him to retract. 
Whitgift's reconciliation to the heads owed much to the intervention of his old mentor Matthew Hutton, now archbishop of York, whom Whitgift regarded as representing an older generation of English Calvinists who did not seek the more rigid applications of discipline and doctrine associated with Theodore Beza. Hutton was asked to comment on the nine articles which had been submitted to Whitgift by Whitaker and which, after some modifications by the archbishop which toned down but did not change their Calvinist orientation, were issued as the Lambeth articles on 20 November. These articles set out the Calvinist view of election and predestination as a fundamental doctrine of the English church, and Whitgift's position, following Hutton's intervention, seems to have moved closer to that of Whitaker and the heads on the central issue of justifying faith and the individual's assurance of salvation. The status of the articles was unclear and the queen disapproved, ordering them to be withheld on 5 December. In consequence they were never published and Whitgift wished them to be considered a private matter between him and the university authorities. Nevertheless, in addition to their acceptance at Cambridge, they were incorporated into the 'Oxford University Acts' of 1596 and 1597. The puritans continued to view the articles as a vindication of their doctrinal position: at the Hampton Court conference in 1604, they sought unsuccessfully to have doctrinal status conferred on them, and the articles were subsequently adopted by the Irish church in 1615. 
Despite their uncertain status the articles, in effect, set out to define in a series of numbered theses the doctrine of the English church, which had previously been a matter of tacit assumption based on the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. As such the articles represented a departure from Whitgift's usual position on these matters, which acknowledged a legitimate space for adiaphora or things disputable. The anti-Calvinists recognized this shift and, given the absence of royal support, a challenge to the articles was expected; it emerged on 12 January 1596 from the hitherto non-polemical Peter Baro. He claimed that the articles did not impugn his position that man, not God, was the author of sin, exploiting the ambiguity in article 4, which permitted a sublapsarian as well as a supralapsarian interpretation of predestination, and claiming that this view had a respectable pedigree in the English church going back to John Hooper and to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. This aroused the opposition of the Cambridge heads, but Baro anticipated support at court and wrote directly to Whitgift on 27 January. Whitgift did not intervene on Baro's behalf but played for time, letting matters take their course. This they did and Baro, recognizing the weakness of his position within Cambridge, did not seek re-election to his chair. The events of 1595-6 represented a victory of sorts for the Calvinists, both Barrett and Baro withdrew from Cambridge, and Whitgift, encouraged by the heads, had issued an unequivocally Calvinist set of doctrinal articles, but these articles had manifestly failed to achieve doctrinal authority and had fallen foul of the queen. As such, the articles attest both to the strength of the Calvinist consensus that existed in the church, and to its limits. Whitgift and the Cambridge Calvinists might have agreed on essentials when it came to doctrine, but the degree to which those essentials should be enforced, and by whom that should be done, remained a source of contention. Two years after these events the archbishop was to be found forcing the election of the anti-Calvinist John Overall to the mastership of St Catharine's College in opposition to the Calvinist heads. 
Alongside these political and theological concerns Whitgift faced the normal responsibilities of an Elizabethan prelate. While at Worcester he had proved himself a doughty defender of ecclesiastical rights and property against the laity, and he continued in this vein at Canterbury. He was a firm opponent of puritan schemes for buying up impropriations in order to augment the stipends of the poorer clergy, since this would undermine the financial position of the hierarchy and of the universities. He was fortunate in his early years at Canterbury for several leases fell due in 1584 and 1585, enabling him to derive an income of over $1000 in each of those years beyond his normal rental income. Whitgift proved an astute manager of his estate, protecting its long-term interests before his personal profit. No lengthy leases were granted, a careful husbandry of the timber on his estates maintained its value, and he preserved the demesne lands at his manors of Lambeth, Croydon, and Bekesbourne. At a period of high inflation Whitgift protected his interests, and those of the church, by making extensive use of rents in kind, which in his early years amounted to 204 fat wethers, 190 quarters of wheat, and 20 loads of hay annually, most of which was consumed within the household. 
As archbishop, and with residences close to the capital, Whitgift was particularly prone to visitation by Elizabeth, who stayed with him most years. The political benefits of this relationship -- it was after one successful visit that Elizabeth gave him the famous sobriquet 'her little black husband' -- had to be set against the financial cost of maintaining a large household and the criticisms that brought from puritan clergy and laity alike. Whitgift trod this narrow line adroitly. He kept a substantial household, as Martin Marprelate caustically observed, of over 100 liveried servants, including some trained captains, which he used to impress the Kentish gentry on his lavish journeys there but which he also placed at the disposal of the crown. On news of rebellion by the earl of Essex breaking in January 1601 it was Whitgift's household captains, at the head of a force of forty horsemen and forty footmen, who secured the arrest of his former pupil, taking him to Lambeth before escorting him to the Tower. His household was clearly at the service of the state and part of his public duty, but that duty went further. 
The archbishop's hospitality was not confined to the rich and powerful, but also encompassed the scholarly and the poor. Paule described Whitgift's household as 'a little academy' (Paule, 98) for the lectures and ecclesiastical exercises he saw performed there, including a weekly sermon on Thursdays during term, and the archbishop provided regular support to scholars both within his houses and at the universities. His patronage extended to these younger friends; five fellows of Trinity during his time there were promoted to the episcopal bench, as were seven of his household chaplains, including Richard Bancroft, his successor at Canterbury. Other scholars, such as Lancelot Andrewes, Matthew Sutcliffe, Hugh Broughton, and Hadrian Saravia, also enjoyed his domestic patronage, as did John Stow. This mode of hospitality was easier for Whitgift, as a bachelor, than for many of his colleagues, but was significant even so. He regularly offered financial support from his own resources to Beza and the Genevan church, maintaining a correspondence into the 1590s despite his difficulties with the puritans at home and his own theological differences, and he used his rents from rectory estates to augment poor livings in his diocese. His commitment to a learned clergy is regularly attested in his visitation articles. His learning was exhibited in a personal library of over 4000 volumes, many later acquired by Bancroft, and he had books dedicated to him by scholars from across the theological spectrum, including Baro and Whitaker. In this Whitgift was the model reformed bishop, but the most arresting picture of his household is Paule's description of Christmas when archbishop and household sat down to eat with the poor. The shortages of the 1590s made the plight of the poor particularly acute and it is to this decade that Whitgift's major charitable benefaction can be traced. On 14 November 1595 he bought the site of the Checquer Inn at Croydon for $200, adding further properties soon afterwards. On 22 November he was granted a licence to found an almshouse, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, for up to forty men and women, and the first seven inmates, all former household servants, were admitted. Provision for a school followed the purchase of another site on 6 October 1596, and in 1599 building work was completed at a cost of over $2718. On 10 July 1599 the chapel was consecrated by Bancroft, and on 25 June 1600 the deed of foundation for both school and hospital, which were endowed with lands bringing an annual income of over $185, was signed and the first schoolmaster appointed. During these years the poor beyond Croydon also commanded the archbishop's attention, as it did that of government. In 1596, faced with national food shortages, Whitgift added his voice to that of the queen in asking the clergy of the province to preach in support of measures designed to ensure cheap corn, and urging the bishops to remind them and the wealthy of their duty of hospitality towards the poor. 
By 1598 Whitgift, like the queen whose confidence he continued to enjoy, had become something of a survivor of a bygone stage in the English Reformation, and those looking ahead were waiting on the deaths of these old dinosaurs before returning to the unresolved conflicts in the church and its relations with the state. Whitgift could still act forcefully, as he did in the matter of Overall's appointment to St Catharine's, and decisively, as he did over the Essex rebellion, but despite his careful promotion of loyal proteges, he no longer dominated the episcopal bench to the extent he had previously. His main activity in these years was in embedding in the church those administrative reforms for which he had fought. He resisted parliamentary attempts to meddle in marriage law and in ecclesiastical fees in the parliament of 1597, treating them in convocation, and in 1601 he and Elizabeth combined to stop further debate on a bill to restrict pluralism in the church. He continued to defend the independence of the ecclesiastical courts from encroachments by the secular courts, particularly the courts of equity, and in 1600 protested about the increasing use of prohibitions in those courts to suspend proceedings in the church courts. Clerical learning remained a high priority in his various enquiries, though he was more optimistic about this than his critics, and he set up a standard table of ecclesiastical fees and tried to curb non-residence among the clergy in the canons of 1597, which were extended to the northern province as well as Canterbury. 
In his official capacity, and from personal friendship, Whitgift played a key role in the events surrounding the illness and death of the queen, and was at her bedside when she died on 23 March 1603. He was chief mourner at her funeral in Westminster Abbey, receiving the offertory and the banners. He was at the council that proclaimed James VI of Scotland king, sending the dean of Canterbury to Edinburgh immediately. At James's request, he sent the new king a report on the state of the church giving details of the learning of the clergy and the state of pastoral provision, and on 25 July presided at the coronation. When James called the Hampton Court conference between the puritans and the bishops on 16 January 1604, Whitgift attended but leadership of the bishops' delegation was assumed by his former chaplain Bancroft, by now bishop of London. That James took the view of the bishops on the key issues would have been a relief to this champion of orthodoxy, but in the following month he caught cold while travelling by barge from his palace at Lambeth to visit Bancroft at Fulham about church business. A few days later he suffered a stroke while dining at Whitehall and he died at Lambeth on 29 February 1604. 
Whitgift's body was carried to Croydon where on 27 March his funeral was solemnized, his former pupil at Trinity, Gervase Babington, by now the occupant of Whitgift's old see of Worcester, preaching the sermon. A recumbent effigy, showing the archbishop with his hands in prayer, marked his grave in the chapel of St Nicholas within the church, where the poor and the scholars of his foundation sat during divine service. Thomas Churchyard published a poem on his death called 'Churchyard's good will', but the controversies that dominated his life soon followed him in death through a lampoon circulated by the puritan Lewis Pickering, who quickly found himself before the Star Chamber. By his will Whitgift confirmed to his hospital and school all those lands purchased by him on their behalf; he made substantial bequests to the poor of Canterbury, Lambeth, and Croydon; he left his parchment books to Trinity College, with any duplicates they had going to Peterhouse; he gave Pembroke College his Complutensian 'Bible' and the works of Thomas Aquinas, and left Bancroft, who was an executor, his paper books and writings, which now form part of Lambeth Palace Library; the residue of his estate he divided equally between his surviving brother and the families of three nephews and nieces. 
Whitgift's reputation has been dominated by those controversies that dominated his life. To a conservative like Stow he was a 'man born for the benefit of his country and the good of his church', but to the author of the 'Marprelate' tracts he was 'the pope of Lambehith'. From John Strype to Thomas Babington Macaulay, and down to the present, judgements on Whitgift are not far removed from their authors' position on the current state of the established church, or established religion in general. He commanded the support of the queen but was mistrusted by more internationally minded protestants on the council like Leicester and Walsingham; his uncompromising stance often exasperated Burghley, even when he shared his aims. Whitgift's conscience was difficult to deal with, and he was capable of pursuing his opponents to the utmost. Yet he had made his reputation as a preacher against the papacy in terms that many of the earlier puritans shared, and, despite his differences with them over discipline and the autonomy of the English church, he continued to share with them a concern for a learned ministry and a commitment to Calvinism. He also established one of the most munificent charitable foundations of the late sixteenth century, paying for it in his lifetime and not, like so many others, in his will. He was capable of great loyalty to some and clearly inspired affection from his chaplains and proteges, but where the rights of the church were concerned personal loyalties were ignored and compromise, even in the pursuit of peace and charity, rejected. The portraits which exist at Croydon, Lambeth, in Cambridge, and in the National Portrait Gallery reveal a dark, thin-faced individual with the severity of the administrator rather than the austerity of the scholar, so it is a surprise to discover that music seems to have played an important part in his life. His written works show a defensive cast of mind, thorough but not creative, which nevertheless laid the foundations for a theory of church-state relations that proved enduring, if not universally accepted. After the promise and hopes of the early Elizabethan church it was Whitgift's task, and perhaps his misfortune, to have to steer a path for that church through the conflicts and inconsistencies that earlier generations could ignore in pursuit of the common enemy. In that task he could not always depend on the full support of his episcopal colleagues, many of whom had more sympathy for puritans than he had, but that lack of support also owed something to his character. His personality and temperament were ill-suited to the open debate that had characterized earlier disagreements within the Reformed camp, and indeed such a strategy may not have been welcomed by his sovereign and supreme governor of the church. He fell back, therefore, on the narrow basis of the law, sometimes, as in the case of Penry and in his pursuit of Cartwright, with a vehemence that more moderate figures considered damaging to the cause he was defending. In so doing his inclusive view of the church as comprising all, and his liberal view of 'things disputable' in matters of theology, were gradually submerged beneath his authoritarian insistence on matters of ceremony and church discipline, but it is worth remembering that, in that controversy, it was his opponents who began by claiming that such things were non-negotiable. 


@@@@@


doc= 29312


Whitehorne, Peter (fl. 1549-1563), soldier and translator, described himself on the title-pages of his books as both a student and 'fellow' of Gray's Inn, and was probably the P. Whytame who was admitted to that institution in 1543. Like many men of his generation he was drawn to Italy. In 1549 he travelled to Siena where he met the English diplomat Sir Thomas Hoby. The two men shared an interest in the achievements of the Roman empire, and when they visited that ancient city together they 'searched out such antiquities as was here to bee seene' (Hoby, 25). In 1550 they went on to explore Naples and Florence. Whitehorne then commenced his military career and for the next ten years campaigned with imperial forces in north Africa. He also spent a brief period in Constantinople, where he studied the military organization of the Ottoman empire. However, he continued to be influenced primarily by both contemporary Italian thought and classical authorities. 
During his years as a soldier Whitehorne made the first translation into English of Machiavelli's 'Arte della guerra', which was published in London in 1560 as 'The Arte of Warre'. He also published in the same year his own treatise, 'Certain Waies for the Orderyng of Souldiers in Battelray', as a supplement to this translation. In this well-regarded study he covered themes not dealt with by Machiavelli, such as fortification, the manufacture of gunpowder, the use of incendiary devices, and signalling. Furthermore, where Machiavelli had been dismissive of artillery, Whitehorne offered a more measured assessment of the utility of cannon. Thus, although a debt to classical authors such as Polybius is evident in the section on signalling, the treatise was an original work of military theory. Its main shortcoming was its brevity; it lacked the detail and copious illustrations that were characteristic of many contemporary continental books. Nevertheless, at the time of its publication, there was no other work in English that offered such insights into the latest developments in siege-craft and military architecture. For this reason Whitehorne can be justly regarded as a pioneer in his field. 
Two further editions of these works were published in 1573 and 1588, an indicator of their popularity and influence. Fabio Cotta's Italian translation of the Greek Onosander's 'Strategicus' had also attracted Whitehorne's attention, and he published an English version, 'Of the Generall Captaine and of his Office', in 1563. Considering the martial education of his countrymen a patriotic duty, so that England should be 'kept from outrageous cruelty, and ravenous spoil of the enemies' (Webb, 7), Whitehorne was a significant figure in the development of Elizabethan military theory; he helped establish the agenda for the protracted debates on the nation's defence that dominated the last two decades of the sixteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29313


Whithorne, Thomas (c.1528-1596), composer and autobiographer, was a son of John Whithorne and his wife, Joan, daughter of William Cabell, of Ilminster, Somerset. He was born in Somerset, probably in Ilminster, where the previous three generations of his family were settled; his sisters Joan, Margaret, and Agnes married Ilminster men. He was said to be aged sixteen in 1544 and forty in 1568, but sixty-two in 1596. 
Whithorne's life and works to 1575 are recorded in 'A book of songs and sonnets, with long discourses set with them...' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. c. 330) written about 1576, in phonetic spelling, for an unknown friend. It is the earliest known continuous English autobiography. Some of its omitted names and places have been identified. It is the tale of unfortunate patrons and amorous women, and contains numerous verses (but no music), including a bawdy poem in broad Gloucestershire dialect, jests, and proverbs. 
Whithorne studied in Oxford, at Magdalen College School (1538-44) and at Magdalen College itself, as a demy (1545), but left without a degree. He moved to London to be employed as John Heywood's 'servant and scholar' ('Autobiography', 1962, 6) for three years, and there learned to play the virginals and lute and to write poetry. On leaving Heywood, Whithorne hoped to teach music in London but found no openings in the metropolis (where he learned to play the cittern and gittern), so had to live in with country families. He declined an invitation to teach one of the duchess of Northumberland's daughters on the instruction of his then mistress. Thereafter he toured the continent to observe foreign customs. Whithorne's delight in Italian epigrams later found expression in a portrait of 1569, not hitherto identified. This half-length miniature shows a man inside a globular metal cage, a position evoking his own phrase, 'the spheres be the walls of music' ('Autobiography', 1962, 196). The accompanying motto, 'So che io sono inteso', has been translated as 'I know that I am in harmony' (Strong, 60). 
Back home, Whithorne was in Lord Ambrose Dudley's service by 1557 and remained there until household economies forced him out. In 1560-62 he was private tutor to William Bromfield's son William, who was then at Trinity College, Cambridge. On William's graduation, he and Whithorne went to London. Bromfield senior, having appointed Whithorne to manage his business affairs in London, left for Le Havre but died soon afterwards. Whithorne's health was poor, so again he took a country post. To further his career, he prepared earlier pieces for publication, and 'Songes for Three, Fower, and Five Voyces' appeared in 1571. This collection consisted of secular songs for a wide range of abilities: these were, in effect, early madrigals. By about 1576 he had improved some verses and tunes. 
Whithorne was appointed chapel master to Archbishop Matthew Parker, for whom he arranged two metrical psalms for four voices; he was in this post at the time of Parker's death in 1575. By 1577 Whithorne was living in the parish of St Alfege, London Wall. On 5 May of that year he married Elizabeth Stoughton in her parish church, St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. In 1582 he was assessed for the subsidy on a mere $3, in St Mary Abchurch parish, where he finally settled. 
Whithorne's 'Duos, or, Songs for Two Voices' -- which in fact contains some pieces for voices and/or instruments -- was published in 1590. The verses of twenty of the fifty-two pieces had appeared in the autobiography, though they may have been written long before. Tipped into the autobiography was a scrap of paper listing early Tudor musicians (for example Robert Fayrfax, John Taverner) on one side, and later ones (including William Byrd, Giles Farnaby, and John Dowland) on the reverse. 
Whithorne declared his nuncupative will on or about 5 July 1596: he bequeathed all his goods (unspecified) to his wife, Elizabeth, having no one else. He died quite soon afterwards, and was buried at St Mary Abchurch, on 2 August. In the event, his will was set aside, and administration was granted on 25 August of that year to his widow, who married Robert Souch at St Mary Abchurch on 18 October 1596. 
Whithorne's autobiography makes interesting reading, though one could wish that he had been more expansive in certain particulars, as when castigating minstrels as 'the rascal and off-scum' of the profession; mentioning the 'pretty, merry' Neapolitan music; and stating that: '
I join th'English with the stranger, t'agree in music's trade, 

So I the flats and sharps do set... 
('Autobiography', 1962, 203, 145, 146)' Those of Whithorne's pieces which began as solo songs are suitably elaborate, whereas the music he composed for his own poems is very staid. His longer works are less restrained, though on occasion the contrapuntal aspects are overstretched, bringing imbalance, as Robert McQuillan argues in detail in his thesis of 1981 (see Osborn and McQuillan). However, his 'songs' were the first English secular partbooks in print, while the 'duos' were the earliest published duets; together they provide a pleasant introduction to Elizabethan middle-class music and song. 


@@@@@


doc= 29314


Whiting, John (1656-1722), Quaker bibliographer and writer, was born at Nailsea near Bristol. His parents were John Whiting (died 1658), a yeoman of Nailsea, and his wife, Mary (died 1666), daughter of John Evans. Whiting recalled that his parents 'came of honest parents, and of good report in the country', where his ancestors had long owned an estate (Whiting, 'Persecution', introduction). They were converted to Quakerism in 1654 by John Audland and John Camm, and the first meetings in Somerset were held in their home. His father died in 1658, leaving the tuition of Whiting and his sister Mary (1654-1676) to their mother, who educated them 'according to truth' (ibid.). In December 1660 his mother was sent with 200 others to Ilchester gaol for refusing the oath of allegiance to the new king, so that he and his sister lived for a time with their grandfather. His mother was released at the spring assizes at Chard, and later in 1661 married Moses Bryant of Nailsea, with whom she had three sons before her death in November 1666. 
Educated at a grammar school, but brought up as a Quaker, Whiting noted that 'the wild nature was apt to appear in me, till truth took hold of me and opened in my understanding' (Whiting, 'Persecution', introduction). At the age of twelve he was 'taken off' from 'sports and pastimes' and 'became more sober and religiously inclined' (ibid.). He was taught hat honour -- doffing the hat to social superiors -- but rejected the practice, regarding it as 'evil' (ibid.). Afterwards he was taught by a Friend, under whom he 'profited most every way'. He evidently found Quaker social customs difficult, however, for: 'the plain language also cost me very dear, it was so hard to take up, so that I could have gone miles about rather than having met some of my relations to speak to them; which how small a thing soever some may count it, I could have no peace till I gave up and took up the cross in that respect, and then it was made easie to me, and I had peace therein. (ibid.)' In 1670 Whiting discovered a testimony in his heart against 'hireling priests' and tithe-taking; as he later wrote: 'I could discern a difference between them and Friends, as plain as between the whitest and brownest bread in my father's house' (ibid.). 
On the death of his stepfather in June 1672 Whiting went to live with his new guardian, Edmond Beaks, at Portishead, near Bristol, for about three years; there he met the Quakers Charles Marshall and George Cole who, he recalled, 'were as fathers in the truth to me' (Whiting, 'Persecution', introduction). Whiting's sister Mary had become a Quaker preacher and in August 1675 set out on a journey towards London. Whiting joined her in Buckinghamshire in November and they visited Quakers in Reading gaol, after which he returned home and his sister continued her mission northwards. On 1 April 1676 he met her again at Norton, co. Durham, where she was taken ill. Her death a week later, on 8 April, at the age of twenty-two was 'a great exercise' for Whiting. Her youthful piety had an intense effect on her brother, and four years later while in prison he wrote a testimony to her, published in 1681 as 'Early Piety Exemplified in the Life and Death of Mary Whiting'. 
Whiting returned to Nailsea after his sister's death: 'being then in the 20th year of my age; and having some of my estate in my hands, I manur'd part of it, and sow'd it with corn the latter end of this year, and the next spring some more of it, of which I had a small crop of about ten acres the summer following. (Whiting, 'Persecution', 10)' He was cited to appear in the bishop's court for non-payment of tithes on 28 May 1678. The following year he was appointed overseer of the poor for his parish; he suffered no further persecution until 28 January 1679, when he was arrested and sent to Ilchester gaol. He was committed at first to the sheriff's ward, or Old Nunnery; after some time he was moved to the Old Friary and allowed to take walks outside and occasionally visit Nailsea. Many other Quakers were also prisoners, and on Sundays they held meetings, attended by outsiders, in the great hall or the walled orchard of the gaol. Whiting was in frequent correspondence with London friends who sent him books. He wrote much, and read the works of Jakob Boehme, Sir Walter Ralegh, and others. In 1681 he was moved to the common gaol in Ilchester and put in 'a dark nasty hole, called Doctors Commons', where he lay on damp straw (ibid., 56). About this time he wrote the testimony of his sister and soon afterwards, he records, 'I began to write my own memoirs... chiefly for a memorial to myself of the dealings of the Lord with me from my childhood' (ibid., 57). In 1684 he was allowed to take a room at the home of another Quaker, Widow Scott, which was 'the best prison (except the Friary) that ever I had', and where the men's monthly meetings were held (ibid., 105). 
In 1685, on James II's accession, Whiting vainly tried to obtain his release: 'it became a proverb', he recalled, 'that liberty of conscience was in the press, it was so long a coming out' (Whiting, 'Persecution', 140). He was free by the time Monmouth's army was marching through the west country and he saw Monmouth in Taunton, where he spoke a few words to the duke in the street and noted his thoughtful and dejected appearance. After the rebellion was smashed, and having himself seen the ruthless behaviour of King James's troops, Whiting thought it safer to surrender himself at Ilchester, where he was thrust into irons among Monmouth's men and spent almost six weeks chained to John Hipsley, another Quaker, for refusing to pay the keeper his fees: 'Nor could we put off our clothes at night, but from one arm, and let them hang on the other, so that we could not turn, but lay mostly on one side (being link'd together) which was very tedious in the heat of the summer. (ibid., 146)' He was allowed to go to his own room after thirteen weeks and was an eyewitness to some of the atrocities of Judge Jefferys at the 'bloody assizes', remaining a close prisoner until the king's proclamation of March 1686. 
On his release Whiting married Sarah Hurd on 20 May 1686; the couple settled at Long Sutton, where she kept on her trade of linen draper, and afterwards moved to a shop at Wrington. Whiting and his wife do not appear to have had any children of their own, but his testimony to Sarah Scott, his niece, reveals that when her father Francis Scott died 'her uncle and aunt Whiting took her, to breed up as their own, and educated her in the way of truth' (Whiting, 'A Memorial', 3) until her death on 27 September 1703 in London at the age of almost thirteen. Whiting set up meetings in the town, and William Penn often visited him and held meetings in the surrounding areas. 
Whiting's autobiography ends in 1696. In 1699 he moved to London, and the remainder of his life was spent travelling in various counties in the south and attending to Friends' business in London. In 1700 he was at the second day morning meeting where one of his manuscripts was read, and at another time was asked to look at George Bishop's book of New England's Friends' sufferings, for reprinting purposes. In 1707 the yearly meeting requested that he gather details of ancient Friends' books from the bookseller Thomas Raylton and report these to the meeting for sufferings, a project which eventually led to his 'Catalogue of Friends' Books' (1708), the first attempt at Quaker bibliography, two copies of which were sent to each monthly meeting in England and Wales and later to other nations. 
As well as 'Persecution Expos'd' and the aforementioned works, Whiting wrote numerous tracts such as 'An Abstract of the Lives, Precepts, and Sayings of the Ancient Fathers' (1684), together with many defences of Quakerism, for example, 'Judas, and the Chief Priests' (1701), an answer to the Quaker separatist George Keith, whom Whiting accused of attempting 'to expose his old Friends to the contempt of the world, and rage of their adversaries', by among other issues charging them with failing to preach 'Christ without' and undervaluing the historic, incarnate Jesus (pp. 1, 4). Other defences included 'Truth and Innocency Defended' (1702) in answer to Cotton Mather, 'Truth the Strongest of All' (1706), another reply to Keith, and 'Christ Jesus Owned as he is God and Man' (1709), a defence of Quaker Christology in answer to Edward Cockson. 
Whiting died in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, London, on 12 November 1722 of a 'fever and inward wasting' (Smith, 922); he was taken from the Bull and Mouth meeting-house on 16 November and interred on the same day at the Quaker burial-ground near Hanover Street, Long Acre. His will shows that he retained property in Somerset, at Congresbury. His wife, who was his executor and main beneficiary, survived him. His bequests were otherwise directed to his cousinage and servants, and to the Quaker poor of his former Somerset and present Strand meetings and the parish poor of Nailsea and St Andrew's, Holborn. He was particularly concerned with the preservation of 'all my originall printed books published by the people called Quakers either bound or unbound except the reprinted collections of their works', left in trust for use by members of the London Friday and Monday meetings. 


@@@@@


doc= 29315


Whiting, Richard (d. 1539), abbot of Glastonbury, is of unknown origins (a statement that he was a son of one of the abbey's tenants at nearby Wrington cannot be substantiated). He became a Benedictine monk at Glastonbury, where he may have studied as a child during the abbacy of Richard Bere (1493-1525). He was ordained acolyte in 1498, subdeacon in 1499, deacon in 1500, and priest in March 1501. Having some time held the position of chamberlain at Glastonbury, on Bere's death in February 1525 he was appointed abbot by Wolsey, probably on the suggestion of John Islip, abbot of Westminster; by this time he is thought to have been approaching the age of sixty. 
Whiting appears to have lived the typical life of a late medieval abbot of a great house (Glastonbury had the highest net income of any English monastery in 1535). He was fond of hunting, entertained on a grand scale, attended parliament, and presented Christmas gifts to the king. He continued the intensive building work begun under Bere, including the completion of St Edgar's Chapel at the east end of the abbey church. As late as 1539 he was concerning himself with having his own arms set up on new buildings at Glastonbury. He also maintained the tradition of hospitality to all, with the abbey feeding the poor of the neighbourhood twice weekly. His abbacy coincided with a period of general decline for the Benedictines, yet at Glastonbury the number of monks rose from forty-six to fifty-four. During the 1530s, moreover, there was an increase in the number of monks who went from Glastonbury to Gloucester College at Oxford, even though Whiting himself seems to have been more interested in music than scholarship, making arrangements in 1534 for the instruction of the choirboys. A visitation in 1538 suggests that there were divisions among the monks, especially between the older and younger ones, and that the abbot had his favourites in the community. Whiting was also apt to reside away from the monastery, especially at his manors of Sturminster Newton in Dorset and Ashbury in Berkshire. Some of his apparent shortcomings were probably due to ill health, however, and he appears to have had few critics before the events of 1539, being described by John Leland, whom he entertained generously, as 'homo sane candidissimus, et amicus meus singularis' ('a most upright man and my particular friend'; 'De rebus Britannicis collectanea', 6.70). 
Early investigations into the management of the abbey and the conduct of its monks found little to complain of (the oath of royal supremacy had been taken by Whiting and his brethren in June 1534), and as late as September 1539 the king's commissioner Richard Layton was severely rebuked by Cromwell for offering a positive appraisal of Whiting's character, a judgement he was quick to retract. By now, however, despite Whiting's efforts to maintain a good relationship with Cromwell, on whom he had bestowed several gifts (notably the advowson of Monkton church) and who as recently as March 1538 had reassured the abbot against 'fear of suppression or change of life' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/1, no. 573), the writing was clearly on the wall. Following cross-examination on 19 September at his manor house of Sharpham near Glastonbury by Layton, Thomas Moyle, and Richard Pollard, who found the aged abbot's answers evidence of 'his cankered and traitorous heart', Whiting, 'being but a very weak man and sickly', was dispatched to the Tower of London (ibid., 14/2, no. 206). Even now proof of the treasonable behaviour Cromwell wished to establish in order to suppress the abbey was hard to find, and, although by the beginning of October Layton and his colleagues had secured depositions from discontented monks at Glastonbury alleging such behaviour, the only specific accusations laid against Whiting were possession of a book found at the abbey condemning the royal divorce and his having hidden a number of precious objects from the despoilers. 
Whiting's trial before a compliant jury took place at Wells on 14 November, the main charge against him being simply that 'of robbyng of Glastonburye churche' (Wright, 260). Sentenced to death by John, Lord Russell, the abbot was the following day dragged on a hurdle through the town of Glastonbury up to Tor Hill to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, 'att whych tyme he askyd god mercye and the kyng for hys great offensys towardes hys hyghenes... and thereapon toke hys deathe very pacyently' (ibid., 261) alongside two of his monks, John Thorne and Roger James. 
Whiting was regarded as a martyr in the late nineteenth century both by the Catholic historian Francis Gasquet and by the agnostic anti-Catholic James Froude, and even the most detached assessment of his last days suggests a man of principle and moral courage, prepared to die for what he believed in. He was beatified in 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 29316


Whitlock, Elizabeth (1761-1836), actress, was the third daughter and fifth child of the provincial actors Roger Kemble (1722-1802) and his wife, Sarah Ward (1737-1807), and was born at Warrington, Lancashire, on 2 April 1761. Although she was apprenticed to a mantua-maker she acquired some theatrical experience in the provinces, and appeared at Drury Lane on 22 February 1783 as Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', a part she repeated on 1 March. She subsequently played at York, where Tate Wilkinson, in 'The Wandering Patentee', described her as 'possessed of marks of merit, but wild as a colt untamed'. 
Elizabeth Kemble returned to Drury Lane for two seasons, playing, through the influence of her elder sister Sarah Siddons, Margaret in Philip Massinger's 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts', Leonora in Edward Young's 'The Revenge', and Elvira in 'Love Makes a Man'. Critical comment, however, remained ambivalent about her talents; she returned to York, and on 21 June 1785 married Charles Edward Whitlock (died 1822). He was manager of the Newcastle, Sunderland, Lancaster, and Chester theatres, and from 1785 to 1791 she was one of the chief actresses of his circuit. The couple had three sons, the eldest of whom, Henry Edward Whitlock (1787-1806), later appeared with them in America. After performing in Edinburgh in 1793, the Whitlocks were engaged in the USA, where they spent the following fourteen years, playing in Annapolis, Philadelphia, Charleston, Boston, and New York, and gaining a solid reputation. Her roles were primarily in tragedy: Belvidera in 'Venice Preserv'd', Imogen in 'Cymbeline', Lady Macbeth, and Lady Randolph in John Home's 'Douglas'. Although not as talented as her older sister, Sarah, to whom she was inevitably compared, Elizabeth Whitlock evidently had the more beautiful voice, and was the more vivacious in company. John Bernard, who knew her in America, commented that, despite her heavy figure, she 'could kindle the sympathies and blind the spectator to every deficiency'. 
On 6 October 1807 Elizabeth Whitlock reappeared at Drury Lane, acting the part of Elwina in Hannah More's 'Percy'. She seems not to have performed again, and she and her husband returned to America for the years 1812-14, before settling at Addlestone, near Chertsey, in Surrey. He died on 3 March 1822, and she some years later, at Addlestone, on 27 February 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 29317


Whitlock, John (bap. 1624, d. 1708), presbyterian minister, was baptized on 23 January 1624 at St Peter-le-Poer, London, the third son of Richard Whitlock, merchant, of London, and his wife, Catherine (1596-1649), daughter of David Burdet of Wye in Kent. On 23 June 1642 he was admitted as a pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge; he graduated BA in 1646 and proceeded MA in 1649. During his years at Cambridge he established a lifelong friendship with William Reynolds (1625-1698), with whom he shared future ministries. Appointed to the living of Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, in November 1646, he was joined by Reynolds in the following month. Together they also supplied the pulpit at Wokingham in Berkshire in 1647 and Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire in 1649. Both men refused to take the engagement in 1649, which led to their being deprived of their posts. 
Whitlock's unwillingness to associate with the republican authorities created a favourable impression with the more conservative members of Nottingham's ruling body. In 1651 the marquess of Dorchester presented him to the living of St Mary's, Nottingham. Reynolds was appointed as his assistant, serving as lecturer. They were instructed to establish a 'Presbytery in the town as soon as they could prove and clear the way' (Carpenter, 22). In October 1651 both men were ordained according to the presbyterian discipline at St Andrew Undershaft in London. Not until 1655, with the establishment of John Barret at St Peter's Church, was a classis established within Nottingham. Whitlock attended all but one of the classis meetings over the next four years and served on several occasions as secretary. This 'three-fold cord' of Barret, Reynolds, and Whitlock was to be prominent in the establishment and consolidation of presbyterianism within Nottingham. Whitlock enjoyed considerable links with presbyterians across the country. On 25 March 1652 he married Mary, daughter of the minister Anthony Tuckney. 
At the Restoration Whitlock was indicted for not reading common prayer and on 6 July 1662 his living was sequestered, a full month before the 'Act of Uniformity' took effect. Making his farewell sermon to his congregation he declared he would begin a policy of 'preaching by silence', that is to refrain from public preaching. Although he continued to teach privately at conventicles over the proceeding years, it was not until the declaration of indulgence of 1672 that he took out public preaching licences as a presbyterian for Mansfield and Nottingham. After his ejection Sir John Musters offered Whitlock and Reynolds accommodation and a degree of protection at Colwick Hall. There Whitlock ministered to a conventicle of over 200 persons, according to a report given to the county lieutenant on 6 September 1663. In the same year he published 'England's Remembrancer', a collection of farewell sermons by Nottingham's ejected clergy. In 1665 he and Reynolds were imprisoned for twelve weeks in the Black Moor's Head in Nottingham for preaching. As a consequence of the 'Five Mile Act' of the same year the two men and their families moved to Shirebrook in Derbyshire, and in 1668 to Mansfield in Nottinghamshire. As the town was not a corporate borough, it proved to be a safe haven, and Whitlock enjoyed the friendship of Lord Wharton who often stayed with him on his journeys to the north. 
Although Whitlock and Reynolds were imprisoned for five months in 1685 after entering the borough town of Newark, the declaration of indulgence two years later enabled the men to return to Nottingham. There they served as joint ministers of the town's presbyterian congregation until Reynolds's death in 1698. Whitlock published 'A Short Account of the Life of the Reverend Mr William Reynolds' (1698) in memory of his great friend and continued to minister at the High Pavement chapel until within two years of his own death. He died at Nottingham on 4 December 1708 and was buried in the chancel of St Mary's on 8 December. His will showed him to own several properties and substantial sums of money were bequeathed to friends, family, and charitable use. Whitlock had two children, a daughter who died in infancy, and a son, John (1661-1723), who succeeded him to the pastorate at High Pavement. 


@@@@@


doc= 29318


Whitelocke, William (c.1520-1584), historian, was born at Wokingham, Berkshire, the eldest son of Richard Whitelocke, holder of the manor of Beaches in Wokingham; his mother was said to be a member of the Grove family from Fingest, Buckinghamshire. After attending Eton College, he was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, in 1537 and graduated BA in 1542, proceeding MA in 1545 and BTh in 1553. He was a fellow of the college between 1540 and 1560, and, as vice-provost, was presented in December 1558 to the vicarage of Prescot in Lancashire; in July 1560 he was admitted to the rectory of Greenford, Middlesex, on the presentation of Sir Edward Thornton. He was collated in March 1561 by Bishop Thomas Bentham to the prebend of Curborough in Lichfield Cathedral, 'in which church', according to his uncle Sir James Whitelocke, 'he lived for the latter part of his time altogeather' (Bruce, 3). 
One of the few clergymen of the period to make a significant contribution to antiquarian studies, Whitelocke completed the first draft of a history of the cathedral church of Lichfield in 1569. His 'Chronicon Lichefeldensis ecclesie', which was compiled at the request of a fellow canon who was curious about the history of the cathedral, went through several drafts. It was mainly a condensed version of the final section, on the bishops of Lichfield, of the Lichfield chronicle written by Alan Ashbourne between 1323 and 1334. Whitelocke made several additions to Ashbourne's account of the holders of the see, and added a further series of brief biographies of the bishops, concluding with the consecration of Bishop Bentham in 1560. To compile his history he used material in the cathedral library, including another chronicle written by John Aston, a contemporary of Ashbourne. The new material which he added on Lichfield traditions, such as the site of a Mercian burial-ground, reflects Whitelocke's antiquarian interests. His episcopal biographies also contain material from the registers of the archbishops of Canterbury, which he might have owed to his friendship with his fellow antiquarian John Twyne, to whom Whitelocke was said to have given information about the dispersal of John Bale's library. 
Whitelocke took the extracts from Ashbourne's chronicle from the copy presented to the cathedral by Thomas Chesterfield in the mid-fifteenth century. Henry Wharton, who published several accounts of the history of the cathedral in his 'Anglia sacra' (1691), not only wrongly ascribed extracts from the original Lichfield chronicle to Thomas Chesterfield, but also incorrectly ascribed to Whitelocke another compendium, the 'Historia ecclesiae Lichfeldensis' written in 1575 by an anonymous author, who was possibly Lawrence Nowell, dean of Lichfield between 1560 and 1576. Four versions of Whitelocke's 'Chronicon' survive, all of them dedicated to his fellow canons; in December 1583 he presented an abridgement of the first draft to another antiquarian friend, the lawyer Francis Thynne. Whitelocke died in Lichfield, unmarried, early in 1584. 


@@@@@


doc= 29319


Whitmore, Sir George (b. after 1572, d. 1654), merchant and local politician, was born in London, the second son of William Whitmore (died 1593), a London merchant, and his wife, Anne (died 1615), daughter of Sir William Bond, a London haberdasher and alderman, and granddaughter of Sir George Bond, lord mayor of London in 1587-8. George Whitmore's elder brother, Sir William Whitmore (1572-1648), was a lawyer and a member of the Haberdashers' Company and of the Merchant Adventurers; he sat as MP for Bridgnorth in 1621, 1624, and 1625, a constituency held by his son, Thomas (1612-1653) in the Long Parliament, until his expulsion as a royalist in 1644. George Whitmore's eldest sister, Elizabeth, married Sir William Craven, lord mayor of London (1610 and 1618), and was perhaps the richest woman in England when her estate passed to her son at her death in 1624. His younger sister, Frances (died 1656), married Sir John Weld and was the mother of the property developer Humphrey Weld. 
Whitmore was apprenticed with his older brother as a haberdasher and later served two terms as master of the Haberdashers' Company (1621-2, 1631-2). He became a member of the Virginia Company in 1609, and owned substantial stock in the East India Company. In 1611 he married Mary ('b'. 1594x6?), daughter of Reynold (or Reginald) Copcott and Jaquelina Hoergaerden. Her stepfather was Richard Daniell (died 1630), burgess of Truro, Cornwall, and owner of the former crown manor of Alverton. The couple had at least three sons and four daughters. In 1631 he rebuilt, in the Italianate style, his residence at Balmes (Baumes) House, Hoxton, in the parish of St Leonard, Shoreditch, where he lived until his death. 
Whitmore's political career began with his election as sheriff for 1621-2, followed by service as alderman for Farringdon Within (1621-6) and Langbourne (1626-43), and then as lord mayor of London in 1631-2. He was knighted on 27 May 1632 and served as president of Bethlem and Bridewell hospitals in 1632-42. As a wealthy alderman and an undersharer of the customs, in June 1639 he was asked to support a city loan to the crown of $100,000, and later in the month, when the aldermen as a body showed themselves unfavourable to the loan, he was one of the seven who agreed to it. With the loan's failure, the customs farmers secured $250,000 for the king, including loans from Whitmore and five other aldermen. Upon Charles I's return from Scotland in November 1641, he welcomed the king at Balmes in an elaborate ceremony, and had a road cut through his estate to smooth the royal journey. 
On 3 December 1641 Whitmore was one of the aldermen who presented a petition to Charles urging him to remain near the capital and condemning recent disorders in the London area. With other wealthy supporters of Charles I he allegedly offered to raise 10,000 troops to protect the king in London at the time of the royal departure in January 1642. In February-March 1642 he was one of the aldermen who signed a petition protesting at parliament's vesting of the London trained bands in the hands of a committee of safety, and acted to defend the claims of the lord mayor and aldermen to control of the city militia. 
With the outbreak of the civil war Whitmore was, in December 1642, a supporter of what parliament considered a royalist-backed petitioning campaign in the City, urging the need for an immediate peace. Meanwhile, his refusal to contribute to loans requested by parliament and its committees had been followed by refusal to pay an assessment of $1500 set by the committee for the advance of money, which led to his arrest and imprisonment in Crosby House, London. With six other aldermen he was transferred to prison at Yarmouth, and later moved to Winchester House and thence to Lambeth Palace in 1644; the committee began seizing his assets, including rents from properties in Essex and East India Company stock. Meanwhile the court of aldermen removed Whitmore from his seat on 2 May 1643. He eventually received a discharge for his sequestered estates from the committee for compounding in 1651. He died at Balmes on 12 December 1654 and was buried at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, London, on 6 January 1655. The estates he left to his sons included not only Balmes, but also properties in Yorkshire, Northumberland, Berkshire, Somerset, Dorset, and Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 29320


Whitney, Geoffrey (1548?-1600/01), author, the son of Geoffrey Whitney, was most probably born in 1548, though 1552 has been suggested as an alternative (Borris, 336), near Nantwich, Cheshire, or possibly in London. His family, of minor gentry status descended from the Whitneys of Whitney, Herefordshire, had held a manor at Coole Pilate, near Nantwich, since 1388. His parents held a tenancy at nearby Combermere, where Whitney was probably brought up. He had at least one brother and four sisters, one of whom may have been the poet Isabella Whitney. Geoffrey Whitney attended Audlem School, near Nantwich, and then studied briefly at Oxford, and for a longer period at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where his tutor was Stephen Limbert, later master of Norwich School. He appears not to have taken a degree. Between 1570 and 1574 he probably studied law at Thavies' Inn or Furnivall's Inn in London, though he was not called to the bar. 
From 1580 (and possibly earlier) to 1586, Whitney was under-bailiff of Great Yarmouth. On 2 August 1580 he made a visit to Scratby Island, off Great Yarmouth, and wrote an account in Latin of the journey. About this time, if not earlier, Whitney increasingly sought and attained the patronage of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, who was high steward of Great Yarmouth. In 1584 Whitney became acting under-steward of Great Yarmouth, and Leicester supported his application for official tenure of the office. However, Whitney's application was unsuccessful, and he was forced to resign the acting under-stewardship in 1586 in favour of John Stubbes, author of 'A Gaping Gulfe'. Whitney responded with legal proceedings against the corporation of Great Yarmouth; in 1587, with Leicester's support, he received $45 in compensation on condition that he make no further claim for an office. In late November or early December of 1585 Whitney presented to Leicester a manuscript version of an emblem book, just before the earl's departure to the Low Countries as governor-general. Whitney seems to have come into contact with Dutch intellectuals during his sojourn in Norfolk. In 1586 he contributed verses in commendation of Jan Dousa the elder's 'Odae Britannicae'. In the early months of 1586 he visited Leiden as a supernumerary in the party of Dousa, taking lodgings from 12 January 1586 for a few nights. On 1 March 1586 he became a student at the new University of Leiden. His period in the Netherlands thus coincided with Leicester's campaign, and Whitney doubtlessly sought to continue his association with the earl, possibly offering himself as a guide to the intellectual culture of Leiden (Manning, 160). 
In the Netherlands, Whitney was persuaded by Leicester and Dousa to publish the emblem book presented in manuscript in the previous year to the earl. Whitney's most famous work, 'A Choice of Emblemes and other Devises', was printed at the Plantin press by Francois Raphelengius in Leiden in 1586 and dedicated to Leicester. It contains 248 emblems, consisting of illustrations, mottos, and explicating verses generally drawing a moral lesson; the work is a considerable expansion and revision of the manuscript version (Tung). It draws upon continental emblematists and is preceded in English by the manuscript emblem book of Thomas Palmer as well as comparable works such as Van der Noot's 'A Theatre for Voluptuous Worldlings' (1569). Nevertheless, Whitney became the pre-eminent emblematist of the Elizabethan period, as recognized by Francis Meres in 'Palladis tamia' (1598, 285). Whitney's 'Emblemes' arguably supports Leicester's militant expansionist protestantism, though the work has also been interpreted as more broadly moralistic and politically cautious. The dedication to Leicester, dated from London on 28 November 1585, praises the earl as 'a zelous favorer of the Gospell, and of the godlie Preachers thereof' (sig. *3); the first emblem celebrates Elizabeth's restoration of reformed religion. Most emblems carry a dedication, such as those on pages 193-5 to the leaders of Leicester's forces in the Netherlands and a number to Whitney's relations and friends. 
At some stage Whitney returned to England and apparently to the neighbourhood of his upbringing. He made his will at Royals Green, near Combermere Abbey, on 11 September 1600, and the will was proved on 28 May 1601. He appears to have died unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 29321


Whitshed, Sir James Hawkins, first baronet (1762-1849), naval officer, was born in 1762, third son of James Hawkins (1713-1805), bishop of Raphoe, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Keene. The family fortune came from William Whitshed. In 1773 he was entered on the books of the sloop 'Ranger', then on the Irish station, and was afterwards on the books of the 'Kent', guardship at Plymouth. He first went afloat in the 'Aldborough', serving on the Newfoundland and North American stations, until on 4 September 1778 he was promoted lieutenant. During 1779 he was in the 'Amazon', on the home station, and in December he joined the 'Sandwich', flagship of Sir George Brydges Rodney, with whom he was present in the action off Cape St Vincent on 16 January 1780. At Gibraltar he was made commander in the sloop 'San Vincente', and, going out to the West Indies with Rodney, was present in the action of 17 April 1780; the next day, 18 April, he was posted to the 'Deal Castle', which, in a hurricane the following October, was blown from her anchorage at St Lucia and wrecked on the coast of Puerto Rico. The crew escaped to the shore, and Hawkins, after recovering from a dangerous fever brought on by exposure, was honourably acquitted by a court martial, and was sent to England with dispatches. In July 1781 he was appointed to the frigate 'Ceres', in which, the following spring, he took out Sir Guy Carleton to New York, and brought him back to England in December 1783. For the next three years Hawkins commanded the frigate 'Rose' at Leith and on the east coast of Scotland. He then studied for three years at Oxford, attending lectures on astronomy, and travelled on the continent, mainly in Denmark and in Russia. In 1791 he assumed the name of Whitshed, that of his maternal grandmother, in accordance with a cousin's will. 
Whitshed married, on 11 December 1791, Sophia Henrietta (died 20 Jan 1852), daughter of Captain John Albert Bentinck RN (died 1775), grandson of the first earl of Portland. They had two sons and four daughters. The eldest son was killed in 1813, when a midshipman of the 'Berwick'. In 1793 Whitshed was appointed to the 'Arrogant' (74 guns), one of the squadron under Rear-Admiral George Montagu in May and June 1794. In 1795 he was moved into the 'Namur', one of the ships which in January 1797 was detached from the Channel Fleet with Rear-Admiral William Parker (1743-1802) to reinforce Sir John Jervis at Lisbon, and to take part in the battle of Cape St Vincent, for which Whitshed, with the other captains engaged, received the gold medal and the thanks of both houses of parliament. He afterwards commanded successively the 'Ajax' (74 guns), and the 'Formidable' (98 guns), in the Channel Fleet, and on 14 February 1799 was promoted rear-admiral. In April, with his flag in the 'Queen Charlotte' (100 guns), he commanded a squadron of four ships of the line which was sent as a reinforcement to the Mediterranean Fleet, on the news of the French fleet's having escaped from Brest. In the pursuit he returned off Brest with Lord Keith. He continued in the channel, with his flag in the 'Temeraire' (98 guns), until 1801, and in 1803, on the renewal of the war, was appointed naval adviser to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, to superintend the arrangements for the defence of the Irish coast and to organize the sea fencibles. He became vice-admiral on 23 April 1804, and in the spring of 1807 was appointed commander-in-chief at Cork, where he remained for three years. On 31 July 1810 he was promoted admiral. 
Whitshed was made a KCB on 2 January 1815, was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth from January 1821 to April 1824, was made a GCB on 17 November 1830, a baronet on 16 May 1834, baron of the kingdom of Hanover in 1843, and admiral of the fleet on 8 January 1844. He died at his house in Cavendish Square, London, on 28 October 1849. Whitshed's second son, St Vincent Keene (1801-1870), succeeded to the baronetcy; on the death of his only surviving son in 1871 the baronetcy became extinct. The third baronet's only child and heir was Elizabeth Alice Frances Hawkins Whitshed, who married Frederick Burnaby, and was later Mrs Aubrey Le Blond ['see 'Le Blond, Elizabeth Alice Frances]. 


@@@@@


doc= 29322


Whitson, John (1553x5?-1629), merchant, was born at Clearwell in the parish of Newland, Gloucestershire. Described by his godson John Aubrey as 'a handsome young fellow' and an early riser who transacted all business before noon, he was a keen falconer ('Brief Lives', 317). In 1570 he was apprenticed to the wealthy Bristol vintner Nicholas Cutt, whose young widow, Bridget, he later allegedly seduced in a wine cellar; he married her on 12 April 1585. Admitted a freeman of Bristol in that same year, Whitson soon became an important merchant, trading mainly to France, Spain, and the Mediterranean, principally in lead, cloth, and leather in return for wine, currants, and alum. During the 1590s he was a member of a syndicate which fitted out two privateers, apparently donating the proceeds from his share of two enemy prizes to various Bristol almshouses. He was accused of customs fraud in 1600, and in 1623 was found guilty by the exchequer of failing to pay prisage on wine. In 1603 he provided much of the financial backing for Martin Pring's voyage to North America. Along with other Bristol merchants he seceded from the newly revived Spanish Company in December 1605 in order to resuscitate the town's Society of Merchant Venturers, which he served as warden in 1605-6 and master in 1606-7 and 1611-12. Between 1611 and 1622 he also acted as a deputy's deputy in the farm of the wine customs, but confusion over the payment of his annual rent of $1400 led to a lengthy exchequer suit. 
According to Aubrey, Whitson 'lived nobly; kept a plentiful table; and was the most popular magistrate' in Bristol ('Brief Lives', 317); his house in St Nicholas Street allegedly boasted 'the stateliest dining room in the city'. Sheriff of Bristol in 1589-90, he was elected alderman of All Saints' ward in 1600, and served as mayor in 1603-4 and 1615-16, an auditor in 1628, constable of the staple on six occasions, and colonel of the local militia. During his first term as mayor, he was prosecuted by the collector of sums paid to compound for purveyance in Bristol, but escaped punishment by the board of greencloth because his presence in Bristol during time of plague could not be spared. In November 1605 he was returned to parliament for Bristol at a by-election, subsequently representing the town in the assemblies of 1614, 1621, 1625, and 1626, but playing a minor role in proceedings. 
Following the death of his first wife, Bridget, in 1608, Whitson married on 21 April 1609 Magdalen Hynde, the beautiful but near penniless widow of a London salter, William Hynde; she died in 1615. He married his third wife, Rachel Aubrey (died 1654), on 18 May 1617. The widow of a Herefordshire gentleman, John Aubrey, her dowry is said to have amounted to $2000. In November 1626 Whitson was stabbed by a litigant while dispensing justice in Bristol, leaving a scar on his cheek. He subsequently wrote 'The Aged Christian's Final Farewell to the World', first published in 1829, in which he condemned the amassing of wealth as 'the idols of earthly minds'. He died in Bristol on 27 February 1629, after falling from his horse, 'his head pitching on a nail that stood on its head by a smith's shop', and was buried with full military honours at a cost of $377 on 9 March in St Nicholas's, Bristol. He left no direct heirs; his three daughters from his first marriage had all predeceased him, and his second and third marriages had proved childless. He therefore left a considerable part of his estate for charitable purposes, which included the foundation of the Red Maids' School in Bristol. After discounting debts amounting to $3000, an inventory made on 1 June 1629 valued his estate at more than $5400, though subsequent litigation demonstrated that a number of properties had not been included in this valuation. 


@@@@@


doc= 29323


Whittaker, George Byrom (1793-1847), publisher and bookseller, was born on 6 February 1793 at New Alresford, Hampshire, the eldest of five children of George Whittaker (1761-1833), Church of England clergyman and headmaster, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Budd (1769/70-1827). Whittaker's father was well remunerated from 1795 as headmaster of Southampton grammar school, and he was the author of several popular educational works, amassing sufficient wealth to advance several thousand pounds to his son. In 1807 Whittaker was apprenticed to Charles Law, a long-established and prosperous wholesale bookseller and publisher of 13 Ave Maria Lane, London, and on obtaining his freedom in 1814 he acquired the business, trading under the name Law and Whittaker until 1818. The concern was greatly enlarged under Whittaker's vigorous management, and he became one of the three leading wholesalers serving the country trade. Within a decade he had also expanded the publishing side of the business to such an extent that Thomas Frognall Dibdin bracketed it together with Longman & Co. as one of 'the two greatest Publishers in England' (Dibdin, xii), an accolade supported by evidence that Whittaker was second only to Longmans in the numbers of new titles listed in the 'English Catalogue of Books' for this period. 
Part of the reason for this success was capital investment, and in 1826 it was estimated that Whittaker possessed copyrights which had originally cost him $160,000, and which were still worth at least $63,000. Much of the capital came from his brother, William Budd Whittaker, who was a partner in the firm from 1818 to 1824, but other members of the family also invested heavily in the business, and in 1826 their total holding was valued at $53,534. In addition, Whittaker had a reputation as a kindly and approachable man, who established relationships of considerable trust with his authors, and it is also evident that he made some inspired business decisions. About 1821, for instance, he acquired for a price estimated to be in excess of $30,000 the copyrights of the hapless William Pinnock's sixty-four educational catechisms, which continued to sell in extraordinary numbers throughout Whittaker's lifetime, the more so since many were carefully and extensively edited by his own, often celebrated, authors. He also possessed a third share (estimated to be worth $5600) in the copyrights of another failed publisher and educational author, Sir Richard Phillips. These purchases indicate Whittaker's particular strength in educational publishing, a speciality inherited from Law; in addition to elementary and school books (including some of his father's), he published numerous works intended for university students. These were generally published in partnership with the university booksellers, especially J. and J. J. Deighton in Cambridge, and included both mathematical and classical works. However, Whittaker's publishing business was general in nature, and included numerous literary works. One of his earliest literary discoveries was Mary Russell Mitford, whose immensely successful first novel, 'Our Village', he began to publish in 1824. 
Whittaker's commercial standing was such that he was elected sheriff of London and Middlesex on 24 June 1823, when only thirty years old. His personal wealth was considerable, and he reportedly possessed seven hunters. However, in the autumn of 1825 he was defrauded by an American-born writer, William Grenville Graham, who had forged bills in Whittaker's name. When the forgery was discovered, Whittaker's bankers demanded a list of his acceptances, and discovered that he had ventured an extensive and unsuccessful speculation in hops. Although the business was still fundamentally sound, the state of financial panic then prevailing resulted in his being denied the usual amount of discount, and as a result he had to stop payment. His debts and liabilities were estimated at over $270,000, but the creditors agreed to leave the management of Whittaker's affairs in the hands of trustees (Self & Co.), in preference to a commission of bankruptcy. Whittaker continued to trade, with financial assistance from the printer Richard Gilbert, who had married his sister Anne in 1823, and was even able to persist with the publication of his splendid edition of Georges Cuvier's 'Animal Kingdom' (16 vols., 1827-35), for which the translation and the engraving of the plates alone cost $7000. The trustees administered his affairs well, soon restoring him to his old position in the trade, and at the end of 1828 he was released by his creditors, although they had not received the full debt. 
Whittaker was allowed to purchase the remainder of his copyrights, and resumed business in partnership with David Gale Arnot (until 1835) and Joseph Skipper Treacher (until 1838), soon also being joined by William Cumber Hood. The new firm flourished, and in 1830 supplanted Simpkin and Marshall as Robert Cadell's London partner in the publication of the collected edition of Sir Walter Scott's 'Waverley' novels (48 vols., 1829-33). It also continued to attract new literary authors, among them Frances Trollope, whose 'Domestic Manners of the Americans' (2 vols., 1832) passed through four editions in a year. The later years of Whittaker's life were reportedly not characterized by the activity of his youth, but he did continue to cultivate some larger projects, including John Payne Collier's new edition of Shakespeare's works (9 vols., 1844). He died of cholera on 13 December 1847 at his home, 20 Upper Phillimore Place, Kensington, London, and was interred in the catacombs at Kensal Green cemetery. Whittaker never married, and most of his property passed at his death to Anne and Richard Gilbert, the business being continued by his nephew Robert Gilbert, in partnership with William Cumber Hood. 


@@@@@


doc= 29324


Whittaker, James William (1828-1876), watercolour painter, was born in Manchester on 24 August 1828, the elder of the two sons of John (sometimes referred to as James) Whittaker, a warehouseman, and his wife, Mary. Both sons were baptized at the collegiate church, Manchester, on 10 April 1831. As a young man James was apprenticed as an engraver to Joseph Heyes, a calico printer in Manchester; this work led him to etching and subsequently to watercolour painting. On 3 June 1846 at the collegiate church he married Sarah Heyes (Hayes) ('b'. 1825), the daughter of Thomas Heyes, a Post Office clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth. The couple had four children, including Charles Henry ('b'. 1855) and Frank Hammet ('b'. 1864); by the late 1840s Whittaker, described as an engraver, was living in Salford. By 1858 he had sufficient money to enable him to move to Wales to work full-time as an artist: for $10 a year he rented Frith Cottage on the road between Betws-y-coed and Llanrwst, Denbighshire, from where he drew pictures of Welsh scenery. Initially he sold his pictures to a Manchester dealer for a price between merely $2 and $4, but a meeting in Wales with the artist Francis William Topham encouraged him to stand for election to the Society of Painters in Water Colours. He was elected to the Old Watercolour Society as an associate in 1862 and a full member two years later. 
Although he is recorded as having exhibited both continental landscapes and Northumberland coastal scenes, Whittaker is best-known for his meticulous and atmospheric evocations of Welsh scenery, such as 'Mountain Scene in North Wales, with Stream and Cattle' and 'Road between Capel Curig and Llyn Ogwen' (both Victoria and Albert Museum, London). In all, 177 of his drawings were exhibited by the Old Watercolour Society at its gallery in Pall Mall, London, and another 14 sketches in its winter exhibition of 1876-7, after his death. He was able to command good prices for his work, the highest recorded being $262 10's'. for 'Flood on the River Conway' at the show of 1864. He also exhibited three pictures at the Royal Academy. His usual signature was J. W. Whittaker. 
Photographs of Whittaker portray him as a tall, rather heavily built man with a round face and full beard, evidently well-dressed and prosperous. Success had enabled him to rebuild his cottage as a substantial house which he called Frith Castle, but towards the end of his life he was drinking heavily and the quality of his work deteriorated. He died on 6 September 1876 after falling into the River Llugwy, above Betws-y-coed. His body was washed downstream where he was found drowned with, according to the coroner's inquest, a couple of empty spirit bottles on his person. His wife had predeceased him and he left four children. The agent to the surrounding Foelas estate commented, 'there is not much of any value as he has sold everything he could convert into money' (Lord, 76-7). 


@@@@@


doc= 29325


Whittaker, John William (c.1790-1854), Church of England clergyman, the son of William Whittaker, gentleman, of Bradford, Yorkshire, and his wife, Sarah Buck, was born at Manchester and educated at Bradford grammar school and St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted a pensioner on 31 March 1810. He was thirteenth wrangler and graduated BA in 1814, when he took up a Beresford fellowship at his college. He proceeded MA in 1817, BD in 1824, and DD in 1830. 
Whittaker published on the Hebrew scriptures in 1819 (with a supplement in 1820) a work which gained him some prominence, and the admiration of Charles Manners-Sutton, archbishop of Canterbury, whose examining chaplain he became. In 1819 he failed to be appointed to the chair of Arabic in Cambridge, and in February 1822 the archbishop presented him to the important vicarage of Blackburn, Lancashire. He was nominated honorary canon of Manchester in 1852. During his time in Blackburn the parish church was rebuilt and twelve new churches in various parts of the old parish were erected. 
Whittaker published 'Justification by Faith' (1825), 'The Catholic Church' (1836), a reply to Nicholas Wiseman (2 vols., 1836-7), and various other works, including a sermon to the Chartists preached in Blackburn in 1839. His learning was wide, and he kept up to the end his reading in philology and geology, and in astronomy, an interest which led him to assist in the formation of the Royal Astronomical Society. One of his unfulfilled projects was a work on the nebular hypothesis and geological time. 
On 20 June 1825 Whittaker married Mary Haughton (died 1871), eldest daughter of Sir William Feilden, baronet (1769?-1859), and his wife, Mary Haughton, 'nee' Jackson; they had nine surviving children. Whittaker died at Blackburn vicarage on 23 August 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 29326


Whittingham, Charles (1767-1840), printer, was born on 16 June 1767 at Stoke Farm, Caludon or Calledon, near Coventry, Warwickshire, the seventh child of Charles Whittingham, farmer, and his wife, Mary. On 25 March 1779 he was apprenticed to Richard Bird, printer and bookseller of Coventry; having completed his apprenticeship in the spring of 1786 he worked for a time in Birmingham before moving to London, where by 1789 he had set up on his own at 10 Dean Street, off Fetter Lane. Whittingham obtained his freedom of the Stationers' Company by redemption on 14 April 1795, and the freedom of the City of London on 6 October of the same year. Over the next few years he occupied various premises in the area of Fetter Lane, and in 1803 established a workshop at 10 Union Buildings, off Leather Lane. It was here that he installed several of the earliest iron Stanhope hand-presses, invented about 1800 and characterized by a large platen allowing an entire sheet to be printed at one impression. For about eight years his business used the imprint the Stanhope Press. 
After a further move in 1807 to Goswell Street in Clerkenwell, Whittingham formed a partnership with Thomas Potts and Robert Bishop, capitalizing on Potts's patent for removing tar from old ropes and processing them into pulp for paper making. Premises for this operation were found in 1809 at Chiswick, 7 or 8 miles west of Whittingham's London printing office; within a year he had leased High House on the Chiswick Mall and moved his residence and part of his printing business to Chiswick as well. He left the London shop in the hands of his foreman Robert Rowland, taking him into partnership in 1810, but the London business was gradually given up, and the partnership terminated in 1819. Whittingham also entered into a partnership with the stationer and bookseller John Arliss from 1813 to 1817, and may have been the Whittingham of the ink-making firm of Whittingham and Scarlet, operating in Carnaby Street during the years 1804-10. 
By 1811, when Whittingham began on occasion to use the imprint the Chiswick Press, he had already built up a thriving business. His surviving account books, now in the British Library, show a steady progress after the first jobbing entries of 1792, which gradually give way to commissions for type specimen books for the Caslon foundry (1794-6), almanacs and religious tracts printed by the thousands, and even a short-lived anti-Jacobin newspaper ('The Tomahawk! or, Censor General', 1795-6). In 1799 Whittingham produced on his own account an elegant 'Poems' of Thomas Gray, immediately selling the whole edition to two booksellers and going on to print an entire series of neat, compact editions of such standard works as Oliver Goldsmith's 'Vicar of Wakefield' (1800), John Gay's 'Fables' (1801), and James Thomson's 'Seasons' (1802). In 1803 he formed an association with the bookseller John Sharpe, and the two men jointly undertook the publication of several series: the 'British Classics', 'Sharpe's British Theatre', and the 'British Poets'. Later, in 1822, Whittingham issued his own 'British Poets' series in one hundred royal 18mo volumes; other of his series include 'Whittingham's Pocket Novels', 'Whittingham's French Classics', and 'Whittingham's Cabinet Library'. 
In his mature years, Whittingham acquired a considerable reputation as a printer of illustrated books. Samuel Jackson Pratt's 'Pity's Gift' (1797) was his first book to feature wood-engraved illustrations, but it was not until he was established at Chiswick that his work began consistently to exhibit the sharpness and evenness of impression associated with his finest illustrated books: the two series of Northcote's 'Fables' (1829 and 1833), 'The Tower Menagerie' (1829), 'The Gardens and Menagerie of the Zoological Society' (1830-31), and 'Puckle's Club' (1834). Whittingham has been credited with the innovation of using overlays, pieces of paper or thin card pasted to the tympan for the delicate regulation of the amount of pressure applied to various parts of a wood-engraving, but it is doubtful that he was the first to use this technique. Such technical improvements as the iron Stanhope press, the composition inking roller, and smooth, machine-made paper also contributed to the success of Whittingham's woodblock printing, and he is reputed to have manufactured his own printing ink. 
Family tradition represents Whittingham as a charitable if severe man, a strict sabbatarian and a strong-willed disciplinarian. Although he married a Mary Mead, who predeceased him, no children (if there were any) survived to adulthood. In 1810 he took Charles Whittingham (1795-1876), his older brother's son, into his business, first as an apprentice and later as a journeyman, and then as a partner from 1824 until 1828, when the younger man moved to London and set up his own printing shop. The Whittingham residence and business was moved about 1818 to the river-front College House at the corner of Chiswick Mall and Chiswick Lane; Whittingham the elder remained there after the departure of his nephew, continuing to print until his health failed in early 1838. On 24 July 1839 he entered into an agreement with his nephew, where, in return for the guarantee of an annuity of $358, Whittingham the elder agreed to hand over the goodwill, types, presses, and fixtures to his nephew, provided that the latter secured a bond of $1000 against possible bankruptcy. On 5 January 1840 Charles Whittingham the elder died at his Chiswick home, leaving his business to his nephew and bequeathing substantial sums to the Stationers' Company, the Printers' Pension Society (which founded special pensions bearing his name), and the poor of Chiswick. He was buried at Chiswick. 


@@@@@


doc= 29327


Whittingham, Charles (1795-1876), printer, was born on 30 October 1795 at Mitcham, Surrey, the son of Samuel Whittingham, nurseryman. At the instigation -- and most likely at the expense -- of his father's younger brother in London, the printer Charles Whittingham (1767-1840), he attended the Islington academy of the Revd John Evans, and on 2 October 1810 was bound apprentice to his uncle, who had recently taken premises at Chiswick. He became free of the Stationers' Company on 4 November 1817, and in 1818 was made a liveryman of the company. He remained in his uncle's printing office for the next ten years, and in 1824 the two men entered into an informal partnership; this was dissolved in August 1828, when the younger Whittingham left Chiswick to set up his own printing shop at 21 Tooks Court, off Chancery Lane in Holborn. 
The elder Whittingham provided his breakaway nephew with two secondhand iron presses and about 1200 pounds of well-used type; he also lent him nearly $1500, charging interest at the rate of 5 per cent. Young Charles paid his first wages bill on 23 August 1828, and within two years the new business was employing a dozen men and showing a profit. At a time when rival establishments such as Spottiswoodes and Clowes were filling vast press rooms with steam-powered printing machines, Whittingham chose instead to follow his uncle in retaining the iron hand-press and concentrating on the production of small editions distinguished for their tasteful design and excellent presswork. Throughout his career he relied on a small number of customers, many of them publishers and individuals or societies who shared his aesthetic concerns; other clients, including the Religious Tract Society and a half-dozen almanac publishers, were taken over from his uncle and provided a steady and undemanding source of income. 
Soon after his move to Tooks Court, Whittingham made the acquaintance of the bookseller and publisher William Pickering (1796-1854), who became his most important customer as well as his close friend. From about 1830 Pickering began sending most of his work to Whittingham, and was soon providing over half the business that entered the Tooks Court shop. In large part, the books that he printed for Pickering have served to confirm Whittingham's reputation as the finest English commercial printer of the nineteenth century. Much of the credit for the typographic design of the books may belong to Pickering, but it was Whittingham's craftsmanship, particularly in the area of presswork, that ensured the success of such projects as Pickering's 1833 'Dance of Death' and his 1844 folio blackletter reprints of the 'Book of Common Prayer' from six early editions. For these and other books Whittingham commissioned initials and headpieces from the wood-engraver Mary Byfield (1795-1871), suggesting as models alphabets and ornaments employed by sixteenth-century English and continental printers. 
With Pickering, Whittingham also began in the late 1830s the typographic experiments that led to the revival of the old face roman types of William Caslon, which had been superseded in the early years of the century by the more fashionable 'modern' faces. The reintroduced Caslon type was used first in 1840 for five Pickering title-pages, and in 1843 Whittingham began work on two books employing Caslon as the principal text type, Hannah Mary Rathbone's 'Diary of Lady Willoughby', published by Longmans in 1844, and an edition in 1845 of Juvenal's 'Satires', an Eton prize book overseen by Pickering. Later, Whittingham commissioned three types for the private use of his printing office: a recutting of one of William Caxton's types (1847); the Basel roman, based on sixteenth-century designs (1850); and a less historically accurate Aldine italic and roman (1856). A distinctive house style, combining proprietary and carefully chosen foundry types with Whittingham's unique stock of borders and initials, was fully evolved by the 1850s, and may be seen to full advantage in such works as the 1853 Queen Elizabeth 'Book of Common Prayer' printed for Pickering, William Calvert's 'The Wife's Manual' (Longmans, 1854), and a second 'Book of Common Prayer' employing borders based on the designs of Geoffroy Tory (Longmans, 1864). Unsurpassed in colour printing from woodblocks, Whittingham produced several books for Henry Shaw, including his 1842 'Encyclopedia of Ornament', as well as a number of colour-printed gift books and the eccentric but dazzling 1847 'Elements of Euclid', in which Oliver Byrne attempted to expedite the teaching of geometry through the use of colour diagrams. 
In 1826 Whittingham married Eleanor Hulley (died 1854) of Nottingham; two sons and three daughters were born between 1827 and 1840. Both sons were eventually apprenticed to their father, and the two eldest daughters, Charlotte and Elizabeth Eleanor, for many years participated in the design and engraving of the press's ornamental woodblocks. On his uncle's retirement in 1839 Whittingham took over the management of the Chiswick shop, inheriting the successful business outright a year later and adopting its Chiswick Press imprint for his own books. He maintained two shops until 1848, when his London lease expired and he was forced to concentrate the business at the Chiswick premises, which he abandoned in January 1852 after purchasing the freehold of the Tooks Court buildings. In 1847 Whittingham was elected a member of the Society of Arts, and in 1851 served as a member of the jury for the section on paper, stationery, printing, and bookbinding of the Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations; he was the co-author, with Ambroise-Firmin Didot, of the jury's official 'Report' (1852). 
Throughout this period Pickering continued to be Whittingham's major client, although from 1845 the publisher was unable to keep current with his payments, and in May 1853 declared bankruptcy. Less than a year later he died, owing Whittingham just under $7500; the printer -- whose own wife had died just a few weeks earlier -- served as executor and arranged for Pickering's burial in the Whittingham plot at Kensal Green cemetery. Pickering's debts to Whittingham were not cleared until 1859, but by October 1853 Whittingham was already making substantial cash advances to another occasional client, the antiquarian bookseller Henry Stevens 'of Vermont' (1819-1886). Stevens's debt, incurred principally through his bookselling activity, reached a high of $6600 in 1859, and was not finally settled until 1881, five years after the printer's death. From 1855 Whittingham also silently took a two-thirds interest in a number of books issued by the publishers Bell and Daldy, possibly viewing the enterprise both as a means of providing work for his skilled personnel and as a way of advertising the special qualities of his printing office and materials. 
Whittingham was throughout his career a shrewd businessman, and much of his success must be credited to his ability to combine fiscal good sense with an unusual concern for the quality of the books printed in his shop. In 'The Charles Whittinghams: Printers' (1896), Arthur Warren described the younger Whittingham as 'hot-tempered' as a boy and 'brusque and severe' as an adult (Warren, 96); Warren's drafts, based in part on the recollections of the printer's surviving children, are more explicit, calling Whittingham a 'somewhat rough and blunt' man who 'showed little or no affection for any one' (BL, Add. MS 43986, fol. 81). He is said to have softened, personally, after 1860, when he took his manager John Wilkins into partnership and retired from an active role in the press. On Wilkins's death nine years later a new partnership was formed between Whittingham, Wilkins's son John Charles, and Benjamin Franklin Stevens, brother of Henry and husband of Whittingham's daughter Charlotte. In 1872 the Chiswick Press acquired its first steam presses. 
On 21 April 1876 Charles Whittingham died at his home in Surbiton, Surrey, and on 27 April was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London, alongside his friend Pickering. His considerable property was shared among his four surviving children, and following the death of the last the residuary estates, then totalling $63,784, were transferred to the Printers' Pension, Almshouse and Orphan Asylum Corporation. The Chiswick Press itself was purchased in 1880 by the publisher George Bell, and was merged with the firm of William Griggs & Sons, lithographers, in 1919. In 1937 the business resumed the old Chiswick Press name; in 1944 it was purchased by Eyre and Spottiswoode, and in 1962 it was finally closed down. 


@@@@@


doc= 29328


Whittingham, Sir Samuel Ford (1772-1841), army officer, elder son and second child of William Whittingham of Bristol, was born at Bristol on 29 January 1772. His Christian names were contracted by himself and his friends into Samford. 
Whittingham was educated at Bristol and was intended for the law. Determined to be a soldier, but unwilling to oppose his father's wishes during his lifetime, he entered temporarily his brother-in-law's merchant firm, and travelled for it in Spain. In 1797 at Bristol he joined the mounted volunteers, an anti-invasion force of the wealthier citizens. His father died on 12 September 1801 (aged sixty), at Earl's Mead, Bristol, and Samford, who was in Spain, became independent. He returned to England and was gazetted ensign on 20 January 1803; he bought a lieutenancy on 25 February, and was brought into the 1st Life Guards on 10 March. Whittingham went to the Royal Military College at High Wycombe, and joined his regiment in London towards the end of 1804. He was introduced by Thomas Murdoch, an influential merchant, to William Pitt, the prime minister, as an officer whose knowledge of Spanish would be useful, and as a result was sent by Pitt at the end of 1804 on a secret mission to the Peninsula; on 14 February 1805, during his absence, he was promoted captain in the 20th foot. On his return he was complimented by Pitt, and on 13 June 1805 he was transferred to the command of a troop in the 13th light dragoons. 
On 12 November 1806 Whittingham sailed from Portsmouth as deputy assistant quartermaster-general of the force, under Brigadier-General Robert Craufurd, intended for Lima; but on arrival at the Cape of Good Hope on 15 March 1807 its destination was changed, and on 13 June it reached Montevideo, recently captured by Sir Samuel Auchmuty. General John Whitelocke had arrived to command the combined forces, and as Whittingham's staff appointment ceased on the amalgamation of the forces, Whitelocke made him an extra aide-de-camp to himself. He took part in the disastrous attack on Buenos Aires and in the surrender on 6 July, and sailed for England on 30 July. He gave evidence before the general court martial, by which Whitelocke was tried in London in February and March 1808. Owing to his having served on Whitelocke's personal staff, Whittingham's position was a delicate one; but he acquitted himself with discretion. 
Whittingham was immediately afterwards appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general on the staff of the army in Sicily. On arrival at Gibraltar, however, he acted temporarily as assistant military secretary to Lieutenant-General Sir Hew Dalrymple, the governor, and, hearing of a projected campaign of the Spaniards under Don Xavier Castanos against the French, obtained leave to join Castanos as a volunteer, with instructions to report in detail to Dalrymple. This special duty was approved from London on 2 July 1808, and on 18 July Whittingham was appointed a deputy assistant quartermaster-general to the force under Sir Arthur Wellesley, but was ordered to remain with Castanos. He took part under Manuel La Pena on 18 July 1808 in the victorious battle of Bailen, being almost the only British officer present, and for his services he was made a colonel of cavalry in the Spanish army on 20 July. 
On his recovery from a severe attack of rheumatic fever, Whittingham was sent to Seville on a mission from the duke of Infantado, and in February 1809 joined the army corps of the duke of Albuquerque in La Mancha, where he took part in several cavalry actions with such distinction that he was promoted brigadier-general in the Spanish army, an appointment dated 2 March 1809. He was present at the battle of Medellin on 28 March, when the Spanish general Cuesta was defeated by the French general Victor. On this occasion Whittingham re-formed the routed cavalry and led them against the enemy. He reported constantly throughout these campaigns to the British minister in Spain, John Hookham Frere, as to the state and operations of the Spanish army. 
Shortly before Wellesley's advance into Spain, Whittingham joined the British headquarters on the frontier of Portugal, and became the medium of communication with the Spanish general Cuesta. On 28 July 1809 at Talavera he was severely wounded when gallantly bringing up two Spanish battalions to the attack; he was mentioned in Wellesley's dispatch a day later. He went to Seville to recover, and lived with the British minister, Lord Wellesley; during his convalescence he translated Dundas's 'Cavalry Movements' into Spanish. He was promoted major-general in the Spanish army on 12 August. 
Whittingham married at Gibraltar, in January 1810, Magdalena, the elder of twin daughters of Don Pedro de Creus y Jimenez, intendant of the Spanish royal armies, and they had a large family, several of their sons serving in the Spanish army. 
During his stay at the British embassy in Seville, Whittingham proposed the idea that was to form the basis of his participation in most of the rest of the war. Convinced that Spaniards would make splendid soldiers if commanded by British officers, he suggested to Henry Wellesley that he form a model division of 10,000 troops in the security of Majorca. Armed and clothed by the British and with at least two British officers per battalion, they could then threaten the French armies in eastern Spain (British command of the sea would enable them to be a powerful raiding force on the Mediterranean coast); meanwhile they might also act as a model for reform in the rest of the army. Though Wellesley eagerly took up the idea, such was Spanish suspicion of the British that Whittingham's proposals met a frosty reception when he presented them at the new capital, Cadiz, in August 1810. However, through the patronage of General Castanos, one of the original members of the collective regency established to govern Spain following the fall of the provisional government (the Junta Central) in January 1810, Whittingham was appointed to command the cavalry of the Spanish army based in Cadiz, in which he succeeded in effecting some improvement. In this capacity in March 1811 he took part in an attempt to raise the siege of Cadiz by landing a substantial force of British and Spanish troops behind the lines of the French forces blockading the city. However, owing to the lack of initiative of the Spanish commander, La Pena, the operation failed, while Whittingham's own part in it was limited to containing a few squadrons of enemy cavalry in the action at Barrosa on 5 March. 
Immediately after the Barrosa campaign Whittingham left Cadiz for Palma de Mallorca, the regency having at last been persuaded to adopt his plans for the establishment of a new mobile division under his command. Even then, because of obstruction from the Spanish authorities, and especially the captain general of Majorca, Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta, the new force -- known as the division de Mallorca and composed of six battalions of infantry and four squadrons of cavalry -- was not ready until the middle of 1812. By then, however, the situation was much changed, and Whittingham's division was incorporated into the expeditionary army sent to Spain from the British base in Sicily. Initially the intention was to besiege the French-held fortress of Tarragona, but this plan was abandoned, and the entire force disembarked at the Spanish-held base of Alicante on 7 August. 
Whittingham's troops remained cantoned in the Alicante area through the winter of 1812-13, and suffered extreme privation for want of supplies. The front in this region remained quiet, but in March 1813 the new British commander at Alicante, Sir John Murray, launched an offensive, Whittingham's division being involved in skirmishes at Jijona and Concentaina on 6 and 15 March. In the latter action Whittingham was shot in the cheek, but his wound was apparently not serious enough to force him to relinquish command. Notwithstanding its initial success the offensive soon halted, and in the first week of April a French counter-offensive quickly regained much of the lost ground. By 12 April Murray's entire force was concentrated at Castalla, and on the following day it was attacked by the French forces of Marshal Suchet. Posted on the extreme left of the allied line, Whittingham's division received the full force of the French attack, but managed to beat it off despite a muddle in its orders that led to the English general being caught in the midst of a major change of position. For this action Whittingham deserved great credit: the hard fight by his men vindicated his efforts, and he displayed considerable tactical skill. 
Following the battle of Castalla the Alicante front was quiet. Whittingham's next action was Murray's expedition to Tarragona in June 1813. This was a humiliating fiasco; Murray panicked and hastily re-embarked his men in most discreditable circumstances -- and the army returned once again to Alicante, being placed under the command of Lord William Bentinck. However, on 21 June Wellington won the decisive victory of Vitoria, which forced the French to evacuate much territory, including the province of Valencia. Whittingham assisted in its reoccupation, then was soon on the Ebro, invading Catalonia on 26 July. Within three weeks, however, a French counter-offensive had sent the army back across the Ebro, the last stages of the retreat being covered by Whittingham, who had to fight a fierce rearguard action at Amposta on 19 August. In the following month Bentinck crossed the Ebro again, but was unable to advance any further than Tarragona due to want of transport and supplies. With the French few in numbers and largely tied up in garrison duty, there was little fighting; Whittingham's division, being left in reserve, did none. 
When Ferdinand VII returned to Spain from his French imprisonment in March 1814 Whittingham was in garrison at Valencia, well placed to intervene in the military coup that overthrew the 1812 constitution and restored absolutism. With little love lost between himself and the liberal regime -- throughout 1812 and 1813 his long series of disputes with the authorities had become so acrimonious that he had offered his resignation -- Whittingham immediately declared his support for the rebellion. To the annoyance of Henry Wellesley, who advocated British neutrality, he headed the march on Madrid, where on the night of 10-11 May 1814 his troops arrested most of the liberal leaders. According to Whittingham, he advised Ferdinand to grant a new constitution more in line with Spanish tradition, but there is no evidence that he ever pressed his views further -- he always retained the favour of the king, who in June 1814 presented him with a mosaic snuff-box and made him a lieutenant-general, and on the escape of Napoleon from Elba obtained permission from the British government to appoint him to the command of a division in the army that had hastily to be mobilized in the Pyrenees. For his services on this occasion, he received the grand cross of the order of San Fernando. He continued to enjoy the favour of the court, and from 1815 to 1819 remained in Spain. However, his family was increasing, his private means had been much reduced by losses, and no support was available from the Spanish government. So he was delighted, in July 1819, to accept the governorship of the newly acquired British colony of Dominica. 
Whittingham's period in Dominica was apparently popular; the island's 'plantocracy' marked his departure with the presentation of a sword of honour, and a cross of the order of San Fernando set in diamonds. Moreover, despite his involvement in the 1814 coup he had never fallen from favour in England. In 1814 he received the rank of colonel in the British army and was appointed an aide-de-camp to the prince regent; and having received praise for his discretion at the court martial of Sir John Murray for his Tarragona failure, Whittingham was knighted and created CB on 3 May 1815. The Dominican appointment was only the first in his distinguished career in British service. In October 1821 he was made a KCH and appointed quartermaster-general -- effectively chief-of-staff -- of the British forces in India. 
Whittingham reached Calcutta on 2 November 1822. He was busy in 1824 with the preparations for the expedition to Ava, and in November with the Barrackpore mutiny. On 27 May 1825 he was promoted major-general; he retained his appointment as quartermaster-general until a command became vacant. He took part in the siege of Bharatpur, was slightly wounded on 13 January 1826, but was present at the capture on 18 January. For his services in this action he was made KCB (military division), on 26 December, and received the thanks of the House of Commons. In February 1827 he was appointed to command the Cawnpore division. On 1 November 1830 he was transferred to the Meerut command, on exchange with Sir Jasper Nicholl. His tenure of command came to an end in August 1833, and he then acted temporarily as military secretary to his old commander, Lord William Bentinck, the governor-general, with whom he returned to England in 1835. 
On arrival in England in July he almost fought a duel with Sir William Napier, on account of the slur which he considered Napier had cast on the Spanish troops in his 'History of the War in the Peninsula', but the matter was arranged by Sir Rufane Donkin. In October 1836 Whittingham was appointed to command the forces in the Windward and Leeward islands. He sailed for Barbados on 22 December, with the local rank of lieutenant-general (exchanged in a few months for the substantive). In September 1839 he was given the command of the Madras army; he arrived at Madras on 1 August 1840, and died there suddenly on 19 January 1841, at Fort George, where he was buried with military honours on the following day. A memorial tablet was placed in the garrison church, Madras. He had written several published and unpublished military works. 


@@@@@


doc= 29329


Whittingham, William (d. 1579), dean of Durham, was the son of William Whittingham, a Chester gentleman, and his wife, a member of the Haughton family of Haughton Tower, Lancashire. About 1540 he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1545. In the same year he became a fellow of All Souls and in 1547 a senior student of Cardinal College (later Christ Church) and proceeded MA. 
Nothing is known about Whittingham's conversion to protestantism, though in later years he gave thanks that he had been 'called from the blindness of idolatry and superstition' (Greenwell, 15). At some point during the reign of Edward VI he travelled on the continent to extend his education in the universities of France, Germany, and Geneva. A skilled linguist (he spoke French and German), he acted for a while as interpreter to Sir John Mason, English ambassador to France. He returned briefly to England soon before the accession of Mary, but his protestant convictions soon forced him to travel overseas again. On 27 June 1554 he arrived at Frankfurt am Main where he became involved in the bitter disputes among the English protestant exiles over the issue of the prayer book of 1552. Whittingham aligned himself with John Knox and the 'democratic', Calvinist party, but the arrival of Richard Cox in March 1555 tilted the balance in favour of the prayer book faction and Knox and Whittingham were compelled to secede to Geneva where their views were more readily acceptable. 
Whittingham arrived in Geneva in September 1555 and in December he became a senior of the English congregation. On 15 November 1556 he married Katherine (died 1590), daughter of Louis Jaqueman, a native of Orleans, she being about ten years his junior. Their first two children, Zachary and Susanna, were born in 1557 and 1558, but both died young. Most of his time at Geneva appears to have been spent in scholarship, the results of which constituted his most lasting achievement: he acted in effect as midwife to the word of God in what was to become protestant England, participating in the preparation of the texts that, with the prayer book, were fundamental to the well-being of the reformed church. He translated the 'New Testament' and assisted with the English version of the Geneva 'Bible', which went through more than seventy editions between 1560 and 1640 and which maintained its popularity among puritans even after the appearance of the 'Authorized Version' in 1611. He helped produce Thomas Sternhold's and John Hopkins's edition of the 'Psalms' and the Genevan 'Form of Prayers', and translated a book on predestination by Theodore Beza. He also found time to write a preface to Nicholas Ridley's 'Brief Declaration of the Lord's Supper' and a controversial introduction to Christopher Goodman's 'How Superior Powers Ought to be Obeyed'. Whittingham's involvement with the latter work, directed as it was against rule by the 'regiment of women', caused Elizabeth to be gravely suspicious of his loyalties. When Knox and Goodman returned to England in 1558, Whittingham stayed on to complete his literary projects and, since the congregation was left without a minister, Jean Calvin suggested he should take on that role. Whittingham was reluctant, but in 1558 he became deacon to the depleted congregation and served it in that role, or as minister, for the remainder of his time in Geneva. Certainly there is no record of his appointment as minister in the 'Livre des Anglois' and Whittingham's precise clerical status at Geneva was to become an issue later in his career. 
Whittingham returned to England in May 1560, but the events of 1558 had cast a doubt on the way in which his career might develop. In January 1561 he accompanied the earl of Bedford on an embassy to France to express the queen's condolences on the death of Francois II and in May 1562 Bedford, Lord Robert Dudley, and the ecclesiastical commissioner Richard Goodrich made an unsuccessful attempt to secure for him the rectory of Loughborough, Leicestershire. It was probably about this time that Whittingham became chaplain to Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, and his diverse talents were drawn together in October 1562 when, at the request of Warwick, he joined the English expeditionary force at Le Havre as a fighting chaplain. In this post he showed outstanding courage and ability, often preaching in his armour so that 'when any alarum came... he would be on the town walls as soon almost as any man' (Green, 11). Secretary of State William Cecil was concerned about some of his doctrinal pronouncements, but Whittingham justified these by the circumstances of the war and the need to maintain harmonious relations with the French Huguenots. 
In June 1563 Whittingham returned to England followed by a letter from Warwick requesting that the vacant deanery of Durham be bestowed on him. The deanery was already 'half promised' to Thomas Wilson, master of requests, but Warwick's suit prevailed and Whittingham was appointed in July, preaching before the queen at Windsor on 2 September before he made his way north. Whittingham does not appear to have had ambitions to rise beyond the deanery despite offers made to him after 1563. In 1572 his name was put forward as a candidate to succeed Cecil, now Lord Burghley, as secretary and in 1575 Sir Henry Killigrew suggested him as a possible ambassador to Scotland because his 'ableness in all manner of ways cannot be denied by any that have skill' (Marcombe, 'Dean and chapter', 33). During the vacancy of the sees of York and Durham in 1576 he was invited by Leicester to come to court 'and he should not fail to have one of those places' and as late as 1579 it was suggested that he should be sent to France as ambassador. The fact that none of these proposals materialized illustrates that Whittingham was not a careerist -- indeed, he professed himself too old, too infirm, and 'very unfit' for the see of Durham or York (Green, 26). It also indicates that he was content with the preferment he had, and that, possibly, the queen still nurtured suspicions about him. 
The deanery of Durham was a lucrative preferment which actually suited Whittingham's personality and abilities well. Owing to the patronage of Bishop James Pilkington there was already a growing band of protestant prebendaries at Durham, although some conservative elements still lingered in the cathedral, limiting the dean's freedom of action. In 1563 the new dean wrote to Cecil informing him of the good order that had been established: regular services, morning and afternoon sermons on Sundays, and 'a general fast with prayers and preaching of God's word' on Wednesdays and Fridays (BL, Lansdowne MS 7, fol. 24). Moreover, the dean was teaching in the cathedral grammar school on a daily basis and because he was 'skillfull in music' he was 'very careful to provide the best songs and anthems that could be got out of the Queen's chapel to furnish the choir with all' (Green, 23). The idyllic picture was dented somewhat by the storm over vestments which was brewing in the mid-1560s. This was an issue on which Whittingham felt strongly and in October 1565 he wrote to Leicester 'God forbid that we by wearing the Pope's attire as a thing but indifferent should seem thereby to consent to their blasphemies and heresies'. In March 1565 he joined in a plea to Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, asking to be excused conformity but, despite the support of Bishop Pilkington, in August 1566 he was summoned before the ecclesiastical commissioners at York with Robert Swift, diocesan chancellor, and John Pilkington, archdeacon of Durham. The accusation against Whittingham was that he had celebrated communion in the cathedral in 1563 without cope or surplice and that he usually wore a black gown and round cap. These accusations were not denied and though he was ordered to wear the correct apparel he prevaricated for a full year before he certified his conformity. 
The incident was an important watershed for Whittingham because thereafter his conformity does not seem to have been in serious doubt. In 1571 he subscribed to Parker's articles and when three years later Thomas Wood was collecting information for 'A Brief Discourse of the Troubles Begun at Frankfurt' (traditionally believed to have been the work of the dean), Whittingham was reluctant to be involved and Wood scolded him for his lack of zeal. Although the 'Rites of Durham' maintain that the dean engaged in some acts of iconoclasm in the cathedral, 'for he could not abide any ancient monuments nor nothing that appertained to any godly religiousness or monastical life', this perspective seems to have been highly selective (J. T. Fowler, ed., 'The Rites of Durham', SurtS, 107, 1902, 60). The evidence for widespread puritan radicalism in the cathedral is therefore slight, with growing religious conservatism on the part of the dean after 1567. 
Whittingham was especially active in administrative matters and initiated important changes which he believed to be in the best interests of the survival of the protestant establishment. He also had a comparatively large family to provide for. He prosecuted determined suits against Captain William Reed for certain lucrative tithes in Norhamshire and Islandshire; and against Walter Jobson for the rectory of Brantingham, Yorkshire. In 1565 he suspended an annual fee to Charles Neville, earl of Westmorland, and caused further dismay by claiming twenty years' arrears of rent from him. Certainly, special efforts were being made in the 1560s and 1570s to follow up rent arrears and in 1568-9 a new exchequer was built over the gatehouse as an improved accounting centre. Although like those of other ecclesiastical estates Durham Cathedral rents remained essentially static, Whittingham made efforts in the 1560s to revive customary services and payments in some chapter manors. But the most fundamental changes concerned tenure on the dean and chapter estates and encompassed the issues of corpes lands and tenant right. 
Corpes lands were cathedral estates set aside for the maintenance of the dean and prebendaries. The problem was that in the 1560s most of these were in lease to the families and friends of former prebendaries, thus depriving the protestant chapter of any advantage from them. Finding a flaw in the old leases, Whittingham commenced a series of suits before the council of the north in 1565 to recover the corpes lands and was broadly successful, although he received criticism for leasing out the same land again without a proviso for the prebendary to vacate it when he left his stall. The issue of tenant right was even more intractable. The chapter was attempting to replace customary tenure on the bulk of its estates with 21-year renewable leaseholds, but not all of the tenants were happy to comply with this innovation. Consequently, Whittingham organized a series of 'lotteries' in which leases were divided up among members of the chapter. They were then in a position to sell the lease to the sitting tenant or to evict the tenant and take occupation of the property themselves. This latter approach was especially controversial, and in 1574 and 1576 the chapter tenants banded together to make complaints to the queen and privy council. Though their claim that they held by tenant right (a form of border military service) was not upheld, the privy council was anxious to preserve stability and in 1577 an order was made by Huntingdon to regulate future leasing. 
This abrasive policy was not without its consequences. The Nevilles felt particularly wounded by the perceived slights of the 1560s and they were readily supported by other chapter tenants who felt similarly aggrieved. In 1568 Christopher Neville, uncle of the earl of Westmorland, wrote to Cecil saying he was 'sore offended' by the dealings of the Durham chapter and that 'their greedy covetousness is such that ten times so much as they have may not suffice themselves' (Marcombe, 'Rude and heady people', 129). During the northern uprising of 1569, which was motivated partly by such grievances, Whittingham acquitted himself well, using the military experience he had obtained at Le Havre. Before the outbreak he urged Bishop Pilkington to assemble the tenants of the bishopric and dean and chapter, armed, at Durham Castle 'which would be a means to awe the collecting rebels and be a stay and refuge for many gentlemen of the country to resort unto' (Green, 24). When this advice was ignored by the bishop he rode to Newcastle upon Tyne and warned the corporation of the danger of a surprise attack, instructing them how to put their defences in order. He finally left Durham on 10 November 1569, four days before the earls entered the city, 'secret intelligence being brought unto him if he went not away that night he could not pass southward for the bridges would be taken up the next night' (ibid., 25). By 15 November he was at York giving advice to the earl of Sussex and on 28 November he was seeking out intelligence around the Yorkshire borders. Finally he joined the royal army under the earl of Warwick and Lord Clinton and entered Durham with them in mid-December, only to discover that his house and books had been looted by the rebels. 
Once the uprising had been finally quelled, underlying issues remained unresolved. In the early 1570s it was alleged that the dean and certain favoured prebendaries had made substantial profits from maladministration of the cathedral estates and Ralph Lever, a dissatisfied protestant prebendary, emerged as the leader of a group who felt themselves excluded, complaining against 'deceitful dealings' (BL, Lansdowne MS 902, fol. 329) and other matters 'tending to the discredit of our society' (Durham University Library, York book, fol. 41). Moreover, in 1574 Thomas Wood warned Whittingham that he had heard Warwick 'once or twice complain of your ingratitude', a veiled reference to the dean's refusal to reward courtiers with grants of church lands (Green, 25). The atmosphere of complaint and counter-complaint thus engendered brought the cathedral and its dean increasingly under the scrutiny of the queen and privy council. 
Whittingham had successfully manipulated the chapter because of his good relationship with Bishop Pilkington and the support of three key prebendaries, Robert Swift and the bishop's brothers, John and Leonard Pilkington. In 1576, however, Bishop Pilkington died, precipitating a series of events that were to lead to the dean's downfall. Jurisdictional rivalry between York and Durham had been an issue since the middle ages, and following Pilkington's death a dispute developed between the chapters of York and Durham, both sees being vacant. Although the issue was taken before the court of delegates, it was abandoned when Edwin Sandys was elected to York and Richard Barnes to Durham in 1577. 
Sandys, who suspected abuses in Durham Cathedral, persuaded Barnes to act as his surrogate during his first metropolitan visitation. Because this was at variance with traditional practice, which held that the diocese of Durham was exempt from visitation from York, Whittingham opposed the move and when Bishop Barnes arrived to visit the cathedral on 8 August 1577 the dean turned him away at the chapter house door 'taking hold of his gown, and so the business was concluded' (Green, 27). Once more the matter was taken before the court of delegates, but the case moved on slowly and was increasingly costly to maintain. More serious, the second dispute earned for Whittingham the unbending enmity of Sandys and Barnes. The dean's biographer alleged that a 'plot' was hatched in 1577 involving Sandys and Barnes, whose visitation had been frustrated; Ralph Lever, who had inner knowledge of chapter politics and deeply held grievances; and Sir Thomas Wilson, recently appointed secretary of state, whose hopes of the deanery of Durham had been thwarted by Whittingham in 1562. If Wilson could become dean he could work with Barnes and Lever to reform the cathedral and unlock the grants of church land that Pilkington and Whittingham had blocked. 
On 10 April 1578 Barnes undertook an unopposed visitation of the cathedral in his position as bishop of Durham and declared himself to Burghley to be dissatisfied with what he found, referring to 'that Augiae Stabulum, the church of Durham..., whose stink is grievous in the nose of God and of men and which to purge far passeth Hercules' labours' (BL, Lansdowne MS 25, fols. 161-2). Consequently, a commission to undertake a royal visitation of the cathedral was issued on 14 May 1578 with the instruction that it was to investigate all spiritual and temporal offences and letters of orders. The fact that the commission included Sandys and Barnes alongside the earl of Huntingdon, president of the council of the north, and Matthew Hutton, dean of York, did not augur well, since these two factions brought with them long-standing and bitter rivalries. 
The commission met for a first session at Durham (23-6 October) and a second session at York (25-8 November) and considered thirty-five articles submitted by Ralph Lever. Though the bulk of these dealt with allegations of immorality, corruption, and mismanagement, virtually all of the discussion centred on the question of the dean's ordination -- whether he was properly ordained by Genevan standards and whether Geneva orders were acceptable in the Church of England. Although Whittingham produced certificates from surviving members of the Geneva congregation, Sandys refused to be convinced that he was properly ordained according to the Geneva rite and this appears to have been the main issue at stake. The matter raised high emotions, not least between Sandys and Hutton, and it particularly dismayed Lever, who had hoped for an examination of the more general issues and was not himself dissatisfied with the dean's orders. When the last session broke up in disarray, Whittingham, sensing his advantage, travelled to London to try to get the commission revoked, only to encounter further disagreement on the privy council between Burghley and Wilson. 
The long years of acrimony had taken their toll on the dean's health. After returning to Durham, he took to his bed, where he languished for nine weeks. Calling his servants before him, 'which were many', he exhorted them in the fear of God, summoning them one by one and telling them the faults he suspected them of 'and did admonish them to leave them' (BL, Add. MS 33207, fols. 5-8). He made his will on 18 April 1579, leaving legacies to his family, friends, servants, the cathedral staff, and the poor. He died at Durham on 10 June, and was buried in the cathedral. During his time as dean he had bought the manor of Balk, north Yorkshire, and part of the rectory of Mitford, Northumberland, and his personal property (reflected in the will of his widow, who died in 1590) included virginals and a quantity of armour. He was survived by six children: Timothy, Sarah, Deborah, Judith, Elizabeth, and Daniel ('b'. 1571). Timothy, knighted in 1604 and MP for Thirsk in 1604 and 1611, purchased the Durham manor of Holmside, where he established a landed family which endured for a hundred years. 
Whittingham's biography, written by an anonymous author about 1603, paints a picture of a man who was very much a part of the European scene of his day and who brought the ideals of Calvinism and the Renaissance to the far north of England. Less committed sources complained consistently about his favouritism and dubious financial dealings. The fact that he encountered considerable opposition as dean was partly due to the conservatism of the region and partly to Whittingham's unbending conviction of his righteousness, which caused him to press on when more circumspect men might have compromised. 


@@@@@


doc= 29330


Whittington, Richard (c.1350-1423), merchant and mayor of London, was born at Pauntley, Gloucestershire, the third son of Sir William Whittington (died 1358), a lesser landowner of Gloucestershire, and his wife, Joan Maunsell. He was apprenticed to a London mercer and was sufficiently established in London by 1379 to contribute 5 marks towards a civic gift to the nobles of the realm. At this date a mercer of London dealt in silk, linen, fustian, worsted, and luxury small goods, and the wealthiest of the trade expected to participate in the export of English wool, woollen cloth, and worsted, and to import the other merceries. 
Whittington's fortune was based in the first place on his skills as a mercer. He had become a major supplier of mercery to the royal court before 1388, when he sold goods worth nearly $2000 to Robert de Vere, favourite of Richard II; other customers included John of Gaunt, the earl of Derby (the future Henry IV), and the Staffords; from at least 1389 he was supplying Richard II, sales of nearly $3500 being made between 1392 and 1394. It is likely that Richard II and his uncle, Thomas of Woodstock, another lover of the luxuries of rank, were Whittington's most diligent and appreciative customers and 'promoters', as they were described in the foundation statutes of Whittington's college. This pattern continued under the succeeding dynasty: he supplied mercery to Henry IV's great wardrobe and for the marriages of Henry IV's daughters, Blanche and Philippa. In the last decade of Whittington's life such sales were less, and he took fewer apprentices, but he continued to import linens and deal in mercery. 
Profits in London on imported mercery could be high but it is probable, although there is no precise evidence, that Whittington also engaged in trade with Italy and in the rapidly expanding export of English woollen cloth; he is known to have had close connections with Coventry and these may have derived from the cloth trade. His involvement in the wool trade seems to have occurred only after the accession of Henry IV, when he had to recoup royal debts from the wool subsidies. He was a large, if not remarkable, exporter between 1404 and 1416, and served as a collector of the wool subsidies in London from 1401 to 1403 and from 1407 to 1410. He also acted as mayor of the staple of Westminster from 3 July 1405 until his death (although it is not certain whether he was in office continuously) and of the Calais staple from at least 1406 to 1413. 
Whittington's wealth from trade, and his contacts with the great who were his customers, were the basis of his moneylending career. From 1388 he is known to have made nearly sixty loans to the crown, major loans occurring from 1397; his loans to Henry IV and Henry V were larger than any made to Richard II, and several were made in conjunction with others, such as the grocer, Thomas Knolles (1402), or a group of Calais merchants (1406-7); he also lent to private individuals like Sir Simon Burley and John Beaufort, earl of Somerset. His capacity to lend substantial sums consistently over a long period, especially from 1400 to 1423, shows his willingness to use his capital rather than tie it up in land; this willingness may have resulted from his lack of children, from a dislike of excessive personal display, or from a love of the mechanics of such loans and of the society of the often very highly placed persons who sought money from him. His gains would have come in the form of financial profits, together with access to the royal ear and a position of influence. He is unlikely ever to have engaged in usury in the sense deplored by the church; Whittington himself sat as judge in usury trials in London in 1421, a sure sign that he was regarded as above suspicion. This capacity to avoid almost all criticism suggests a character of austere correctness coupled with an ability to inspire trust. His position as a royal financier was at times of great service to the city as well as to his own purse and the crown. 
Whittington's civic career followed the usual pattern: he had become a common councilman for Coleman Street ward by 31 July 1384, and held this office intermittently until 12 March 1393 when he was elected alderman of Broad Street ward; he moved to the ward of Lime Street in June or July 1397 and remained there until his death. In June 1392 he was one of the twenty-four citizens 'of the second rank of wealth in the city' ('Chronicon Henrici Knighton', 2.319) summoned to Nottingham by the king to answer charges, with the mayor and aldermen, of misgovernment -- an inquiry which allowed the king to seize the city into his own lands. On 21 September 1393 Whittington was elected sheriff, and at midsummer 1395 he was elected a warden of the Mercers' Company for the first time. Meanwhile he was selling mercery to Richard II and acquiring the king's trust. This trust showed itself when the mayor, Adam Bamme, died in office on 6 June 1397 and Whittington was appointed to the vacancy two days later by Richard II at his most high-handed. Within days Whittington had negotiated that the city might purchase its full liberties from the king for $10,000; his fellow citizens showed their gratitude when they elected him mayor on the following 13 October for a complete term. Despite his good relations with Richard II, Whittington was in April 1398 one of those who had to seal blank charters placing themselves and their goods at the king's pleasure. His role during the usurpation of Henry IV is unknown: however personally loyal to Richard he may have been, he acquiesced in the change, and his wealth and status ensured that the new king had as much need of him as had his predecessor; a close associate and fellow mercer, John Shadworth, had suffered imprisonment at Richard's hands and probably took a more active part in the usurpation. Significantly both men sat on the first council of Henry IV from 1 November 1399 to 18 July 1400. 
The other details of Whittington's civic career hardly match the anxieties and political manoeuvring of the 1390s. He was warden of the Mercers' Company again in 1401-2 and 1408-9. His first mayoralty had seen the organization of Blackwell Hall as the sole place where non-citizens and aliens could buy and sell cloth. His second full term as mayor, from 13 October 1406, was distinguished by the decision to make customary the mass that had been held before his election. He served for the only time as MP for the city in 1416, a year when the city was quiet and when he made no loan to the crown. On 13 October 1419, when he was certainly in his sixties, he was elected mayor for the third time by his fellow citizens. His attempt to regulate the price of ale and standardize its measures during this term provoked an acrimonious dispute with the Brewers' Company which continued for several years, Whittington winning his point against more temperate advice. Later the brewers were placated by the diplomacy of John Carpenter, common clerk of the city and Whittington's executor. The dispute reveals not only how greatly the old man was respected but also how severe, even embarrassing, his rectitude could be in matters of trade. Only for the last years of his civic career can some assessment be made of his day-to-day involvement: between 1416 and his death in 1423 he attended 50 per cent of meetings of the court of aldermen and all but two of its meetings during his mayoralty year of 1419-20. 
Concomitants of Whittington's success and ability were his appointments to commissions and other civic duties: he had been a custodian of the goods of the politically exiled mercer, John More, in 1384; in 1397 as mayor and escheator he had the task of seizing the forfeited goods of Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, his old 'promoter', in London; he sat on fifteen commissions of oyer and terminer between 1401 and 1418; he was appointed to supervise the collection of papal revenues in England in 1409; he and Thomas Knolles drew up the list of London citizens liable to pay a subsidy in 1412; between 1413 and 1421 he was one of the supervisors and accountants of the renewed work on the nave of Westminster Abbey begun by Richard II, to which he himself had contributed in 1401/2; and in 1414 and 1418 he was on commissions to seek out Lollards and their goods. 
Whittington's preference for liquid capital, borne out by his failure to acquire a large landed estate, may have been connected with the fact that he had no children. He married Alice, daughter of Sir Ivo Fitzwarin (died 1412), a Dorset landowner, possibly as late as 1402. Alice was seriously ill by October 1410, when Whittington was licensed to have a Jewish doctor attend her, and she probably died the following 30 or 31 July (the date of her obit). At his death Whittington had few holdings outside the city. The manor of Over Lypiatt, Gloucestershire, was acquired from his maternal uncle, Philip Maunsell, in 1395, in lieu of a debt of $500; it was successfully claimed by his brother, Robert, as a deathbed bequest. He also held lands in Dorset during the life of his father-in-law, possibly in repayment of loans. His most notable purchase in the city was his great house in the Royal, next to the church of St Michael Paternoster Royal, made in February 1402, the possible date of his marriage. His rebuilding of this church was begun in 1409 to provide a suitable resting place for himself and his wife; he undoubtedly planned to make the church collegiate and establish an almshouse there, projects completed by his executors. This almshouse still survives as Whittington College, administered by the Mercers' Company. 
Whittington gave to good works throughout his life and a few details are known: a library at the London Greyfriars; Rochester Bridge; a longhouse at St Martin Vintry (public lavatories and almshouse); and a refuge for unmarried mothers at St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark. By 5 September 1421, when he drew up his will, he had decided to leave his entire fortune to charity. His will was largely impersonal, making bequests to the standard charities, and was designed to control his executors but not trammel them. Its substance was that all the estate was to be realized in cash and spent on good works, a sum estimated as in the region of $7000. Until his death on 23 or 24 March 1423 (the date of his obit) major projects must have been discussed with his executors: completing the college of priests and almshouse at St Michael Paternoster Royal; rebuilding Newgate prison, to which money was also left in his will for distribution among the prisoners; rebuilding the south gate of St Bartholomew's Hospital; establishing a library at Guildhall; and installing public fountains in the city. 
Whittington's personal interests and friends are difficult to identify. His patronage of two libraries and the known interest of John Carpenter, his chief executor, in education, as well as the association of John Colop, one of those who distributed Whittington's estate in alms, with the dissemination of pious books now known as 'common profit books', argue that Whittington, too, wished to foster the religious knowledge of both clergy and laity. Other important friends were John White, the master of St Bartholomew's Hospital and before that rector of St Michael Paternoster Royal, and John Coventry, mercer, both his executors; Richard Clifford, keeper of the great wardrobe during the period of Whittington's large sales to Richard II, and later bishop of London (1407-21), one of the few men for whom Whittington acted as executor and another promoter of clerical education; and the unknown Roger, once rector of St Margaret, Lothbury, for whom Whittington arranged prayers in his will. Most enigmatic are his relationships with Richard II and Thomas of Woodstock, who with their wives, Anne of Bohemia and Eleanor de Bohun, were to be prayed for at Whittington's foundations in perpetuity. 
It is one of the curiosities of history that this austerely noble figure should have become the subject of nursery rhymes and Christmas pantomimes. By the early seventeenth century the story was being circulated how Whittington, an orphan from the west country, had travelled to London, where he became a scullion in the kitchen of the wealthy merchant Hugh Fitzwarren (a figure unrepresented in fifteenth-century records); there his master's daughter, Alice, befriended him against an overbearing cook. Like all Fitzwarren's servants he was allowed to contribute to the freight of his master's trading ship, the 'Unicorn', but the only thing he could offer was his cat, for which he had paid just 1died When the vessel touched on the coast of north Africa, the king there, driven to distraction by the rats and mice which had overrun his palace, bought the cat for ten times more than the price of the whole of the rest of the ship's cargo. Back in London Whittington had meanwhile despaired of fame and fortune, and set out to leave the city, only to be recalled by the chime of Bow bells, which seemed to be pealing to the words 'Turn again, Whittington, lord mayor of London.' He duly turned, and the return of the 'Unicorn', bearing the money from the sale of his cat, allowed Whittington to marry his master's daughter and rise to be lord mayor. The elements of folklore discernible in this story -- common in north and south Europe and even in Persia -- may have flourished all the more strongly because its hero's own personality had been obscured by all the factual evidence for his benefactions. The impression of the historical Whittington as a remote, rather isolated, figure may indeed be overstated by the lack of personal records. What has survived, to be cherished and turned into a legend after his death, is the sense of civic and humanitarian duty which made him leave his personal fortune to the poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 29331


Whittington, Robert (c.1480-1553?), schoolmaster and grammarian, described himself as a man of Lichfield, Staffordshire, and was probably born in or near the city; his surname is that of an adjoining village. He was a pupil of the grammarian John Stanbridge, perhaps at Lichfield Cathedral school, and is plausibly identical with the Robert Whittington ordained acolyte in Lichfield Cathedral in 1496, and subdeacon there in 1503, to an ordination title provided by Ranton Priory, Staffordshire. He probably became a priest in 1504. Meanwhile, about 1499 he began to study rhetoric and in 1501 to teach as a schoolmaster. These facts emerged when, in 1513, he petitioned the University of Oxford to allow him to be laureated as a rhetorician and to wear silk in his hood, a request granted on condition that he composed one hundred verses of poetry. As Whittington adduced only his rhetorical study and teaching to support his application, it looks as if he had not undertaken significant studies at a university, and there are no grounds for Anthony Wood's assertion that he was taught by Stanbridge at Magdalen College School, Oxford, in the early 1490s. 
During the 1510s Whittington appears to have taught in London, while striving to gain the attention of important people. About 1519 he presented Cardinal Wolsey with a manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 523) containing a treatise in verse, 'De difficultate justiciae servandae in reipublicae administratione', and a prose 'Panegyricus de quattuor virtutibus cardineis', with a dedication requesting Wolsey's patronage. In the same year he published 'Libellus epigrammaton', an anthology of poems addressed to Henry VIII, Wolsey, Thomas More, and John Skelton. His 'Vulgaria', published in 1520, pays compliments to the late king, Henry VII, to Thomas Linacre, and to More himself, who is famously referred to as 'a man for all seasons'. Whittington's efforts succeeded by 1523, at the latest, when he enjoyed the favour of Henry VIII. It is likely that he succeeded Francis Philip in that year as schoolmaster to the henchmen, the noble youths of the royal household, and he certainly held this appointment from Michaelmas 1528 until Christmas 1538. He also occupied a succession of benefices, including the vicarage of Mancetter, Warwickshire, from 1514 until about the 1520s; the rectory of Bedhampton, Hampshire, from an unknown date to 1523; and the rectory of Drayton Parslow, Buckinghamshire, from 1523. The latter two were both in the gift of the king. He was a canon and prebendary of the collegiate church of Warwick from at least 1535 until its dissolution in 1544, and in 1538 Henry VIII presented him to the valuable rectory of Stoke-on-Trent, enabling him to relinquish his household post. His career was a prosperous one by the standards of most early Tudor schoolmasters. In the 1520s his annual gross income was over $30, including $20 as schoolmaster of the henchmen, and this rose to more than $60 after 1538, Stoke-on-Trent being worth some $40. 
Whittington was famous in his day as the author of elementary Latin school books. The list (with first known dates of printing) includes 'De nominum generibus' (1511), 'Declinationes nominum' ('c'.1511), 'De heteroclitis nominibus' ('c'.1511), 'Syntaxis' (2nd edn, 1512), 'De syllabarum quantitate' (2nd edn, 'c'.1512), 'De octo partibus orationis' ('c'.1514), 'De synonymis' together with 'De magistratibus veterum Romanorum' (1515), 'Vulgaria' (English and Latin sentences for translation, 1520), and 'Verborum preterita et supina' (1521). He also edited John Stanbridge's 'Accidence' ('c'.1515). The earliest of these works seems to go back to at least 1510, since 'Syntaxis' includes a dedication to Stanbridge (who died in that year) and a complimentary Latin poem by him. Each title dealt with a different aspect of grammar, and they could be bought individually and cheaply; as such they were widely sold and frequently republished up to the early 1530s. Their author seems to have had a high opinion of his own abilities. When William Horman published another large 'Vulgaria' in 1519, with commendatory verses by his friend William Lily, high master of St Paul's School, London, Whittington posted verses on the door of Lily's school, ridiculing the size and price of Horman's volume and Lily's judgement in endorsing it. This led to the so-called 'grammarians' war', in which Lily and Horman published a two-part attack on Whittington, called 'Antibossicon' (1521), so named because it identified him with the bear-shaped water-tap in Billingsgate, London, built by his namesake Sir Richard Whittington. They criticized Whittington's abilities as a poet and grammarian, and mocked his descriptions of himself, in his books, as 'of Lichfield, master of grammar, and chief poet of England ('prothovates Anglie'), laureated in the most flourishing academy of Oxford'. Whittington rejoined with a tract of his own against Lily, called 'Antilycon' ('Against the wolf'), and the 1521 edition of his 'De nominum generibus' contains further attacks and a motto promising that 'he will humiliate the slanderer'. 
Whittington's grammars continued to be printed during the 1520s, usually by Wynkyn de Worde but briefly also by Richard Pynson. About 1529, however, Whittington seems to have moved his custom to Peter Treveris, who issued his works for the next two years. This arrangement was not satisfactory, and by 1533 Whittington had returned to Worde, his school books now including Latin verses attacking Treveris. Worde, however, ceased to issue Whittington's works after 1534, because of difficulty with the author or falling demand, and Whittington turned his attention to translation from Latin into English. He brought out versions of Erasmus's 'De civilitate morum puerilium' (1532), three works by Cicero ('De officinis', 1534; 'Paradoxa', 'c'.1534; and 'De senectute', 'c'.1535), and three allegedly by Seneca ('The Forme and Rule of Honest Lyvynge', 1546; 'The Myrrour or Glasse of Maners', 1547; and 'De remediis fortuitorum', 1547), the 'Forme' and 'Myrrour' being correctly by Martin of Braga. His two remaining benefices of Drayton Parslow and Stoke-on-Trent were both filled by new incumbents in the autumn of 1553, and, though the appointments do not mention his previous tenure, it is likely that he died in possession of them in the summer of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 29332


Whittle, Peter Aloysius (1789-1866), antiquary, was born at Inglewhite in the parish of Goosnargh, Lancashire, on 9 July 1789; a Roman Catholic, he took the additional name Aloysius on his confirmation. He was educated at the grammar schools of Goosnargh, Walton-le-Dale, and Preston. After serving an apprenticeship he began business as a bookseller and printer at Preston in 1810, and became an active contributor to various journals. On 9 October 1827 he married Matilda Henrietta (1802/3-1873), daughter of Major Armstrong of Dublin; they had three sons. 
Whittle was the author of many topographical and historical accounts of local towns and historic sites, including: Preston (1821); Southport, Lytham, and Blackpool (1831); Houghton Tower (1845); St Marie's Chapel, Fernyhalgh (1851); Blackburn (1852); and Bolton-le-Moors (1855). He also prepared for the press (but apparently never published) many works, including a compendium of botany, a history of Wigan, and some lectures on poetry. Widely read, and largely self-taught, he was an industrious writer who accumulated considerable amounts of information, but his books were criticized for their poor arrangement, lack of citation of authorities used, and unacknowledged use of the work of other authors. It was said that his Preston history was superior to his other works on account of it being overseen by helpers ('Preston Guardian'). Although he styled himself FSA, he was not a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
After giving up his business in 1851, Whittle lived in Bolton for some years before moving to Mount Vernon, Liverpool. In 1858 the prime minister, Lord Derby, gave him a civil-list pension of $50 a year for his services to literature. He also made a number of applications to the Royal Literary Fund. Whittle died on 7 January 1866 at his home in Tillotson Street, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 29333


Wittleseye, William (d. 1374), archbishop of Canterbury, was nephew to Simon Islep, likewise archbishop, a kinship that provided the foundation for much of Wittleseye's ecclesiastical career. His family possibly had Northamptonshire associations; his will mentions his chapel at Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire. His date of birth is unrecorded. In 1351 he named an illegitimate brother, Roger Elingdon, and identified Reginald Neuton and Roger Herleston as kinsmen. His will names William and Ralph (the latter his chamberlain) as relatives; the former was probably the William Wittleseye the elder, who died before 1363. 
The first secure references to Wittleseye appear in the 1330s. He was master of arts, probably of Oxford, by 1335, when he acquired his first known benefice, the rectory of Meesdon, Hertfordshire. Others followed, some of them cathedral canonries (at Lincoln, Exeter, Lichfield, and Chichester), others rectories and canonries in lesser collegiate churches. The most significant was the archdeaconry of Huntingdon, held from 1337. His early ecclesiastical career was interspersed with continued activity as a scholar, but no known writings survive. In 1348 Pope Clement VI granted him permission to study civil law at a university for three years. This he presumably did at Cambridge, where he had lodgings that year. In 1349 he was described as bachelor of both laws, and probably then incepted for his doctorate in civil law at Cambridge. On 10 September 1349 he was admitted as master of Peterhouse, Cambridge; he remained in post until 1352, but later moved to Oxford, where he was apparently teaching in 1360. By then he was a professor and doctor of both laws. 
Wittleseye's university connections continued after his elevation to the episcopate. In 1367 he obtained a papal bull freeing Oxford University from the obligation to obtain confirmation of the chancellor's election from the bishop of Lincoln. As archbishop of Canterbury he was embroiled in the affairs of Canterbury College. In October 1370 he and his 'satraps' were considered hostile to the monastic hold there; nevertheless, in July 1371 Wittleseye appointed a monk as college warden, and in 1372 confirmed the appropriation of Pagham church to the foundation. His debt to Cambridge was acknowledged with the bequest of his books to Peterhouse. 
Wittleseye's links with his archiepiscopal uncle were critical. In late 1350 he was Islep's envoy to the curia at Avignon, and was among the archbishop's proctors for 'ad limina' visits in 1352 and 1358; in 1351 Islep appointed him proctor before the 'parlement' of Paris. From 1353 until 1359 he appears as the archbishop's chancellor; he also acted as commissary-general, and received numerous specific commissions. He became official of the court of Canterbury on 25 July 1360, remaining in post until his consecration as bishop of Rochester. There is little sign of involvement with secular administration, although he acted as Edward III's emissary to Avignon in 1353. In 1351 he was described as a councillor of both Mary de St Pol, countess of Pembroke (died 1377), and of the abbot and convent of Spalding (who supported his request for a papal provision). By then he was also petitioning the pope on his own behalf, and as patron of other clerics. 
On 23 October 1360 Wittleseye was elected bishop of Rochester, to succeed John Sheppey. Rochester's dependence on Canterbury suggests that Islep had a hand in the appointment. Nevertheless, formal confirmation took time. Papal provision was delayed until 3 July 1361. Spiritualities were released on 28 November, the temporalities held from the crown on 13 December; those held from the archbishopric probably followed on 25 December with his profession of obedience. Consecration occurred at Otford, Kent, on 6 February 1362. 
Wittleseye's tenure of Rochester was uneventful. He spent much of his time with Archbishop Islep, for whom he celebrated all Canterbury ordinations until shortly after his translation to Worcester. The papal bull for that appointment was issued on 6 March 1364, temporalities being released on 28 June. His enthronement was, however, delayed until 11 May 1365. Again, the register suggests an uneventful pontificate, during which he apparently spent most of his time in the diocese. On 11 October 1368 another translation occurred, to succeed Simon Langham at Canterbury after Edward III had forced his resignation following his nomination as a cardinal. The bull was received on 13 January 1369, temporalities were restored on the 15th, and enthronement took place on 17 June. Wittleseye held the primacy until his death at Lambeth Palace on 5 or 6 June 1374. He apparently fell ill soon after his translation, and remained an invalid thereafter. Whatever hopes were held of him must soon have faded. Nevertheless, he did not totally avoid controversy. The 'Eulogium historiarum' records a confrontation with Edward, the Black Prince, at a great council which, if not fictitious (as sometimes alleged), probably occurred in June 1373. In a debate on papal authority in England, notably concerned with King John's submission, and perhaps linked to papal claims to taxation, Wittleseye is first recorded as supporting the papal stance, but then as backing down after a heated exchange with the prince. 
Wittleseye's will, made on his deathbed, was proved on 13 June 1374. To Peterhouse he left his books on theology and both laws, and also those acquired from his kinsman William; some remain there. He was buried in Canterbury Cathedral, his monumental tomb remaining until 1787. On 2 February 1371 he had founded a chantry in the hospital of St Nicholas, Harbledown, Kent, which continued until 1548. 
Little evidence of Wittleseye's character remains. The records of his administration are unremarkable, at Canterbury perhaps because of his illness. Despite being Islep's protege, he must have had qualities that made him more acceptable as an archbishop than other candidates; but they are no longer immediately identifiable. 


@@@@@


doc= 29334


Whitty, Edward Michael (1827-1860), political journalist, was born in London in 1827, the son of Michael James Whitty (1795-1873), a journalist, and his wife, 'nee' Neill. Educated at Liverpool Institute and at Hanover, he began his journalistic career early, working on the provincial press from 1844. In 1846 he became a shorthand gallery reporter in the House of Commons, writing the parliamentary summary for 'The Times' until 1849. During the same period he was the London correspondent for the 'Liverpool Journal'. He worked for the 'Daily News' from 1849 until 1852, when he became an editor at 'The Leader', working with George Henry Lewes and E. F. S. Pigott. While at 'The Leader' he developed his best-known work -- parliamentary sketch writing. These columns began on 14 August 1852, and ran under the byline 'The stranger in parliament' from 13 November 1852. His highly accurate character sketches, written in an 'habitually irreverent' tone, with a certain 'pungency of expression', were received with delight or disgust, depending on the personality and sensibilities of the reader. Their style and tone were generally acknowledged to have been a strong influence on later parliamentary sketch writers, notably Grenville Murray. The early and mid-1850s were the high point of Whitty's career, and selections of his sketches were published as 'History of the Session, 1852-3' (1854; reprinted as 'St Stephen's in the Fifties', 1886), 'The Derbyites and the Coalition' (1854), and 'The Governing Classes of Great Britain: Political Portraits' (1854; expanded and reprinted 1859). The phrase 'governing classes' was often attributed to him, although Carlyle had used it earlier. His sketches of party leaders in 'The Governing Classes' were especially ascerbic. Of Palmerston (who was fifty-six at the time) he wrote, 'Youth, in all its virtues, as well as with all its vices, is the principle characteristic of Lord Palmerston' ('Governing Classes', 129). He berated Gladstone for his seriousness and what he saw as his blinkered attention to his scholarly work. Of Disraeli's vanity he wrote, 'He does not care for abuse: -- let us then abuse him' (ibid., rev. edn, 1859, 208). 
In 1857 Whitty argued with Lewes and Pigott and left 'The Leader' to become editor of the 'Northern Whig' in Belfast. He satirized the other 'Leader' editors and their circle in his novel 'Friends of Bohemia, or, Phases of London Life' (1857), which was first seen as a critique of literary dandyism, but later as a bitter and unnecessary attack on old friends. He left the 'Northern Whig' and returned to London in 1858. His wife and two children died in 1859. Whitty was already a heavy drinker by the late 1850s, and this tragedy seems to have worsened this behaviour. Some of his friends became so fearful for his health that they convinced him to accept their offer of passage on a temperance ship to Melbourne, where Whitty would be able to get work on the newspaper 'The Argus'. He left England in late 1859. While on the passage to Australia, Whitty drank some of the ship's doctor's medicinal alcohol. It nearly killed him immediately, but he survived to land in Melbourne. The effects of this poisoning were the most likely cause of his death at the house of a relative, soon after arriving, on 21 February 1860. A few years later, a monument to him was raised in Melbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 29335


Whitty, Michael James (1795-1873), newspaper editor and proprietor, born in Enniscorthy, Wexford, was the son of a corn merchant and owner of some vessels trading from that port. Whitty was intended for the priesthood, but did not complete his studies. In 1821 he commenced his literary career in London, and among his earliest friends were Sir James Bacon and George Cruikshank. He was appointed editor of the 'London and Dublin Magazine' in 1823, and in its first volume appeared the substance of a work which he later revised and published about 1870 as 'Robert Emmet', with a prefatory note signed M. J. W. He remained editor of the magazine until 1827. From 1823 to 1829 he contributed largely to Irish periodical literature, and was an ardent advocate for Catholic emancipation. He published anonymously in 1824 two volumes of 'Tales of Irish Life', with illustrations by Cruikshank. These stories depicted the customs and condition of the people of his homeland, and were a great success, being reprinted in America and also translated into French and German. 
Whitty began his connection with Liverpool in January 1830, when he accepted the post of editor of the 'Liverpool Journal'. He vacated this position in February 1836 on his appointment as chief constable of the borough. He had previously been superintendent of the nightly watch. During his twelve years' tenure of the office he perfected the organization of the police force and formed an efficient fire brigade. On his retirement he was presented by the town council with the sum of $1000 in recognition of his services. 
Whitty's connection with the 'Liverpool Journal' had not been wholly severed during this period of his life, and in 1848 he bought the paper and resumed his literary work. For many years he acted as the Liverpool correspondent and agent of the 'Daily News'. In 1851 he was a witness before the parliamentary commission appointed to inquire into the 'Newspaper Stamp Act', and he vigorously advocated the abolition of the stamp act, the advertisement duty, and the duty on paper. On the removal of these taxes he issued in 1855 the 'Daily Post', the first penny daily paper published in the United Kingdom. 'Whitty's Guide to Liverpool' was also published from that office in 1868. 
Whitty sold both his newspapers in 1869, and the last few years of his life were spent in retirement at Windermere Terrace, Prince's Park, Liverpool. He died there on 10 June 1873, and was buried at Anfield beside his wife, who was the sister of E. B. Neill, London correspondent of the 'Liverpool Albion'. He was survived by his daughter, Anna Whitty, and his son, Edward Michael Whitty. 


@@@@@


doc= 29336


Whitworth, Charles, Baron Whitworth (bap. 1675, d. 1725), diplomatist, was possibly born at Blore Pike, near Eccleshall, Staffordshire, and was baptized on 14 October 1675 in his maternal grandfather's church at Wilmslow, Cheshire. He was the eldest of the six sons of Richard Whitworth (died 1718) of Blore Pike, and his wife, Anne, the daughter of the Revd Francis Moseley. He spent his childhood at the family home of Batchacre Park, Adbaston, Staffordshire. After Westminster School (queen's scholar, 1690) he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1694 (BA 1699, fellow 1700). On graduation he became secretary to George Stepney, envoy at Berlin, who had attended the same foundations and who was at that time the best-informed Englishman in the affairs of the Holy Roman empire. In this expertise Whitworth was Stepney's successor, and already in November 1701 was 'fitly qualified' to act as British aide to Cardinal Lamberg, the Holy Roman emperor's chief commissary at the congress of Regensburg. In February 1702 Whitworth's warrant was signed, but that 'these credentials [were] ready sooner than his money' was, as for all contemporary British diplomats, Whitworth's plight now and throughout his career (BL, Add. MS 37353, fols. 1-3). 
Whitworth stood in for Stepney at Vienna when the latter was absent from his ambassadorial duties there, until in September 1704 he was appointed envoy-extraordinary to Russia, where, so Tsar Peter I commented to Whitworth in May 1705, 'for some considerable time no Englishman had appeared with a public character'. Whitworth on his journey from Vienna had been able to meet high incidental expenses only by drawing heavily on his father, expenses exacerbated by time spent discovering the tsar's whereabouts. His initial commission was to attempt regularization in Anglo-Russian commercial relations by remedying the Russia Company's mismanagement of its award (1698) of the tobacco monopoly in Russia. A commercial treaty with Russia was not achieved in Whitworth's lifetime, but that the tobacco monopoly business was resolved between 1707 and 1711 owed much to his assiduity and resource. In 1708 he had to handle Russian sensibilities over an arrest for debt in London of the tsar's emissary, Matveyev, who had been sent to Queen Anne in 1707 to seek British mediation in the Great Northern War between Tsar Peter and Charles XII of Sweden, when the power of the latter was increasingly threatening the very survival of Petrine Russia. But the triumph of Russian arms over Sweden at Poltava in July 1709 transformed the scene in eastern Europe, and recognition of this change was signalled in London by Whitworth's elevation to ambassadorial status in February 1710. 
While Whitworth remained formally accredited to Russia until November 1712, the course of events in northern and eastern Europe necessitated commissions for him in Berlin, Vienna, the Palatinate, and The Hague. Augustus of Saxony-Poland, with electoral responsibilities newly accorded by the new emperor, Charles VI, was himself a participant in the Great Northern War, with consequent prejudice to British commercial interests in Danzig; Tsar Peter's peripatetic activity in Brandenburg and Bohemia following his Turkish peace of July 1711 and Russian resentment at the Western powers' apparent disregard of Russia's Balkan vulnerability furnished Whitworth with sufficiently demanding briefs between May and October 1711. Already in 1710 the elector of Hanover, statutorily designated successor to the ailing Queen Anne, and the future George I, had entered into a friendship treaty with Russia with an eye to territorial gains from Sweden in Germany. However, in the face of Russian importunacy Whitworth always upheld the primacy for Britain of her friendship with Sweden, and on 15 April 1711 he wrote to Henry St John with a summary of the current Russian temper: 'on one side their vanity and insatiate desire for new conquests, on the other the fear of losing what is already gained, hang on them like an ague' ('Sbornik', 61.177). His 'Account of Russia as it was in the Year 1710', though not published until 1758, was soon available in manuscript to the ministry at home. Succinct and perceptive, it was a survey of Petrine Russia which held its readership through to the century's end and beyond. Though a whig by affiliation, Whitworth afforded unimpeachable counsel to the tory government on his return home in 1713 as to how a beleaguered Sweden might be cajoled into an accommodation with her Western allies. 
In April 1714 Whitworth was posted to Augsburg to observe the Franco-imperial peace negotiations at Baden that summer, and in the autumn he returned to Regensburg as British minister to the imperial diet. This accreditation lasted until August 1716, when he was appointed envoy at Berlin. In May 1717 he was seconded to The Hague on account of the stubborn refusal of the Dutch to respect the British trade embargo with Sweden and their obdurate adherence to neutrality in international affairs following the costly war with France. Whitworth was also instructed, along with Admiral Sir John Norris, to undertake a mission to the tsar while he was in the United Provinces, its purpose being to further a commercial treaty without a political commitment, and to steer the tsar away from blandishing France and opening his own channel of communication with Charles XII. Whitworth from the outset was sceptical about the mission, which indeed yielded no result; but from then until his return to Berlin in May 1719 he remained in the United Provinces, endeavouring through the thickets of Dutch internal politics to implicate the republic with its formal allies Britain and France (the triple alliance) in plans to serve the interests of the emperor, Charles VI, not only in the contentious Southern Netherlands but against Spain in the Mediterranean (the projected Quadruple Alliance). In November 1717 Whitworth was frustratedly to observe 'this state jogs along like a resty jade, a whip and a spur make him advance a step or two, but 'ere you are aware he stops short again and your trouble is to begin' (C. Whitworth to G. Tilson, 8 Nov 1717, TNA: PRO, State Papers Holland 258). 
Whitworth's return to Berlin in 1719 was occasioned by Lord Stanhope's success in London in finally overcoming Hanoverian antagonisms towards Prussia. In 1720 he married the comtesse de Vaulgremont (died 1734), the daughter of a government official in French-speaking Flanders; the marriage was childless. He was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron Whitworth of Galway in January 1721 and entered parliament in 1722 as a member for Newport, Isle of Wight. Whitworth had remained at Berlin until June 1722, opining that 'as for the Czar himself, all England has to wish is only a common intercourse of civility and trade. All further engagements are unnecessary and may be dangerous' (C. Whitworth to C. Townshend, 14 Oct 1721, TNA: PRO, State Papers Prussia 90/15). Though a sick man, he served at the congress of Cambrai (1723-5), an attempt to resolve imperial issues outstanding since the formation of the Quadruple Alliance. This was rendered abortive by the Madrid-Vienna axis of 1725. He died at his house in Gerard Street, London, on 23 October 1725 and was buried on 6 November in the south aisle of Westminster Abbey. His barony lapsed on his death. His friendships suggest an engaging and sagacious man, but Whitworth was firstly a most accomplished diplomat and an unsurpassed interpreter of the Russia of his day. 


@@@@@


doc= 29337


Whitworth, Sir Charles (c.1721-1778), politician and writer, was the only son of Francis Whitworth MP (1684-1742) of Leybourne, Kent, and Joan Windham of Clarewell, Gloucestershire. He was the nephew of Charles Whitworth, Baron Whitworth. He was educated at Westminster School (1730-38) and proceeded to Lincoln's Inn in 1738. On his father's death in 1742 he inherited the family estate at Leybourne, and in 1747 he was returned as MP for Minehead, the constituency his father had also represented. On 1 June 1749 he married Martha (died 1786), eldest daughter of Richard Shelley, commissioner of the stamp office, and niece by marriage of the duke of Newcastle. They had seven children who survived childhood: Catharine ('b'. 1750), Charles Whitworth, later Earl Whitworth (1752-1825), Mary ('b'. 1753), Francis (1754-1805), later a lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Artillery, Richard ('b'. 1755), who was a captain of the Royal Navy and was lost at sea, Priscilla ('b'. 1760), and Anna Barbara ('b'. 1763). 
Whitworth hoped that his connection with the duke of Newcastle would lead to some favour and he continually pressed the duke for appointment to a government office. His persistence was rewarded when he was awarded a secret service pension of $400 p.a. in February 1755. In August 1758 he persuaded Newcastle to appoint him lieutenant-governor of Gravesend and Tilbury Fort in lieu of his pension. At the general election in 1761, under pressure from Newcastle, he stood down as MP for Minehead in favour of Lord Egremont's candidature and stood successfully for Bletchingley instead. He was returned once more at Minehead in 1768 and represented the constituency until 1774. 
As an MP, Whitworth played little part in debate and spoke only on practical matters such as the payment of militia officers, with which he was personally concerned, having served as a major in the West Kent militia since 1759. In May 1768 he secured a post for which he had previously stood in 1765, when he was elected chairman of the twin committees of supply and ways and means, to which 'money chair' was attached a secret service pension of $500 p.a. This was a position for which he was well qualified, having published in 1763 'A Collection of the Supplies and Ways and Means from the Revolution to the Present Time'. He was knighted on 19 August 1768. He had found his niche in politics, and was a very competent finance chairman for the decade until his death. To accommodate government wishes he continued to be shuffled from one parliamentary seat to another. At the general election in 1774 he was dissuaded by Lord North from standing again at Minehead and was instead returned for East Looe, but in January 1775 he moved to Saltash. 
Whitworth wrote a number of political and historical works of reference. In 1764 he published a directory of members of successive parliaments from 1660 to 1761. This was followed by a 'List of English, Scots and Irish Nobility' (1765) and a historical account of the price of wheat in 1768. He demonstrated his grasp of public finance in his 'Public Accounts of Services and Grants, 1721-1771' (1771). He also contributed to the 1766 edition of David Lloyd's 'State Worthies' the 'Characters of the kings and queens of England', and added improvements to the third edition of Timothy Cunningham's 'History of the Customs, Aids and Subsidies of England' (1778). Chosen one of the vice-presidents of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, at its meeting on 28 February 1755, he supported the society for the rest of his life. Whitworth died at Bath on 22 August 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 29338


Whitworth, Charles, Earl Whitworth (1752-1825), diplomatist and politician, was born at Leybourne Grange, Kent, on 19 May 1752, and baptized there on 29 May, the eldest of the three sons (there were also four daughters) of Sir Charles Whitworth (c.1721-1778), MP, and his wife, Martha (died 1786), the daughter of Richard Shelley of Conduit Street, London, latterly commissioner of the stamp office, and the niece of Sir John Shelley, fourth baronet. After education at Tonbridge School from 1761 to 1765, Whitworth, like his father, initially chose an army career, and on 30 March 1772 he became an ensign in the 1st foot guards. He served in North America in 1776-7. On 22 May 1781 he became a captain, and on 8 April 1783, by exchange, was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 104th regiment. Later in that year the duke of Dorset was appointed ambassador at Paris and Whitworth, who ventured there, impressed Queen Marie-Antoinette by his handsome figure and insinuating manners. She and Dorset are credited by the memoirist Sir Nathaniel Wraxall with obtaining for him his first diplomatic posting. 
Whitworth left England as envoy-extraordinary to Poland in December 1785, pausing at Hanover with a letter of introduction from George, prince of Wales, who assured his brother Frederick that he and Whitworth were convivial intimates and that 'a more gentlemanlike, liberal-minded man never existed' ('Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', 1.151). He reached Warsaw on 21 January 1786, and spent two years there during the uneasy reign of Stanislas Poniatowski. Having been ordered to investigate any moves to carve up Poland or Turkey, he obtained little information, though he was sent to Kiev in April 1787 to observe Poniatowski's meeting with the empress of Russia. There he met Catherine, who declined political discussion: he had been authorized to suggest an Anglo-Russian alliance. 
In November 1788 Whitworth was transferred to Russia in the same capacity with this objective. He was at first amiably received by the empress. In 1790, however, Russian successes in war against the Turks alarmed Pitt's ministry, which, following Whitworth's advice that Russia was vulnerable, proposed sending an armada to the Baltic to force Catherine to give up the Black Sea port of Ochakov. The empress was defiant, and Whitworth now warned his government of the uncertain prospects of success. He was nevertheless ordered on 27 March 1791 to present Catherine with an ultimatum, only to have it countermanded when Pitt encountered strong opposition in parliament. In June 1791 Whitworth applied to succeed to the Istanbul embassy, which was offered to him in March 1793, whereupon he declined. His impact on the Russo-Turkish peace treaty of Jassy in January 1792 was limited -- he had in any case been assisted in negotiations by William Augustus Fawkener. Nevertheless, he was nominated a knight of the Bath on 17 September 1793 and was invested by the empress on 17 November. 
The empress's espousal of the counter-revolutionary alliance against France improved Whitworth's position, though his attempts to halt the second partition of Poland in 1793 failed; furthermore, Lord Grenville, the foreign secretary, disliked Catherine's insisting on the restoration of the Bourbon royal family in France. In February 1795 Whitworth negotiated an Anglo-Russian treaty of alliance whereby Russia fielded 65,000 troops in exchange for a British subsidy. Catherine died before its implementation, and the emperor Paul, her successor in 1796, was at first hostile to the alliance, despite professing the contrary to Whitworth. By July 1798 French aggression in Malta had caused the emperor to change his mind, and Whitworth resumed negotiations successfully. In December a provisional alliance, to be joined by Prussia and Austria, was achieved. This was snagged by Prussian aloofness and by subsidy arrangements for Austria, and in March 1799 Whitworth was officially rebuked for his unauthorized negotiations with the Austrian Count Cobenzl, which were supposed in London to have culminated in a signed agreement for a new loan to Austria. This nearly cost him his post, which was offered to Lord Bathurst. He was saved by the intercession of Count Vorontsov, Russian ambassador in London, who perceived that Paul's resentment of Austrian interference might wreck the alliance. 
The treaty with Russia was approved by Grenville, and in April, Russian troops were dispatched to the west. Whitworth was rewarded by the emperor with the order of Malta and in July 1799 an Irish peerage was earmarked for him. Later in that year Paul, irritated by British interference in Malta, changed sides again. By 4 April 1800, when he became Baron Whitworth of Newport Pratt, co. Galway, Whitworth was under orders to leave Russia, where Paul snubbed him. Relations between the two countries were in suspense for a year. Whitworth left St Petersburg on 8 June and travelled via Stockholm. On his return to London he presented a modest memorandum on the state of Russia to Grenville, denouncing the unreliability of Paul, contrasted with Catherine. He found employment, in August, as envoy to Denmark, which as a party, like Russia, to the armed neutrality of the north, was resisting British searches of its vessels. He had not succeeded, while in Russia, in deterring the neutrality's threat to British interests, but he was now accompanied by a naval squadron under Vice-Admiral Dickson, which waited in Elsinore (Helsingor) Roads to reinforce his mission. The Danes gave way on 29 August. After returning to England on 27 September 1800, Whitworth was, as promised the previous year, sworn of the privy council on 5 November. 
On 7 April 1801 Whitworth married, by special licence at Dorset House, Westminster, Arabella Diana Sackville, the dowager duchess of Dorset (1767-1825), the daughter and coheir of Sir Charles Cope, second baronet, of Brewerne, Oxfordshire, and the widow of his old acquaintance John Frederick, third duke of Dorset. Her mother, Catherine Jenkinson, 'nee' Bishopp (1744-1827), was the second wife of the first earl of Liverpool. They had no children. Thanks to his wife's ample resources, Whitworth's financial future was secured. He had brought home debts from Russia, and further embarrassment in the shape of the Russian Countess Gerbetzov (elsewhere rendered Gerebstov), who claimed to have supported him financially in Russia. She set off for London with her husband, too late to impede the marriage, but not too late, according to Wraxall, to accept $10,000 from the bride for quiet possession of Whitworth, although no surviving evidence corroborates this. Whitworth now had hopes of a peace-making embassy to France, though this was awarded in October 1801 to Lord Cornwallis, with the understanding that Whitworth should proceed to Paris once peace was achieved. He became a deputy lieutenant of Kent on 20 January 1802. 
Following the peace of Amiens, Whitworth was duly posted to Paris on 10 September 1802. Arriving on 16 November in receipt of revised and sterner instructions, he was presented on 7 December to the first consul, Napoleon Bonaparte, whose royal pretensions were already rumoured, and his wife to Josephine Bonaparte at St Cloud on the 11th. From January 1803 the British government under Addington was increasingly uneasy about Bonaparte's aggressive foreign policy. After getting nowhere with Talleyrand, the French foreign minister, whom Bonaparte had instructed to be haughty to him, Whitworth was further disappointed in a lengthy interview with Bonaparte on 18 February. Bonaparte accused Britain of breach of treaty for failing, as yet, to evacuate Malta or Egypt. This alleged perfidy spoiled the prospects Bonaparte hinted at of France and Britain carving up the world between them, and was the basis of further criticism by Bonaparte at a public levee on 13 March 1803. Whitworth was not given a chance to make any substantial counter-allegations, though he replied diplomatically, refusing to be browbeaten. British visitors among the 200 persons present were addressed by Bonaparte in between barbs directed at Whitworth, and gave him credit for his patience. Bonaparte, who according to one British witness did not raise his voice, afterwards tried to discredit exaggerated reports of the occasion. Despite an attempt to patch up a settlement over Malta through Joseph Bonaparte and Talleyrand, there was no question of conciliating Napoleon, whose politeness to Whitworth amid the diplomatic corps on 4 April followed his own very unpunctual appearance. It was generally supposed that he wished to delay a complete rupture until his intended invasion of Britain was better prepared. Whitworth was ordered to present a British ultimatum, the terms of which he later criticized. He was prevented by indisposition from meeting Bonaparte again on 1 May and, after several delays in the granting of his passport, left Paris on 12 May, six days before hostilities were resumed by the pre-emptive British declaration of war. 
Although Whitworth hankered after further employment, he was placed at a disadvantage. He had no seat in either house of parliament, though his wife was patron of East Grinstead borough. In 1801 his only political attachment had been to his chief Grenville, and his friends, but in the meantime Grenville, who was unconvinced of Whitworth's abilities, and his cousin Pitt, both out of office, had drifted apart. On 9 May 1804, when Pitt returned to power without Grenville, Whitworth wrote unsuccessfully to the premier seeking employment, if only as joint postmaster-general, asking no salary beyond his current pension. In July 1803 he had, as a local figurehead of resistance to Bonaparte, become lieutenant-colonel of the Holmsdale battalion of 600 infantry volunteers, based on Maidstone. Having settled at Knole since their marriage, he and his duchess, both described by the diarist Joseph Farington as having plain and easy manners, were popular in Kent, and were commended for their charity, notably in providing employment for the elderly poor. In 1805 there was some talk of Whitworth's taking the prince of Wales's livery, but the first indication of advancement came, not during Grenville's ministry of 1806, but from the duke of Portland's, which on 15 April 1807 appointed him a lord at the Board of Trade. As such, he complained to Thomas Lawrence, while sitting for his portrait, about the excessive granting of licences to trade with Napoleonic Europe. He had declined the offer by the foreign secretary, George Canning, of a diplomatic mission to Denmark in September 1807 for private reasons, which gossip confined to distaste for Canning. His prospects changed in 1812 when Lord Liverpool, his mother-in-law's stepson, became premier. On 2 March 1813 he was made a lord of the bedchamber to the king ($1000 a year), and on 3 June 1813 he became viceroy of Ireland ($30,000 a year). This had been declined by the duke of Beaufort and Lord Yarmouth: the former was present when the prince regent ostentatiously toasted Whitworth for his public-spirited acceptance of office. On 14 June he was created a British peer, as Viscount Whitworth of Adbaston, Staffordshire, his ancestral county. 
Whitworth was ceremonially installed at Dublin on 26 August 1813 and was created LLD (Dublin) on 23 September. His tenure was made easier by the continuation in office of his predecessor's chief secretary, Robert Peel, and the civil secretary, William Gregory, both of whom found him congenial: Peel, who wished to return to England in 1814, was persuaded by him to remain. In patronage matters he leaned on their experience and insistence on straight dealing, and apart from pensions worth $700 a year for an impoverished sister of his and a nephew's widow, both approved by Peel, he dispensed no personal patronage. Captain Francis Beaufort informed Joseph Farington in 1817 that the viceroy gave 'satisfaction to all and [was] popular from the prudence and justice of his administration without the aid of feastings and other such means of acquiring popularity. The Duchess is likewise much liked from her easy and cheerful manner' (Farington, 'Diary', 14.5001). He succeeded in dissolving the Catholic board, at a time when it had become unpopular, in 1814, and in the same year he saw through the renewal of the 'Insurrection Act', followed by the 'Peace Preservation Act', which introduced a constabulary. 
The unfortunate death of the duchess's only son, George, the fourth duke of Dorset, on 14 February 1815, after a fall from his horse during a visit to Dublin, led to a leave of absence, during which the three lords justices deputizing for Whitworth were unable to prevent the transfer of 5000 troops from Ireland to Flanders. On his return on 12 May 1815, the deficit was made good by embodying the militia. He was created GCB on 2 June 1815, and on 25 November 1815 was made Baron Adbaston and Earl Whitworth. He had meant to depart after three years, and had threatened to do so in 1816 if an Irish peerage were granted to George Canning, but he agreed to remain until summer 1817 so that arrangements to consolidate the English and Irish treasuries could be concluded. As it was, he was faced with an ominous Irish famine before he left. He regarded the Irish family connections of his successor, Lord Talbot, as a disadvantage to a viceroy, and was relieved when Peel again agreed to extend his stay. He handed over to Talbot on 9 October 1817. 
Although he had no taste for further public office, or for the House of Lords, Whitworth remained open to suggestion. In April 1819 he paid an unofficial but stately visit to Paris with the duchess, visiting the restored Bourbons, and was there again in October, 'en route' for Naples, both capitals being political hotspots at the time. He had been high steward of Stratford upon Avon in place of his stepson since 26 January 1816 and became FSA on 18 November 1819. On 19 July 1821 he was assistant lord sewer at George IV's coronation, and later that year, ineffectually, was shortlisted by Lord Liverpool to recommend to the king for the lord chamberlainship. Thereafter he spent most of his time at Knole, which he had embellished and planted, and where he died after three days' illness on 13 May 1825. He was buried at St Nicholas's, Sevenoaks, which he had rebuilt. The duchess was his heir to an estate valued at under $70,000. She died on 1 August the same year, making special provision for the preservation of Knole, where a portrait of Whitworth by Hoppner, a drawing by Edridge, and a bust by Kirk are preserved. A bust by Carew adorns his monumental inscription in St Nicholas's, Sevenoaks. Lawrence's portrait of him is in Paris, at the Louvre. 
Whitworth was praised in an obituary as 'one of the best examples of an English nobleman' ('GM', 95/2, 1825, 82). There is no doubt that he looked the part, and that he sought to act it. This obituary remarked on similarities between him and his kinsman the first Baron Whitworth, whose papers he deposited at Knole. The latter certainly excelled as a diplomatist, and, while both served in Russia, the first baron wrote a notable account of his experiences there, later published, while Charles junior, whose father had been an author, sent a few pages, coloured by disappointment, to Lord Grenville. His long stay in Russia was fraught with difficulties in dealing with its autocratic rulers, especially with the vacillating Paul, who alternately fawned on him or spurned him, eventually dismissing him with a sense of failure. What nearly led to dismissal by his own government in 1799 was a misjudgement of his own, though its gravity was exaggerated by the slowness of communications between St Petersburg and London, sometimes taking six weeks, and resulting in prior information being received from nearer sources. He was, professionally, dutiful and dogged and, if astute, was at that time not particularly perspicacious. 
The rebuke by Bonaparte on 13 March 1803 was the most widely reported event in Whitworth's career, and of course Bonaparte stole a show he had himself devised. In these circumstances, the dignified demeanour of the diplomatist taken off his guard was so frequently acknowledged as to earn him retrospective credit. In 1922 the 'Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy' opined that no important negotiations had ever been so mismanaged as those with Bonaparte dictated by Addington and Hawkesbury in 1802-3, but from this censure exempted Whitworth, 'who, throughout, tempered firmness with discretion, manliness with extreme forbearance' (Ward and Gooch, 1.325). Even so, judgements of Whitworth's diplomatic acumen are various. His subsequent progression from an Irish barony to a British earldom excited envy among his peers; yet unlike some of them he could point to public services, both diplomatic and viceregal, which justified it. He could also have pointed to the difficulty caused him by his relative poverty in a farflung diplomatic posting previous to his marriage, when his personal morality was suddenly impugned. The sting was taken out of Countess Gerbetzov's case against him by his wife's resolute backing, but other ladies were less convinced. Mrs Fitzherbert, who had been secretly married to the prince of Wales, told Thomas Creevey in 1805 that Whitworth was a monster, albeit a remorseful one, and hinted darkly that she could tell him far more to make him think so. Lady Bessborough also thought he had treated the Russian countess very badly. If it were true that she, a married woman unhappy with her husband, had spent considerable sums of money on Whitworth in Russia, with a promise of eventual marriage, there would be a case to answer, but doubts were thrown on this story in an article in the 'Quarterly Review' for December 1836, which dubs the lady in question Gerepzov. As the sister of the Empress Catherine's last favourite, Prince Platon Zubov, she might be credited with a role in restoring the humiliated Whitworth to Catherine's favourable attention after the Ochakov crisis, and possibly with obtaining political information for him, perhaps at some expense, but the rest has become unattested speculation. 


@@@@@


doc= 29339


Whitworth, Sir Joseph, baronet (1803-1887), mechanical engineer and machine tool manufacturer, was born at Stockport on 21 December 1803, the son of Charles Whitworth (1782-1870) and Sarah (1780-1814), daughter of Joseph Hulse. His father was a loom framemaker in the textile industry who, when his wife died in 1814, put his three young children in the care of foster parents and took advantage of an offer to train for the Congregationalist ministry. Joseph, who was eleven at the time, seems never to have spoken to his father again. 
Whitworth's childhood was extremely hard, but he appears early to have shown aptitude in working with machinery. He formed the conviction that he would be best able to develop this skill in Manchester, and took the first opportunity to move there in search of engineering employment. There in 1821 he was employed by Crighton & Co., a leading firm of textile machine-makers, as a working mechanic. His first ambition was to be a good workman, and he often in later years said that the happiest day he ever had was when he first earned journeyman's wages. 
In February 1825 Whitworth married Fanny Ankers (1800-1870), the daughter of a bargemaster of Tarvin in Cheshire, and shortly afterwards entered the workshop of Maudslay and Field in the Westminster Bridge Road, London. Henry Maudslay recognized his exceptional talent, and placed him next to one of his most capable mechanics, John Hampson, a Yorkshireman. It was while working for Maudslay that, after intensive effort, Whitworth discovered the means of creating a truly plane surface, by means of which for all kinds of sliding tools frictional resistance might be reduced to a minimum. 
The most accurate planes, which were essential in the manufacture of steam engine valves, printing press tables, and in lathes and planing machines, had hitherto been obtained by first planing and then grinding the surface. 'My first step', Whitworth said, 'was to abandon grinding for scraping. Taking two surfaces as accurate as the planing tool could make them, I coated one of them thinly with colouring matter and rubbed the other over it. Had the two surfaces been true the colouring matter would have spread itself uniformly over the upper one. It never did so, but appeared in spots and patches. These marked the eminences, which I removed with a scraping tool till the surfaces became gradually more coincident. But the coincidence of two surfaces would not prove them to be planes. If the one were concave and the other convex they might still coincide. I got over this difficulty by taking a third surface and adjusting it to both of the others. Were one of the latter concave and the other convex, the third plane could not coincide with both of them. By a series of comparisons and adjustments I made all three surfaces coincide, and then, and not before, knew that I had true planes.' This account gave less credit than was due to Maudslay, who had previously insisted on his workmen using good plane surfaces. But the importance of Whitworth's improvement can hardly be overestimated, for it laid the foundation of an entirely new standard of accuracy in mechanical construction. 
On leaving Maudslay's Whitworth worked at Holtzapffel's, and afterwards at the workshop of Joseph Clement, where Whitworth's aptitude for accurate mechanical work was put to good use in the construction of Charles Babbage's calculating machine. In 1833 he returned to Manchester, where he rented a room with steam power in Chorlton Street, and put up a sign, 'Joseph Whitworth, tool-maker, from London', thus founding a workshop which soon became a model of a mechanical manufacturing establishment. The next twenty years were devoted mainly to the improvement of machine tools, including the duplex lathe, the hollow-box structure, and the quick-return motion and reversing tool in planing machines. These were all displayed and highly commended at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Between 1839 and 1849 he took out fifteen patents for machine tools. 
A natural sequel to the discovery of the true plane was the introduction of a system of measurement of ideal exactness. This was effected between 1840 and 1850 by the conception and development of Whitworth's famous measuring machine. A system of planes was so arranged that of two parallel surfaces the one could be moved nearer to or further from the other by means of a screw, the turns of which measured the distance over which the moving plane advanced or retired. Experience showed that a steel bar held between the two planes would fall if the distance between the surfaces were increased by an extremely small amount. For moving the planes Whitworth used a screw with twenty threads to an inch, forming the axle of a large wheel divided along its circumference into five hundred parts. By this means if the wheel were turned one division, the movable surface was advanced or retired 1/500 of a turn of the screw -- that is by 1/10,000 of an inch. This slight difference was found successfully to make the difference between the steel bar being firmly held and dropping. A more delicate machine, made in 1859, made perceptible a difference of one two-millionth of an inch. 
As this device was gradually perfected, Whitworth was able to elaborate a system of standard measures and gauges, which soon proved of such enormous utility to engineers and opened the way for the production of standardized parts in tools and machinery. But of all the standards introduced by Whitworth, that of the greatest immediate practical utility was his uniform system of screw threads. He explained this system in a paper read to the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1841, entitled 'On a uniform system of screw threads'. Hitherto the screws used in fitting machinery had been manufactured upon no recognized principle or system: each workshop had a type of its own. By collecting an extensive assortment of screw bolts from the different English workshops, Whitworth deduced as a compromise an average pitch of thread for different diameters, and also a mean angle of 55 degree, which he adopted all through the scale of sizes. The advantages of uniformity could not be resisted, and by 1860 the Whitworth system was in general use. The efficacy of Whitworth's innovations was first generally recognized at the Great Exhibition of 1851, where his exhibit of patented tools and inventions gained him the reputation of being the leading mechanical constructor of the time. He also won praise for his invention of a street cleaning machine, which was widely adopted in British towns. 
In 1853 Whitworth was appointed a member of the royal commission to the New York Industrial Exhibition. The incomplete state of the machinery department prevented his reporting upon it, but he made a journey through the industrial districts of the United States, and published upon his return, in conjunction with George Wallis, 'The Industry of the United States in Machinery, Manufactures, and Useful and Ornamental Arts' (1854). In this he drew special attention to the suitability of the machinery which he had seen at the state armoury, Springfield, Massachusetts, for the production of firearms. 
In 1856 Whitworth was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and at the Glasgow meeting delivered an address in which his favourite projects were ably set forth. He deplored the tendency to excessive size and weight in the moving parts of machines and the national loss by over-multiplication of sizes and patterns. He contemplated the advantage that might be derived from decimalizing weights and measures, and this concern led in 1857 to his paper 'On a standard decimal measure of length for engineering work', delivered at the institution. His papers, five in number, each one of which represented a revolution in its subject, were collected in 1858 as a thin volume, 'Miscellaneous Papers on Mechanical Subjects, by Joseph Whitworth, F.R.S.'. Whitworth had been elected to the Royal Society in 1857; he was created LLD of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1863, and DCL Oxford on 17 June 1868. 
Meanwhile, the course of Whitworth's career had been changed by the Crimean War. In 1854 he had been requested by the Board of Ordnance to design and give an estimate for a complete set of machinery for manufacturing rifled muskets. This Whitworth declined to do, as he considered that experiments were required in order to determine what caused the difference between good and bad rifles, what was the proper diameter of the bore, what was the best form of bore, and what the best mode of rifling, before any adequate machinery could be made. Ultimately the government were induced to erect a shooting gallery for Whitworth's use near his home at Fallowfield, Manchester, and experiments began there in March 1855. These showed that the recently adopted Enfield rifle was untrue in almost every particular. In April 1857 Whitworth submitted to official trial a rifle with a hexagonal barrel and.45 inch bore, which in accuracy of fire, in penetration, and in range, 'excelled the Enfield to a degree which hardly leaves room for comparison' ('The Times', 23 April 1857). Whitworth's rifle was not only far superior to any small arm then existing, but it also embodied the principles upon which subsequent improvements were based, namely, reduction of bore (to.45 inch calibre), an elongated projectile, more rapid twist, and extreme accuracy of manufacture. This rifle, after distancing all others in competition, was rejected by a War Office committee as being of too small calibre for a military weapon. Yet in 1869 a similar committee recommended the.45 inch bore as most suitable for military use. 
The inventor found some consolation for the procrastinations of official procedure in the fact that at the open competition promoted by the National Rifle Association in 1860 the Whitworth rifle was adopted as the best-known, and on 2 July 1860 the queen opened the first Wimbledon meeting by firing a Whitworth rifle from a mechanical rest at a range of 400 yards and hitting the bull's-eye. The new rifle was adopted by the French government, and was generally used for target-shooting until the introduction of the Martini-Henry, a rifle in which several of Whitworth's principles were embodied. 
In the construction of cannon Whitworth was equally successful, but again failed to secure their adoption by the British military authorities. In 1862 he made a rifled gun of high power (a 6 mile range with a 250 lb shell). But this gun, despite its unrivalled ballistic power, was rejected by the Ordnance board in 1865. It seems likely that the keen rivalry between Whitworth and Sir William (later Lord) Armstrong in the manufacture of artillery, and the ambivalent attitude of the War Office towards both, substantially retarded the progress of British artillery for nearly twenty years. 
It was after the termination of this 'battle of the guns' that Whitworth made the greatest of his later discoveries. Experience had taught him that hard steel guns were unsafe, and that the safeguard consisted in employing ductile steel. A gun of hard steel, in case of unsoundness, explodes, whereas a gun of ductile steel indicates wear by losing its shape, but does not fly to pieces. When ductile steel, however, is cast into an ingot, its liability to 'honeycomb' or form air-cells is so great as almost to neutralize its superiority. Whitworth now found that the difficulty of obtaining a large and sound casting of ductile steel might be successfully overcome by applying extreme pressure to the fluid metal, while he further discovered that such pressure could best be applied, not by the steam hammer but by means of a hydraulic press. Whitworth steel, as it was styled, was produced in this manner from about 1870, and the virtue of its special application in the manufacture of guns was soon exploited. In 1883 the gun-foundry board of the United States, after paying a visit to Whitworth's large works at Openshaw, near Manchester, gave it as their opinion that the system carried on there surpassed all other methods of forging. 
At the Paris Exhibition of 1867 Whitworth was awarded one of the five 'grands prix' allotted to Great Britain. In September 1868, after witnessing the performance of one of the Whitworth field-guns at Chalons, Napoleon III made him a member of the Legion d'honneur, and about the same time he received the Albert medal of the Society of Arts for his instruments of measurement and uniform standards. 
Whitworth's interest in artillery did not flag, and he continued to make new experiments. He was the first to penetrate armour-plating upwards of 4 inches in thickness, and the first to demonstrate the possibility of exploding shells without using any kind of fuse. In 1873 he gave to the world his own version of the points at issue with the Ordnance department in 'Miscellaneous Papers on Practical Subjects: Guns and Steel'. The unfortunate treatment to which he was subjected was due in part, no doubt, to his plain and inflexible determination. Whitworth always refused to modify a model which he knew to be right out of deference to committees whom he regarded as incomparably his inferiors in technical knowledge. 
Whitworth appears to have become increasingly irascible and domineering as he grew older, but he was always attentive to the welfare of his own workers. In 1874 he converted his extensive works at Manchester into a limited liability company. Whitworth, his foremen, and others in the concern, twenty-three in number, held 92 per cent of the shares, and had practical control; no goodwill was charged, and the plant was taken at a low valuation. At the same time the clerks, draughtsmen, and workmen were encouraged and assisted to take shares of $25 each. Ironically, ten years after his death, on 1 January 1897, the firm was united with that of his great rival Sir William Armstrong at Elswick, with an authorized capital of upwards of $4,000,000. 
As early as 18 March 1868 Whitworth wrote to Disraeli, offering to found thirty scholarships of the annual value of $100 each, to be competed for upon a basis of proficiency in the theory and practice of mechanics. In the following year his generous action and his merits as an inventor were publicly recognized by his being created a baronet. Whitworth's first wife, from whom he appears to have become estranged, died in October 1870, and on 12 April 1871 he married Mary Louisa (1829-1896), daughter of Daniel Broadhurst, and widow of Alfred Orrell of Cheadle. Shortly before his second marriage (though still retaining The Firs, Fallowfield, as his Manchester residence) he purchased an estate at Stancliffe, near Matlock. There, upon an unpromising site, amid a number of quarries, he constructed a wonderful park, and he acquired much local celebrity for his gardens, his trotting horses, and his herd of shorthorns. His iron billiard table (remarkable for its true surface), his lawns, cattle pens, and stables were all 'models'. As he advanced in age Whitworth formed the habit of wintering in the Riviera; but he was not fond of going abroad, and in 1885 he made for himself at Stancliffe a large winter-garden, hoping to spend the winters at home. He passed one winter successfully in Derbyshire, but in October 1886 he went out to Monte Carlo, and there he died on 22 January 1887. Lady Whitworth survived her husband, dying on 26 May 1896 and, there being no children from either marriage, the baronetcy became extinct. The second Lady Whitworth was buried beside her husband in a vault in Darley Dale churchyard. 
For many years before his death Whitworth made no secret of his intention to devote the bulk of his fortune to public and especially educational purposes. But when he died he left the apportionment of his considerable fortune to his wife and trustees. After paying $100,000 to the Department of Science and Art in fulfilment of Whitworth's intention expressed in 1868 of permanently endowing thirty scholarships, the legatees, during the twelve years that elapsed after the testator's death, devoted various sums, amounting in all to $594,416, to educational and charitable purposes. A number of bodies in Manchester benefited especially, including the Whitworth Park and Institute as well as Owens College and the Manchester Technical School. 
Whitworth was a pioneer of modern production engineering, outstanding for his refinement and systemization of engineering methods. His mind was that of an experimentalist. A man of few words, he encountered each problem in mechanics by the remark 'Let us try.' His pioneering experiments with rifles were a striking example of this. While drawing heavily upon the earlier achievements of others in the development of precision engineering, 'he did more than anyone else to bring these standards of accuracy into general engineering practice' (Musson, 'Whitworth and the growth of mass-production engineering', 126). 


@@@@@


doc= 29340


Whood, Isaac (1688/9-1752), portrait painter, practised for many years as a portrait painter and professional copyist in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was a skilful imitator of the style of Sir Godfrey Kneller. He was especially patronized in the 1730s by the duke of Bedford, for whom he painted numerous portraits of members of the Spencer and Russell families to hang at Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire; some of these were copied by Whood from other painters. 
There is a good portrait of Archbishop Wake by Whood at Lambeth Palace, painted in 1736. At Cambridge there are portraits by Whood at Trinity College, including Roger Gale (1738), and Trinity Hall. His portraits of ladies were some of the best of that date. These include, in 1735, 'Anne, Third Duchess of Bedford' and, in 1737, 'Lady Georgina Spencer' (both Woburn Abbey), of which Sir George Scharf commented 'spiritedly painted, with much breadth of treatment' (Scharf, 127). Some of his portraits were engraved in mezzotint, notably one of Laurent Delvaux the sculptor (1734), engraved by Alexander van Haecken (1735), who assisted Whood 'to dress and adorn his pictures with silks satins velvets embroideryes' (Vertue, 'Note books', 125) and finished a portrait of J. M. Rysbrack after Whood's death, and several by John Faber junior in the 1740s. Whood's drawings in chalk or black lead on vellum are of interest, particularly those now known of Dean Swift (NG Ire.) and William Stukeley (1725; Society of Antiquaries, London; 1727; Bodl. Oxf.), and Vertue wrote that he had 'much advanc'd his knowledge & pencil with more freedom and correctnes abundantly' (ibid., 58). In 1743 he executed a series of designs to illustrate Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras'. 
As a portraitist Whood was 'as eminent a figure in that Art, as any of that Profession' and 'a most humorous and agreeable companion' ('Daily Advertiser', 3 March 1752, in Vertue, 'Note books', 160). He was a member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society (1721) and the Society of Antiquaries ('c'.1751). His finances in later years were severely restricted as a result of a lawsuit over an estate. He died in Bloomsbury Square, London, on 24 or 26 February 1752, aged sixty-three; the duke of Bedford paid his funeral expenses. 


@@@@@


doc= 29341


Whorwood, Jane (bap. 1612, d. 1684), royalist agent, was the elder daughter of William Ryder (died 1617) of Charing Cross, Westminster, a Scot and principal harbinger of the royal stables, and Elizabeth de Boussy (died 1659) of Antwerp, laundress to Queen Anne. Jane was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 3 February 1612, her name being entered in the register as Janna. Early in 1619 her mother married James Maxwell (died 1650) of Innerwick, groom of Prince Charles's bedchamber and gentleman usher of the black rod. The couple, who continued to live at Charing, subsequently took Guildford Park, Surrey, as their chief estate five years before Maxwell was ennobled as earl of Dirleton in 1646. Jane's younger sister Anne (1613-1683) later married Sir Thomas Bowyer of Leighthorne and North Mundham, near Chichester; of their two Maxwell half-sisters, Elizabeth (1620-1659) married Lord William Hamilton, soon to become secretary of state for Scotland, and Diana (1622-1675) married Charles Cecil, Viscount Cranborne, the first surviving son of the second earl of Salisbury. Jane, who outlived her sisters, was excluded from their wills, and none of the ten Hamilton and Cecil nieces was named after her, despite her naming her own daughters Diana and Elizabeth in compliment within weeks of her half-sisters' respective weddings. 
In 1634 Jane married Brome Whorwood (1615-1684), heir of Sir Thomas Whorwood of Sandwell, West Bromwich, and of Holton, Oxford, through his wife Ursula, 'nee' Brome. The marriage was arranged in a deal with James Maxwell for a lenient judgment on Sir Thomas in Star Chamber, where he stood indicted for ordering his bailiff to kill a man; Jane's age was misrepresented as nineteen in the marriage licence declaration, probably to conceal that she was nearly four years older than Brome Whorwood; Sir Thomas died on the wedding day. Jane brought to the marriage $2600 in money, plate, and jewels from her stepfather's famed wealth. After the marriage, which probably took place at St Faith's under St Paul's, Brome Whorwood erected a brass in St Paul's Cathedral to his parents. The couple had four children, Brome (1635-1657), James and Elizabeth (who both died in infancy), and Diana (1639-1701). Diana married Edward Master, chancellor of the diocese of Exeter, in 1677. In 1642 Brome Whorwood evacuated his family to Holton, to join Charles I's war capital at Oxford. He then opted for neutrality, living in France until 1645. Inevitably Jane was drawn into the war effort at Oxford, back in the court that was familiar to her from her youth. She smuggled gold worth more than $80,000 to the king on behalf of Sir Paul Pindar, prominent among the East India and Levant Company merchants who financed the king's war and who had been Maxwell's commercial allies in peacetime. In 1646 Lord General Thomas Fairfax took over the Whorwood home at Holton for his personal quarters and there -- to mark the first anniversary of the battle of Naseby in June -- Cromwell's daughter Bridget married the New Model Army's commissary-general, Henry Ireton. Charles I, fleeing Oxford in April, entrusted jewels to John Ashburnham, treasurer and paymaster of the king's army, who was believed to have passed them to Jane. 
In 1647 Whorwood followed Charles to Newcastle, where her stepfather attended the diminished, captive royal court. She successfully lobbied the king, against strong competition, for the embassy at Constantinople to be given to Sir Thomas Bendish, reputedly her paramour. As Charles moved south to Holdenby House, Northamptonshire, Jane lodged near Northampton where she negotiated with Sir Robert Banastre to pay off Banastre's fine for compounding, by corrupting the chairman of the committee for the advance of money. She acted as courier for Sir Lewis Dyve, carrying letters from the Tower of London to the king; for Alderman Sir Thomas Adams, also in the Tower, conveying money from him to the king, and consulted the astrologer William Lilly on Charles's behalf. Lilly's incomplete papers show appointments with Jane ranging from May 1647 to June 1659. The king was at Hampton Court from August 1647 until November, 'never a prisoner, any more than a bird in a pound' (A. Fea, 'Memoirs of a Martyred King', 1905, 259). Jane's stepfather was joined there by her brother-in-law, William Hamilton, earl of Lanark, who attended as a Scottish commissioner in that 'scottified' court. Under threat from radicals in the New Model Army, Charles decided to flee on 11 November and did not wait for Lilly's response, despite sending Jane to ask his advice on the same day. 
Charles arrived on the Isle of Wight, more by default than by design. The island's governor, Colonel Robert Hammond, placed him in protective but open custody in Carisbrooke Castle. Sir John Oglander, deputy lieutenant, who was close to the king in the early weeks, was Jane's cousin by marriage through the Bromes of Holton. After word of escape plans and a 'tumult' at Newport, parliament placed Charles under close guard in January 1648, forbidding private access, parley, or correspondence. From London and from a base at Netley Abbey, Hampshire, home of the first marquess of Hertford, Jane organized couriers and letters, largely in cipher; she corresponded as 409 with her brother-in-law Lanark, 410, as he planned an invasion from Scotland, and she continued to consult Lilly about the king's escape plans. On 20 March 1648 Charles failed in an attempt to escape from Carisbrooke when it proved impossible for him to squeeze between bar and window frame of his chamber. Another attempt was planned and, in April, Jane arranged a boat that she and John Browne, Ashburnham's retainer, took to an anchorage on the Medway, ready to take Charles to Holland. The venture was delayed as Hammond moved the king to a more secure lodging in the castle. When finally, on 29 May, Charles was about to climb through his window, Hammond -- who was well aware of the escape attempt -- walked into the room. The governor had been warned weeks before by the committee at Derby House that a boat was waiting for the king. Whorwood was identified as being on board, 'a tall, well fashioned and well-languaged gentlewoman with a round visage and pockholes in her face'. The antiquary Anthony Wood, who had often seen Jane in Oxford, added to this description that she was 'red haired'. Jane and Browne were overtaken by the Kent uprising and the mutiny in the fleet, and returned to London frustrated after five weeks. 'Had the rest done their parts as carefully as Wharwood', lamented Hertford, 'The King would have been at large' (letter from H to earl of Lanark, 27 June 1648, 'Hamilton Papers', 224). 
Moderate parliamentarians feared the army more than the king and were still prepared to settle with Charles in order to pre-empt the army radicals. This was in spite of attempted royalist uprisings in Kent and Surrey, a naval mutiny, and the Hamiltons' failed invasion in the king's name, all in the summer of 1648. Talks were proposed to be held at Newport, near Carisbrooke, beginning in September 1648. Hammond accepted the king's parole on 27 August, allowing him free access to and correspondence with his friends. In July Charles had invited Jane Whorwood to come to his chamber secretly, explicitly promising an intimate encounter. His letters reveal they met alone on the evening of 28 August and planned to do so again on 31 August. That summer they exchanged letters on an almost daily basis, Jane's cipher being variously N, 719, and 390. She sent him a 'long wise discourse', 'a memorial', 'hints', and 'arguments and advice', which have perished (cited by Charles I, BL, Egerton MS 1788, letters 32, 50, 17). He had 'perfect trial of her friendship to me' (ibid., letter 17), and wrote to her sometimes twice a day, but of their correspondence only two letters to her from the king survive. Of Jane's letters to Charles's close attendant, Henry Firebrace, six (and her countersignature on a letter from John Browne) survive; one (over the pen name Hellen) to William Hopkins of Newport, and two to her brother-in-law, William Hamilton, earl of Lanark, also survive. Between April and December 1648 the king noted thirty-three other letters he had written to Jane, and eighteen she had written to him, all of which are now lost. 
William Fiennes, Lord Saye, commissioner for parliament and a 'conservative Independent', believed he had more influence with the army's commanders than was in fact the case. According to Lilly, he therefore advised Charles to protract negotiations with parliament until he, Saye, could achieve a better compromise for the king with the army. Lilly claimed to have advised Jane about Saye early in September 1648, arguing that the king should concede immediately and go to London. Jane spent the autumn of the Newport talks monitoring political developments in London and Westminster. The king ignored the advice of both Lilly and Saye, prevaricating while planning an escape to France. On 13 November Jane wrote from London, where she had ridden post-haste on news of the army's intent to arrest the king. She described to Hopkins how 'my travels, accidents, dangers more become a Romance than a letter' (13 Nov 1648, Hopkins corresp., Royal Collection, 1080413/53; published inaccurately in Wagstaffe, no. 53, p. 5). On her return to Newport about 21 November she sounded out Colonel Hammond and begged the king to escape immediately. Charles chose instead to face what 'God shall be pleased to suffer men to do unto me' ('Farewell speech to the commissioners at Newport', Firebrace, 153). Between the king's arrest and transfer from the island in November 1648, and his execution at Whitehall on 30 January 1649, escapes were planned, attempted, and rumoured, but Jane's role in them remains uncertain. Her last known exchanges with the king were two letters that he received at Windsor on 26 December, and to which he replied setting down 'all I know'. It was his last letter to her. 
On 28 January, the Sunday between sentence and execution, Charles sent his parliamentarian attendant, Sir Thomas Herbert, with an emerald and diamond ring from his finger to retrieve jewels left in the keeping of a woman on Cannon Row. Thomas Herbert, the antiquary Sir William Dugdale, and through them Anthony Wood, believed this to be Jane Whorwood. In 1681 Herbert changed his mind, identifying the woman as Lady Wheeler, the king's laundress, who lived on Cannon Row. The Wheelers had also owned a second house next door. Herbert may have wished to deflect from the notoriety of Jane's husband, Brome Whorwood, who after twenty years as MP for Oxford (1661-81) had emerged as an extreme whig, and was regarded as an enemy of the crown. Jane even apologized for him to Charles II in 1682. S. R. Gardiner and others have since questioned Herbert's accuracy and truthfulness in several matters; his health was also deteriorating by 1681, when he changed his opinion regarding this matter. An emerald and diamond ring and ring box were found in the butler's safe keeping when an inventory was made of Holton House in 1684. 
Jane Whorwood was imprisoned briefly and fined by parliament in 1651 for bribing the committee chairman, Lord Howard of Escrick, in the Banastre case. Her wartime complicity in gold smuggling and other royalist activity was concealed by John Ashburnham and the herald Sir Edward Walker when parliament was actively seeking out offenders as late as 1651-3. The MP Thomas Coke admitted under interrogation in 1651 that Jane had played a considerable role in carrying intelligence to the king 'as well to Oxford as to the Isle of Wight', alongside Lady Wheeler. He also confirmed Lilly's account of Lord Saye's being 'the most inward with the King' at Newport ('The Manuscripts of his Grace the Duke of Portland', 10 vols., HMC, 29, 1891-1931, 1.582, 593). 
Jane returned home about 1651 to a violent husband and his mistress, Catherine Allen, a baker's daughter from St Peter-in-the-East parish, Oxford, whom he had placed in charge of Holton House. Before this Brome had spent the war years in France and the couple, although not estranged, seem to have lived separate lives between 1646 and 1651. Brome's violence and adultery drove Jane from Holton in 1653, but she agreed to return the following year when Brome promised to treat her well. Again she was forced to flee in April 1657, this time seriously injured. That September her son, Brome, drowned in the Solent 'en route' for the Isle of Wight. A judicial separation and alimony were granted to her in chancery in June 1659 (the court of arches having been abolished under the Commonwealth) and a month later, her mother, the countess of Dirleton, instituted a trust fund for 'my ill daughter'. Jane fought for her alimony at the bar of the Commons, in private with Charles II, before the lord chancellor and the court of arches, and through the bishop of Oxford, yet Brome paid only one-tenth of the award over twenty-five years. He suffered a stroke in Old Palace Yard, Westminster, and died on 12 April 1684, four days before he was due to appear before Judge Jeffreys for 'treasonous libel'. He was buried at St Bartholomew's Church, Holton, on 24 April. Jane died in obscurity five months later, either in London or with her daughter Diana Master at Holton, and was also buried in St Bartholomew's on 20 September 1684. In November of that year her daughter took letters of administration of her estate and an inventory estimated her possessions at $40. Following Diana's death in 1701 the Holton and Sandwell estates passed to Brome's illegitimate son from his relationship with Catherine Allen, Thomas ('b'. 1657), conditional on his taking the surname Whorwood. 


@@@@@


doc= 29342


Whyte, Samuel (1734-1811), schoolmaster and poet, was born aboard ship on a voyage between Dublin and Liverpool. His mother, whose name has not been discovered, died soon after giving birth. He was once thought to be the natural son of Solomon Whyte, a very extensive landowner from Banbridge, co. Down, but it now seems much more likely that his father was Solomon's younger brother, Richard Whyte (died 'c'.1744), who was deputy governor of the Tower of London, probably a sinecure not requiring much attendance. Samuel enjoyed a happy childhood in Liverpool, near St Peter's Church, in the home of foster parents, but his fortunes were to change when he returned to Dublin and was reluctantly taken in tow by relations. The only one with a kind word to say to him was his first cousin, Frances Chamberlaine, nine or ten years his senior, who later married the actor and educationist Thomas Sheridan. No doubt to get him out of the way, Samuel was packed off as a boarder to Samuel Edwards's academy in Golden Lane, Dublin, where he obtained a sound education, although there is no information as to how long he remained there. 
Towards the end of 1754 Whyte crossed to Liverpool where he revisited the scenes of his childhood. Having lost nearly all his money in that city, he undertook the journey to London on foot with only 9 shillings in his pocket. He appears to have spent a year or so in London where he may have met the woman who was to be his wife, the Therania, apparently, of several of his poems. However, Mrs Whyte never became reconciled to living in Ireland: she missed her friends and, following the birth of three children, her health deteriorated. It is not therefore surprising that the couple separated, although Whyte was exceedingly bitter about the breakup in the poem 'The Retrospect', written in 1759. 
In April 1758 Whyte set up in Grafton Street, Dublin, a seminary for the instruction of youth, which he also described as an English grammar school. Thomas and Frances Sheridan were to prove a source of great encouragement and support in this project, both by sending their own children to the school and by encouraging some friends and relations to do likewise. Having thus got off to a good start, Whyte's academy soon acquired a great reputation, attracting pupils not only from Dublin but from the provinces as well. It was to number among its pupils the writers Richard Brinsley Sheridan and Thomas Moore, and the duke of Wellington is believed to have spent a short period there before proceeding to Eton College. Catering for boys and girls, Catholics and protestants, its co-educational, interdenominational ethos was, in Ireland at least, two centuries before its time. A hands-on headmaster, Whyte was on visiting terms with the parents of many of his pupils, whom, outside the normal curriculum, he encouraged to take part in private theatricals, to write verse and to socialize at balls, plays, and other entertainments. 
Whyte's academy continued to be popular and successful up to the end of the century. It went out of favour after the 'Act of Union' 1801, when the absence of a parliament in Dublin was to result in the decline of that city as a centre of fashion, culture, and the arts. The school lingered on for some years after Whyte's death in 1811 under the direction of his son, Edward Athenry, who had been his father's partner for some years. As well as being a headmaster, Whyte had pretensions to being an educationist. His first work in that sphere was his 'Treatise on the English Language', which, though printed in 1761, was published in 1800. His edition of James Burgh's 'The Art of Speaking' (2nd edn, 1763) proved popular and reached a seventh edition in 1787; Whyte also published 'An introductory tract on education' that was prefixed to his 'Beauties of History' (2nd edn, 1775). In 1772 he published a collection of verse entitled 'The Shamrock, or, Hibernian Cresses', a quarto volume of over 500 pages of which thirty-five were devoted to his 'Thoughts on the prevailing system of school education' and the rest to verse. However, Whyte conceded that only two thirds of the verse in this bulky tome was his own, the rest being in the main the work of his students. Since this leaves the reader in the predicament of not knowing precisely which are Whyte's poems and which are not, any assessment of Whyte's work as contained in this volume is rendered impossible. 
In 1792 Whyte's son Edward Athenry collected his father's work in a 400-page volume entitled 'Poems on Various Subjects', of which 280 pages are devoted to verse and the rest to explanatory notes, remarks on Boswell's life of Johnson, and forty pages of what are called 'extracts'. It ran to several editions. Again, some of the poems are by other hands, but such poems are duly credited. In this volume Whyte emerges as a fluent versifier for whom, however, no great claims can be made as a poet. There are occasional pieces, such as 'A Familiar Epistle to J. H., Esq.' (in reality a description of Dublin in 1758), which, apart from being competent verse, are of interest to the social historian as depictions of life in the Dublin of his time. 
In 1801 Whyte and his son Edward Athenry published 'Miscellanea nova', a hotchpotch of 280 pages of which only forty are devoted to verse and the rest to letters from various members of the Sheridan family together with Whyte's successful petition to the Irish parliament in the early 1760s to have Thomas Sheridan, then a bankrupt skulking in France, released from his debts. Samuel Whyte died in Grafton Street in September 1811 and was buried in St Anne's churchyard, Dawson Street, Dublin, on 29 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 29343


Melville, George John Whyte- (1821-1878), novelist and poet, was born on 19 June 1821 at Strathkinness, Fife, the eldest son of Major John Whyte-Melville (1796/7-1883) of Strathkinness, convenor of the county of Fife, and his wife, Catherine Anne Sarah Osborne (1791/2-1878), youngest daughter of Francis Godolphin Osborne, fifth duke of Leeds. Robert Whytt (1714-1766) was his great-grandfather. He was educated at Eton College under John Keate, and in 1839 received a commission in the 93rd highlanders. He exchanged into the Coldstream Guards in 1846, was made captain, and retired in 1849. He married, on 7 August 1847, Charlotte, daughter of William Hanbury, first Lord Bateman; they had a daughter, Florence Elizabeth, who became the Viscountess Massareene. However, he did not have a happy relationship with his wife, and she eventually remarried bigamously. 
When the Crimean War broke out in 1854, Whyte-Melville volunteered for active service and was appointed major of Turkish irregular cavalry. After peace was restored two years later, he devoted himself to literature and field sports, especially fox-hunting, on which he soon came to be regarded as an authority. He lived for some years in Northamptonshire after his marriage and then moved to Tetbury in Gloucestershire. He published some translations of Horace in 1850, and in 1853 his first novel appeared, 'Captain Digby Grand: an Autobiography', which was initially serialized in 'Fraser's Magazine'. It was, arguably, semi-autobiographical: its hero leaves Eton and joins the army, sees service in North America, and, after a period of dissipated living, inherits, marries, and goes hunting. The book was popular. 
Over the next twenty-five years, Whyte-Melville wrote twenty-five more novels, some of contemporary life and some historical romances. He was particularly concerned with the military and sporting life. He drew on his experiences of the Crimean War for 'The Interpreter: a Tale of the War' (1858). The title of 'Riding Recollections' (1875) is self-explanatory, while John Sutherland notes 'Katerfelto' (1875) for its 'vivid stag-hunting scenes' (Sutherland, 672). On the other hand, it was with a romance set during the English civil war, 'Holmby House: a Tale of Old Northamptonshire' (1860), that he established his name. 
Despite Whyte-Melville's devotion to literature, he did not seem to regard himself as a professional, or even as a particularly good, novelist. All his earnings from writing he gave to projects such as the provision of reading-rooms for grooms and stable-boys in hunting-quarters. Nor, according to his friend Frederick Locker-Lampson, did he seek out overtly literary society, preferring the company of soldiers, hunters, and country gentlemen (Locker-Lampson, 382). The plots of his novels were sometimes incredible and always exciting; 'The Times' (4 January 1871) remarked on his 'light and rapid style, which seems to run on wheels'. However, his concerns were not necessarily light-hearted. For example, his long religious poem 'The True Cross' (1873) delineates a punitive God and, with great ambivalence, a proud, noble yet damned hunter and his lady. 
Given his reputation, Whyte-Melville's death was ironic. On 5 December 1878 he was hunting near the White Horse, in the Vale of Pewsey; the hounds had found a fox, and he was galloping along the grass headland of a ploughed field. His horse fell, and he broke his neck and was killed outright. He was buried at Tetbury. His friends commissioned R. W. Edis to design both a large marble cross, placed over his grave, and a memorial fountain at St Andrews in Scotland. Joseph Edgar Boehm designed a portrait medallion to adorn the fountain. Whyte-Melville's father survived him, and at his death in 1883 Strathkinness passed to his kinsman, James Balfour, who assumed the name of Melville in addition to his own. 


@@@@@


doc= 29344


Whytehead, Thomas (1815-1843), poet and missionary, was born on 30 November 1815 at Thormanby, Yorkshire, the youngest son of Henry Robert Whytehead (1772-1818), curate of Thormanby and rector of Goxhill, and his wife, Hannah Diana (died 1844), daughter of Thomas Bowman, rector of Crayke, co. Durham. When his father died, on 20 August 1818, Whytehead's mother moved with her five girls and four boys to York. At the age of eight, Thomas Whytehead went to Beverley grammar school; he left at fifteen. Thomas's brother Robert (1808-1863), an undergraduate at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1830, then prepared Thomas for entry to Cambridge. When Robert took a curacy in Swineshead, Lincolnshire, in 1833, Thomas went to visit him, and was initiated into parish life, actively assisting his brother. 
In October 1833 Whytehead became a pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, where a distinguished academic record followed: a Bell scholarship (1834); two chancellor's English medals, with poems entitled 'The death of HRH the duke of Gloucester' (1835) and 'The empire of the sea' (1836); the 1835 Hulsean prize for his essay entitled 'The resemblance between Christ and Moses'; and Sir William Browne's gold medal for Latin and Greek epigrams (1836). In the classical tripos Whytehead came second in February 1837, and he used a copy of the class list to communicate the news to his sister Anne. Whytehead's letters to Anne reflect his love of home ('college may be animating, but it is not 'home'', June 1834) and his loneliness ('I have just got a little bird in a cage to make some sort of companion for me, as I often feel as if I wd give anything for something alive like myself to keep me company', February 1834). In March 1837 he became senior classical medallist and was elected to a fellowship at St John's College. He graduated BA in 1837, MA in 1840, and in 1838 he held a classical lectureship at Clare College; he was admitted 'ad eundem' at Oxford in 1841. He was ordained deacon in 1839 and accepted the curacy of Freshwater, Isle of Wight, where his former college tutor I. F. Isaacson was clergyman; he was ordained priest in December 1840. Whytehead's dedication to the religious life is apparent throughout his letters and verse, and his work 'College Life' (1845, 2nd edn 1856) presents a view of Oxford and Cambridge primarily as sites of spiritual and moral development. In 1835 Whytehead had volunteered himself to the Church Missionary Society, and he finally agreed to become chaplain to the newly appointed bishop of New Zealand, George Augustus Selwyn. Whytehead's health had never been strong: in particular, a recurring eye problem had dogged his studies. After sailing for Australia on 26 December 1841 he was taken ill in Sydney with a ruptured blood vessel, the precursor of a collapsed lung. He spent months there before being able to progress to New Zealand. He taught himself Maori in this time, translating two hymns, one of them Bishop Ken's evening hymn. He faced his death, as he had lived, with Christian conviction. He died on 19 March 1843 at Waimate, Bay of Islands, and was buried beside the new Waimate church building two days later. 
Whytehead made little impression on the literary world. He was commissioned to write an ode for the installation of the duke of Northumberland in 1842 as chancellor of Cambridge University, performed to music by T. A. Walmisley. His 'Poems' (1842) was sufficiently well received to prompt a second edition, published as 'Poetical Remains' (1877), edited by Thomas Bowman Whytehead, who appended a memoir based on his uncle's letters. This appeared eight years after the new chapel at St John's, Cambridge, was consecrated, with its full-length painting of Whytehead on the choir roof as one of the nineteenth century's representative figures. In a minor way he was such a representative: a highly-educated clergyman poet whose writing reflected his unswerving faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 29345


Whytt, Robert (1714-1766), physician and natural philosopher, was born in Edinburgh on 6 September 1714. He was the second son of Robert Whytt (died 1714) of Bennochy, an advocate whose family was traceable to the late fifteenth century and had intermarried with the better-known families of Balfour and Melville, and who died six months before Robert was born. His mother, Jean, daughter of Anthony Murray of Woodend in Perthshire, died about 1720. Whytt was educated first at the public school of Kirkcaldy, where his widowed mother had moved. There is little evidence for the common assumption that about 1727 he followed his elder brother, George (died 1728), to the University of St Andrews, which George had left abruptly on the death of their mother. It is much more likely that he was the Robert Whyt recorded as matriculating in arts in Edinburgh in 1729, the year after George died. Certainly Whytt was studying medicine there in the following year under Alexander Monro 'primus', in whose class-list he appears also in 1732 and 1734. 
Later in 1734 Whytt left for London to study under the great lithotomist William Cheselden. From the wards of the London hospitals he went to those of Paris and attended the lectures of Jacques Benigne Winslow. After this he studied at the foremost medical school of the time, Leiden, and with the 'teacher of all Europe', the ageing Herman Boerhaave. Whytt took his MD (like many contemporary Scottish physicians) at Rheims, on 2 April 1736. After returning home he took the career steps of taking an equivalent degree from St Andrews, on 31 October 1737, and becoming a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, on 21 June 1738; he was elected a fellow on 27 November and began his practice. His first wife was Helen Robertson, sister of General Robertson, governor of New York. The two children of this marriage died in infancy and Helen died in 1741. On 24 April 1743 he married Louisa Balfour (1718-1764), the daughter of James Balfour, first laird of Pilrig, Edinburgh, and Louisa Hamilton. A woman of great beauty, Louisa was known as the White Rose of Pilrig and her portrait was painted by Philip Mercier in 1751 (priv. coll.). The couple had fourteen children, of whom eight had died by the age of five. 
Whytt's contemporary reputation rested in the first instance on his use of lime water and soap in cases of the stone of the bladder, about which he published his 'Essay on the virtues of lime-water and soap in the cure of the stone' in 'Observations and Essays in Medicine by a Society in Edinburgh' (vol. 2, pt 2, 1743). Whytt considered that lime water and soap were the active principle of a secret remedy of Joanna Stephens which had been made public at great cost by parliament. Interest had been heightened by the controversy over the death of Sir Robert Walpole, in which was implicated a medicine containing lime. Whytt's paper went through several editions and was translated into French and German. Soap, when dissolved in lime water, remained popular as a lithontriptic until the second half of the nineteenth century. 
By 1739 Whytt had begun to question the received views on the nature of the vital motions, and thus to begin his most important enterprise. The Boerhaavian orthodoxy was that the body was a machine composed ultimately of particles, some with chemical properties. No part was played by the soul as a source of motion in the body, as in the traditional systems of Galen and Aristotle, ultimately because Descartes, the greatest proponent of physiological mechanism, had denied it. Descartes had also espoused a modified form of Harvey's doctrine of the circulation of the blood, leaving a residual problem of whether a wholly mechanical heart could account for the circulation of the whole mass of blood, even through the capillaries. Whytt believed that no mere machine could perform vital actions and held that the living body contained a 'sentient principle' that could perceive and react to stimuli in an unconscious way. Unconscious perception was unintelligible to mechanists, for whom the soul, as the organ of perception and rationality, was entirely distinct from matter. In place of the discredited Galen and Aristotle, Whytt could draw support from Hippocrates, who had divided the bodily parts into 'containing', 'contained', and the 'impetum faciens', the vital spark that provided motion. 
Whytt outlined these ideas in a paper read before the Philosophical Society in Edinburgh in 1745 or 1746, which no doubt helped to bring the 'lime-water' doctor more into the public eye. He was teaching in the 'Town's College' in the latter year and was elected professor of the practice of medicine in the Edinburgh medical faculty in the place of Andrew Sinclair, on 26 August 1747. He was also appointed as the professor of the institutes of medicine. Whytt was associated with Alexander Monro 'primus' and William Cullen at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, where he gave clinical lectures in 1760. 
Whytt's major work was his 'Essay on the Vital and other Involuntary Motions of Animals' of 1751. In it he elaborated his doctrine of the sentient principle: it was the soul, distributed all over the body and acting in a limited way in the organs and tissues it occupied. It carried impressions in the sensory nerves and initiated motion in the muscles. It was not limited to the brain, for a frog survived the loss of its head. Moreover, the headless frog still retained the power to move its foot away from a pricking needle: clearly the frog retained the power of sentience and motion, which combined to generate a beneficial action. This power, now known as reflex action, lay in the spinal cord, as Whytt showed by destroying it. Whytt's work also drew him into the European arena, where he conducted a controversy with the great Albrecht von Haller on 'sensibility and irritability' -- the sentient and motive powers of the parts of the body still generally regarded as a machine. Haller and the mechanists represented Whytt as a follower of the religious enthusiasm of Stahl, the pietist of Halle, who argued for the physiological actions in the body of an autonomous, freely acting, and even wilful soul. But Whytt believed that the soul was bound by the laws of the parts of the body it occupied; this was recognized by a number of practitioners who from the 1740s began to react against the mechanism of Boerhaave. One of them was Francois Boissier de Sauvages, who corresponded with Whytt and taught animist doctrines in Montpellier. A principal argument of Whytt and the animists was that if the body was a hydraulic machine, in the Newtonian manner, then there must be a non-mechanical source of motion that moved it. 
Whytt's interest in the sensibility and co-ordination of the nerves led to a major work on nervous diseases in 1764. It has been suggested that this work helped to make 'nervous disease' a fashionable term, replacing 'the vapours' -- a remnant of humoral pathology. Whytt's doctrine was that the part of the soul resident in the sensory nerves was so bound by the laws of union of body and soul that it allowed each nerve to transmit only its own kind of stimulus to the brain and spinal cord. Here the soul, acting as a kind of common sensory agent, redirected the stimulus to appropriate motor nerves. This accounted for the 'sympathy' of the parts of the body, many of them later recognized to be under the control of the sympathetic nervous system. In disease these sensibilities and sympathies became distorted. Whytt's general pathology also rested on the principles of unconscious sentience and response, and his lectures, which remain unpublished, drew on the 'Institutiones pathologia' (1750) of Hieronymus David Gaubius, who had been teaching in Leiden since 1744 and who was a follower of Boerhaave. 
Whytt's context was the Scottish Enlightenment of Edinburgh and the city's new medical school, and the connections of both with continental and colonial-American medicine. Whytt corresponded with a number of doctors in these places and his works were translated into French and German. His work was recognized by the society of which he was part: he was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society (16 April 1752) and to the presidency of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh (1 December 1763). His position as physician to the king in Scotland is said to have been created for him. There was a pugnacious side to his writing, and he took part in controversies not only with Haller, but with his Edinburgh colleague Alston (on the topic of lime water). 
Whytt died in Edinburgh on 15 April 1766. His medical attendants did not name the disease that killed him, and the post mortem revealed fluid in the thorax, a red spot on the stomach wall, and concretions in the pancreas. He was buried in Old Greyfriars Church, where there is a monument to his memory. Whytt's collected works were published by his son in 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 29346


Wiburn, Percival (1533/4-1606), Church of England clergyman, was perhaps from Kent. He was admitted scholar on Cardinal Morton's foundation at St John's College, Cambridge, on 11 November 1546, became a fellow on 8 April 1552, and proceeded BA in that academic year. In Mary's reign he joined the exile, arriving at Geneva on 8 May 1557 and being formally admitted resident there on 14 October. He returned to Cambridge by summer 1559, when he proceeded MA, and on 24 July became junior dean and philosophy lecturer at St John's. He was ordained deacon in London on 25 January 1560 and priest on 27 March following. By June he was chaplain to Lord Keeper Bacon, and in this capacity promoted many candidates for livings during the next fifteen years. On 23 October 1560 he was himself presented to a canonry of Norwich, which he resigned by January 1562. On 7 February 1561 he was presented to a canonry of Rochester, and on 16 November that year to the like dignity in Westminster Abbey; both stalls he held for life. He became senior fellow of St John's on 6 April 1561, and college preacher that Michaelmas. 
About October 1561 Wiburn married and was licensed to preach. In the convocation of 1563 he was proctor for the Rochester chapter. About this time he was recommended to Lord Robert Dudley as 'godlie' ('Pepys MSS', 2, misdated), and in 1563 Dudley's brother, the earl of Warwick, hoped to have Wiburn as a chaplain in the Le Havre expedition. On 25 April 1563 Wiburn was presented by the crown to the vicarage of Holy Sepulchre, Holborn, to which he was instituted on 8 March 1564. Wiburn became prominent among the agitators for further reform. He was one of those who on 20 March 1565 petitioned the ecclesiastical commissioners to tolerate some measure of nonconformity. When Archbishop Parker finally summoned the London clergy to Lambeth on 26 March 1566 and required instant assent to the prescribed costume and other requirements, Wiburn must have been among the thirty-seven who refused and were sequestered, with deprivation following automatically after three months. Wiburn's London benefice was lost to him by October, but he retained his canonries. 
Meanwhile the puritans looked abroad for support, and in summer 1566 Wiburn led an unofficial delegation to Switzerland. At Geneva, Beza received him amiably, but he had a cool reception from Bullinger in Zurich. The Swiss were reluctant to antagonize the English bishops, which is precisely what Wiburn's mission achieved. He drew up a 'State of the church' describing conditions in England, but was subsequently obliged to deny that he had suggested that many Catholic practices were still countenanced. It is said that Wiburn had to support himself for a time, but he most likely returned to Cambridge, since it was from there that he moved to Northampton. He was invited by local gentry to preach in the latter town, and by May 1570 had established himself as 'de facto' superintendent of the local clergy; he introduced the meetings known as 'exercises' or 'prophesyings', at first with the support of Bishop Edmund Scambler of Peterborough. A more radical scheme involving the civic leadership in a Genevan-style regime for the whole community was drafted on 5 June 1571, still ostensibly with the bishop's support. But just as this 'order of Northampton' was devised, Wiburn (who had been satirized in a ballad distributed by his opponents as 'alias tiburne [Tyburn] tyke') was summoned to London to be interrogated by Parker. By February 1572 Scambler acted to end Wiburn's whole ministry in Northampton, despite pleas from the earl of Leicester. Wiburn removed himself to the neighbouring village of Whiston, where, under the protection of the lady of the manor, Isabel Catesby, he continued to draw a large congregation. In July 1573 he was again examined in London, this time before Star Chamber, in connection with the dissemination of Cartwright's 'Replye'. 
On 9 June 1575 Wiburn was licensed to be absent from his canonries to preach the gospel in the Channel Islands; he was active in Jersey and Guernsey for two years, and with Arthur Wake drafted the islands' first church order. Back at Rochester in 1581 he was appointed the cathedral's divinity lecturer. In the same year, having been authorized to dispute with Catholics, he published a reply to Robert Persons. Despite these official employments he was again suspended from preaching for several years from 1583/4. His dogged refusal to wear the surplice eventually marked him out as an old campaigner. By 1599 his Rochester colleagues acknowledged it would be 'a myracle' if he now changed his ways (Knighton, 'The reformed chapter', 72). At Westminster he latterly occupied the judicial post of archdeacon, and conducted an amiable house-swap with Lancelot Andrewes. In his final years he preached at Battersea, and enjoyed the patronage and society of Ann, Lady Bacon, at Gorhambury. 
Wiburn died between 23 April and 16 May 1606. He asked to be buried in Whiston churchyard. He left sons John, Nathaniel (both in orders), and Joseph, and a daughter, Mary (married to William Striddle). He left money to the prisoners in the gaols of Northampton, Rochester, and Westminster Gatehouse, and directed that his Hebrew, Latin, and Greek books be shared among his sons. His wife had clearly predeceased him; her identity is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 29347


Wiche, John (1718-1794), General Baptist minister, was born at Taunton, Somerset, on 24 April 1718. His parents were members of Mary Street Baptist Church whose pastor, Joseph Jefferies senior (died 1746), had rejected Calvinism. Jefferies, who baptized the sixteen-year-old Wiche in the meeting-house on 25 June 1734, and Thomas Lucas, Baptist minister at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, from 1721 to 1743, provided his early education. Joseph Burroughs and James Foster, Socinian pastors of London's non-aligned Paul's Alley/Barbican Baptist Church found assistance from the General Baptist Fund in 1726 for Wiche to study successively at the liberal dissenting academies at Taunton, Kendal (1738-9), and Findern (1740). 
In 1743 Wiche went to assist a Mr Phillips, an aged Baptist minister at Salisbury, who soon died leaving Wiche as pastor. Here he met and corresponded with the deist writer Thomas Chubb who lived nearby. In addition, Chubb's sermon 'Englishmen Urged to Loyalty by their Sense and Love of Liberty', about the 1745 Jacobite uprising, foreshadowed Wiche's future concerns for civil and religious liberty. In 1746 Burroughs and Foster introduced him to a small General Baptist church meeting at Rose Yard, Maidstone, and Tovil in Kent. Here he remained as elder for the rest of his life. As a means of livelihood he established a school. In 1755 he married Elizabeth Pine (1735/6-1766) of the leading family in the church. Of their six children, Thomas (died 11 July 1821, aged sixty-three) became a London bookseller; Sarah married the banker Sampson Kingsford (died 1821), General Baptist elder and messenger from Canterbury; and Mary married John Evans (1767-1827), pastor of the General Baptist church meeting in Worship Street, London. 
When, in 1759, Nathaniel Lardner published his 'Letter on the Logos' (written 1730) postulating 'that Jesus Christ is a man with a reasonable soul and a human body' (Wilbur, 2.265), Wiche read it and became a Unitarian. He also began a correspondence with Lardner which lasted until Lardner's death. Lardner's 'Letter' also converted Joseph Priestley to Unitarian beliefs, and later, under the pseudonym Nazaraeus, Wiche contributed 'Observations favouring the miraculous conception' to Priestley's 'Theological Repository' (5, 1786). Later, after the 1791 Birmingham riots had driven Priestley from his home, Wiche personally approached Henry Dundas on Priestley's behalf. Another of Wiche's correspondents was the Anglican theologian Francis Blackburne. When Wiche publicly supported Blackburne's 'Confessional', which called for an end to subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', the two men entered into another extended correspondence. Until the American war, Wiche had loyally responded to every public fast. The war caused him to re-examine this practice, and henceforth he rejected public fasts as dependent on human authority. Likewise, he rejected Christmas day worship as based on the human authority of the papacy. Scripture alone was the only permitted authority. Eventually he abandoned sermons for scriptural exposition, and regarded public prayers that used the 'we' form as presumptive and unscriptural. 
A frugal person, Wiche's only extravagance was to buy books, and he amassed a considerable library. 'Let all descriptions of men write and publish what they please, and every thing that is false can be refuted' ('Protestant Dissenter's Magazine', April 1797, 128) was his firmly held belief. After he died, on 7 April 1794 at Maidstone, his General Baptist church amalgamated with the Presbyterian/Unitarian congregation in Earle Street, Maidstone, where another friend, William Hazlitt senior (1737-1817), was once minister. Wiche was buried at the General Baptist burial-ground in Tovil, near Maidstone. Quiet and retiring, he valued personal honesty and truthful searching more than popular appeal in ministry. George Wiche (1767-1799), Unitarian minister at Monton, Eccles, Lancashire, from 1788 to 1795, was his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 29348


Wickens, Sir John (1815-1873), judge, was born on 13 June 1815, the second son of James Stephen Wickens, solicitor, of Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, London, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Hayter of Winterbourne Stoke, Wiltshire. Educated under Dr Keate at Eton College (1829-32), where he won the Newcastle scholarship, he went on to win an open scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, and matriculated there on 30 November 1832. He graduated BA in Michaelmas term 1836 with a double first in classics and mathematics (though, despite statements to the contrary, he did not win the Newdigate prize), and took his MA in 1839. He was unsuccessful as a candidate for a Balliol fellowship, however, and this was variously attributed to an ill-timed display of his wit and to his smoking having annoyed the master. 
Wickens was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 27 April 1837, and was called to the bar in May 1840. His practice grew slowly, but he gained a reputation as a conveyancer, a draftsman of equity pleadings, and an opinion writer. When in 1852 a number of leading juniors took silk as a result of procedural reform in the court of chancery, Wickens became one of the most distinguished juniors at the chancery bar. He was retained in most of the heavy chancery suits of the day, and appeared frequently before the House of Lords and the privy council. He was not a fluent speaker, but had a trenchant and concise way of arguing a point. From January 1843 until his appointment to the bench he was junior equity counsel to the Treasury. His own modesty apart, this appointment prevented him applying to become queen's counsel, and disqualified him from being a parliamentary candidate. In 1845 Wickens married Harriet Frances, daughter of William Davey of Cowley House, Gloucestershire. Their daughter Mary married George Farwell, who became a lord justice of appeal. 
In 1868 Wickens became vice-chancellor of the county palatine of Lancaster in succession to Sir William James who became a vice-chancellor. In 1871 Wickens was elected a bencher of his inn, and on 18 April of the same year was appointed to the bench as a vice-chancellor in succession to Sir John Stuart. He was knighted on 29 June 1871. It was said that as a judge he went too slowly and was too much under the influence of precedent, following co-ordinate precedents even if he thought them wrong. But, as his obituary in the 'Solicitors' Journal' noted, 'he understood law', and brought to his work a conscientious thoroughness and an intimate knowledge of practice. His judgments contained lucid statements of principle, and masterly applications of principle to new cases. His decisions, rarely appealed from, were even more rarely reversed; an appellate position would have made his ability more conspicuous. Apart from the law, he was known for his wit and humour, his general learning, and the brilliancy and interest of his conversation. 
Wickens died at his home at Chilgrove, Westdean, near Chichester, in Sussex, on 23 October 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 29349


Henry Lewis Wickham (1789-1864), the Wickhams' only son, was born at Cottingley, Yorkshire, on 19 May 1789. He was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford, and called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 13 May 1817. He was appointed receiver-general of Gibraltar by Lord Grenville in lieu of an extra pension for his father, and served as principal private secretary to Viscount Althorp (third Earl Spencer) during the latter's stint as chancellor of the exchequer (1830-34). He served as a commissioner of excise enquiry, chairman of the board of stamps and taxes (1838-48), and as a commissioner of public loan. With his cousin John Anthony Cramer he wrote 'A Dissertation of the Passage of Hannibal over the Alps' (1820). He married Lucy, daughter of William Markham of Becca Hall, Yorkshire, and they had three children: William of Binsted Wyck, editor of 'The Correspondence' (1870) and MP for Petersfield, Hampshire (1892-7); Leonora Emma; and Henry Lamplugh. Henry Wickham died in Chesterfield Street, Mayfair, London, on 27 October 1864 ('GM', 1864 (vol. 2)). 


@@@@@


doc= 29350


Wickham, William (1761-1840), politician, diplomatist, and founder of a British foreign secret service, was the elder son of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Wickham (1731-1804) and Elizabeth (died 1815), daughter and heir of William Lamplugh of Cottingley, vicar of Dewsbury, Yorkshire. Henry Wickham had been educated at Leipzig and Neuchatel universities and began his military career with two years in the army of Piedmont. William was born in October 1761 at Cottingley, Bingley, Yorkshire, and baptized on 11 November 1761. He was educated at Winchester College (1773-6), Harrow School (1776), and Christ Church, Oxford (1779-82), where he was a younger contemporary of William Wyndham Grenville, John King, and Charles Abbot (Baron Colchester). At Geneva University (1782-6) he studied law under Amedeo Perdriau, and graduated MA in February 1786. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in November 1786. 
Wickham married Eleanore Madeleine (1763-1836), daughter of Professor Louis Bertrand and Isabella, 'nee' Mallet, in Geneva Cathedral on 10 August 1788. This linked him with the leading families of Geneva and laid the foundation of his career. His brother-in-law Professor Marc Auguste Pictet was related to Isaac Pictet, British charge d'affaires at Bern (1772-4), while Eleanore's cousin, the Syndic Rigaud, became an influential friend. 
Wickham served as a commissioner of bankrupts from 1790 to 1794. On 7 July 1792 his name (misspelt) appeared in the fiats for appointment of magistrates. He was attached to the Whitechapel police office (TNA: PRO, C234/25). Wickham again visited Switzerland in 1792. On his return he wrote to John King, under-secretary at the Home Office, asking to be remembered if anyone was to be sent out to Switzerland and indicating that his communication 'must 'be' and 'remain' in strict and perfect confidence between you and me' (Wickham to King, 4 Dec 1792, Hants. RO, 38M49/6/5/2). This refutes the long-held belief that it was Lord Grenville's friendship that procured Wickham his diplomatic employment; rather, it was King's friendship with both. 
As a government magistrate Wickham worked at the Home Office and employed informers to discover possible treasonable activities. He was commended by ministers for his ability in this field, which included procuring information on the activities of emigres as well as of the London Corresponding Society. This was probably the secret service carried out for Lord Grenville from August 1793, concerning which Wickham wrote that to avoid comment all communication passed through the office of the lord chancellor, Lord Rosslyn, and that all trace was removed from the records (27 March 1831, Hants. RO, 38M49/1/56/24). His information led to the arrest of the London Corresponding Society officers in May 1794 (E. Nepean to Wickham, 10 May 1794, Hants. RO, 38M49/6/6/1). 
The third duke of Portland, who was then home secretary, appointed Wickham as superintendent of aliens in July 1794. This position officially linked his work as a police magistrate with Lord Grenville and William Pitt. To Pitt, Wickham made regular visits as an intermediary with Portland: 'I was often received in his dressing room, more than once in his bedroom'. Pitt generally 'either minuted down or desired me to report verbally his observations to the Duke of Portland' (Hants. RO, 38M49/1/56/24). 
Wickham's diplomatic career began in October 1794. His request for a post in Switzerland was remembered on the arrival of a memoir, forwarded by Lord Robert Fitzgerald from Bern. It purported to be a proposal for peace from two members of the French national convention. Wickham was dispatched on 15 October with Grenville's unsigned instructions to investigate the authenticity of the memoir (Hants. RO, 38M49/1/26/1). The secrecy and haste of his departure precluded any possibility of a secretary to accompany him, and the only funds provided were $200 for travelling expenses. Investigation led Fitzgerald and Wickham to conclude that the memoir was a clever intrigue. But Wickham remained in Switzerland, where he began the build-up of an extensive network of secret service agents throughout central Europe and France. Fitzgerald was granted leave of absence on 9 December 1794. He presented Wickham to the Bern Council as charge d'affaires, lent him $100, and left in January 1795 (TNA: PRO, FO74/4 1794, 38M49/1/27/3). 
Wickham had no financial resources, public or private; his immediate necessity was to find a friend, a secretary, and funds with which to entertain 'small quick parties to a few friends. It is liked here, and without it you are without consideration' (Wickham to Grenville, Hants. RO, 38M49/1/27/3). Initially Grenville, with no precedent for funding a foreign secret service, could only pass money through his private account, with the Treasury's obligatory three-month delay. So Wickham had to accept help from his wife's banker relatives. But as an impoverished country gentleman he had a careful approach to money, telling Grenville in March 1795 that his expenses were greater than expected -- and rising. His bill at the post office 'regularly exceeded $2 per week... and travel was extravagant'. Wickham hoped that the delay on payments of public funds could be relaxed in his case, 'otherwise I really know not how I must go on'. Two months later his naivety had evaporated, and he was sending Grenville's secretary receipts for $6000 -- exclusive of his own expenses (Grenville's 'separate account', 24 May 1795-27 Jan 1796). 
Promoted to minister-plenipotentiary in March 1795, Wickham resided alternately at Bern and Lausanne, with a privileged position in relation to the Bern councils. By appointing Swiss officials as British officers in the Swiss regiments paid by Britain, Wickham achieved control over passports on the Jura frontier with France (Cavin). He set up a regular correspondence with Lyon and Paris, and, via Francis Drake and John Trevor, British diplomats at Genoa and Turin, also with northern Italy and the Midi (Hants. RO, 38M49/1/10-11). At the same time Lord Grenville directed Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Gregan Craufurd, on a special mission at the Austrian army headquarters, to liaise with Wickham from June 1795 both for political purposes and as a method of passing funds -- via army extraordinaries -- authorized by parliament. Wickham took on several secretaries -- all French -- for the different aspects of this work, while Grenville sent the Foreign Office clerk Charles William Flint to assist in May 1795 (TNA: PRO, FO 29/5, FO 74/9, nos. 50 and 51; BL, Add. MS 69440, fols. 72-3; Hants. RO, 38M49/1/27/12). 
Wickham's intentions were to assist royalist insurrections within France, to provide funds to manipulate elections to the Paris councils, and to suborn a French republican army to support a restoration. By May 1797 he appeared to have achieved his purpose. General Pichegru, supported by senior officers, was well placed to head the overthrow of the Directory, but proved incapable of the revolutionary action required. Wickham's plans were destroyed by the Director Barras, who, advised by General Bonaparte, carried out the coup of 18 Fructidor (4 September 1797). The Director Barthelemy and generals Pichegru and Willot, with a total of forty deputies, were deported to the penal colony of Sinnamary in French Guiana. Wickham's funding of anti-Directory espionage was disclosed, leaving his credibility as a diplomat in shreds and his networks temporarily paralysed. Friends in the Bern Council asked him to 'withdraw quietly without waiting for orders' (Hants. RO, 38M49/6/13/1, 17 Oct 1797, 38M49/1/56/25). He left Switzerland on 7 November to visit the wounded Charles Gregan Craufurd at Frankfurt. 
Grenville ordered the withdrawal of the Bern mission, but the continuation of the correspondence with royalists of the interior of France (Bodl. Oxf., MS Talbot c. 14, fols. 60-61, b 21, fols. 71-5). With these arrangements in place, Wickham and his first secretary, James Talbot, returned to London in January 1798, when Portland appointed Wickham under-secretary at the Home Office with John King. But Thomas Carter, Portland's private secretary, disputed the position of superintendent of aliens that he had held in Wickham's absence. This was resolved, and in July 1798 a king's warrant appointed Wickham, John King, and Charles Flint joint superintendents (Hants. RO, 38M49/6/2/1-2/; TNA: PRO, HO38/7/573). Meantime, the immediate task was to arrange for Talbot's secret return to the Swabian frontier with Switzerland. He left in February 1798, while Wickham reorganized and increased the status of the alien office. 
In May 1799 Wickham returned to Switzerland to liaise with the subsidized Russo-Austrian armies and to replace Talbot, who had lost control of the Swabian agency, which included the Paris deputies proscribed in the purge of September 1797, and Swiss emigres. A coherent force had been formed under General Hotze. The result -- the assassination of the French envoys at Rastadt in April 1799 -- had shocked Europe (Sparrow). Wickham was to control the Swiss corps and liaise with Austria, Bavaria, and Wurtemberg for the supply of further subsidized troops, while continuing the secret networks within France. General Pichegru joined Wickham at Zurich to meet an envoy from Director Barras, who had agreed to a restoration of Louis XVIII in return for a large bribe and letters patent providing a pardon for his regicide. Due to the French victory at Zurich on September 1799, the meeting never took place. Incriminating papers were seized at General Korsakov's headquarters and Pichegru fled ('Fortescue MSS', vol. 5; Archives Nationales, F7 6217, dos. 4064, 19 Feb 1801). 
Wickham's next plan was to raise a French royalist army in the Midi, to be commanded by General Willot, supported by Pichegru. This extremely expensive project was destroyed by Bonaparte's victory at Marengo on 14 June 1800. The apparent defeat of all his plans, combined with the suggestion by George Rose, the secretary to the Treasury, that he had misused public funds, caused Wickham to retreat to a monastery, close to a nervous breakdown. Portland praised his actions, but the second coalition and the Swabian agency were effectively finished. Wickham returned to England in 1801 (Hants. RO, 38M49/8/11, 38M49/1/27/12, 38M49/8/21/1-3). 
Wickham hoped for a diplomatic appointment at Berlin. However he was 'persona non grata' in Prussia, just as he was in Switzerland. In February 1802 he was appointed a privy councillor and chief secretary in Ireland, and returned as MP for Heytesbury, which he shortly exchanged for Cashel. As chief secretary he continued the work of his predecessor, Charles Abbot, in reducing government expenditure. His resignation in January 1804 was a complicated decision. Although he used the excuse of ill health, his true reasons were horror at the execution of Robert Emmet; a belief that suppression of the Catholics was morally wrong; and a conviction that the duke of York's decision to give Lord Cathcart sole command of the military in Ireland, over the head of the lord lieutenant, was in contempt of the constitution (Hants. RO, 38M49/1/48/6, 7, 38M49/1/56/15-16). 
From 1806 to 1807, as MP for Callington and a lord of the Treasury, Wickham defended his use of public funds (Hants. RO, 38M49/1/137, 38M49/1/138). But his resignation as chief secretary had ended his career, and, feeling a failure, he spent much time in later life vindicating that decision. He could not see the far-reaching effects of his secret service organization, not only on the Napoleonic war but also on twentieth-century wars, through the resurrection of its principles in 1908 (Hants. RO, 38M49/1/56/15-16, 31, 35-8; TNA: PRO, KV 1/1). 
In 1810 Wickham was made an honorary DCL at Oxford. He had a house close to Lord Grenville's Dropmore and bought Binsted Wyck, in Hampshire, but after 1815 he spent much time in southern France or Switzerland, having no settled home for the last fifteen years of his life. He died at Brighton on 22 October 1840. 




@@@@@


doc= 29351


Wickwane, William de (d. 1285), archbishop of York, is of unknown origins, and his early career is wholly obscure. Although he never held an advanced academic degree, his status as a 'magister' has led to the suggestion that he may have been a student at the University of Paris (or possibly Oxford). Whether he was the author of the theological compilation or 'Memoriale' with which he is credited by John Bale, bishop of Ossory, is, however, extremely uncertain. Nor, as far as is known, had he any experience of administrative service on behalf of the English crown. It is accordingly somewhat surprising that Wickwane already held the important dignity of chancellor at York Minster by January 1264, the month in which he was also admitted to the rectory of Ivinghoe in Buckinghamshire. As chancellor and (from at least 1268) canon and prebendary of Newbald, he emerges from Archbishop Giffard's archiepiscopal register as a somewhat truculent member of the York Cathedral chapter, often at odds on financial matters with his superiors. Nevertheless, only two months after Giffard's death in April 1279, Wickwane was elected in his place by an overwhelming majority (eighteen votes out of twenty-one) of the chapter. He lost no time in travelling to Italy where the pope, Nicholas III, set aside the capitular election, and then by papal authority provided Wickwane to the archdiocese of York before consecrating him archbishop at Viterbo on 26 August. The temporalities of his see were restored on 28 October. 
Immediately on his return to England, Wickwane began to display a provocative -- and characteristic -- tenacity in defence of what he took to be the canonical privileges of the church of York. His insistence on having his primatial cross carried before him while travelling through the province of Canterbury from Dover to his enthronement at York, which took place on Christmas day 1279, caused something of a national scandal and permanently embittered his relations with Archbishop Pecham. More dangerously still, and as early as 12 December 1279, Wickwane launched what seems to have been the first full-scale programme of provincial visitation that the northern English church had ever experienced. In 1281 the archbishop deliberately asserted his metropolitan authority over his suffragan see of Durham. On being prevented by force from visiting the cathedral chapter there on 25 June, he had his chair set up in Palace Green and concluded an uncompromising sermon by excommunicating Bishop Robert de Insula as well as Prior Richard of Claxton and his monks, later placing Durham under an interdict. Two years later he took the opportunity of Robert de Insula's death to renew his attempts to conduct a visitation of the Durham chapter, this time 'sede vacante'. On 3 July 1283 he dismounted at the cathedral, only to find the church closed against him yet again. Wickwane was forced to leave Durham unceremoniously, after an even more dangerous assault on himself and his retainers than the one he had endured in 1281. 
Despite ceaseless endeavours to find a solution to the complex legal issues at stake, Wickwane's attempts to exercise jurisdictional superiority in the diocese of Durham therefore ended in humiliating failure for him. The election of Antony (I) Bek to the bishopric of Durham in July 1283 introduced a new and powerful personality into the confusions of the situation, but the archbishop was now too enmeshed in litigation against the monks of Durham to contemplate a compromise. As his register demonstrates, he was also restlessly active in visiting religious houses and churches within his own diocese. In late 1284 he finally decided to seek justice against the obduracy of the Durham Cathedral chapter by visiting the curia in person. Reported to have arrived at the Cistercian abbey of Pontigny in Burgundy by December 1284, he became fatally ill not long afterwards and returned to Pontigny to die on 26 or 27 August 1285. Miracles were later alleged to have been worked at his tomb there, but in the north of England, Wickwane left a more ambiguous reputation, as an archbishop who was 'lean, harsh and niggardly', but to those who knew him best also 'just in judgement and most tender in conscience' ('Chronicle of Lanercost', 19). 


@@@@@


doc= 29352


Widdicomb, Henry (1813-1868), comic actor, born in Store Street, Tottenham Court Road, London, on 14 February 1813, was the son of 
When he was fifteen Harry Widdicomb was entered by his father as a clerk at the custom house. Against his father's wish he left this employment in 1831, and obtained an engagement at the Margate theatre under Saville Faucit. He joined the Yorkshire circuit under Down, but moved to London about 1835 and was engaged by Andrew Ducrow. When Astley's was burnt down he went to Liverpool and played leading low comedy parts under Malone Raymond. In March 1842 he was taken on by Benjamin Webster at the Haymarket, his first employment at a West End theatre. In 1845 he became joint manager of the Sheffield and Wolverhampton theatres with Charles Dillon, but three years later he returned to London, and was principal comic actor at the Surrey Theatre from 1848 to 1860. He played, at first occasionally and then regularly, under Fechter at the Lyceum, notably in 'Sarah's Young Man' (August 1858), Gilbert's 'Uncle Baby' (November 1863), and as the First Gravedigger in 'Hamlet' (January 1861 and May 1864), as well as in many other minor roles. He was last seen during 1867 at the Holborn Theatre. 
Widdicomb never attained the first rank, but he had a considerable fund of original humour and power of facial expression. He died in Kennington Park Road on 6 April 1868, and was buried at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29353


John Esdaile Widdicomb (1787-1854), a well-known figure for many years in London, who from 1819 to 1853 was riding-master and conductor of the ring at Astley's Amphitheatre. The elder Widdicomb, before he was at Astley's, played in pantomimes with Grimaldi at the Coburg Theatre, and was said to be an excellent ring-master. When there was no evening performance at Astley's he was frequently seen at Vauxhall. He died in Kennington on 3 November 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 29354


Widdowes, Giles (1588/9-1645), Church of England clergyman, the elder son of Thomas Widdowes of Mickleton, Gloucestershire, entered Oriel College, Oxford, probably in 1603 or 1604. He graduated BA on 25 February 1608, proceeded MA on 27 January 1614, and was elected fellow of Oriel on 19 July 1610 by recommendation of William Barlow, who as the bishop of Lincoln was the official college visitor and who overruled objections. In 1614, through the support of Endymion Porter, whose father held land at Mickleton, Widdowes almost obtained from the king Walgrave rectory in Northamptonshire, but it went to John Williams, Lord Chancellor Ellesmere's chaplain. After supporting in 1618 the election as provost of Oriel of William Lewis, chaplain to Lord Chancellor Bacon, Widdowes became college dean in 1619/20. However, when in 1621 Bacon fell from the chancellorship, Provost Lewis, beleaguered by scandal, departed, and John Williams, newly installed as lord keeper, in his role as bishop of Lincoln became the visitor of Oriel. On 14 December Widdowes resigned his fellowship and moved to Gloucester Hall, where he was vice-principal for a time. 
In 1619 Widdowes had obtained the rectory of St Martin's at Carfax, Oxford. Here he gradually introduced fuller prayer book worship at his church, Thomas Crosfield noting on 1 January 1628, 'The custome of Common prayer morning & Evening begun at Carfax' ('Diary', 17). It was later claimed that Widdowes had placed a crucifix in a window. He was an antisabbatarian and danced at Whitsun ales. 
Widdowes produced poems for university volumes commemorative of royal occasions. In 1630 he printed a sermon preached at Witney 'concerning the lawfulness of Church-authority, for ordaining and commanding of Rites and Ceremonies to beautifie the Church', entitled 'The Schysmatical Puritan', which he dedicated to Katherine, duchess of Buckingham, as her 'most humble servant and Chaplaine'. It was 'much displeasing to Dr. Abbot archb. of Canterbury' (Wood, 3.179). William Prynne, whom Wood suggests Widdowes had tutored at Oriel, responded in the 1630 edition of his 'Anti-Arminianism'. In 1631 Widdowes reprinted 'The Schismatical Puritan' and replied to Prynne in 'The Lawlesse Kneelesse Schismaticall Puritan', dedicated to Porter. Prynne countered later that year with 'Lame Giles his Haultings'. Wood suggested Widdowes 'was fitted as 'twere on purpose to duel with Prynne (as Don Quixot with the wind-mill which no man else was knight errant enough to encounter)' (Wood, 3.855). 
Although Widdowes's anti-puritan stance was sufficiently pronounced to provoke disturbances at St Martin's by puritanical scholars of Lincoln College on 13 December 1637 and by another group on 10 February 1641, he was not successful in gaining further preferment during Laud's time at Canterbury. In 1639 he sought through Porter and the presumed goodwill of Laud the benefice of Islip, Oxfordshire, which was in the gift of the dean and chapter of Westminster. The dean, none other than John Williams, was at that time under suspension, but Islip was given to a fellow of St John's College. 
Widdowes was generous to the poor and an energetic pastor towards soldiers during the civil war. He died poor and living in rented accommodation at Oxford, his goods being valued at only $4 17's'. 10died He was buried on 4 February 1645 in the chancel of St Martin's. Wood described him as 'a harmless and honest man, a noted disputant, well read in the schoolmen, and as conformable to, and zealous in, the established discipline of the church of England, as any person of his time, yet of so odd and strange parts that few or none could be compared with him. (Wood, 3.179)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29355


Widdrington, Ralph (1614/15-1688), scholar, was born at Cheeseburn Grange, Stamfordham, Northumberland, the son of Lewis Widdrington (died 1630) and his wife, Catherine, daughter and heir of William Lawson of Little Usworth, co. Durham. From Morpeth School on 25 June 1632 he was admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, as pensioner and pupil of John Fenwick. There he graduated BA in 1636, proceeded MA in 1639, and was elected fellow, probably in 1639. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in March 1641 but was ordained and thenceforth tutored actively at Christ's, where his family connections brought him sons of north-country gentry. Fourteen of his younger relatives entered Christ's between 1649 and 1670. 
Widdrington was one of three Christ's fellows not removed in March 1644, another being Henry More. Later he denied taking the covenant and claimed to have left college for almost two years, returning only through the influence of 'a relation or two' -- presumably his elder brother Sir Thomas Widdrington, MP and subsequently speaker (Peile, 'Register', 1.421-2). On 24 October 1650 he succeeded Henry Molle as university orator (a position he retained until 1673) and soon after took the engagement, as Samuel Dillingham informed Sancroft on 30 December. Cromwell named him Greek professor on 12 December 1654; Isaac Barrow, who 'had the consent of the University', had to wait for the professorship until Widdrington resigned at the Restoration (J. Aubrey, 'Brief Lives', ed. A. Clark, 2 vols., 1898, 1.90). He attempted in 1659 to displace Ralph Cudworth as master of Christ's. Pepys heard on 21 February 1660 'how he did oppose all the fellows in the college'; a year later he had given up his pupils 'and was now quite out of interest' (Pepys, 1.63, 2.44). Charged with 'failure in trust' and 'fraudulent dealing', he refused to co-operate and in April 1661 'was removed from the college for contumacy and neglect of statutes' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 574-5). 
However, Widdrington still had political influence and obtained a king's bench mandamus (20 June 1661), then reinstatement by a privy council committee. In 1665 he unsuccessfully made what Henry More called 'a long rabble of accusations' against Cudworth, and 'collaterally' against More himself ('Conway Letters', 243, 242). When a fellow was elected in 1667, and a proctor in 1676, Widdrington again sought outside intervention. Meanwhile his personal affairs prospered: he was created DD by royal mandate in 1661 and preferred to the rectories of Thorpe on the Hill, Lincolnshire (6 February 1661), Wendon Lofts, Essex (1666; resigned 1676), Terrington, Norfolk (1673), and Great Munden, Hertfordshire (17 December 1675). Already Lady Margaret preacher (since 1664), he was chosen professor of divinity on the king's recommendation of 30 December 1672. 
Widdrington contributed verses to 'Justa Edovardo King' (1638), 'Luctus et gratulatio' (1658) on the funeral of Oliver and succession of Richard Cromwell, ''Sostra'' (1660) on the return of Charles II, and other university collections. He wrote a short treatise on the Lord's supper for the Cambridge edition of Thomas a Kempis's 'De Christo imitando' (1688). His long correspondence with Sancroft suggests he was a difficult friend, in particular his letters of 25 November and 3 December 1672 which then reaffirm their friendship. He died in college on 10 June 1688, having made Christ's the beneficiary of his will, dated 19 March 1688, but only after three nephews were dead -- an inevitably contentious arrangement, which lost the college most of his substantial estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 29356


Preston, Roland (1567-1647), Benedictine monk, was born in January 1567, probably in Shropshire, though his family are unidentified. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 22 December 1576, but he did not take his degree, which may imply that he was a Catholic recusant. In 1586 he went with other students via Allen's English College at Douai (which was temporarily taking wartime shelter in Rheims) to the new English College in Rome. He was already a priest when he entered the Benedictine noviciate at Monte Cassino, where he was professed under the name Thomas on 16 June 1592. Some time later he was transferred to the abbey of Santa Justina at Padua, and may have spent time at San Giorgio, Venice. If so, this helps to explain his later somewhat Gallican view of the church, for there was a good deal of tension between Venice and the papacy at this time. He was well thought of by the superiors of the Cassinese congregation and was employed in teaching theology, being evidently an able man. 
In late 1602 the pope agreed, after no little delay, to allow English monks from the Cassinese and Spanish congregations to travel to England as missionaries: the first two Cassinese were Preston and Anselm Beech, who landed at Great Yarmouth in 1603. Here they met, probably by arrangement, Sigebert Buckley, the last survivor of the community of Westminster restored under Queen Mary, who was living with the Woodhouses at Caston, Norfolk. They made arrangements for him to live in London in reasonable comfort. There on 21 November 1607, Buckley was able to aggregate to himself Robert Sadler and Edward Maihew, two newly professed Cassinese monks. They represented (at least in the opinion of the lawyer-monk Augustine Baker, who was present) the entirety of the rights, property, and privileges of the English congregation as it had existed up to the dissolution. It is not clear that Preston was actually present, but he is included in Buckley's list of four monks through whom Buckley extended his handing on of rights to others whom they had received as monks. In fact Preston was the superior for the Cassinese monks working in England for many years. 
Preston is known chiefly for his involvement in the disputes about the oath of allegiance, devised in 1606, with the intention of securing a body of Catholics whom the government could consider loyal subjects, and of aiding James I's aspirations towards Christian unity, but opposed by Rome and most Catholic leaders. Preston addressed the issue in his 'Apologia cardinalis Bellarmini pro jure principum' (1611), utilizing the probabilism absorbed from his theology teachers in Rome, chiefly the Jesuit Gabriel Vasquez. With Rome slow to make any definite decision he pressed the claim that Catholics could take the oath since there was no definite prohibition or, if there was, there was also a body of theological opinion which would allow the oath, leaving the matter merely 'probable'. 
The issue was for many a genuine question, and it generated a European field of publications for several years, in which leading figures like James I and Cardinal Bellarmine took a vigorous part. It is thought that Preston's argument, that the pope's power to depose princes was not 'de fide', and need not be held by every Catholic (though abhorrent to the Jesuit-inspired zeal of the Counter-Reformation), was very convenient to the government, and attractive to James himself in his promotion of conciliarism and European peace. Thus the government was content to keep Preston for over thirty years in relative comfort in the Clink prison, and he was content to be able to write (and operate in some part as a priest), his imprisonment shielding him from direct interference by the Inquisition. 
Preston wrote a series of works, mostly in the decade 1611-21, under a pseudonym, Roger Widdrington. The real Widdrington was a keenly recusant minor landlord in Northumberland, a useful front who, because of his remoteness, would not be likely to come to much harm. The general weight of opinion and probability, now as in his own time, is that there was, and is, no real doubt that Preston, not Widdrington, was the author. Widdrington was somewhat unconvincing in this guise as an energetic writer and learned controversialist, but there seems to have been at least friendship, and perhaps co-operation, between the two. 
Preston continued to publish on the oath controversy, often as responses to opponents, and in both Latin and English. He was an able and courteous controversialist, and was regarded with considerable respect by Bellarmine, Suarez, and others, who took his position and influence very seriously. Rome several times tried to get him to toe the line, working through people like Panzani, the papal envoy (himself not unsympathetic to Preston's position on the oath), and several of his works finished up on the 'Index', the first in 1614. He responded to his works' condemnation in 'A Copy of a Decree' (1614), with an appendix directed against the Jesuit Thomas Fitzherbert. He renewed his appeal to Rome with the lengthy Latin 'Rogeri Widdringtoni... supplicatio' (1616), published with a lengthy appendix responding to Bellarmine's accusations, but placed on the 'Index'. He continued to publish in English, and in his 'short and plain' 'A New-Yeares Gift for English Catholikes' (1620) 'abandoned his uncommitted attitude and told the faithful that they would risk damnation if they refused the oath' since the doctrine of deposition of princes was heretical (Lunn, 'English Benedictines', 50-51). With mounting pressure upon him he appealed to Rome with his 1620 'Appellatio' and his 1621 'Reverendorum partum D. Thomae Prestoni... humillima supplicatio'. He appears to have submitted, and not to have published further. As a forerunner of ecumenism Preston had tried to make accommodation possible. 
Preston's later years are unclear. There is in existence a royal warrant which gave him licence to live outside the Clink, being by this time an old man. In 1646 he appealed to parliament after pursuivants had raided his rooms in the Clink and removed all his books and possessions, which on a previous occasion (1634) had amounted to five or six cartloads of books, with many other valuables. For thirty-three years, he said, he had been a prisoner there, writing in the king's service, to his discredit in Rome, and now he was 'not able to cloath and uncloath himself without help'. Indeed shortly afterwards he caught fever and died, either in the Clink or nearby, in the spring of 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 29357


Widdrington, Samuel Edward (1787-1856), writer on Spain, was the eldest son of Joseph Cook (1759-1844) of Newton Hall, Morpeth, Northumberland, vicar of Chatton and Shilbottle, and sufficiently acquainted with the duke of Northumberland to ask him to be a sponsor for his son. His mother, Sarah Brown, the daughter of E. Brown, was a great-niece and coheir of Nathaniel Widdrington of Hauxley in Northumberland. Samuel Cook entered the navy on 31 December 1802 and saw service in the English Channel, notably in the vicinity of the Camp de Boulogne, where Napoleon was then amassing a flotilla for his projected invasion of England. Cook was later sent to the West Indies, where in June 1805 he obtained special mention for his conduct in the capture of the felucca 'La Concepcion'. On 10 July 1809, after further service off the coast of Cayenne and Surinam, he was appointed lieutenant to the 'Fame' (74 guns). On 16 September 1813, when under the command of Captain Edward Reynolds Sibly in the sloop 'Swallow', he led a successful attack on the 'Guerriere', a French brig, in the neighbourhood of Port d'Anzo in Tuscany. He later served with Captain Charles Dashwood in the 'Windsor Castle' (74 guns), on which, in May 1824, when at Lisbon, Dom Joao VI of Portugal took refuge from his son Dom Miguel, who was putting pressure on him to abdicate. In consequence, Cook was presented by Dom Joao with the Portuguese Order of the Tower and Sword, and was promoted to the rank of commander. Wearing this insignia he sat for a portrait by the Sevillian artist Jose Gutierrez de la Vega which was later hung at Newton Hall, Morpeth. He retired from the service shortly after. It would appear that mineralogy and botany were subjects closer to his heart than the navy. 
Although he refers to having known Spain from his earliest youth, it was not until 1829 that Cook made his first extensive tour of the country, where he was to remain for over three years. It is difficult from his descriptions to reconstruct the order of his excursions, mostly made from Madrid; but with the possible exception of Richard Ford, whom he met in Seville, Cook explored more remote districts of Spain than any other visitor. Accompanied by Sir Charles Lyell, the geologist, he also made an excursion into the central Pyrenees. While in Madrid, he had shown particular interest in the new mineralogical department added to the museum of natural history. Before leaving Spain he sent home a collection of geological sections together with fir-cones of various species (from which were grown two trees still standing at Newton Hall in the 1990s), and also a number of paintings by Spanish artists, among them a St Catherine by Zurbaran, which he had acquired, for he considered himself a connoisseur. On 18 September 1832, not long after his return to England, Cook married Dorothy, second daughter of Alexander Davison of Swarland Park, Northumberland. In 1834 his 'Sketches in Spain during the Years 1829, 30, 31, and 32' was published, and, in 1838, 'Observations on the Present State of the [Carlist] War' written from a whig point of view. He also published papers on botany. 
In 1840 Cook assumed the surname of Widdrington. He was a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Royal Geographical Society. In October 1842 he revisited Spain, and, 'en route' to Andalusia, inspected the phosphorite deposits at Logrosan, the paintings by Zurbaran at neighbouring Guadalupe, and the cinnabar mines of Almaden. On the return journey Widdrington traversed the Asturias and Galicia, provinces he had not explored previously. At Oviedo he met Schultz, a German professor of geology and mining, and remarked on the 'unsaleable' remains he had seen of a consignment of testaments left by George Borrow, whose missionary activities he gratuitously criticized. Widdrington sailed home from Vigo, relieved after having been officiously interrogated at both Santiago and Pontevedra by the police, who, suspicious of his activities, had accused him of 'examining buildings', which was true enough. 
Richard Ford, when acknowledging the invaluable assistance he had received from him while compiling his 'Handbook for Travellers in Spain' (1845), described Widdrington as 'a great geologist and stalker of little birds and fat women, a tall, stiff man, with a sort of philosophical hat', and as a writer 'dry, painstaking and accurate... [who] understands the people better than the pictures. There he breaks down lamentably... and does not know a Murillo from a mainmast' ('Letters of Richard Ford'). Nevertheless, Widdrington's 'Spain and the Spaniards in 1843' (1844), the result of his second tour, was reviewed sympathetically by Ford, who remarked that 'every page discovers good sense, observation, and earnestness, a love of the beautiful and a single-hearted desire to obtain and impart correct information... and like the former [book], must ever be reckoned among the classical works on Spain' ('QR', 1846). 
Widdrington died childless at Newton Hall on 11 January 1856, and was succeeded in his estates by his nephew, Shallcross Fitzherbert Jacson, son of his sister Frances, who also assumed the surname of Widdrington. 


@@@@@


doc= 29358


Widdrington, Sir Thomas (c.1600-1664), politician and speaker of the House of Commons, was the eldest son of Lewis Widdrington (died 1630) of Cheeseburn Grange, Stamfordham, Northumberland, who was the 'base-begotten' scion of a venerable Northumbrian family. Widdrington's mother was Catherine, daughter and heir of William Lawson of Little Usworth, co. Durham. The scholar Ralph Widdrington was a younger brother. He matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in April 1617, and graduated BA at Easter 1620. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 14 February 1619, called to the bar in 1625, and from 1625 to 1631 reported cases in the court of king's bench. In January 1632 he was appointed recorder of Berwick upon Tweed upon the recommendation of Sir John Fenwick, and in 1633 delivered a loyal speech to the king, who had stopped in the town on his way to Scotland. The following year Widdrington married Frances (1612-1649), daughter of Sir Ferdinando (later second baron) Fairfax, with whom he had six children. Through this alliance he became linked with the Fairfax family's wide network of friends and kinsmen in Yorkshire, which included Thomas, Viscount Wentworth (the future earl of Strafford). In April 1637 Widdrington was appointed recorder of York upon the recommendation of Sir Richard Hutton, and on 30 March 1639 delivered another fulsome address to the king in which he referred to the Scottish covenanters as 'rebels' (Johnson and Bell, 1.348). He was knighted two days later. That same year he was retained as a counsellor-at-law by Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland, who commanded Charles's navy in the first bishops' war, and was on close terms with both Wentworth and the Fairfaxes. He also became a bencher and ancient at Gray's Inn in 1639, and on 10 November 1641 was appointed the society's treasurer. 
Widdrington was elected MP for Berwick on 11 March 1640, and contributed to several of the debates in the Short Parliament, usually to clarify legal points. In the autumn he stood for election at York as Strafford's nominee, but was rejected by the corporation. He was returned again for Berwick on 3 October. Though never prominent in debate he was one of the most active members of the Long Parliament. Before Pride's Purge he was nominated to almost 300 committees, made numerous reports to the house, managed twenty-three conferences, and was entrusted with drafting almost sixty bills and ordinances. One of his first tasks was to help prepare the Commons case against his former patron, Strafford. He also played a leading role in the attack on the new canons and the Laudian episcopate, and was named to numerous committees for godly reformation and the suppression of recusancy. Having drawn up the articles of impeachment against Bishop Wren, he presented them to the Lords on 20 July 1641, with a 'smart, aggravating speech' (Rushworth, 4.350) in which he accused Wren of suspending 'painful ministers' and of introducing 'dead and venomous ceremonies' ('The Parliamentary... History', 9.492, 493). When Charles arrived at York in March 1642 Widdrington was reportedly on hand with an address urging the king 'with great boldnesse and vehemencie' to 'condescend unto... Parliament' ('The Kings Entertainment at Yorke', fol. 3/63). Over the next few months he helped to forward parliament's military preparations, but after being granted leave of absence on 22 July did not return to the house for two years. He spent much of the intervening period in royalist-held York, where he advised the corporation in its dealings with the royalist commander, the earl of Newcastle. In February 1643 he addressed the queen on her arrival at York, urging her to 'bend herselfe, with all her faculties, to a peace' ('Kingdomes Weekly Intelligencer', 7-14 March 1643, 86, BL, E 93/6). His abandonment of parliament may have stemmed from hostility towards inviting in the Scottish covenanters -- a scheme mooted in senior parliamentary circles since 1642. Once the solemn league and covenant had been agreed, however, he may have come to regard Scottish intervention as a necessary evil in reclaiming the north for parliament and counterbalancing the king's use of Irish troops. 
Widdrington was readmitted to the Commons on 3 June 1644, and three days later chaired a committee of the whole house concerning the Westminster assembly rules of ordination. He figured prominently in parliament's efforts to settle a godly ministry, and was added to the committee for plundered ministers in November 1644. Through his chairmanship of the northern committee and its successor, the northern association committee (the Commons' standing committees for northern affairs) he also played a major role in sustaining the parliamentarian war effort. Similarly, he was a key figure in the establishment and maintenance of the New Model Army, under his brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and on 8 May 1645 was added to the committee for the army. His links with the Fairfaxes and apparent dislike of the Scots inclined him strongly towards the anti-Scottish, 'Independent' faction at Westminster, of which Northumberland was a leading member. Perhaps his greatest service to this group was as chairman of the committee of the whole house that drew up the Newcastle propositions over the winter of 1645-6. These were correctly perceived by the Scots as a repudiation of their confederalist terms for settlement in Britain and Ireland. 
Appointed a parliamentary commissioner to the army on 12 June 1647, Widdrington was at Fairfax's headquarters when presbyterian rioters 'forced' the two houses late in July, and probably returned to Westminster with the New Model Army early in August. His continuing alignment with the Independents is suggested by his appointment in March 1648 as a commissioner of the great seal -- the new commissioners allegedly being chosen 'by the private junto of Cromwell's party beforehand' (Whitelocke, 'Memorials', 2.277). According to his friend and fellow commissioner Bulstrode Whitelocke, Widdrington was far less reluctant to accept the post than he was himself. On 12 October Widdrington was raised to the degree of serjeant-at-law and made one of the king's serjeants. By this stage, however, he was troubled by the increasingly radical turn of army politics, and though he and Whitelocke retained their seats at Pride's Purge, they were 'sad to see such doings' ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 225), and had 'no great mind to sit in the House... as it was then constituted' (Whitelocke, 'Memorials', 2.478). At Cromwell's urging -- he having consulted the two men and William Lenthall on 18 and 21 December -- they attempted to devise a moderate settlement that would be agreeable to the army, and on 23 December they took part in a fruitless conference at the speaker's house about 'settling the kingdom by the Parliament, and not to leave all to the sword' (Whitelocke, 'Memorials', 2.481). 
The two men resolved to have nothing to do with Charles's trial and decided to retire to Whitelocke's house in the country for its duration. Nevertheless, they attended the house on 8 and 23 January 1649, and took the 'dissent', the repudiation of the December vote to continue negotiations with Charles, used as a test for continued membership, just two days after the king's execution. On 8 February they were appointed commissioners of the great seal, but at this point Widdrington's scruples finally got the better of him and he declined the post on grounds of conscience. In respect of his former services he was allowed to practise within the bar and voted an extra quarter's salary. He was named to just thirty committees in the Rump, many of them to do with legal reform or northern affairs. He was appointed serjeant for the Commonwealth on 6 June 1650, and a councillor of state on 10 February 1651. At a meeting called by Cromwell late in 1651 to discuss the settlement of government he advocated some form of monarchy, suggesting the duke of Gloucester as king. On 19 April 1653, at a conference at Whitehall, he spoke strongly against the army's intention of dissolving the Rump. 
Regarded by Cromwell's court as a 'very serviceable' man (Thurloe, 'State papers', 5.196), Widdrington was made a commissioner of the great seal on 4 April 1654 and a treasury commissioner the following August. In summer 1654 he was returned MP for York, and supported the Cromwellian interest at Westminster. He faced another moral dilemma in 1655 over the bill for reforming the chancery. Like Whitelocke he regarded the bill as detrimental to the public interest and his oath of office. While insisting that they were 'very unhappy not to satisfy his Highness' ('CSP dom.', '1655', 152), the two men refused to execute the ordinance and on 8 June they were removed from office. Widdrington retained Cromwell's favour, however, being appointed chancellor of the county palatine of Durham on 3 September 1655. In summer 1656 he was returned MP for both York and Northumberland, and opted to sit for the latter. When parliament assembled on 17 September, John Lisle moved that Widdrington be made speaker, as a 'person of great integrity and experience... and every way qualified for that service' ('JHC', 7.423). In fact he proved a poor choice -- he was often indecisive, showed a poor grasp of procedure, and was frequently indisposed through ill health. He acquitted himself better on large ceremonial occasions, as, for example, in his speech to Cromwell on 23 January 1657, congratulating him on his deliverance from Sindercombe's plot. His address to Cromwell on 31 March at the presentation of 'The humble petition and advice' was 'at once grave and eloquent and long and prolix' ('CSP Venice', '1657-9', 37). He urged Cromwell to accept the crown, arguing that it was 'well-known to the nation, agreeable to their constitutions, and necessary to the temperament of the people' (ibid.). He repeated this exhortation in similar addresses on 8 April and 25 May. The high point of his speakership came on 26 June, when he presided at Cromwell's investiture as protector. Exactly a year later he was appointed lord chief baron of the exchequer. He was active in the restored Rump in 1659-60, and was nominated to both the December 1659 and the February 1660 councils of state. On 18 January 1660 he was transferred from the court of exchequer to the post of principal commissioner of the great seal. 
At the Restoration, Widdrington lost all the offices and honours that he had gained since the civil war but he was restored to the post of serjeant-at-law on 1 June 1660, and appointed temporal chancellor of the bishopric of Durham on 21 December. He was returned for Berwick and York to the Convention Parliament, and chose the latter seat. He was among those MPs thought to favour a presbyterian church settlement and imposing restrictions on the king's prerogative as the price of his restoration. He also moved (unsuccessfully) that former royalists or their sons be expelled from the house. He was returned for Berwick to the Cavalier Parliament, but by that stage he had effectively retired from public life. He resigned as recorder of York in December 1661, having given up the recordership of Berwick in 1658. He died on 13 May 1664, and was buried in the chancel of St Giles-in-the-Fields, near his wife and his daughter Dorothy, three days later. His only son, Thomas, had died at The Hague in May 1660, and thus Widdrington's Northumberland estate, valued at $800 per annum, passed to his brother Henry. The rest of his property, which was mainly in Yorkshire, was divided among his four surviving daughters. Despite receiving large salaries in his various employments during the interregnum, he died with debts of $2350. The royalist Sir Philip Warwick sums him up as 'a good lawyer, but naturally a cautious and timorous man' (P. Warwick, 'Memoires of the Reigne of King Charles I', 1701, 381). Widdrington wrote, in or about 1660, 'Analecta Eboracensia', a description and history of York, which remained unpublished until the nineteenth century when it appeared in 1897, edited by C. Caine. 


@@@@@


doc= 29359


Widdrington, William, first Baron Widdrington (1610-1651), royalist army officer, was born on 11 July 1610, the only son of Sir Henry Widdrington (died 1623), of Great Swinburne and Widdrington, Northumberland, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Nicholas Curwen, of Workington, Cumberland. His father died on 4 September 1623, when William was thirteen; in February 1627 the king granted his wardship to his kinsman William Cavendish, Lord Mansfield (later earl of Newcastle), with the expectation that he was to marry the daughter of John Steward of Coldingham. In the event the match seems not to have taken place, and on 10 January 1630 he married Mary (died 1676), daughter and heir of Sir Anthony Thorold, of Blankney, Lincolnshire. They had eight sons and two daughters. Widdrington was knighted by the king at Newmarket on 18 March 1632. 
From 1635 to 1640 Widdrington took an active part in the administration of Northumberland, and served as high sheriff in 1636-7; in 1640 he was a deputy lieutenant for the county. He also evidently had a place at court. When the king set up a separate household for the prince of Wales in 1638, with Newcastle as its governor, Widdrington was, according to Clarendon's account, chosen one of the prince's gentlemen of the privy chamber. He was elected MP for Northumberland in both the Short and the Long parliaments. His hostility to the Scots, whose army was quartered in his county, and his loyalty to Charles I was clear at the outset of the Long Parliament, for he had to apologize to the house on 10 November 1640 for calling the covenanting army 'invading rebels' ('JHC', 25). On 15 March 1641 he presented to the commissioners for the Scottish treaty a petition concerning the depredations in the northern counties caused by the Scots while they awaited pay due from England. He was one of the fifty-six members whose names were posted as 'betrayers of their country' for voting against the attainder of Strafford in May 1641. He has been taken as one of those MPs who, emerging early as an opponent of the Scots, was to become one of 'the inner ring of the Royalist party in the Commons' (C. Russell, 'The Causes of the English Civil War', 1990, 15). 
At the outbreak of the civil war Widdrington took up arms for the king, who created him a baronet on 9 July 1642. Five days later he was in Newcastle, apparently raising forces; his steward brought in a company of tenants in arms for the king. In an army list of 1642 he appears as major of Sir Lewis Dyve's regiment. In consequence of his royalism parliament expelled him on 26 August 1642. 
During the war Widdrington joined the earl of Newcastle's northern army, serving with him in Yorkshire, Derbyshire, and Lincolnshire, and with particular distinction at Bradford. Following the death of Charles Cavendish in July 1643 he was given command of the south-eastern section of Newcastle's command, particularly Lincolnshire and Rutland, and he may have had some role in Nottinghamshire. Margaret Cavendish, duchess of Newcastle, says that he was 'president of the council of war, and commander-in-chief of the three counties of Lincoln, Rutland, and Nottingham' (Cavendish, 166). In August 1643 he was put in command of the garrison at Lincoln, and he and John Henderson were defeated at Horncastle, in Lincolnshire, by the army of the eastern association on 11 October. On 2 November he was created Baron Widdrington of Blankney, Lincolnshire. 
In early 1644 Widdrington was a member of the House of Lords at Oxford when it wrote to the Scottish privy council condemning the solemn league and covenant. He assisted in the defence of York in June 1644. After the battle of Marston Moor he accompanied Newcastle to Hamburg, and eventually to Paris. He stayed in France until the summer of 1648, before returning to the Low Countries, where he joined Prince Charles. His extensive coalmines and mills were sequestered from 1646, and the mines sold by the treason trustees. He himself was proscribed by parliament on 14 March 1649 and his estates confiscated; on 17 July his wife was granted a pass to go beyond the sea. 
Widdrington crossed over to Scotland with Charles in June 1650 but did not hold command until after the defeat at Dunbar, on 3 September 1650. The committee of estates regarded him as 'wrong principled' and ordered him repeatedly to quit the kingdom, but eventually, on 28 December, gave him leave to stay. He followed Charles into England in 1651, and joined the earl of Derby's forces in Lancashire. Derby's force was routed at Wigan Lane by Robert Lilburne on 25 August, and Widdrington mortally wounded. According to Clarendon he was slain on the field, having been wounded many times and refused the quarter offered him; other accounts suggest that he died a day or two later. He was succeeded by his eldest son, William; a daughter, Jane, married Sir Charles Stanley, Derby's nephew. 
Clarendon described Widdrington as 'one of the most goodly persons of that age, being near the head higher than most tall men'. He remembered a man who was quick-tempered but ready to apologize when his anger and indignation had overstepped the mark: 'He was a man of great courage and choler, by the last of which he incurred the ill will of many, who imputed to it an insolence of nature, which no man was farther from, nor of a nature more civil and candid towards all in business or conversation. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.185)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29360


Widdrington, William, fourth Baron Widdrington (1677/8-1743), Jacobite leader, was the son of William Widdrington, third baron (1656-1695), and Alathea Fairfax ('fl'. 1677-1694), daughter and heir of Charles, fifth Viscount Fairfax of Emley, Yorkshire. He had a staunch Roman Catholic and royalist ancestry. The first baron, his great-grandfather William Widdrington, was a royalist army officer who was killed at the battle of Wigan (1651). His grandfather served in the army of Charles II, and at the revolution of 1688 his father was dismissed as governor of Berwick and Holy Island and briefly imprisoned. He was kept under surveillance as a likely participant in Jacobite intrigue, but he shortly went into self-imposed exile on the continent, where he died in 1695. He left three sons, William, Charles (died 1756), and Peregrine (died 1749), all of whom became active Jacobites. William, the fourth baron, was educated at Morpeth grammar school and at the Jesuit College Louis-le-Grand in Paris, and he became familiar at the Stuart court at St Germain. In 1700 he married Jane Tempest (died 1714), daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Tempest, bt, of Stella Hall, co. Durham, a flourishing Tyneside coaling estate, where he lived because Widdrington Castle, his ancestral seat on the Northumbrian coast, was sacked during a French raid in 1691. He had a rent roll of some $4000 a year and became a leading figure in local Roman Catholic and tory-Jacobite circles, though he did not intervene in local politics or in elections. He was a keen country sportsman and enjoyed a reputation for generous hospitality. His wife died on 9 September 1714 leaving three sons and five daughters. 
Widdrington took a leading part in the planning of the northern contribution to the Jacobite rising of 1715. He was passed over for general command because of his Roman Catholicism; he had no military experience or expertise, in any case, but he provided one of the five troops in the Northumbrian Jacobite force, and his brothers Charles and Peregrine joined him in arms. He instigated the plan to transfer operations to the north-west when the planned seizure of Newcastle was thwarted, and he effected the liaison with the Lancastrian Jacobites through his family connections. He was confined to his bed with gout during the action at Preston, and when it was clear that the situation was hopeless he advised Thomas Forster to capitulate. He was tried for high treason by the House of Lords on 19 January 1716. In his defence he maintained that he was not privy to the plan; he had joined hastily and rashly only to keep face with his friends; he had appeared with personal arms only; and he was the first to propose a surrender. He also asked that the plight of his five motherless children be considered. He was found guilty and was sentenced to death, but with only hours to spare he was reprieved at the intervention, it was said, of Lord Carlisle and Lady Cowper, the lord chancellor's wife and a Northumbrian. He and his brothers were released from the Tower in November 1717 under the 'Act of Grace' (3 Geo. I c. 19), but the forfeiture of his estates and the attainder on his barony were not lifted. Peregrine remained in London and, from 1732, lived at Chiswick with Mary, 'nee' Sherburne, widow of the eighth duke of Norfolk, without benefit of clergy (indeed, she dismissed her chaplain, Thomas Lawson SJ, for his effrontery in querying their marital status). Charles went abroad and died at St Omer in 1756. 
In July 1718 Widdrington married Catherine Graham (1677-1757), daughter (and coheir in 1739) of Richard Graham, Viscount Preston, of Nunnington Hall, North Riding of Yorkshire, and granddaughter of Lord Carlisle. In 1719, although the king had no objection, the Commons rejected his petition for an annual allowance of $700 from his late wife's estate to support himself and his 'distressed family'. In 1723 (by 9 Geo. I c. 19, s. 13) he was granted $12,000 from the sale of his estates; in 1733 he successfully petitioned for the restitution of his marital estates. In 1728 Roger Gale described him as 'an infirm valetudinarian' ('The Family Memoirs of the Rev. W. Stukely', SurtS, 73, 1882, 200). He died at Bath on 19 April 1743, aged sixty-five, and was buried at Nunnington; his widow erected an impressive memorial by James Gibbs to him in the parish church. She died childless in 1757. Notwithstanding the extinction of the title, Henry Francis (1701-1774), his eldest son, was commonly called Lord Widdrington by his fellow Catholics, thus confusing the obituarists at his death in 1774. The Durham estates passed to his nephew, Thomas Eyre of Hassop, and thus out of the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 29361


Wiffen, Benjamin Barron (1794-1867), biographer, the second son of John Wiffen (1761-1802), ironmonger, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Pattison (1761-1841), was born at Woburn, Bedfordshire, on 28 October 1794. His elder brother was Jeremiah Holmes Wiffen (1792-1836), whom he followed to the Friends' school, Ackworth, near Pontefract, in 1803. On leaving in 1808 he went into his father's business, and remained in it at Woburn until 1838, when his health failed, and he subsequently retired to Mount Pleasant, near Woburn, with his widowed mother and unmarried sisters. His literary interests were encouraged by his brother and by Richard Thomas How of Aspley Guise, Bedfordshire, the owner of a remarkable library. 
Early in 1840 Luis de Usoz y Rio, already interested in the Quakers and in Jeremiah Wiffen (now dead) as a translator of Spanish poetry, arrived in London from Italy and was introduced by George Borrow to Josiah Forster. At Forster's request Wiffen called on Usoz y Rio in Jermyn Street. There at once sprang up a lifelong friendship between them, and 'henceforward Spain took entire possession' of Wiffen. Late in 1840 or early in 1841 he made his first visit there with George William Alexander (a fellow Quaker and first treasurer of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society) as a deputation to forward the abolition of the slave trade; in 1842 he accompanied Alexander a second time to Spain and Portugal. In 1843 or 1844 Usoz wrote to Wiffen of his plan to recover and republish long lost and long prohibited works by sixteenth-century Spanish religious writers of a broadly Reformation character, and to seek Wiffen's help in this task. Now Wiffen began his book-hunting, of which he gives a most interesting account in his 'Notices and experiences'. He obtained some unique treasures, both in Britain and from the continent. Many rare works he himself copied line for line; of others he obtained transcripts. All was done to assist Usoz, and without his aid the collection of 'Reformistas antiguos espanoles' (20 vols., 1847-65) could not have been produced. Wiffen himself edited volume 2, the 'Epistola consolatoria' (1848), by Juan Perez de Pineda, contributing also a notice of the author in Spanish and English which was reprinted with the English translation (by John T. Betts) in 1871. He also edited volume 15, the 'Alfabeto cristiano' (1861), by Juan de Valdes, in Italian, with modern versions in Spanish and English by Usoz and Wiffen respectively. The remaining volumes were edited by Usoz y Rio. Wiffen also wrote the 'Life and writings of Juan de Valdes' (1865) which accompanied the English translation of Valdes's 'Hundred and Ten Considerations' by John T. Betts; and a 'Biographical sketch' (1869) of Constantino Ponce de la Fuente, to accompany the English version of his 'Confession of a Sinner', by the same translator. In 1874-1904 Eduard Boehmer printed the 'Bibliotheca Wiffeniana' (3 vols.), containing lives and writings of Spanish reformers from 1520, 'according to... Wiffen's plan and with the use of his materials' (as the full title states) but reshaped and with a large contribution by Boehmer himself. The work is a monument to Wiffen's aims and values as stated by himself as early as 1848: 'No merely sectarian or proselytising motive had suggested this course, but something of a love of books, and literature, and a feeling (call it obstinate or generous, as you will) that the persecuted victims of literature should find a voice in after ages, and protectors from the cruelty and bigotry of the ruling powers of their own times. (Pattison, 127)' In early life, and again later, Wiffen wrote verse of some merit but he published nothing separately. He reportedly destroyed his more youthful work. A substantial selection of his later poems (unpublished previously, for the most part) is given in Pattison's 'The Brothers Wiffen'. Wiffen died, unmarried, at Aspley Guise on 18 March 1867, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Woburn Sands on 24 March. In Pattison's 'The Brothers Wiffen' he is described as 'a small, pale, keen-eyed man' (81), always dressed in Quaker garb, and strict in all observances of the Friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 29362


Wiffen, Jeremiah Holmes (1792-1836), poet and translator, was born on 30 December 1792 at Woburn, Bedfordshire, the eldest of the six children of John Wiffen (1761-1802) and Elizabeth, 'nee' Pattison (1761-1841). Both parents came from Quaker families; his father was a poetry-loving ironmonger and his mother had been a dressmaker on the duke of Bedford's estate, and was reputed to be a visionary. His father died in 1802, leaving his mother to run the large ironmonger's shop next to the George Hotel (later the Bedford Arms), Woburn, and care for five surviving children. His younger brother was Benjamin Barron Wiffen, and his youngest sister, Priscilla, married Alaric Alexander Watts. After attending three local schools, at the age of nine Jeremiah went to Ackworth School, the Friends' public school near Pontefract, Yorkshire, where he received a sound, if eclectic, education, developing his taste for poetry, learning wood-engraving, and probably acquiring some Latin and Greek. 
In 1807 Wiffen was apprenticed to Isaac Payne, a schoolmaster, in Epping, Essex, and in the same year his first published poem, 'Address to the Evening Star', appeared in the 'European Magazine' (October 1807). The following year he contributed an account of Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, with an etching of the church by himself to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 78, 1808, 497). In 1811 he returned to Woburn and opened a school in Leighton Road. Studying mostly at night (which became a lifelong habit), he taught himself Hebrew, French, and Italian, and later Spanish and Welsh. Together with James Baldwin Brown the elder and Thomas Raffles he published 'Poems by Three Friends' in 1813. These poems and his two independent volumes of poetry, 'Aonian Hours' (1819) and 'Julia Alpinula... and other Poems' (1820), show the influence of Campbell, and more especially of Byron. On a visit to the Lakes with his brother in the summer of 1819 he called on both Southey and Wordsworth, whose 'white pantaloons' and 'hawk's nose' he described in his diary. He argued amicably with Wordsworth about the merits of Campbell's poetry, and wrote a sonnet to commemorate their meeting. 
In the summer of 1821 Wiffen was appointed secretary and librarian to the duke of Bedford at Woburn Abbey. Also in 1821 he issued his 'Proposals' for a new translation of Tasso's 'Gerusalemme liberata' in Spenserian stanzas, together with a specimen book. His next essay in verse was 'The Works of Garcilasso de la Vega' (1823), a translation from the Spanish dedicated to the duke of Bedford, with a life of Garcilasso de la Vega and an essay on Spanish poetry. Publication of 'Jerusalem Delivered' (2 vols., 1824) was delayed by a fire in the printing office. Dedicated to the duchess of Bedford, it became his best-known work, running to a number of editions in both Britain and America over the next thirty years. Hogg, in the 'Noctes Ambrosianae', says: 'the best scholar amang a' the Quakers is friend Wiffen, a capital translator, Sir Walter tells me, o' poets wi' foreign tongues, sic as Tawso, and wi' an original vein, too' (Wilson, 243). In a long review in June 1826 the 'Quarterly Review' concluded that, as a translator of Tasso, Wiffen could not hope to contend successfully with Fairfax. Wiffen declined an LLD from Aberdeen University in 1827. He contributed poems to magazines and 'albums', and published occasional poetry, often associated with Woburn, throughout his life. 
According to his daughter, Jeremiah's 'ideal Love married another', and it was only after her death that he married Mary Whitehead (1789-1872), a Quaker from a Nottingham family, on 20 November 1828 at the Friends' meeting-house in Leeds. They had three daughters: Ida Margaret Wiffen (1829-1865), Mary Isaline Whitehead ('b'. 1831), and Hannah Holinshed ('b'. 1835). On his marriage, he moved from the abbey to a cottage provided by the duke at Froxfield, where he spent the rest of his life. Wiffen took eight years to compile his 'Historical Memoirs of the House of Russell' (1833), for which he made extensive researches including a four-month tour in Normandy. 
Wiffen remained a lifelong Quaker and was known as a Liberal reformer. His family seems never to have known poverty, and his post at Woburn brought him not only financial security, but contacts with many of the leading political and artistic figures of the time. Portraits by George Hayter (1824) and William Brockedon (1830) show him with Byronic good looks, but what his friends recalled were his gentleness, courtesy, and good conversation. Following attacks of breathlessness, which he disregarded for some months, he died suddenly at Froxfield on 2 May 1836 and was buried on 8 May in the Quaker burial-ground, Hogsty End, Woburn Sands, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 29363


Wigan, Alfred Sydney (1814-1878), actor, whose father, James Wigan, a teacher of languages, was at one time secretary to the Dramatic Authors' Society, was born at Blackheath, Kent, on 24 March 1814. The actor and playwright Horace Wigan was his younger brother. His early career is obscure, his own accounts of it being contradictory. Since he exhibited some talent for music, he became 'a wandering minstrel', and sang at Ramsgate, Margate, and elsewhere. He was also an usher at a school and assisted his father at the Dramatic Authors' Society. Under the name of Sydney or Sidney he was in 1834 at the Lyceum, and the following year was under Louisa Cranstoun Nisbett at the Queen's Theatre, Tottenham Street. When John Braham opened the newly erected St James's Theatre, Wigan joined him, and, under the name of Sidney, was in September 1836 the original John Johnson in 'The Strange Gentleman', by Charles Dickens. In 1838 he was at a small theatre in the Old Manor House, King's Road, Chelsea, where he played Tom Tug in 'The Waterman', and other musical parts, and sang songs between the acts. With Madame Vestris he appeared in 1839 at Covent Garden, as Mr Wigan, playing the original Sir Otto of Steinberg in Sheridan Knowles's 'Love'. On 5 August 1839 he married the actress Leonora Pincott ['see below']. 
Wigan continued at Covent Garden until 1844. Some success attended his Montagu Tigg in 'Martin Chuzzlewit' and his French usher in 'To Parents and Guardians', but it was not until he was cast for Alcibiades Blague in Jerrold's 'Gertrude's Cherries, or, Waterloo in 1835' that he showed, as a guide to the field of Waterloo and a seller of vamped-up relics of the fight, the remarkable finish of his style. On the abrupt closing of Covent Garden, Wigan went to the Strand, where he played Iago in a burlesque of 'Othello' and parodied W. C. Macready, and then to the Lyceum, with the Keeleys, having also played at Drury Lane for a while. In later years he produced his own 'Watch and Ward' (in which he was the Chevalier Du Guet), 'A Model of a Wife' (in which he was Pygmalion Bonnefoi), 'Luck's All', 'The Loan of a Wife', 'Next Door', and 'Five Hundred Pounds Reward', in all of which he took some part. 
As a member of Benjamin Webster's company Wigan appeared at the Haymarket in October 1847, playing Sir Benjamin Backbite in a revival of Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal'. There he was also the first Osborne in Westland Marston's 'The Heart and the World' and the first Hector Mauleon in Webster's 'The Roused Lion'. Dudley Smooth in Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money', Goldfinch in Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin', and Tattle in Congreve's 'Love for Love' were his other successful roles at this time. After playing at the Olympic for a while, where he produced his own 'Law for Ladies', he was in 1848-9 at the Haymarket again with Mr and Mrs Charles Kean, playing various Shakespearian characters, in particular the Clown in 'Twelfth Night', Bassanio in 'The Merchant of Venice', and one of the Witches in 'Macbeth'. His Achille Talma Dufard in his comedy 'The First Night' (adapted from 'Le pere de la debutante'), seen at the Princess's in October 1849, was one of his finest impersonations. At the Olympic he produced in 1850 his farce 'A Dead Take-In'. He continued to play at the Olympic, the Princess's, and the Adelphi until 1857, when, on the plea of ill health, he took a benefit on his retirement from the stage. He reappeared, however, at the Adelphi in March 1859 as Sir Paul Pagoda in 'The Bengal Tiger'. 
Once more Wigan's career on the stage was in full swing. He opened the St James's in November 1860 and was at the Haymarket once again in April 1861. The following year, with his wife, he gave a series of readings in London, and in October 1867 he opened the newly erected Queen's Theatre in Long Acre with Charles Reade's 'The Double Marriage', adapted from his novel 'White Lies'. On the opening of the Gaiety in December 1868 he was Adolphe Chavillard in 'On the Cards', an adaptation by Alfred Thompson of 'L'escamoteur'. Later, for the benefit of Charles Mathews, Wigan played Dangle in 'The Critic'. In May 1870, in 'The Man of Quality', an alteration by John Hollingshead of 'The Relapse', he was Lord Foppington. On 6 July 1872, in 'The First Night' and 'Still Waters Run Deep', he took a farewell benefit at Drury Lane and retired from the stage. After giving a few private readings, he was seen at the Gaiety at an afternoon performance of 'The House or the Home' and 'The Bengal Tiger'. In the summer of 1878 he left his house, 33 Brompton Square, and moved to Folkestone, where he died, at 26 Sandgate Road, on 29 November 1878. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 8 December. 
Wigan was an admirable actor in a rather narrow groove. He lacked robustness and breadth of style, and could never play a modern gentleman, which part he could not even dress. Humour and pathos were, however, equally at his command. He was a French scholar, and his greatest successes were made in Frenchmen or characters in which he spoke French or broken English -- Tourbillon in 'To Parents and Guardians', Chateau-Renaud, Talma Dufard, Adolphe Chavillard, Hector Mauleon in 'The Roused Lion', and the Marquis de Belleterre in 'The Poor Nobleman'. His method was modelled to some extent upon that of Bouffe, a brilliant French actor of the early nineteenth century. Among purely English characters, his John Mildmay in 'Still Waters Run Deep' may count as his masterpiece. 
Wigan's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 29364


Wigan, Horace (1815/16-1885), actor and playwright, was born in Blackheath, Kent, the son of James Wigan, a teacher of languages who at one time was secretary to the Dramatic Authors' Society. His older brother was the actor Alfred Sydney Wigan. Evidence of his birthdate is contradictory but on his marriage, on 24 June 1844, to Emma Herbert ('b'. 1813/14), daughter of Henry Thompson, his age was recorded as twenty-eight. His occupation was given as schoolmaster. He was first seen in Dublin, on 1 August 1853, as Billy Lackaday in 'Sweethearts and Wives', and later replaced Webb as King Bruin in 'Good Woman in the Wood'. After leaving Dublin he made, under the name Danvers, his first appearance in London, on 1 May 1854 at the Olympic, as Paddy Murphy in Lever's extravaganza 'The Happy Man'. He was the original O'Rafferty in Tom Taylor's 'A Blighted Being' on 17 October, but failed to win acceptance as a representative of Irishmen, and made no mark for four years. On 5 June 1858, under his own name, he was the first Smythers, a hairdresser, in Taylor's 'Going to the Bad', and on 2 December the first Smoothly Smirk in John Oxenford's 'The Porter's Knot'. His next parts included Abder Khan in H. J. Byron's burlesque 'Mazeppa', Horatio Cocles Bric-a-brac in Taylor's 'Payable on Demand', and Mr Cunningham in Taylor's 'Nine Points of the Law'. At the Strand on 26 September 1860 he produced an adaptation from the French entitled 'Observation and Flirtation'. He was the original Solomon Probity in H. T. Craven's 'The Chimney Corner' (21 February 1861). His own 'Change for a Sovereign' was produced at the Strand on 14 March, and on 30 June he created the part of Symptom, an imaginary invalid, in his play from the French 'A Charming Woman' ('A trente ans'). His 'Friends or Foes', from Victorien Sardou's 'Nos intimes', was given at the St James's on 8 March 1862, and was the best of his adaptations. While still performing at the Olympic, he was the first Fusell in Watts Phillips's 'Camilla's Husband' (14 November 1862) and the first Blush in 'Taming a Truant', his own adaptation of Sardou's 'Papillone' (19 March 1863). His first distinct acting success was as the original Hawkshaw, a detective, in Taylor's 'The Ticket-of-Leave Man' (27 June 1863). 
On 1 November 1864 Wigan undertook the management of the Olympic, the only house in which he had been seen in London, and produced on the opening night Taylor's 'The Hidden Hand' and two farces, Oxenford's 'The Girl I Left behind me' and John Maddison Morton's 'My Wife's Bonnet' -- all three adaptations. While manager he continued to act in a variety of parts, and in 1865 brought out his own play 'Always Intended'. By 1866, however, he had resigned the Olympic to Benjamin Webster, though he remained acting manager. He was the first Percy Chaffington in Maddison Morton's 'If I had a Thousand a Year' (21 October 1867) and Cornelius Tattenham in 'From Grave to Gay', by Ben Webster the younger (2 December 1867). In J. S. Coyne's 'The Woman of the World' ('Les coulisses de la vie') he created the part of the first Golden Bird (18 February 1868). Inspector Javert in 'The Yellow Passport' (7 November), an adaptation of 'Les miserables', was another success. 'The Life Chase', an adaptation by Wigan and Oxenford of 'Le drame de la rue de la Paix', was produced at the Gaiety on 11 October 1869, and a melodrama by Wigan entitled 'Rag Fair', in which he played a cheapjack called Brightside, was given at the Victoria on 20 May 1872. At the Gaiety (14 December) he played the Doctor in 'Awaking', Campbell Clarke's version of 'Marcel', and in the Vaudeville's revival of 'The Road to Ruin' he was Sulky (1 November 1873). In a performance of 'The School for Scandal' at Drury Lane, for Webster's benefit, he was Rowley. 
On 24 April 1875, as manager, Wigan opened the Holborn Theatre, renamed the Mirror, with a revival of 'The Hidden Hand', Maltby's 'Make yourself at Home', and James Kenney's 'Maids of Honour'. On 29 May he was the original Inspector Walker in 'The Detective' ('Le parricide'), adapted by Clement Scott and E. Manuel. However, his speculation was not successful. The theatre passed into other hands and, after frequent changes of name, was demolished. On Wigan's retirement from management a complimentary benefit was given him at Drury Lane. He died on 7 August 1885 at Woodbank, Sidcup, Kent, the house of his daughter Jane Emma Hernu. 
Wigan was a quiet, stolid, undemonstrative actor, whose chief success was obtained in detective parts which called for no display of emotion. Rowley in 'The School for Scandal' suited him exactly, and showed the measure of his intelligence. He was a fair linguist and translated many pieces. Nicoll lists twenty-four plays and adaptations by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29365


Wigan, John (1696-1739), physician and author, was born on 31 January 1696, the son of William Wigan, rector of Kensington, Middlesex. In 1710 he was admitted to Westminster School, and thence proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 15 June 1714. He graduated BA on 6 February 1719, MA on 22 March 1721, and MB and MD (6 July) in 1727. Some of his poems are included among those written at the time of Queen Anne's death in 1714, and also of Dr Radcliffe's death in the same year. Besides these, he wrote the lines on the death of Dean Aldrich which were published in Vincent Bourne's edition of the dean's poems; and at least four of the exercises in the 'Carmina quadragesimalia' (vol. 1, 8, 57-8, 62-3, and 104-5) are ascribed to him. On 5 October 1726 he was admitted principal of New Inn Hall, Oxford, and about the same time was appointed secretary to the earl of Arran, the chancellor of the university. 
Wigan was admitted as a candidate at the Royal College of Physicians on 12 April 1731, and as a fellow on 3 April 1732, at which point he resigned his post at New Inn Hall and moved to Craig Court in London. He was elected physician to Westminster Hospital in 1733, a post he retained until 1737. In 1738 he travelled with his friend Edward Trelawny to Jamaica, acting as his physician and secretary. In Jamaica in 1739 Wigan married Mary Wheeler, daughter of John Douce, a planter on the island, and widow of Philip Wheeler of Jamaica, and they had one daughter, Mary Trelawny Wigan. 
In his day Wigan was well known as a writer. As early as 1718 he published a translation of a work by Longinus on fever cures. He also produced a respected edition of Aretaeus, published in 1723. When Boerhaave published his edition of the same author in 1735, he referred heavily to Wigan's book, and included a grateful acknowledgement of Wigan's achievement. Wigan also produced a number of other translations and indexes. He died in Jamaica on 5 December 1739, aged forty-three. A black marble slab was laid as a memorial to him in the cathedral church of St Catherine, Spanish Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 29366


Leonora Wigan (1805-1884), was the daughter of Pincott, a showman, and his wife, Elizabeth, who was the daughter of William Wallack and sister of James William Wallack. Leonora was at the outset a rope-dancer and performer on stilts. Her first appearance in London took place on 6 July 1818 at the English Opera House (Lyceum) as Chimpanzee in a pantomime drama, 'La Perouse, or, The Desolate Island', based on Kotzebue; her mother was Umba and J. P. Cooke La Perouse. She also took part in the ballet 'Don Juan' and was Ganymede in 'Midas'. She was next at Drury Lane, at which her uncle James Wallack was stage-manager from 1826 to 1828, playing pantomime, utility, and walking ladies. In 1831 she was with Madame Vestris at the Olympic, where her Catherine Seton, in a burlesque on 'Mary Queen of Scots', attracted attention. On 5 August 1839 she married Alfred Wigan, whose senior she was by several years, and whom she had nursed during an illness. When in April 1844 the Lyceum opened under the management of the Keeleys, Mrs Wigan spoke the opening lines of Gilbert a Beckett's 'Forty Thieves' as a police inspector of fairies; Wigan was Mustapha in the same production. She had a plump figure, a bright eye, and a mass of dark hair, but was not otherwise attractive. To her husband and his associate and partner, Robson, she was of great service, as she had stage knowledge and flair, though with no special expository capacity. She took, after her marriage, some important parts -- Mrs Candour in 'The School for Scandal' and Mrs Malaprop in 'The Rivals' -- and obtained applause as Mrs Yellowleaf in 'The Bengal Tiger' and Mrs McCann in 'Up at the Hills'. Her best part was Mrs Hector Sternhold in 'Still Waters Run Deep'. She supported her husband at most of the theatres at which he appeared, and acquired a reputation in Frenchwomen. She died on 17 April 1884 at her residence, Westwood Lodge, The Avenue, Gipsy Hill, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 29367


Wigg, Lilly (1749-1828), botanist, was born at Smallburgh, Norfolk, on 25 December 1749, the son of a poor shoemaker in that village. He received a good village education, and was brought up to his father's trade, but moved to Great Yarmouth before he was twenty, where until 1801 he kept a small school in Fighting-cock Row. He acquired some knowledge of Latin, Greek, and French, was a skilled arithmetician, and wrote a beautifully neat copperplate hand; his love of botany and skill as a collector procured him the acquaintance of Dr John Aikin, Thomas Jenkinson Woodward, Sir James Edward Smith, and Dawson Turner. Wigg restricted his botanizing to the district around Great Yarmouth, where he made several additions to the list of local flowering plants. His main interest was, however, the seaweeds, which he necessarily found cast up on the beaches, and of which he amassed a rich collection. 
In 1801 Turner engaged Wigg as a subordinate clerk in Messrs Gurneys and Turner's bank at Great Yarmouth, a position which he occupied for the rest of his life. The sober Wigg was often the butt of his younger colleagues' practical jokes; the ideal bank employee, described by his obituarist as 'laborious and exact, neat and clean in mind and person, honest in word and deed, modest, retiring and diffident' ('GM'), Wigg was nevertheless stalwart in his beliefs which embraced republicanism, the Baptist faith, and an ardent dislike of papism; he was not, however, a churchgoer. 
For nearly twenty years Wigg was collecting material for a history of edible plants, some of which exists in manuscript at the Natural History Museum and at Kew. He also studied the birds and fishes of the Norfolk coast. He was elected an associate of the Linnean Society as early as 1790. He contributed to J. E. Smith's 'English Botany' (1790-1814), and to W. Withering's 'Botanical Arrangement' (1787-92). Dawson Turner named after him 'Fucus' (now 'Naccaria') 'wigghii'. Wigg died at Great Yarmouth on 28 March 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 29368


Wigginton, Giles (fl. 1564-1597), Church of England clergyman and religious activist, was a native of Oundle in Northamptonshire. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1564 under the patronage of Sir Walter Mildmay. He was elected a scholar in 1566 and graduated BA in 1569, being elected to a fellowship of the college despite the vigorous opposition of the master John Whitgift, who was already suspicious of Wigginton's puritan sympathies. He took the degree of MA in 1572 and established a reputation for his scholarship in Greek and Hebrew. His puritan views were accompanied by a controversial wit which further alienated Whitgift, who, he alleged, kept him from all college offices and preferments. Wigginton never overcame his sense of injustice at his treatment by Whitgift, so much so that in the mid-1580s, on being offered a handshake by Godfrey Goldsborough, one of Whitgift's proteges, he shrank from it 'as if he had been a serpent, because I knew him to be a corrupt, prophane, proud, nonresident, pluralist pseudo-hierarchist' (Peel, 2.246), an account which is revealing of Wigginton's combative nature. His religious views appear to have attracted the attention of the puritans at Dedham, who tried unsuccessfully to have him appointed to the living there in 1576 or 1577, but in 1579 his college appointed him to the vicarage at Sedbergh in the Yorkshire dales, where his energies could be expended against the common enemy of popery. 
Wigginton's character, as much as his views, soon attracted the attention of ecclesiastical authority in the north, and in 1581 Archbishop Edwin Sandys wrote of him that 'he laboureth not to build, but to put down, and by what means he can to overthrow the state ecclesiastical' (Peck, 115). Wigginton had powerful support among a section of the puritan gentry, and on a visit to London in 1584 he was invited to preach before the judges in the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West. News of this came to the notice of his old Cambridge adversary John Whitgift, by now archbishop of Canterbury, who sent an order in the dead of night forbidding him to preach and requiring him under bond to appear before him at Lambeth the next day. There Wigginton was tendered the 'ex officio' oath to answer articles as yet undeclared, and on his refusal to take the oath, he was committed to gaol in the Gatehouse, where he remained for nine weeks. On his release he was forbidden to preach in the southern province and returned north to his living. Whitgift continued to pursue him, and on the word of an informant ordered Sandys to initiate proceedings against Wigginton. This Sandys did and Giles was deprived of his living by William Chaderton, bishop of Chester, in 1585. Despite this reputation Wigginton's pastoral involvement bore fruit, and a report on his parish at about that time suggests that he had brought the people of the place to an understanding of reformed principles and practice. This may have owed something to the short catechism he had compiled for his parishioners, which he may have published in 1589 and which was definitely published by his grandson in 1646 as 'An Introduction to the Christian Faith'. 
Following deprivation Wigginton found himself in York during the trial of the Catholic martyr Margaret Clitherow, with whom he entered into discussion in her prison cell. In the course of the trial he is said to have intervened on her behalf in open court, contesting the legitimacy of the proceedings, and after her sentence he again attempted to persuade her to renounce her views. Wigginton then moved on to London where he once again fell foul of his implacable opponent Whitgift. Brought before the archbishop and again refusing the 'ex officio' oath, Wigginton once more found himself in prison, this time the White Lion, and also in chains. Removed to another prison he was degraded from orders, despite the intervention on his behalf of the earls of Warwick and Huntingdon. Wigginton left London on his release and returned to his home town of Oundle where he joined and took a leading role within a group of radical dissenters in the town who withdrew from the parish church to nearby Stoke Doyle, where the squire, Anthony Palmer, was sympathetic. This group, which included the schoolmaster Robert Pamphlin and William Hacket, a local maltster, disrupted the religious life of the town considerably in the years up to 1590. 
Wigginton had not severed his connections with the north and returned intermittently to his former parish at Sedbergh where he preached unlicensed. While in Yorkshire, Wigginton was arrested and imprisoned in Lancaster gaol from where, on 27 February 1587, he sought the help of his old patron Mildmay. His treatment by Whitgift figured largely in the first of the Marprelate tracts, 'The Epistle', and this fact, along with his former reputation, made him one of the first suspects for the authorship. He was arraigned before the high commission on 6 December 1588, when he again refused the oath and found himself imprisoned in the Gatehouse once more. Though not the author of the Marprelate tracts Wigginton did pen lively accounts of his earlier confrontations with Whitgift which survive in manuscript and may have provided the Marprelate source, and he appears also to have transcribed some separatist writings at this time. While in prison he composed a 'Treatise on predestination' and, more in keeping with his style, he also compiled a mock set of visitation articles, purporting to emanate from Whitgift, in which he set out the agenda of the godly while pillorying the archbishop. Wigginton remained in prison for some time and was visited there by his former associate from Oundle William Hacket, whose frenzied response to the crisis within puritanism following the arrest of the leaders of the classes was to prove disastrous. Through Wigginton, Hacket made the acquaintance of Edmund Copinger and they, with Henry Arthington, embarked on the series of events that led to the announcement of the second coming, followed by the suicide of Copinger and the execution of Hacket in July 1591. The extent of Wigginton's knowledge and involvement in what was to prove a calamity to the puritan cause remains obscure, but he is credited with authorship of a pamphlet, 'The Fool's Bolt', distributed by the conspirators, and the authorities were quick to implicate him in the events. 
Wigginton was released from prison and sought the support of Burghley in trying unsuccessfully to regain his old living at Sedbergh. His movements thereafter remain obscure: he wrote to Burghley on 4 April 1597 outlining plans for a college to train clergy to engage in controversy with the Roman Catholic missioners and presenting him with a manuscript treatise written against the papists, and in the same year he was presented for preaching unlicensed in his brother's Northamptonshire parish of Collingtree and for disturbing the incumbent of the nearby parish of Blisworth by, characteristically, rushing into the pulpit to preach a sermon of his own. With that he disappears from the record, possibly to the anonymity of his old stamping ground in London where a daughter of his was baptized, at Stratford Bow, later that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 29369


Wigheard (d. 664x7), archbishop-elect of Canterbury, was a Kentish priest and cleric under Archbishop Deusdedit. Following the death of Deusdedit in July 664, he was nominated as archbishop by Ecgberht, king of Kent, and sent to Rome, where he died of the plague before he could be consecrated. The existence of a letter from Pope Vitalian to Oswiu, king of Northumbria, apparently answering a request to appoint an archbishop, led Bede to infer that Wigheard had been sent jointly by both kings. This is unlikely. The pope did, however, probably consult some of Wigheard's companions on the question of filling the vacant see of Canterbury, to which he eventually appointed Theodore in March 668. 


@@@@@


doc= 29370


Wight, Robert (1796-1872), botanist, was born at Milton, Duncra Hill, East Lothian, on 6 July 1796, the twelfth of fourteen children of Alexander Wight, a writer to the signet, and his wife, Jane. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and the University of Edinburgh, gaining his surgeon's diploma in 1816 and graduating MD two years later. 
Wight went on several voyages as surgeon, including one to America, before entering the East India Company's service in 1819. He was appointed assistant surgeon on 25 May of that year, and attached to the 42nd native infantry stationed at Madras, where he employed Indians to collect plants, and, then knowing little about botany, obtained copies of G. L. Willdenow's 'Species plantarum', C. H. Persoon's 'Synopsis', and an English translation of Linnaeus's 'Genera plantarum'. A collection sent by him to Professor Robert Graham in 1823 was lost at sea, but one formed at Samulcotta, Rajahmundry, Vellore, and Madras, reached W. J. Hooker at Glasgow in 1826. In that year Wight was appointed to succeed James Shuter as naturalist in the Madras presidency. He made an extensive tour, lasting nine months, in the southern provinces (his route is marked on the map in N. Wallich's 'Plantae Asiaticae rariores') during which he collected birds, insects, and minerals as well as many plants. In 1828, on the abolition of his Madras office, Wight was appointed garrison surgeon at Negapatam and thoroughly explored that neighbourhood and Tanjore, employing Indian collectors and artists at his own expense. 
In 1831, having attained the rank of surgeon on 22 February, Wight contracted jungle fever and returned home on three years' leave, most of which he spent in Edinburgh. He carried with him about 100,000 plant specimens, the duplicates of which he distributed to institutions and individuals in Britain and Europe. He published an account of part of his Indian collection in four articles in W. J. Hooker's 'Botanical Miscellany' (vols. 2 and 3, 1830-33). These were included in his 'Illustrations of Indian Botany, Principally of the Southern Parts of the Peninsula' (1831-2). This book and three of the four articles incorrectly give Wight's forename as Richard. 
However, during his leave Wight was mainly occupied in preparing, with George Walker-Arnott, one of his chief works, the 'Prodromus florae peninsulae Indiae orientalis' (1839), which J. D. Hooker and T. Thomson, in their introductory essay to the 'Flora Indica' (1855), described as 'the most able and valuable contribution to Indian botany which has ever appeared, and one which has few rivals in the whole domain of botanical literature'. Wight's return to India resulted in only the first volume's being published: even so, that work describes nearly fourteen hundred species, using A. P. de Candolle's natural classification, and in 1833-7 Wight issued a lithographic catalogue of 2400 species enumerated in it. While Wight was staying with Hooker in Glasgow he learned the craft of lithography and purchased presses and tools to use in India. With J. E. Smith's and J. Sowerby's 'English Botany' (1790-1814) as his model, it was his intention to publish a series of plates of Indian plants. 
On returning to India in 1834 Wight was attached to the 33rd native infantry at Bellary, and marched with them to Palamcottai, near Cape Comorin, a distance of some 700 miles. There he recruited three Indian collectors. He then planned a systematic series of plates to illustrate J. R. Ainslie's 'Materia medica of Hindustaan' (1813; 2nd edn, 1826), a scheme which he never carried out but in the course of which he published various papers on medicinal plants in the 'Madras Journal of Science'. The garden formed by the Agri-Horticultural Society of Madras in 1835 got off to a good start with Wight as its dynamic secretary. The following year he was seized with a severe attack of fever in Tinnevelly and convalesced for a few weeks in Ceylon. In the same year he was relieved of military duties and transferred to the revenue department, with instructions to investigate the state of agriculture in south India, in particular, cotton, tobacco, coffee, senna, and other useful plants. In this capacity he had charge from February 1842 to 1850 of experimental cotton farms at Coimbatore. (A detailed account of his work there is given in J. F. Royle, 'On the Culture and Commerce of Cotton in India', 1851, 467-523.) On 17 January 1838 Wight married Rosa Harriet, daughter of Lacy Gray Ford of the Madras medical board. 
By 1838 Wight had trained a team of Indian craftsmen capable of lithographing two illustrated books almost simultaneously. He embarked on their publication fully convinced that textual descriptions of plants alone were inadequate. 'Illustrations of Indian Botany' (1838-50) ceased after only two volumes with 182 crudely hand-coloured plates by Indian artists. The 2101 plates in the companion work, 'Icones plantarum Indiae orientalis' (1838-53), were uncoloured. Although the government of Madras subscribed to a small number of copies, Wight lost money on the venture but he had the satisfaction of knowing that 'The Indian Flora can now, I believe, boast of being more fully illustrated than that of any other country under British sway, Great Britain alone excepted' ('Icones', 6, 1853, v). He selected 200 plates from the 'Icones', depicting plants in the Nilgiri hills in south India, and had them coloured for his 'Spicilegium Neilgherrense' (1846-51) in a limited edition of 100 copies. 
Wight remained at Coimbatore until March 1853, when he retired, taking with him nearly 10,000 specimens, representing more than 4000 species, which he presented to Kew Gardens in 1871. He then purchased Grazeley Lodge, Shinfield, near Reading in Berkshire, formerly the residence of W. Mitford the historian, and farmed the 66 acres of this property. In 1861 and 1862 he contributed articles on cotton farming to the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', and from 1865 to 1868 he gave information on medicinal uses of Indian plants to Edward John Waring's 'Pharmacopoeia of India' (1868). He died at Grazeley Lodge on 26 May 1872; he was survived by his wife, four sons, and a daughter. 
A man of exceptional energy, tenacity and industry, Wight was never daunted by the magnitude of the tasks he undertook. He was an outstanding collector who described more than 3000 species of the Indian flora, some of them new to science. His achievements are even more impressive with the limited resources at his disposal in India and the absence of any financial support. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1832 and of the Royal Society in 1855 and is commemorated in the names of more than 120 plants (listed by R. K. Basak in 'Taxon', 30, 1981, 787-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 29371


Wightman, Edward (bap. 1580?, d. 1612), alleged heretic, may perhaps have been the child baptized on 14 July 1580 by his father John Wightman at Hinckley, Leicestershire; William Burton recorded in 1622 that he was from a family of the manor of Wykin in that parish. A report of his trial describes Wightman as a draper of the parish of Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, and he was resident there in early 1609, attending the exercises led by the celebrated puritan minister Arthur Hildersam in the town. Here he voiced some very unorthodox views which Hildersam and his friends failed to shake. Wightman then set down his ideas in a manuscript, consisting of eighteen sheets, and delivered the work personally to James I, who was hunting at Royston, Cambridgeshire. The king's commission confirmed the existence of 'a book written and subscribed by him, and given to us', but this has not survived ('A True Relation', 9). This initiative brought him to the notice of the authorities. According to Samuel Clarke, 'the Bishop and his friends gave out, that Wightman learned his opinions... of the puritans, and of the foresaid exercises, and of Master Hildersham by name'. But Wightman specifically denied this, recalling during his trial, at a public session on 26 November 1611 'in the hearing of five hundred people', that Hildersam had sought to confute his views in private conference, arguing 'that his opinion of soul-sleeping was directly repugnant to the scriptures', and had publicly opposed him on 21 April 1609 (Clarke, 117). Nevertheless, in the following months the bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Richard Neile, used Wightman's views as a means to denounce Hildersam before the king, in order to justify and authorize the suppression of the exercises with which he was associated, at both Burton and nearby Repton. 
By the time of the start of his trial for heresy in November 1611, Wightman had been imprisoned for over six months, having been examined at least five times, on 18 April, 6 May, 9 September, and 8 and 29 October, by Bishop Neile and others including the young William Laud, then president of St John's College, Oxford. Laud also attended the trial, which opened in the consistory of Lichfield Cathedral on 19 November; subsequent sessions were held on 26 and 29 November and from 2 to 5 December. On 2 December, Wightman was said to have recalled that he had abandoned an orthodox Trinitarian position within the previous two years. It is clear from the report of his sentence that he had also adopted what later came to be known as 'seeker' views, apparently identifying himself as one of the new apostles, or extraordinary men, who presaged the return of Christ. By now, he was found to hold 'That Jesus Christ is only man and a mere Creature and not both God and man in one person', but that 'Christ our saviour took not human flesh of the substance of the virgin Mary his mother'. His belief in the sleep of the soul in death applied also to Jesus. Wightman is said to have referred to the Nicene and Athanasian creeds and the 'twelve articles of the belief' as 'inventions of man' (Burrage, 2.218-19). 
On 3 December, Bishop Neile asked Wightman to confirm that the account of his views had been given 'freely of his own accord without distraction of mind', to which he replied in the affirmative (Burrage, 2.219-20). His conviction was 'as a heretic' but the punishment was imposed by the civil power through a writ of 9 March issued under the great seal for his execution, and directed to the sheriff of Lichfield ('A True Relation', 9). Much later, on 9 August 1639, Neile himself recalled Wightman's first ordeal at the stake: 'the fire [having] scorched him a little, he cried out that he would recant. The people thereupon ran into the fire and suffered themselves to be scorched to save him'; after reading a statement abjuring his views, Wightman was unchained and returned to prison. There, for two or three weeks, he considered his captors' demand for a formal written recantation. After refusing, he was brought once more to the consistory, where, reported Neile, he 'blasphemed more audaciously than before'; Neile's further recollection that he had 'died blaspheming' may therefore be taken to signify only that at his execution in April 1612 Wightman died reaffirming his earlier views ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 85). 


@@@@@


doc= 29372


Wightman, Joseph (d. 1722), army officer, was appointed ensign in the 1st foot guards on 29 December 1690. He progressed to lieutenant and captain on 7 August 1693, and to captain and lieutenant-colonel on 8 December 1696. He subsequently transferred to Sir Matthew Bridge's regiment and saw service in Flanders during the Nine Years' War (1689-97). In 1701 Wightman went with the regiment to the Netherlands prior to the onset of the War of the Spanish Succession (1702-13). He saw extensive active service during the duke of Marlborough's initial campaigns, and was promoted to lieutenant-colonel and took command of the regiment in 1702. On the recommendation of Marlborough, Wightman received the brevet rank of colonel on 26 August 1703, with the intention that he should command the contingent of troops earmarked for service in Spain. At this time Marlborough described Wightman as 'a very careful, diligent officer' (Murray, 1.192). In Spain, Wightman served with his regiment (now Holcroft Blood's) in the army of Henri de Massue de Ruvigny, earl of Galway; he was made brigadier-general on 1 January 1707, and fought at the battle of Almanza (25 April 1707). On Blood's death Wightman was appointed, on 20 August 1707, to the colonelcy of the regiment (subsequently the 17th foot, or Leicesters), and on 1 January 1710 he became major-general. 
On 12 June 1712 Wightman was appointed the commander-in-chief in Scotland, as the deputy for John Campbell, second duke of Argyll. The appointment came on the recommendation of General John Webb, despite Argyll's preference for Brigadier-General William Breton in the post. Wightman's position was, accordingly, rather awkward and Argyll's attitude toward his lieutenant seems to have been most unco-operative, with official correspondence to Argyll delayed or ignored altogether. Despite this, Wightman made extensive efforts to bolster the government's position in Scotland, at a time of rising sympathy for the Jacobite cause. At the outset of the 1715 rising Wightman shrewdly drew together his meagre forces and secured Stirling town and castle. Argyll joined him there from London in mid-September. Wightman commanded the infantry in the centre of the army at the battle of Sheriffmuir (13 November 1715) and, although the troops on his left broke, his solid defence held the highlanders' rush. This local success enabled Argyll to employ his cavalry on the right wing to disperse much of the Jacobite army. Rather inevitably there was some dispute between Wightman and Argyll over the meagre honours of the day. Wightman's own account, printed in 1717 as a part of Robert Patten's 'History of the Late Rebellion', was subsequently criticised by admirers of Argyll for being unduly partial. 
Wightman continued to serve in Scotland, and he commanded the government army at the small battle of Glenshiel during the Jacobite rising of 1719. His capable tactics, using mortars to unsettle the entrenched highlanders and then sending Campbell's dragoons (subsequently the Royal Scots Greys) to turn the flank of their position, were admirably successful. The rebels dispersed and the accompanying Spanish soldiers surrendered shortly afterwards. 
In recognition of his services in Scotland, Wightman was appointed governor of Kinsale in Ireland. Before taking up the post he died of a stroke when in Bath, on 25 September 1722. Probate, granted on 7 November 1722, suggests that he was usually resident in the parish of St James's, Westminster; administration was granted to his widow, Eliza. 


@@@@@


doc= 29373


Wightman, Sir William (1785-1863), judge, the eldest son of William Wightman, gentleman, of St Clement's, London, a member of an old Dumfriesshire family, and his wife, Elizabeth, was baptized on 2 September 1785 at St Clement Danes, Westminster. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 23 March 1801, and in the same year moved to Queen's College as a Michel exhibitioner. He graduated BA in 1805, and MA in 1809. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 31 January 1804, Wightman practised initially as a special pleader. In 1819 he married Charlotte Mary, a daughter of James Baird of Lasswade near Edinburgh; they had four daughters. 
Wightman was called to the bar in 1821, and in 1830 joined the Inner Temple 'ad eundem'. On the northern circuit his reputation as a sound and clear-headed lawyer brought him a large practice. He was engaged in the prosecutions arising out of the Bristol riots of 1831, but owing to his modesty was little known outside the profession. He gave assistance to the law officers of the crown for several years as junior counsel to the Treasury, and was appointed in 1831 to the royal commission on the courts of common law, and in 1833 to the commission concerned to codify the criminal law. 
On the resignation of Mr Justice Littledale, Wightman was appointed a justice of the court of queen's bench on 15 February 1841, and was knighted on 28 April of the same year. He served as a judge for nearly twenty-three years as the trusted colleague of three successive chief justices. He had a sound knowledge of the law, combined with patience, courtesy, and clear reasoning. As at the bar, he did not seek distinction, but fulfilled his duties with dignity and simplicity. Beyond his judicial capacity, he was a pleasant companion, and capable of displaying considerable literary knowledge. He was elected an honorary fellow of Queen's College, Oxford, in 1859. Seized with 'apoplexy' ('GM'), he died on circuit in the judges' lodgings at York on 10 December 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 29374


Wightwick, George (1802-1872), architect and writer on architecture, was born on 26 August 1802 at Alyn Bank, near Mold in Flintshire, the only child of William Wightwick (1775-1811), a country gentleman, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Taylor (1779-1864). William Wightwick was accidentally drowned in 1811, and in 1815 George's mother married Walter Damant, a widower with three children. Following the death of his father, George had been sent to board at Wolverhampton grammar school, but after his mother's remarriage the family moved to London, where he attended Dr Lord's school at Tooting until 1817. He trained as an architect, and in 1818 was articled to Edward Lapidge of Grosvenor Square. After completing his pupillage in 1823 he had difficulty obtaining permanent employment, but gained some work through writing and making drawings for 'The Public Buildings of London', by Britton and Pugin. In 1825, following the settlement of his deceased father's affairs, Wightwick made use of the little money available to him for a year's travel in Italy, and in 1828 he privately published 'Select Views of Roman Antiquities', well received but not commercially successful. In 1827 he took employment with Sir John Soane as companion and amanuensis. It was an acrimonious relationship that lasted only eight months, but which none the less resulted in a friendship that was important for Wightwick. Later that year he moved from London to join his family in the west country. 
Wightwick established himself in Plymouth, and was then invited to join the practice of John Foulston, the architect who had designed Plymouth's public buildings. The date and terms of this partnership are not known, but Foulston retired some six months later, leaving Wightwick to complete outstanding commissions, particularly work for the earl of Mount Edgcumbe at Stonehouse, as well as continuing with others, notably Bodmin Lunatic Asylum. On 26 August 1829 Wightwick married his stepsister Caroline Damant (1808-1867); that year he became increasingly busy, designing private houses, terraces, public buildings, shops, and churches in the Plymouth area and Cornwall. Many of his commissions emanated from the social network that he energetically cultivated and which was based upon his membership of the Plymouth Athenaeum. In Plymouth he designed the mechanics' institute ('c'.1827), Athenaeum Terrace (1832), the Esplanade (1836), and the post office at Devonport (1850; dem. 1945). In Devon he designed Calverleigh Court at Tiverton (1844) and Watermouth Castle, near Ilfracombe (1845). His work took him into Cornwall, and his country houses are noteworthy: Luxtowe in Liskeard (1831), Trevarno, near Helston (1839), Penquite at Golant (1848), and particularly the alterations to Tregrehan House at St Blazey (1848). 
Although Wightwick's buildings may seem random in variety, eclectic in style, and uncontroversial in execution, they were generally well regarded, but it was the design of his churches that provoked criticism. He designed nine churches, of which eight were built between 1834 and 1844, all to the same formula, a boxlike auditorium with only a shallow chancel and without aisles or pillars. It was Wightwick's belief that Gothic form should be modified to accommodate contemporary, popular requirements, a view he expressed in a series of articles for 'Weale's Quarterly Papers on Architecture' (1844-5), and which led to his downfall in the eyes of the ecclesiological establishment. Although his religiosity was later questioned, it was the depth of his convictions that defined his church design. He offended the increasingly ritualistic opinion of the high-church party, expressed in the pages of 'The Ecclesiologist', but Wightwick refused to compromise, and thus censured, his church commissions fell away. 
In 1852 Wightwick retired with his ailing wife to Bristol, and three years later moved to Portishead. Caroline Wightwick died on 19 June 1867, and six months later, on 2 January 1868, Wightwick married Isabella ('b'. 1832), the daughter of Samuel Jackson, the watercolour painter of Clifton. Both his marriages were childless. Wightwick died at his home, 2 Adelaide Terrace, Portishead, on 9 July 1872, and was buried in the graveyard of the local Anglican church, St Peter's, alongside his first wife. His second wife survived him. He left almost all his drawings, watercolours, and papers, including his manuscript lectures, to the RIBA, his architectural work largely contained within six carefully catalogued volumes. 
Throughout his professional life as well as in retirement Wightwick wrote extensively, and may be considered one of the first architectural journalists. Early in his career he wrote for two short-lived west country periodicals, 'The Philo-Danmonian' (January-June 1830), and the 'South Devon Monthly Museum' (January 1833 - June 1836). Later his 'Hints to Young Architects' (1846) was reprinted four times, and his terms of employment were printed in 'The Architect' (2, 1850). He contributed critical comment on Ruskin's 'Seven Lamps of Architecture' in six articles in the 'Architect and Building Operative' (November 1849 - January 1850). In retirement he contributed a series of articles on architecture to 'The Critic' between January 1852 and May 1858, and another series to the 'Edinburgh Building Chronicle' between May 1854 and May 1857. He wrote prolifically for other national journals, including 'Bentley's Miscellany', which published his autobiography 'The life of an architect' in parts between 1852 and 1854, and in 1852 contributed a monthly series on local architectural matters to the 'Bristol Times' under the pseudonym Robert Ramble. He was awarded the RIBA silver medal for his essay 'A critical study on the architecture and genius of Sir Christopher Wren' in 1859. Wightwick may now be remembered as an architect, but he was also a romantic pragmatist who sought to entertain as well as to educate through writing and lecturing. In 1840 'The Palace of Architecture: a Romance of Art and History' was published, his work of fantasy that embraced all architectural styles, a volume that represented this gregarious man as truly as his functional but ideologically incorrect churches. 


@@@@@


doc= 29375


Wiglaf (fl. 827-c.840), king of the Mercians, succeeded to the kingdom in 827, in very difficult circumstances. His predecessors Beornwulf and Ludeca had been killed in battle against the East Angles in 826 and 827; at the same time, King Ecgberht of Wessex had conquered the provinces of Kent, Surrey, Sussex, and Essex, formerly under Mercian control. Mercia's sudden decline seems to have been due to a continuing leadership crisis, which began with the death of King Cenwulf in 821 and was exacerbated by the deposition of Ceolwulf in 823. The origins of Beornwulf, Ludeca, and Wiglaf are obscure; they were probably regional rulers, strong enough to establish themselves on the throne, but not necessarily in a position to command the loyalty of all the Mercian factions. In 829 Ecgberht of Wessex conquered Mercia, deposed Wiglaf, and went on to receive the submission of the Northumbrians; he struck coins at the Mercian mint of London and a king-list indicates that he was briefly regarded as king of Mercia. But the annal for 830 in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' remarks: 'In this year Wiglaf again obtained the kingdom of the Mercians' ('ASC', text A, s.a. 828, 'recte' 830). There is no real evidence that Wiglaf rebelled against Ecgberht's authority; nor can it be shown that he was a client king of Ecgberht, despite the impression given by the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (essentially a West Saxon source for the ninth century), that Ecgberht's victories in 829 established him as overlord of all of southern England. This and other evidence does suggest, however, that some kind of political settlement arose between Wiglaf and Ecgberht. 
There is no overt indication of West Saxon interference in Mercian affairs in the years immediately after 830 (the invasion of Wales by Ecgberht in that year would have had to have been launched from Mercia, but it may well have taken place before Wiglaf's restoration). Wiglaf had control of Middlesex in 831 and would therefore seem to have regained the vital port of London, but the London mint became moribund early in his reign and no Mercian coinage was produced until the early 840s. Wiglaf disposed of land and issued charters without reference to Ecgberht; the earlier of the two surviving diplomas in his name is dated to 'the first year of my second reign', which shows that Wiglaf was prepared to acknowledge the fact of his temporary deposition. It must remain an open question whether Wiglaf was restored in 830 by his own efforts or by those of Ecgberht; whatever the circumstances, Wiglaf's 'second' reign appears to signal the beginning of a change in the relationship between Mercia and Wessex. The keynote is no longer a perennial hostility marked by frequent clashes, but rather a growing accommodation which matured into occasional alliances against the growing viking threat. 
Perhaps bolstered by an understanding with Ecgberht, Wiglaf managed to secure his position in Mercia and went on to rule until about 840. The exact date of his death has not been preserved, but it is known that he was buried in a mausoleum at Repton. The eighth-century Mercian ruler AEthelbald (died 757) had also been interred at Repton; Wiglaf may have been a kinsman or descendant of AEthelbald, but it is also possible that the place of his burial was chosen simply to associate him and his family with earlier greatness. His queen, Cynethryth, may have represented an alliance with another Mercian faction (Offa's queen had the same name), but she is known only from her attestations to Wiglaf's two diplomas. The earlier of these, which dates from 831, is also attested by Wiglaf's son, Wigmund. According to the 'Passio sancti Wigstani', which may be based on a ninth-century source, Wiglaf arranged for Wigmund to marry a daughter of King Ceolwulf named AElfflaed; they had a son, Wigstan, who was later murdered and venerated as a saint at Repton. The 'passio' suggests that Wigmund did indeed become king after Wiglaf's death. There is no independent evidence to support this claim (although it must be admitted that the sources for this period are very poor indeed), and the fact that Wigmund does not attest Wiglaf's diploma of 836 may indicate that he died before his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 29376


Wigner, George William (1842-1884), analytical chemist, was born on 19 October 1842 at Norfolk Street, King's Lynn, the eldest son of John Thomas Wigner, minister of the local Baptist church, and his wife, Harriett Louisa ('nee' Ovenden). He was educated at Lynn grammar school before becoming a clerk in a private banking firm in London in 1859. 
Wigner spent his leisure time studying chemistry, and, following a lecture he gave on the subject, was offered, in 1864, a post in the Deptford chemical works of Frank Hills. In 1867, in conjunction with the bullion brokers W. C. and R. G. Sillar, Wigner developed the ABC process of sewage treatment, which was patented in June 1868. Using a mixture of alum, blood, and clay, the patentees hoped to purify sewage and at the same time produce a powerful manure. In the same year that the patent was granted, Wigner became managing director of the Native Guano Company, set up to work the process. Despite the insinuation by the royal commission on river pollution in 1870 that the ABC process was fraudulent, it remained the most durable of chemical sewage treatment processes, and was still operating in the late 1880s. 
In the early 1870s Wigner ceased to be active in the Native Guano Company, and in 1872 he began practice in Great Tower Street as a chemical analyst, specializing in commercial materials and foodstuffs. On 4 April in the same year he married Fanny Louisa (1850/51-1884), daughter of William Harrison, wholesale grocer. In 1878 Wigner carried out a programme of analyses of the waters of seaside towns, sponsored by the 'Sanitary Record', and published as 'Seaside water: an examination into the character of the water-supply at the watering places of England and Wales' (1878). Wigner's salutary warning that many places to which holiday makers were resorting for health were unhealthy brought forth hostile criticism from local medical men and partisan chemists. 
Wigner was a promoter of the 'Sale of Food and Drugs Act' of 1875 and principal founder of the Society of Public Analysts in the same year. He served as public analyst for Plumstead, Greenwich, and Deptford. Recognizing that prosecutions often failed due to disagreement over proper methodology, he was an early leader in the movement for standard methods. In 1876 Wigner and John Muter became proprietors as well as editors of 'The Analyst'. Wigner's editorial criticism of some of his colleagues' methods strained the fellowship of the young society but strengthened the profession. As editor, as secretary of the society from its beginning until 1883, and as president during the last year of his life, Wigner made the society and the journal a clearing-house of information in the fight against adulteration, compiling annual reports from public analysts in Britain and America, reviewing trends in adulteration, and undertaking analytical and legal efforts against it. A definition of adulteration drafted by Wigner won a prize from the United States national board of health in 1880 and was incorporated into legislation passed by several states. In 1878 he proposed a point system that would sum the results of several tests and allow ready comparison of waters from different towns. Comparisons using a simplified version of the scale were published annually in 'The Analyst' during the early 1880s. 
Wigner was a fellow of the Chemical Society and of the Institute of Chemistry. Most of his approximately fifty scientific papers were contributions to 'The Analyst' on many aspects of food and water chemistry. He died at his home, 82 Wickham Road, Brockley, of stricture of the oesophagus on 17 October 1884, a few months after the death from rheumatic fever of his wife, and was buried in Brockley cemetery five days later. The couple were survived by their two small children. 


@@@@@


doc= 29377


George Vicesimus Wigram (1805-1879), writer and lexicographer, was born in Walthamstow, Essex, on 28 March 1805, the twentieth child of Sir Robert Wigram, and the fourteenth with his second wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Watts. Converted in 1824 as a young officer he left the army and entered Queen's College, Oxford, in 1826, but did not graduate. He intended to take orders in the Church of England but Bishop Blomfield declined to ordain him on the grounds of his extreme evangelical views. In 1827 he met with John Nelson Darby in Oxford and joined the (Plymouth) Brethren, devoting himself at the same time to the study of the biblical text. In 1831 Wigram published 'A Protest Against the National Establishment of England', and towards the end of the same year organized the first Brethren congregation in London. In 1834 his first wife, Fanny, died. She was daughter of Thomas Cherbury Bligh. He later made a second marriage, to Catherine, only daughter of William Parnell of Avondale and aunt of Charles Stewart Parnell. 


@@@@@


doc= 29378


Wigram, Sir James (1793-1866), judge and legal writer, was born at Walthamstow House, Essex, on 5 November 1793, the third son of Sir Robert Wigram (1744-1830) and his second wife, Eleanor Wigram (1767-1841), daughter of John Watts of Southampton. Wigram's father, a merchant and shipowner, and MP for Wexford and Fowey, was created baronet in 1805. His elder brother, the second baronet, changed his name to Fitzwygram in 1832. Another of his brothers was Joseph Cotton Wigram. Wigram was educated privately before matriculating in 1811 at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA as fifth wrangler in 1815, and proceeded MA in 1818. He gained a fellowship at Trinity in 1817 but vacated this on his marriage on 24 December 1818 to Anne (died 1844), daughter of Richard Arkwright of Willersley Castle, Derbyshire, and granddaughter of Sir Richard Arkwright. The couple had four sons and five daughters. 
Wigram was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 18 June 1813, and called to the bar on 18 November 1819. He practised in the court of chancery with such success that he was appointed king's counsel on 27 December 1834 and was elected a bencher of his inn in January 1835. In 1831 he published his 'Examination of the rules of law respecting the admission of extrinsic evidence in aid of the interpretation of wills' which went through four editions in his lifetime, and appeared in a fifth edition in 1914. This was followed in 1836 by his 'Points in the Law of Discovery' (2nd edn., 1840). These books led to an interesting correspondence with some of the American judges, including the eminent commentator Joseph Story who regarded them as 'works of extraordinary merit, ability, and learning, and eminently useful to the profession' ('Life and Letters of Joseph Story', ed. W. W. Story, 2 vols., 1851). 
Wigram's wife's family owned considerable property in the neighbourhood of Leominster, Herefordshire, and supported by this Wigram stood as parliamentary candidate for Leominster as a tory in 1837. He was unsuccessful, but was returned for the borough without opposition at the next general election on 28 June 1841, but sat only until his appointment to the bench as a vice-chancellor on 30 October 1841, following the statute 5 Vict. c. 5 which provided for the appointment of two further vice-chancellors. He was knighted on 15 January 1842 and sworn of the privy council, becoming a member of its judicial committee. His decrees, well reported by Thomas Hare, were remarkable for their lucid exposition of legal principle and were generally admired. He resigned on 26 October 1850 as a result of an illness which led to complete blindness, and was granted a pension of $3500 a year. He died at his home, 68 Portland Place, London, on 29 July 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 29379


Wigram, Joseph Cotton (1798-1867), bishop of Rochester, was born at Walthamstow, Essex, on 26 December 1798, the fifteenth child of Sir Robert Wigram, first baronet (1744-1830), an eminent Irish merchant and shipowner of London and Wexford. His mother, Sir Robert's second wife, was Eleanor Wigram (1767-1841), daughter of John Watts of Southampton. Joseph was educated privately at Fulham and proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA as sixth wrangler in 1820, MA in 1823, and DD in 1860. He was ordained deacon in November 1822 by the bishop of Ely and priest in May 1823 by William Howley, bishop of London. He served as a curate of Leytonstone, Essex, from 1822. In 1827 he became a district clergyman in the parish of St James, Westminster, under the Revd J. G. Ward. His twelve years of devoted work saw five new schools built and teams of visitors established. The chapel of ease for which he was responsible was rebuilt and opened as St Luke's Church, Berwick Street. He was also appointed secretary of the National Society from 1827, a position he held until 1839. On 1 March 1837 he married Susan Maria (1816-1864), daughter of Peter Arkwright of Willersley in Derbyshire. On 28 March 1839 he was appointed by James Scott rector of East Tisted in Hampshire, and in 1850 removed to the rectory of St Mary's, Southampton, which was in the gift of Charles Sumner, bishop of Winchester. On 16 November 1847 he was collated archdeacon of Winchester. He also held a canonry at Winchester Cathedral from 1850 until his consecration as bishop of Rochester on Ascension day 1860 in the parish church of St Mary, Lambeth. Bishop Charles Sumner wrote: 'my right arm is cut off to furnish Rochester with its chief ruler' (Sumner, 397). He died in London at 15A Grosvenor Square on 6 April 1867 and was buried at Latton parish church in Essex alongside his wife. They had six sons and three daughters. 
Wigram's qualities as a Christian leader have been somewhat underestimated. His archidiaconal report on the problems of Portsea (1851) demonstrated a far-sighted awareness of the problems of a naval parish and how they might be addressed. As a bishop Wigram was a resolute opponent of non-residency in his diocese, which then included Essex and most of Hertfordshire. He was a conscientious pastor to his clergy and worked to raise their minimum salary to $250 per annum. He was staunchly committed to the parochial system and a decided advocate of mission women to assist the clergy. He argued that infants be baptized at public worship and that confirmation candidates should be given careful and full instruction. Wigram also promoted national day schools and evening institutions for adults. Although appointed by Lord Palmerston, Wigram was not quite 'of his politics', as Owen Chadwick observed (1.472). One explanation for this was Palmerston's overriding concern to have bishops who, regardless of their political allegiance, would make an active contribution to the debates in the House of Lords on church affairs. Wigram was a conscientious bishop of evangelical views, who on one occasion somewhat rashly denounced his clergy for wearing moustaches and playing cricket with their parishioners on village greens. Wigram's strong advocacy of lay agents to assist the incumbent in the parish and his teaching on the second advent suggest that his sympathies were with the Recordites. When he died Bishop Charles Sumner wrote that 'he was one of the most single-minded, straightforward men I have ever known, somewhat cold in manner, but full of energy and devotion to his work. The diocese will never have a more disinterested and unselfish head' (Sumner, 397n). 
Wigram was essentially a pastor rather than a scholar and the bulk of his published writing related to practical and ministerial topics. In addition to a number of sermons and pamphlets he wrote 'Elementary Arithmetic' (1831), 'The Geography of the Holy Land' (1832; 5th edn, 1855), 'Practical Hints on the Formation and Management of Sunday Schools' (1833), 'The Cottager's Daily Family Prayers' (1862), and 'Daily Hymns for the Month' (1866). 
His younger brother, 
In his youth Wigram lavished his immense wealth on clothes and horses; at Oxford he kept a close carriage. Latterly he used his inheritance for religious publishing. He became dissatisfied with Alexander Cruden's biblical concordance because it gave no clues as to the Greek language. In 1839 he therefore financed and published 'The Englishman's Greek and English Concordance of the New Testament', a second edition of which appeared in 1844 and an index in the following year. This work was based on the concordance of E. Schmidt and contained an alphabetical arrangement of every word in the Greek text. It was followed in 1843 by 'The English's Hebrew and Chaldee Concordance of the Old Testament'. Later, in 1867, he edited with W. Chalk 'The Hebraist's Vade Mecum', which was the first attempt at a complete verbal index to the contents of the Hebrew and Chaldee scriptures. 
The close friend and associate of John Nelson Darby, Wigram sided with him in the split with the (Plymouth) Brethren which resulted in the setting up of the separate Exclusive Brethren in 1849. Indeed it is clear that Wigram's unbending disposition inclined Darby to maintain his differences with Plymouth groups. Wigram initiated and edited a new journal for the Exclusives under the title of 'Present Testimony'. Along with Darby he contributed articles and teaching which helped to generate the rapid expansion of Exclusivism in the middle Victorian years. 
Wigram died on 1 January 1879 at his house, 45 Great Cumberland Place, London, leaving more than $50,000 of the money he had inherited from his father's estate. Seven or eight hundred people, 'almost entirely well-to-do middle class', attended his funeral at Paddington cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29380


Wihtgar (d. 544?), king of Wight, was the eponymous founder of the dynasty which ruled the Isle of Wight until 685 and from which King Alfred's mother, Osburh, claimed descent. Wihtgar is said in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' to have fought with Stuf against the British in 514, following the arrival of the West Saxons with three ships at 'Cerdicesora'. In 534 Stuf and Wihtgar are recorded as receiving the Isle of Wight from their kinsmen Cerdic and Cynric; in 544 Wihtgar is said to have died and been buried at 'Wihtgarabyrig'. 
Wihtgar is one of several examples in the early annals of the chronicle of presumably mythic individuals whose names seem to be derived from places with which they were associated. The first element of his name is an Anglicization of Vecta, the Latin name of the Isle of Wight, whose inhabitants were sometimes referred to in Anglo-Saxon sources as Wihtgara. The genealogy of the royal house of Kent also incorporated names in Wiht-, and there seems to have been an early association between Kent and Wight. Bede believed that both were areas of Jutish settlement and finds from Anglo-Saxon cemeteries on the Isle of Wight have their closest parallels in Kent. It is difficult to disentangle any truths about the origins of the kingdom of Wight from the entries in the chronicle, which clearly follow established conventions for foundation myths, though it should be noted that Stuf, unlike Wihtgar, is an acceptable personal name. The linking of the myths of Stuf and Wihtgar with those of Cerdic and Cynric is likely to have occurred after 685 when Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, conquered the island and had its last king, Aruald, and his two brothers, put to death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29381


Wihtred (d. 725), king of Kent, was the son of Ecgberht I (d. 673) ['see under 'Eorcenberht] and the brother of Eadric (d. 686) ['see under 'Hlothhere], both rulers in Kent. For several years after Eadric's death Kent had been at the mercy of foreign invaders, who had set their own candidates on the throne: Mul ('r'. 686-7), brother of the West Saxon king Caedwalla; Swaefheard ('r'. 687/8- 'c'.692), son of the East Saxon king Saebbi; and Oswine ('r'. 688/9-690?), backed by the Mercian king AEthelred. Eventually Wihtred managed to build up enough support to make good his claims to the kingship. In July 692 Swaefheard and Wihtred were ruling together in Kent; they may have been joint rulers, or the kingdom may have been divided between them. Bede's calculations about the length of Wihtred's reign suggest that he first came to power in the autumn of 690, but some of Wihtred's charters indicate that the beginning of his reign was usually reckoned from the summer or autumn of 691. By 694 Swaefheard had disappeared from the scene, for in a charter of that year Wihtred made a grant of land without reference to a joint ruler, and explicitly gave thanks to God 'who has extended our boundaries as they were in our father's time' ('AS chart.', S 15). In this charter, Wihtred's wife Cynegyth is presented as co-donor; no earlier Kentish queen had been given this status in a charter, and after Wihtred's reign they once more sink into obscurity, so it may have been the case that Cynegyth was given additional importance because Wihtred relied on the support of her kindred. 
In the early years of Wihtred's sole reign there is evidence for close relations between Kent and Wessex. In 694 the people of Kent 'made terms with Ine' (king of the West Saxons from 688 to 726) and presented him with 30,000 pence in compensation for the killing of the West Saxon usurper Mul in 687 ('ASC', s.a. 694); it may be significant that the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' links this event with Wihtred's succession to the kingdom of Kent. Either in 695 or in 696 Wihtred proclaimed a set of laws in the course of a Kentish assembly at an unidentified place called 'Berghamstyde'. In comparison with other seventh-century law-codes, Wihtred's laws seem particularly preoccupied with ecclesiastical matters, such as the position of the church and churchmen in secular society, and the enforcement of lay observance of ecclesiastical rules. Towards the end Wihtred turns to the more worldly matter of the treatment of thieves, and closes with a prescription that strangers and foreigners should keep to the road or be assumed to be thieves. Remarkably this same provision is to be found in the law code of King Ine (issued between 688 and 694), which implies that the two rulers had come to some agreement about the treatment of foreigners in their respective kingdoms. 
After its difficult beginning, Wihtred's long reign seems to have been remarkably uneventful; but the sources are poor for this period and certain triumphs and calamities may have slipped from the record. It has been suggested that in the 690s the kingdoms of Anglo-Saxon England arrived at an involuntary balance of power, which led to a period of relative stability; Northumbria was in decline and Mercia was deterred from trying to conquer south-eastern England by the existence of strong kings (with a mutual understanding) in Wessex and Kent. Possibly this impression of relative peace is a product of inadequate source material; there is a hint of troubles in the preamble of the grant of privileges which Wihtred made to the Kentish churches in 699. Nevertheless, it is clear that Wihtred must have been a very able (or very fortunate) king to rule the wealthy kingdom of Kent for more than thirty years, apparently without challenge, and to be able to hand it on to his sons. He may well have made judicious use of alliances, regularly cemented by marriage. His first wife, Cynegyth, seems to have died or to have been repudiated very quickly, for in a charter of 696 there is a new royal consort named AEthelburh, again presented as co-donor of the estate; she appears prominently in Wihtred's other charters from the late 690s. Towards the end of his reign Wihtred was associated with a third queen, named Waerburh, who attested with her husband and her son Alric the proceedings of a synod that took place at Bapchild, probably in 716 ('AS chart.', S 22); the charter as it stands is spurious, but the forger has made use of witness lists from a genuine document or documents. Wihtred also seems to have strengthened his position by winning the firm support of the Kentish churches. In his law code he exempted them from the payment of royal tribute, a concession strengthened by a charter of privileges issued in 699. He is also known to have made land grants to the monastery of St Peter and St Paul (later St Augustine's) in Canterbury, and to the ministers in Thanet and Lyminge; in some late sources he is remembered as the founder of the minster at Dover. 
Wihtred died on 23 April 725 and was buried in St Mary's Church in the monastery of St Peter and St Paul, Canterbury. He was succeeded by his three sons: AEthelberht II (d. 762), Eadberht I ['see under 'AEthelberht II], and Alric. Nothing more is heard of Alric after Wihtred's death, which suggests that he may have been denied power by his half-brothers (he was evidently the son of a different wife, Waerburh); his elder brothers ruled jointly until Eadberht's death in 748. 


@@@@@


doc= 29382


Wikeford, Robert (d. 1390), archbishop of Dublin and administrator, was probably born at Wickford Hall, Essex. A scholar and fellow (1344) of Merton College, Oxford, he subsequently studied abroad and became doctor of laws. He was a king's clerk and acquired interests in Henley and elsewhere in Surrey. He was rector of Avington church, Hampshire, in 1351 and held numerous other preferments, including the prebends of Scamblesby in Lincoln (1363), Ludington in Shaftesbury (1368), and North Newbald in York (1370). In October 1361 Wikeford was collated to the archdeaconry of Winchester. He was also, by 1380, dean of the king's free chapel in Penkridge, Stafford. He served the king overseas, first on a mission in November 1368 to Pope Urban V, and then on diplomatic assignments in various locations, including Brabant (1370), Flanders and the Flemish cities (1371), and Aquitaine (1373). He held the post of constable of Bordeaux from 7 March 1373 until 23 July 1375. On 12 October 1375 Wikeford was promoted by papal provision to the archbishopric of Dublin, the temporalities being restored on 30 January 1376. He was appointed chancellor of Ireland on 18 July 1376 but did not, apparently, take up office immediately. He was reappointed on 26 September 1377, after the accession of Richard II, but was replaced on 15 December 1378 by Robert Sutton, nominated keeper of the seal. In 1378 Wikeford was active in the defence of Dublin against the Irish of Leinster. He successfully petitioned in 1380 for the restoration to his see of the manor of Swords, seized in 1377 in the course of investigations by Nicholas Dagworth. 
In March 1384 Wikeford went to England on business concerning both the king's interests and those of his see. Following this he was reappointed chancellor on 10 September 1384, with special privileges reserving to the king any complaints against him. In December 1384 he was rebuked for exceeding his authority and acting without the consent of Philip Courtenay, lord lieutenant, and was relieved of his office before 27 March 1385. He was, however, chosen with Alexander Balscot, bishop of Ossory, to report to the king from the great council in October 1385, which asked for royal intervention to defend the lordship. Wikeford was absent from Ireland from January 1386 until 27 September 1387. He was among the advisers to Richard II witnessing the Shrewsbury statement of the judges in September 1387 which declared illegal the proceedings of the recent commission; and, according to the monk of Westminster, he betrayed the judgment to the duke of Gloucester. Wikeford died on 28 August 1390, leaving money to Merton College for all the altars in the college chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 29383


Wilberforce, Henry William (1807-1873), Roman Catholic convert and journalist, the youngest son of William Wilberforce (1759-1833), politician and philanthropist, and his wife, Barbara Ann Spooner (1777-1847), was born at Clapham, Surrey, on 22 September 1807. Two of his elder brothers were Robert Isaac Wilberforce and Samuel Wilberforce. At the age of nine Henry was sent for private tuition to the Revd John Sargent, rector of Graffham, Sussex. He was transferred six years later with his brother Samuel to the Revd F. R. Spragge's establishment at Little Bounds, Bidborough, Kent. He matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 16 March 1826, going into residence the following Michaelmas term. During four long vacations he read with John Henry Newman, whose intimate friend he became. He was active in the debates of the Oxford Union, of which he was elected president. He graduated BA in 1830 with a first class in classics and a second class in mathematics. Initially intending to become a barrister, he was admitted to study at Lincoln's Inn in 1831, but he continued to reside at Oxford, where he won the Ellerton theological prize and took his MA degree in 1833. 
Under Newman's influence Wilberforce decided to give up the law and take holy orders. He was ordained deacon in 1834 and immediately appointed by his relative Charles Richard Sumner, bishop of Winchester, perpetual curate of Bransgore, on the edge of the New Forest. He had just married, on 24 July 1834, Mary (1811-1878), the fourth daughter of his former tutor John Sargent. One of her sisters married his brother Samuel; another married Henry Edward Manning. They had five sons and four daughters; four of the children died young. Wilberforce was an ardent supporter of the Tractarian movement, with advanced liturgical ideas which he put into practice in his parishes. In 1838 he published 'The Parochial System: an Appeal to English Churchmen', a plea for church extension and lay stewardship. In 1841 the archbishop of Canterbury nominated him to the vicarage of Walmer, near Deal. In 1843, on the suggestion of the prince consort, he was presented by the lord chancellor to the wealthy vicarage of East Farleigh, near Maidstone, held some years earlier by his brother Robert. 
Preceded by his wife, Wilberforce was received into the Roman Catholic church on 15 September 1850, resigning his vicarage. He published 'Reasons for Submitting to the Catholic Church: a Farewell Letter to his Parishioners' in 1851, which led to a controversy and reached its sixth edition in 1855. As a married former parson, he was excluded from both his clerical and legal vocations. There was little employment for him in his new church, and he was often in financial difficulties; but his spirits were never dampened. In 1852 he became secretary of the newly founded Catholic Defence Association in Dublin. This led to the publication of 'Proselytism in Ireland' (1852), a correspondence between him and the Revd Alexander Dallas on the latter's Irish church missions. In 1854 Wilberforce became proprietor and editor of a London weekly newspaper, the 'Catholic Standard', renamed in 1855 the 'Weekly Register'. In the politics of Roman Catholic journalism the 'Weekly Register' was the Liberal rival of the tory 'Tablet'. Wilberforce was cautiously supportive of the liberal Catholics Sir John Acton and Richard Simpson and their 'Rambler' and 'Home and Foreign Review'. Wearying of the burden of editing a weekly, Wilberforce put the 'Weekly Register' up for sale in 1863 and sold it in 1864. Thereafter he confined his journalism to writing more than twenty articles and reviews for the 'Dublin Review', seven of which were posthumously published by his sons as 'The Church and the Empires' (1874), with a biographical memoir by Newman. Throughout his life it was this good man's fate to be overshadowed by more distinguished connections. A journey to Jamaica having failed to restore his health, Wilberforce died on 23 April 1873 at his residence, Chester House, Stroud, Gloucestershire, and was buried in the nearby Dominican churchyard at Woodchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 29384


Wilberforce, Robert Isaac (1802-1857), Roman Catholic convert, was born on 19 December 1802 at Broomfield, on Clapham Common, the fourth child and second son of William Wilberforce (1759-1833) and his wife, Barbara Ann (1777-1847), eldest daughter of Isaac Spooner of Elmden Hall, Coventry. Two of his three brothers (William, the eldest, and Henry Wilberforce, the youngest) were later received into the Roman church, and Samuel Wilberforce -- three years his junior -- became successively bishop of Oxford and of Winchester. 
Wilberforce was educated at a private school owned by the Revd E. G. Marsh at Nuneham Courtenay, near Oxford, proceeding thence to Oriel College, Oxford, in 1820. He obtained first-class honours in both classics and mathematics in 1823, and three years later gained the prestigious prize of a fellowship at Oriel, becoming the colleague of the future leading spirits of the Oxford Movement: John Keble, John Henry Newman, Edward Pusey, and Richard Hurrell Froude. He proceeded to deacon's orders after taking up his fellowship and was ordained priest in 1828. 
At this time Wilberforce's religious views were in a state of flux. He had experienced an abortive love affair shortly after taking his degree and had seriously considered becoming a missionary. In addition, his first meeting with Keble in the summer of 1823, while studying under him at a reading party at Southrop parsonage in the company of Froude and Isaac Williams, had caused him some perplexity, as he encountered for the first time the high Anglican tradition of churchmanship so utterly different in its emphasis and spirituality from the evangelicalism of his father and his Clapham friends. Cautious by nature, he reserved his judgement. In 1827, however, after reading Keble's newly published 'The Christian Year', all his misgivings disappeared, and he was prepared to declare his total devotion to its author. Up to that point he had been most closely in sympathy with Pusey, and had determined to emulate him in acquiring a command of German and Hebrew; to this end he had obtained from Pusey letters of introduction to the disciples of Schleiermacher at the universities of Gottingen and Bonn. On the eve of his departure for Germany in the winter of 1827, however, circumstances at Oxford intervened. Edward Copleston, provost of Oriel, was appointed bishop of Llandaff, and Wilberforce -- anxious to see Keble at the head of his college -- remained in Oxford to press his claims at the ensuing election. In the event Edward Hawkins was elected provost, and Wilberforce subsequently accepted a post as college tutor. 
For the next three years the relationship between Wilberforce and Newman (and R. H. Froude, another recently appointed tutor) became closer -- they had been so close, indeed, that Newman offered Wilberforce a curacy at St Mary's in 1829, which he declined; shared family social occasions aroused speculation that a match was imminent between Wilberforce and Newman's sister Jemima. Conflict at Oriel between the three junior tutors and the new provost began in the summer of 1828. Wilberforce broached a proposal, soon militantly championed by Newman and Froude, that tutorial responsibility, hitherto little more than that of a college lecturer, should be rendered more appropriate to a scholar in orders by the giving to each tutor of special charge for a limited number of serious students ('reading men' as opposed to the idle gentlemen commoners), over whom they would exercise both academic and moral supervision. Hawkins, at first sympathetic, became uneasy at what he suspected -- not without reason -- might encourage favouritism and provide an opportunity to indulge in religious proselytism. Disagreement turned into conflict in 1829 when Sir Robert Peel resigned as MP for the university on the question of Catholic emancipation, and Newman and Hawkins found themselves on opposite sides in the consequent bitter parliamentary election. Peel -- to Hawkins's chagrin -- failed to regain his seat, and the provost interpreted Newman's opposition to him as yet another attempt to undermine his authority. His decision to refuse to assign new pupils to Newman, Wilberforce, and Froude effectively led to the termination of their tutorships in 1831. 
Wilberforce had been loath to support Newman in his campaign against Peel. He was not by nature a fighter. Unlike his dearly loved brother Samuel, he was a shy, self-effacing man -- unambitious, studious, slow to commit himself. For him, release from college duties meant the opportunity, at last, to study in Germany, and he left for Bonn in the summer of 1831. However, German student life appalled him; he could read German but felt too embarrassed to speak it. Being slightly deaf, he could not understand it when spoken to him, so his attendance at lectures induced instant sleep. Also he felt homesick. He returned to England in December 1831, sought out a lady who had stirred his heart on their first meeting at the Wilberforce home in 1828 -- Agnes Wrangham, the daughter of the archdeacon of Cleveland -- and duly proposed to her. They were married in June 1832. It was entirely in his character that he spent the first day of their honeymoon in embarking upon the writing of a book. 
There followed the quest for a suitable living, the outcome of which cooled Wilberforce's relations with Newman. There was no shortage of offers. It was even suggested that he might become first bishop of Calcutta, prudently taken no further. The most attractive proposal, which he eventually accepted, came from his father's friend Lord Brougham, the whig lord chancellor, who on hearing that the Wilberforce family fortune had virtually collapsed offered him the substantial living of East Farleigh in Kent. It gave Newman no pleasure that a friend of his had accepted preferment from an infamous whig. 
Members of this generation of the Wilberforce circle seemed blighted by the untimely deaths of their wives. Samuel Wilberforce and his brothers-in-law Henry Manning and George Dudley Ryder (all of whom had married daughters of John Sargent of Lavington) suffered agonies of early bereavement. So it was to be with Robert too. Agnes died in November 1834, following the birth of their second son, Edward. Their first-born, William, was only one year old. A Yorkshire cousin of Agnes, Jane Legard, came to look after the stricken family, and in April 1837 she and Wilberforce were married. Three years later, in August 1840, the family moved to Yorkshire, Wilberforce securing the living of Burton Agnes, near Beverley, through an exchange sanctioned by the lord chancellor. In January 1841 he was appointed archdeacon of the East Riding, succeeding his father-in-law by his first marriage, Francis Wrangham, who was retiring. 
In the intervening years Wilberforce had been much occupied in the writing of the five-volume 'Life and Letters' of his father, who died in 1833 -- a joint task in collaboration with his brother Samuel, published in 1838. It was not congenial work, and the less so because of Robert's growing antipathy to almost every aspect of evangelicalism, an attitude not entirely shared by his younger brother. He found himself, if not actually within the Tractarian camp, in full sympathy with Newman's 'Lectures on Justification' (1838) and his attempt to represent Anglicanism as the 'via media' between Roman Catholicism and continental protestantism. This view was reinforced when he came to study Lutheran doctrines more closely in his first book on a theological theme, 'The Five Empires', published in 1841. The move to Yorkshire and the tiresome archidiaconal duties, undertaken with characteristic conscientiousness, made him feel increasingly isolated from the mainstream of ecclesiastical events. He could not share Samuel's growing estrangement from Newman, but still less was he prepared to endorse Henry's devoted discipleship. It was with his brother-in-law, Henry Manning, archdeacon of Chichester from 1840, that he came to find the closest kinship, especially after a visit Manning paid to Burton Agnes in 1843. From that time on they corresponded regularly, at once sanguine in their expectations of Samuel Wilberforce's advancing ecclesiastical fortunes, but utterly downcast by a momentous event in October 1845 -- Newman's reception into the Roman church. 
Not from his own choosing, but very much at the instigation of Gladstone, Manning found himself cast in the role of the new leader of the shattered Tractarian ranks, and he looked to Wilberforce for help and advice at every turn, acknowledging his superior scholarship. While Wilberforce did not entirely share Manning's preoccupation with the high calling of the sacerdotal commission and his views on the importance of sacramental confession, he was at one with him in three respects: the centrality of the sacraments; the conviction that the Church of England, if it were to be seen truly as a teaching church, must be freed from all state interference in matters of doctrine; and the need within the church for a systematic corpus of theology. Both Manning and Gladstone were convinced that Wilberforce was the one man capable of producing this theological synthesis, and in the years between 1845 and 1853 he duly accepted the challenge in the form of three substantial volumes: 'The Doctrine of the Incarnation' (1848), 'The Doctrine of Holy Baptism' (1849) -- a rather more polemical work, directed against the writings of the evangelical William Goode -- and 'The Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist' (1853). In these works, the doctrine of baptismal regeneration is set forth starkly and uncompromisingly: so too the doctrine of the real presence in the eucharist, though Wilberforce did not go so far as to accept the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation. Most significantly, Tractarian incarnationalism receives its climactic interpretation as 'the great objective fact of Christianity' ('Doctrine of the Incarnation', 4). 
Wilberforce's grand design in the three related volumes is also expounded in his series of sermons preached between 1847 and 1850, and published as 'Sermons on the New Birth of Man's Nature' (1850). Each deals with a particular aspect of the incarnation and the sacramental system, representing the doctrine of the incarnation as the very essence of Christianity (challenging the evangelical contrary emphasis on the centrality of the atonement). Wilberforce describes the sacraments as 'the natural outworks' of the incarnation, in accordance with the teaching of St John who declared 'mediation to be the great law of the Gospel Kingdom, the central fact in the economy of grace' (p. 225). This massive dogmatic compendium could be taken as the swansong of mid-Victorian high-church theology. A completely new interpretation of the doctrine of the incarnation was soon to appear in the post-Darwinian decades, when Tractarian teaching and the insights of F. D. Maurice fused in the works of the Lux Mundi group, and of Charles Gore in particular. It was also a swansong in a more personal sense. While he was writing his 'magnum opus' Wilberforce endured the same agonies as his friend Manning as he witnessed the seemingly inescapable proof of the inherent Erastianism of the Church of England in two successive blows: the appointment in 1847 of the allegedly heterodox R. D. Hampden to the bishopric of Hereford by Lord John Russell, and the consequent failure of the church's protests to carry the slightest weight; and the even more devastating exhibition of the church's impotence when the judicial committee of the privy council overruled the court of arches in the notorious Gorham judgment of 1850. In this case, a secular court presumed to define the doctrine of the Church of England by requiring the high-church bishop of Exeter, Henry Phillpotts, to institute to a living within his diocese a Calvinist who rejected the doctrine of baptismal regeneration. In desperation Wilberforce watched Manning, his closest friend and ally, fight and fail, and eventually accept the inevitable by seeking reception into the Roman church in 1851. His own brother Henry had already made the same decision. 
From 1851 onwards Wilberforce entered into a period of spiritual anguish as his brother Samuel, together with Gladstone, Pusey, and Keble, strove to keep him faithful to the church of his baptism, while Newman, Manning, and his brother Henry advanced every possible argument to entice him to join them. His situation rapidly became intolerable. In January 1853 his wife died after months of illness, during which he had done his utmost to conceal the turmoil in his mind. There were rumours too that a prosecution was afoot over his extreme views on the nature of the eucharist. In the end it was the question of the authority of the church and the inadmissibility of the royal supremacy that resolved his dilemma, and he published his conclusions in what was to be his last publication, 'An Inquiry into the Principles of Church Authority' (1854). He resigned his preferments in August that year, and in October left the country for Paris, where he was received into the Roman Catholic church on All Saints' eve. Gladstone, on hearing the news, wrote to Samuel Wilberforce: 'He stands at the head of our living divines. His withdrawal from the Church of England could be compared to nothing but that of Newman and Manning, and I am not sure that the blow would not be as great as either' (Newsome, 'Parting of Friends', 402). 
Wilberforce's initial intention was to retire as a layman to a small estate in Connemara in Ireland (purchased against this eventuality), and to lose himself in his books. Manning pressed him to seek ordination, hoping that he would join him in the community of priests (the Oblates of St Charles Borromeo) that he had been commissioned to found in order to undertake missionary work in the poorest quarters of London. In 1856 Wilberforce entered the Accademia Ecclesiastica in Rome on the pope's nomination. While in minor orders he was taken ill with gastric fever. He died in Albano on 3 February 1857, and was buried in Rome in the St Raymond's Chapel of the church of S Maria sopra Minerva. Manning, who had been at his friend's bedside until the end, reported to Henry Wilberforce: 'In Rome the one thing remarked in him... was his childlike humility. He had in truth entered the kingdom of God as a little child' (Newsome, 'Parting of Friends', 409). 


@@@@@


doc= 29385


Wilberforce, Samuel (1805-1873), bishop of Oxford and of Winchester, was born on 7 September 1805 at Broomfield, Clapham Common, fifth child in the family of four sons and two daughters of William Wilberforce (1759-1833), MP and philanthropist, and his wife, Barbara Ann (1777-1847), eldest daughter of the evangelical Birmingham banker Isaac Spooner (1735-1818) and his wife, Barbara, 'nee' Gough-Calthorpe (1744-1826), of Elmdon Hall, Warwickshire. His brothers were William (1798-1879), Robert Isaac Wilberforce (1802-1857), and Henry William Wilberforce (1807-1873), his sisters Barbara (1799-1821) and Elizabeth (1801-1831). In 1808 the family removed to Kensington Gore, then after 1821 moved several times before settling in 1825 at Highwood Hill in Mill Hill, Middlesex. Here they remained until the younger William's debts forced its sale in 1831. 
Samuel was educated privately by a series of clerical schoolmasters: in 1817 he was sent to Stephen Langston at Hastings and then to Edward Garrard Marsh at Nuneham Courtenay, Oxfordshire. In 1819 he was removed to George Hodson, at the time chaplain to William Wilberforce's friend Lewis Way at Stanstead Park, Sussex (fellow pupils included Henry Hoare), with whom he remained when Hodgson removed to Maisemore, Gloucestershire, in 1820. In 1822 Samuel was sent to Francis Spragg at Bidborough, Kent, to prepare for university. As befitted the son of a leading member of the Clapham Sect, Wilberforce's happy childhood was characterized by the strong evangelicalism of both his home and his schools. His parents took an intense interest in the spiritual and moral development of their children, and Samuel appears to have experienced particularly intense scrutiny as William's favourite. His father wrote to his nine-year-old son: 'I am anxious to see decisive marks of your having begun to undergo the 'great change'' (Newsome, 'Parting of Friends', 49). 
In 1823 Wilberforce followed his brother Robert to Oriel College, Oxford, as a commoner. Here he formed a close circle of friends, including George Prevost and Charles Anderson, known as the Bethel Union on account of its religiosity. Unlike Robert and his younger brother Henry, however, he did not become intimate with John Keble; though close to Hurrell Froude, Wilberforce was 'stigmatized as a humbug' by the latter and John Henry Newman (Ward, 247), differing from them not least on the question of celibacy. A keen rider and hunter, Wilberforce also took a prominent part in the proceedings of the nascent Union Society. Here he adopted a liberal stance, arguing that the deposition of Charles I had been justified and favouring Catholic emancipation. In 1826 he graduated BA with a first in mathematics and a second in classics, proceeding MA in 1829 (he was subsequently awarded a DD in 1845 and an honorary fellowship of All Souls in 1871). In November 1826 he was an unsuccessful candidate for a Balliol fellowship. Any further attempt was pre-empted by Wilberforce's eagerness to marry Emily (1807-1841), daughter of a close friend of the Wilberforces and Hodsons, John Sargent (1780-1833), evangelical rector of Lavington, Sussex, and his wife, Mary (1778-1861), daughter of the banker Abel Smith. The marriage, on which Wilberforce had set his heart in 1821, was celebrated by Charles Simeon on 10 June 1828; during the next six years Henry Wilberforce, Henry Edward Manning, and George Dudley Ryder married Emily's sisters. Four sons and one daughter survived infancy, including Ernest Roland Wilberforce (1840-1907), later bishop of Chichester. 
Fulfilling his father's hopes, Wilberforce took deacon's and priest's orders in 1828 and 1829 respectively. He was appointed to his first post, a curacy at Checkendon, Oxfordshire, in January 1829. Close to Oxford and with fewer than 300 inhabitants, the living was carefully selected to suit an inexperienced pastor; among others rejected as too demanding were a curacy at Chiddingfold, Surrey, and later the vicarage of Ribchester, Lancashire, offered by his father's two evangelical episcopal cousins, Charles Richard and John Bird Sumner. None the less, as clergyman in charge, Wilberforce was an active pastor, instituting Sunday afternoon lectures on the gospels and special services on saints' days. It appears that his encounter with dissent, continued contacts with Oxford associates, and dismay at the prospects for the established church combined to reinforce the respect for church order characteristic of Claphamite evangelicalism in a development towards high-churchmanship; simultaneously, his response to contemporary politics led him now to speak of himself as 'a very high Tory' (Ashwell and Wilberforce, 1.45), condemning Peel's acceptance of Catholic emancipation. 
In January 1830 Wilberforce left Checkendon when C. R. Sumner presented him to the rectory of Brighstone, Isle of Wight. Worth $700 a year, and with 700 inhabitants, this was a more challenging post, and brought the advantage of comparative proximity to Lavington. The climate also suited Emily's poor health -- the string of christenings at Brighstone being punctuated by miscarriages and a stillbirth. Wilberforce soon impressed Sumner with his qualities. He proved a model parochial clergyman, introducing evening and cottage services, and founding Sunday and day schools, an infirmary and dispensary, and an allotment ground. In 1833 Wilberforce formed a clerical society on the island, effectively establishing himself as one of the leading clerics in the diocese, a position recognized in 1836 when Sumner appointed him rural dean, and earlier by his selection as preacher at the 1833 visitation. His status was further enhanced by his inheritance of the Lavington estate on the death of Henry Sargent in 1836, Wilberforce thus becoming Manning's squire. 
The 1833 visitation sermon, 'The Apostolical Ministry', alarmed some evangelicals with its emphasis on the apostolical succession and 'high-church principles'. Wilberforce still retained great respect for the evangelical tradition, admiring Sumner and strongly supporting the Church Missionary Society ('my favourite society') while trying to bring it into closer association with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG). Nevertheless, he was increasingly uncomfortable with Calvinism and the low-church tendencies of mid-1830s evangelicalism, and welcomed the publication of the 'Tracts for the Times', both for their emphasis on episcopacy and holy living, and as a protest against the Erastian policy of the state. In 1835 Wilberforce claimed to 'belong to no school' (Ashwell and Wilberforce, 1.90), and was in effect forging his own version of the 'via media'. His support for the Tractarians could not extend to a repudiation of the Reformers (and effectively his father), and he was troubled by their neglect of justification, their severe line on post-baptismal sin, and the doctrine of reserve. He regarded these as deviations from the teachings of high-churchmen such as Richard Hooker and William Beveridge, to whom he professed his allegiance. Moreover, the publication of Hurrell Froude's 'Remains' in 1838 disturbed Wilberforce deeply: whereas a university sermon preached in 1837 owed much to Newman, Wilberforce's two sermons as select preacher in 1838 both warned of the danger of Oxford teaching. Newman's subsequent refusal to publish Wilberforce in the 'British Critic', and the reluctance of Tractarians to subscribe to the Martyrs' Memorial in Oxford, confirmed his misgivings in their unacceptable display of party spirit. 
From the mid-1830s, Wilberforce was establishing a wider reputation. This led to offers of further preferment, including a preachership in Tunbridge Wells Chapel (1834); St Dunstan-in-the-West, from Charles Simeon; the important vicarage of Leeds from Sir Robert Inglis in 1837; and Walter Farquhar Hook's proposed swap for his living of Leamington in 1838. Although Wilberforce was impatient of further advancement, these were all declined on Sumner's advice or medical grounds. 
Wilberforce's reputation was in part acquired as an author. His portrait of evangelical sanctity in an anonymous 'Notebook of a Country Clergyman' (1833) was echoed in an edition of Henry Martyn's journals prefaced with a memoir of John Sargent (1837), and it was probably Samuel who prevented Robert playing down their father's evangelicalism in their joint 'Life of William Wilberforce' published in 1838, followed in 1840 by an edition of his correspondence. The influence of a young family is apparent in 'Agathos' (1839) and 'The Rocky Island' (1840), collections of improving stories for the young, and by the end of the decade Wilberforce was engaged on the history of the Episcopal church in the USA published in 1844. 
More important than his writings, however, were Wilberforce's frequent and accomplished appearances in pulpits and on platforms. His most significant speaking engagement came with a preaching tour for the SPG in Devon and Cornwall in 1839, which won him the lasting admiration of Henry Phillpotts. With his speech on colonial bishoprics at the Mansion House on 8 April 1840 -- which prompted Charles James Blomfield to observe 'I do not quite like hearing you, for you make me cry' (Ashwell and Wilberforce, 1.160) -- this tour established him as a leading speaker of the day. 
Wilberforce's obvious talents were acknowledged when Sumner made him archdeacon of Surrey in November 1839, an appointment which entailed promotion to a canonry at Winchester the following August. Wilberforce took avidly to his new responsibilities, organizing ruridecanal chapters, attempting to establish a consolidated fund for the revenues of all church societies in the archdeaconry, and delivering widely read charges which William Ewart Gladstone, at least, worried adopted a tone more appropriate to a bishop than an archdeacon. In October 1840 the bishop presented him to the rectory of Alverstoke, Hampshire, a parish of some 13,000 inhabitants embracing both the military and naval establishments of Gosport and the resort of Stokes Bay. Outside commitments made him more dependent than previously on curates. Once more, however, Wilberforce was an active pastor, instituting additional services, schools, and district visiting. The curates (including his friend Richard Chenevix Trench) themselves were organized into an effective team ministry, and the parish attracted candidates for ordination seeking practical experience. More recognition came when a speech on the slavery issue won the favour of Prince Albert, who made Wilberforce a chaplain in January 1841; he became a favourite preacher at court, being appointed sub-almoner to the queen in October 1844, and then high almoner in 1847 (he served in this post until 1869). 
Wilberforce was invited to deliver the Bampton lectures for 1841, but withdrew after Emily's death on 10 March 1841. This tragedy permanently marked Wilberforce. For the remainder of his life the anniversary, her birthday, and chance references to the past always provoked strong emotions, providing the occasion for self-examination and the renunciation of the worldly ambition which Wilberforce recognized in himself. Another source of distress in the early 1840s was the evident divergence in the theological positions of his circle as revealed by the contest for the Oxford poetry professorship (in which Wilberforce backed James Garbett) in 1841. During the same year Wilberforce welcomed the Anglo-Prussian scheme for a Jerusalem bishopric as a means of introducing episcopacy into the national church of Prussia. In each case Wilberforce found himself ranged against his brothers and other high-churchmen who had expected his support; given his association with Sumner and Baron von Bunsen at court, and his rapid advancement, there were inevitably accusations of trimming. As with his support for the degradation of William George Ward in February 1845, however, Wilberforce's stance owed more to his distaste for the divisions in the Church of England fostered by the Tractarians. It nevertheless did no harm to his prospects, and in March 1845 Wilberforce was promoted to the deanery of Westminster, his decision to retain Alverstoke provoking further criticism. 
Wilberforce's Westminster career was short-lived. In October 1845 Sir Robert Peel offered him the bishopric of Oxford, overriding Blomfield's misgivings at the appointment of a high-churchman in the context of the Tractarian controversy. His new office, to which he was enthroned on 13 December 1845, thrust Wilberforce into national prominence, but much of his subsequent reputation rests on his work within his diocese. In 1845 Oxford was effectively a new diocese, Buckinghamshire being appended to an already recently enlarged bishopric. Part of the challenge confronting the new bishop was consequently to consolidate the jurisdiction. 
Wilberforce's high estimation of the episcopal office and his commitment to the preservation of unity in the visible church ideally suited him for this task. The stress on unity also appeared in a memorandum drawn up on his appointment, which emphasized the need to 'Be a 'father in God' to men of 'all' opinions amongst my clergy' (Ashwell and Wilberforce, 1.319). Wilberforce sought to improve and invigorate diocesan institutions and clerical performance, and also to promote the corporate life of the diocese and counter the polarizing effects of church party. Many of the methods he employed had already been introduced by others -- notably Sumner, from whom Wilberforce learned much -- but sheer force of personality and energy combined with the systematic thoroughness of his reorganization of diocesan activity to convince many contemporaries that Wilberforce was 'inaugurating 'a new era in the history of the English episcopate'' (Burgon, 2.12). 
Central to Wilberforce's achievement was his own presence throughout the diocese. He travelled incessantly, increasing the number of confirmation centres from the nine employed by Bagot to 188 by the 1860s, each visited triennially; numerous consecrations, society meetings, and informal descents on individual clergy also took the bishop out into the diocese. In 1850 Wilberforce inaugurated annual Lenten missions, in which a week-long residency in a major town incorporated daily services and often an ordination. Wilberforce regarded ordinations as one of his most important responsibilities, and enforced rigorous standards. He ensured more personal contact with ordinands during a period of residence at the rebuilt episcopal palace at Cuddesdon. Candidates were thus introduced into the diocesan clerical community focused on its bishop. Wilberforce fostered this community through encouraging the calling of ruridecanal chapters, annual assemblies of rural deans at Cuddesdon, an embryonic diocesan synod summoned in protest at the 'papal aggression' in 1850, and from 1860 a clerical retreat at Cuddesdon. Cuddesdon was also the site for a theological college founded in 1854. Here students participated in a round of daily services and were trained in a highly clerical environment in close proximity to the episcopal palace, in contrast to the earlier foundations at Wells and Chichester, where no such common life had been practised. 
Episcopal authority over the diocese was enforced through the accumulation of more diocesan patronage (the fourteen livings in episcopal hands in 1845 had increased to ninety-five in the diocese alone by 1869), and the careful selection of able men of all parties as archdeacons and rural deans. These officers assisted in the investigation of sensitive issues of doctrine or liturgical irregularity and in Wilberforce's determined effort to discipline inefficient or immoral clergy (he gleaned the names of those attending hunt balls from the newspapers). As in his own parishes, Wilberforce tried to increase the provision of services, insisting on monthly, and encouraging weekly, celebrations of holy communion. The diocesan machinery was completed by a series of diocesan societies and charities, under the auspices of which more than $2 million were expended in the diocese. 
Wilberforce's oratory and vigour promised increasing prominence in an episcopate the brightest ornaments of which were a generation older. His public speeches broadly accorded with the advice Prince Albert tendered the new bishop, in abstaining ''completely' from mixing himself up with the politics of the day' (Newsome, 'Parting of Friends', 306) save when humanitarian concern dictated otherwise, as on the issue of slavery which had been so dear to his father. His views on the whigs -- 'shabby, word-eating, pocket-picketing... sacrilegious villains' -- were consequently reserved for private occasions (Soloway, 261-2). He made a successful maiden speech in the Lords on the subject of transportation in March 1846, and soon after was the main spokesman among bishops identified with conservatism who supported the repeal of the corn laws. If he thought of himself as a 'Liberal Tory', however, he remained an opponent of 'modern liberalism... a heartless steam engine' (ibid., 260) and what he regarded as the evils of industrial society. He strongly supported the Ten Hours Movement and purchased a suit from the Christian socialists' tailors co-operative. His charge of 1848 ranged widely across social issues, calling on the clergy to fight prostitution and blood sports while championing improved sanitation, amelioration of the poor law, and prison reform. If Wilberforce's social thought ultimately harked back to a pre-Victorian, hierarchical rural world, he also believed current social problems to be partly a result of the inadequate efforts of the Hanoverian church to bind the classes. This created a tension reflected in his support for additional free seating in churches while he remained less convinced than some other bishops of the need to dispense with appropriated pews altogether. Another consequence was his determined effort to promote church education, both nationally (he helped to arrange a compromise between the government and the National Society over inspection in 1846) and in his diocese, where his initiatives included the foundation of a diocesan training college for teachers, which opened at Culham in 1852. 
The auspicious opening of Wilberforce's episcopate was swiftly followed by a severe set-back. In November 1847 Lord John Russell nominated Renn Dickson Hampden as bishop of Hereford. In 1836 Wilberforce had joined the outcry at Hampden's appointment as regius professor of divinity at Oxford; now he signed the episcopal protest initiated by Henry Phillpotts, and then individually suggested to Lord John Russell that Hampden's orthodoxy be determined before a special tribunal. Since Hampden was rector of Ewelme, Oxfordshire, it was to Wilberforce that William Henry Ridley and others gave notice of their intention to file articles against him. On 16 December 1847 Wilberforce signed letters of request to initiate a hearing before the court of arches, and wrote to Hampden, quizzing him on his theology and asking him to withdraw his Bampton lectures and 'Observations on Dissent' from circulation. Hampden's answer failed to satisfy the bishop, but Wilberforce was later disquieted to discover that Hampden had already attempted to withdraw the 'Observations', leaving the less controversial Bampton lectures as the only basis for the charge of heterodoxy. Wilberforce now read the Bamptons for the first time, found no heresy, and was also advised that he should not have issued letters of request (which he had regarded as an administrative act) unless he believed there was a 'prima facie' case to answer. Withdrawing the letters, Wilberforce unsuccessfully urged Hampden to expunge the offending passages, and then, in a letter of 28 December 1847 subsequently published in 'The Times', absolved Hampden of error. While close associates appreciated the courage of his public admission of error and determination to follow his conscience, Charles C. F. Greville spoke for many others in declaring that 'Sly Sam of Oxford... has covered himself with ridicule and disgrace' ('Greville Memoirs', 6.118). His final efforts to extract concessions from Hampden were regarded as desperate attempts to save face. High-churchmen felt that Wilberforce had presumed to judge the case himself and then betrayed the cause from self-interest; liberals and evangelicals marked the bishop as an intolerant and impetuous high-churchman. The incident appears to have cost Wilberforce his favoured position at court, and, in his own view, his chance of promotion to Canterbury on the death of William Howley in 1848. As the queen informed Gladstone on Wilberforce's death, she had 'admired and liked him 'most before' he became a Bishop, and before he leant so much to those High Church views which did harm' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 2.264). It was at this time that Wilberforce acquired his enduring nickname of 'Soapy Sam'. 
Wilberforce's position was also complicated by a series of conversions to Roman Catholicism in his close family. The defection of the Ryders in 1846 was followed in 1850 by that of his brother Henry and his wife. In 1851 the Gorham case provoked the secession of Manning; three years later it was the turn of Robert Wilberforce, and in 1863 the eldest brother, William, was received. Alongside Gladstone, with whom an association had developed during the early 1840s, Wilberforce struggled unsuccessfully to prevent this final disintegration of the Lavington circle. The conversions caused Wilberforce great personal distress, costing him some of his most sustaining friendships and sources of counsel. They also provoked suspicion as to the sincerity of Wilberforce's own Anglicanism. Robert's secession prompted Wilberforce to contemplate resigning his see 'in order that without reproach of remaining in the English Communion for the sake of my preferments I may testify... against the accursed abominations of the Papacy' (Newsome, 'Parting of Friends', 401). 
The context of the conversions lay behind the close scrutiny applied to Wilberforce's response to Tractarianism and ritualism in his own diocese. He took a strong line on what he regarded as Romanizing excesses. Thomas William Allies repeatedly troubled his bishop, until in 1849 the publication of his 'Journal of the Tour in France' led Wilberforce to demand a retraction, which was shortly followed by Allies's secession. A similarly uncomfortable relationship with Edward Bouverie Pusey culminated in a dispute over the latter's distribution of devotional manuals and the practice of regular confession. In 1850 Wilberforce informally inhibited Pusey from preaching in the diocese, only rescinding his ban after publicly condemning the manuals in his 1851 charge. None the less, where admonition was required Wilberforce preferred to act informally, and his inclusive vision of the national church made him determined to accommodate practices which he believed did not in themselves promote secession or might help to restrain those tempted to abandon the national church. His resolve in this respect was only hardened by evangelical demands that he should take punitive action; he consequently experienced fierce criticism, particularly from 'The Record'. In 1849 Wilberforce gave his support to a proposal by William John Butler and Elizabeth Crauford Lockhart to create a sisterhood for the reclamation of fallen women at Wantage. In 1852 another house of mercy was established in the diocese, this time at Clewer on the initiative of Thomas Thelluson Carter. Although Wilberforce imposed strict restrictions on both institutions, there was inevitably controversy, not least when Lockhart seceded to Rome. Wilberforce was similarly vulnerable over developments at the theological college at Cuddesdon, where Henry Parry Liddon, appointed vice-principal in 1854, encouraged liturgical variations unacceptable to Wilberforce. Forced by the efforts of Charles Portales Golightly and public concern into initiating an inconclusive inquiry in 1858, Wilberforce continued to shelter Liddon from criticism while privately cautioning him that Cuddesdon graduates were 'too peculiar'. The appointment of Henry H. Swinny as principal in 1858 finally led Wilberforce to acknowledge the incompatibility of their positions, and he accepted Liddon's resignation. 
These difficulties made the 1850s and early 1860s frustrating for Wilberforce, and his discomfort was increased by his lack of sympathy with most of the governments of the period and in particular his outrage at the episcopal appointments of Russell and Palmerston. With Gladstone supportive but powerless, he also recognized the unlikelihood of his own promotion; his enmity with Palmerston dated back to an incautious attack on the future premier at a meeting of the Winchester Diocesan Church-Building Society in 1837. In 1862 he dared to dream of York, but was disappointed, as he was in 1868 when, despite his growing distance from Gladstone over politics and the Irish church, Benjamin Disraeli failed to promote him to London, the vacancy cruelly coinciding with a further apostasy, that of Wilberforce's surviving daughter, Emily (Ella), and her husband, J. Henry Pye. 
Throughout this period Wilberforce was an important figure in national debates on ecclesiastical issues. His interventions had three overall objectives. The first was the preservation of the connection of church and state, and with it the Christian character of the nation. To this end Wilberforce resisted Jewish emancipation, changes in marriage and divorce law, the conscience clause in education, Sunday opening of museums and exhibitions, and the total abolition of church rates. He none the less accepted the need for adjustments to reflect changing circumstances, such as university reform, and on church rates his preferred solution was a voluntary rate if, in return, control of the parish church could be restricted to those prepared to pay. 
This last proposal would have contributed to Wilberforce's second purpose, the strengthening of the church's capacity for independent action and self-determination. The same objective prompted his call for an expansion of the episcopate. Wilberforce also sought to ensure that missionary bishops should be appointed by the church and not the state, sponsoring an unsuccessful bill to this effect in 1853. While Wilberforce was less disconcerted by the Gorham judgment than many in his circle -- 'a mere state decision' (Ashwell and Wilberforce, 2.40) -- it nevertheless gave an important impulse to his efforts in this direction. He supported Blomfield's efforts of 1850-51 to secure a more satisfactory final court of appeal in ecclesiastical causes than the judicial committee of the privy council. From the mid-1850s onwards Wilberforce argued that, in order more clearly to demonstrate that lay judges did not exercise authority over the church's doctrine, the ecclesiastical element should be removed from the judicial committee, with bishops sitting separately to determine doctrinal matters referred to them by the court of appeal. 
In 1850 Blomfield's solution was to refer ecclesiastical causes to the upper house of a revived convocation. Wilberforce had previously argued against reviving convocation, but now emerged alongside Henry Hoare as a leading campaigner for its restitution. In 1852 Wilberforce persuaded the bishops convened for the formal business of convocation to petition to be heard on a pending 'Clergy Discipline Bill', and secured an agreement that Archbishop J. B. Sumner, who opposed the revival, would not prorogue the session without the agreement of his suffragans. From then on the revival progressed steadily but slowly as the archbishop's resistance was gradually eroded. While Sumner remained at Canterbury, Wilberforce was the leading figure in convocation, and, with Blomfield failing and then retiring, this helped to establish his pre-eminence among the episcopate, as did his early involvement in the church congress. 
Wilberforce's third aim was to resist challenges to doctrinal orthodoxy emerging from liberal churchmen and new scientific theories. An exception was his standing by Frederick Denison Maurice when he was dismissed for heterodoxy by King's College, London, in 1853. More characteristically Wilberforce was prominent in the orthodox response to the publication of 'Essays and Reviews' in 1860. His anonymous review for the 'Quarterly Review' (109, January 1861, 248-305), which sent the issue through five editions, condemned the essayists collectively for arguing away revelation and dogma in placing too much reliance on Rowland Williams's 'verifying principle' and already discredited German thought. Wilberforce drew up the collective episcopal response published in 'The Times' (12 February 1861) and subsequently organized a volume of 'Replies to Essays and Reviews' (1862). In February 1864 he moved the synodical condemnation of the volume in convocation, described by Lord Westbury as 'a well-lubricated set of words,... so oily and saponaceous that no one can grasp it' ('Hansard 3', 176, 1864, col. 1546), an oblique reference to Wilberforce's nickname. It was also Wilberforce who in 1863 persuaded the bishops to inhibit his former friend John William Colenso and who secured the condemnation of the 'Pentateuch Critically Examined' (that is, demonstrated to be a collection of fabulous stories) in convocation. 
Wilberforce had a lifelong interest in natural history, being vice-president of the British Association and serving on the council of the Geological and Zoological societies. It was therefore as a keen amateur scientist as well as a theologian that he reviewed Charles Darwin's 'On the Origin of Species' for the 'Quarterly Review' (108, July 1860, 225-64). Relying heavily on the work of his friend Richard Owen he dismissed the book as bad science with distressing theological implications; Darwin thought the review 'uncommonly clever' ('Correspondence', 8.293). When the British Association met in Oxford in 1860, Wilberforce flippantly asked if anyone would be prepared to trace their descent from an ape on their grandmother's side. The joke elicited a stinging off-the-cuff riposte from Thomas Henry Huxley, who (in one version) claimed such ancestry was preferable to descent from a 'man highly endowed by nature and possessed of great means and influence and who yet employs those faculties for the mere purpose of introducing ridicule into a grave scientific discussion' (Jensen, 168). The incident has subsequently acquired fame as a dramatic landmark in the supposed Victorian triumph of rational science over obscurantist religion, but caused no great stir at the time, Wilberforce himself believing he had got the better of the exchange. 
Wilberforce's stance as defender of orthodoxy in the early 1860s moderated the hostility of his evangelical critics; moreover Anglo-Catholics, starved of episcopal representation, increasingly forgot their reservations and adopted Wilberforce as a champion. By the time of Gladstone's appointment as prime minister, therefore, he was a less controversial figure, whose stature in the church was unquestionable. The political differences between premier and bishop were also diminished as Wilberforce accepted the inevitability of Irish disestablishment after the 1868 election. Gladstone at last gave Wilberforce the recognition he craved: in December 1869 he was enthroned as bishop of Winchester. Wilberforce at once busied himself with diocesan affairs, combined now with his role as a member of the commission on ritual appointed in 1867 (on which he moderated proposals to discipline ritualists and resisted alteration of the Athanasian creed). In 1870 he was appointed president of a committee of convocation charged with revision of the translation of the 'New Testament', and became embroiled in a characteristic controversy over the involvement of the Unitarian scholar George Vance Smith. The demands of the new diocese strained his health: Wilberforce suffered three heart attacks during 1870 and 1871. He was still fully active, however, when on 19 July 1873 he suffered a riding accident near Abinger, Surrey, while accompanying Lord Granville to Holmbury to meet Gladstone. Wilberforce died almost immediately. On 25 July in accordance with his own wishes, he was buried next to his wife in Lavington churchyard. 
Frequently caricatured during his own lifetime (for example by Disraeli in 'Lothair', and as the third son of Archdeacon Grantly in Anthony Trollope's 'The Warden'), Wilberforce's considerable posthumous reputation was established in a predominantly Anglo-Catholic historiography which exaggerated the originality, if not the vigour, of his diocesan activity. Sabine Baring-Gould, writing in 1914, for example, claimed that 'He was the first of the Bishops of the Victorian age to show what the duties of a bishop were.... He may truly be said to have recast the whole idea of the Episcopate, and to have successfully raised the tone of clerical life' (Baring-Gould, 175). Later in the twentieth century he was most frequently remembered for his confrontation with Huxley, in which he was unjustly cast in the role of a pompous, privileged, and ignorant obscurantist. His prominence in so many aspects of Victorian religious history (not to mention the remarkable and moving family history so minutely documented in the Wilberforce family papers) nevertheless ensured that with the revival of academic interest in the subject from the 1960s onwards he received more scholarly attention than any other member of the nineteenth-century episcopate. 
Wilberforce's most striking quality was his energy (not least as a letter writer: his son estimated that he completed an average of 6430 letters a year, and on one occasion he simultaneously dictated four letters to secretaries while writing a fifth himself). This lay behind his remarkable achievement of establishing himself as a leading national figure while simultaneously gaining a reputation for a uniquely intimate relationship with his own diocese. As a public speaker he had few clerical rivals. His charm and what Liddon called 'the force of conscious sympathy' won him influence and loyalty, if also feeding his reputation for 'soapiness'. His public manner gave little hint of the personal griefs so movingly recorded in his private papers and somehow caught in the sober portraits of Wilberforce in later life. He himself recognized many shortcomings, without being able to overcome them. He was ambitious: in 1846 Benjamin Jowett observed harshly that Wilberforce never lost sight of the spiritual in pursuing the temporal ('Life and Letters of Benjamin Jowett', ed. E. Abbott and L. Campbell, 1, 1897, 152). He was impatient of the complexities of issues, his impetuosity leading him into positions which on later reflection he could not conscientiously sustain. The early Victorian church required the confident, non-partisan, and invigorating leadership at which Wilberforce excelled. Later in the century, however, Wilberforce's own uncomplicated faith ill equipped him for the necessary formulation of a constructive response to the challenge of liberal theology. 


@@@@@


doc= 29386


Wilberforce, William (1759-1833), politician, philanthropist, and slavery abolitionist, was born on 24 August 1759 at the Wilberforce house in High Street, Hull, the third child and only son of Robert Wilberforce (1728-1768), merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1798), daughter of Thomas Bird, of Barton, Oxfordshire. His paternal grandfather, William Wilberforce (1690-1776), established the family fortunes through the Baltic trade, acquired Yorkshire landed property, and was twice mayor of Hull. The younger William had three sisters, but only one of these, Sarah (1758-1816), survived to adulthood. 
William was a small and delicate child, but precocious. He was first educated, in 1767-8, at Hull grammar school. There, under the tuition of Joseph and Isaac Milner, he was set on a table and made to 'read aloud as an example to the other boys' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 1.4). In 1768, because of his father's premature death, he was sent to live with an uncle, also William Wilberforce, and his wife, Hannah, at their homes in St James's Place, London, and in Wimbledon. During the following two years he attended Mr Chalmers's school in Putney, which he later described as 'very indifferent' (Harford, 197). Meanwhile his aunt Hannah, an admirer of George Whitefield and friendly with the Methodists, influenced him towards evangelicalism. His grandfather and mother, however, took fright, and brought him back to live in Hull, where every effort was made to distract him from such enthusiastic religion. In the short term these endeavours appeared successful, and during his teenage years William spent his holidays immersed in the lively social round of Hull while continuing his education, from 1771 to 1776, as a boarder at Pocklington School. 
Wilberforce entered St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1776. His quick intelligence and substantial fortune, augmented by the deaths of his grandfather in 1776 and his childless uncle William in 1777, relieved him of any necessity for applying himself to hard study. His undergraduate years were therefore spent in an atmosphere of easy-going sociability, although he regarded the more dissipated extremes of university life with distaste. He took his BA in 1781 and his MA in 1788. 
Wilberforce showed little inclination to involve himself actively in the family business, and while still at Cambridge he resolved to pursue a political career. In September 1780, when barely twenty-one, he was elected MP for Hull. In the House of Commons, free from any financial need to obtain public office, he adopted an independent stance from the outset. His earliest recorded interventions in debate, on smuggling and on naval shipbuilding, reflected the maritime interests of his constituency. He became a member of several clubs, notably Goostree's, the focus for a circle of about twenty-five young members. A particularly significant friendship was established with his Cambridge contemporary William Pitt the younger, who regularly stayed with Wilberforce at his house in Wimbledon inherited from his uncle. Pitt, Wilberforce, and Edward Eliot travelled to France together in autumn 1783. 
After Pitt became prime minister in December 1783, Wilberforce, albeit without government office, was a key supporter of his minority government in its difficult early months. In particular, on 25 March 1784 he delivered a powerfully effective speech at the Yorkshire county meeting in the Castle Yard at York, being dramatically interrupted by the arrival of a messenger with news of the dissolution of parliament, which Wilberforce himself announced to the assembled freeholders. Having thus brought himself prominently to public attention, Wilberforce rapidly emerged as a compromise Pittite candidate for Yorkshire at the ensuing general election. On 6 April the Foxites conceded defeat, and he returned to the Commons as a representative of England's largest county -- a remarkable achievement for a man without major landed interests who was not yet twenty-five. At the time this success seemed fully to open his way to the fulfilment of conventional ambition; in the event it was to provide him with the independent political weight required for a career that took a very different course. 
Wilberforce's boyish encounter with evangelicalism appeared in his late teens and early twenties to have been a passing phase, and he later recalled that he 'had imbibed sceptical notions, and had hired a sitting at Lindsey's Unitarian Chapel' (Harford, 206). In 1785, primarily through the influence of Isaac Milner, later dean of Carlisle, with whom he travelled on two extended continental tours, he became convinced that mainstream Christian doctrine was true. He then went through an evangelical conversion experience, lamenting the perceived futility of his past life, absorbing 'the infinite love, that Christ should die to save such a sinner' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 1.91). From this followed a resolution to commit his future life wholly to the service of God. He sought spiritual advice from the leading evangelical clergyman John Newton, whom he had encountered as a boy, and who now strongly counselled him to remain in politics. This influence was reinforced from a different quarter by that of Pitt, who warned him against rendering his 'talents useless both to yourself and mankind' (Pollock, 38). Hence Wilberforce resolved not to withdraw from public life, but rather to perform his parliamentary duties 'with increased diligence and conscientiousness' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wilberforce c. 49, fol. 14). 
The gregariousness, generous hospitality, and liveliness in conversation that had characterized Wilberforce before 1785 persisted after his conversion. Though he himself was prone to regard such attributes as evidence of spiritual declension, they were in fact powerful tools for motivating others and gaining affection and co-operation. His effectiveness as a parliamentary leader, and more broadly as an agent of national religious and moral revival, stemmed from his capacity to combine spiritual earnestness with charm, tact, and lightness of touch in human relationships. At the same time his Christian convictions, and his sense of the ultimate significance and rightness of his causes, ensured a fundamental integrity and a dogged readiness to persist in the face of repeated set-backs. 
In the short term, however, there were some false starts. In the parliamentary session of 1786 Wilberforce brought forward a bill on the criminal law designed to reduce the sentence on women convicted of treason from burning to hanging, and to extend dissection after execution from murderers to rapists, arsonists, burglars, and robbers. It passed the Commons but was thrown out by the Lords. He also introduced a 'Registration Bill', providing for the registration of all freeholders, and for the taking of polls in several centres across a county on the same day, rather than -- as then happened -- only in the county town over several days. Again the measure was lost in the Lords. The tentative and unsuccessful nature of these forays into humanitarian and parliamentary reform was a sign of Wilberforce's good intentions, but also of his lack of experience and his inability immediately to find compelling causes on which to focus his energies. 
Nevertheless, at the end of 1786 Wilberforce demonstrated the strength of his commitment to political life by taking the lease of a house in Old Palace Yard, Westminster, close to parliament, and deciding to sell the house in Wimbledon that had hitherto been his main home. For the next five years he lacked any other permanent residence of his own, and when away from Westminster drew on the extended hospitality of his numerous friends. In particular John Thornton, a fellow evangelical and half-brother of his aunt Hannah, gave him the regular use of a room at his home in Clapham. 
It was in 1787 that the concerns that dominated the rest of Wilberforce's life became clear. First, through a variety of channels, particularly association with the circle around Sir Charles and Lady Middleton, and visits from Thomas Clarkson, Wilberforce's hitherto vague concern for the welfare of slaves was transformed into sustained leadership of the parliamentary campaign for the abolition of the slave trade. He had already begun to collect evidence when his decision was catalysed by a conversation with Pitt and William Grenville in May 1787, under what came to be called the 'Wilberforce oak' at Holwood in Kent, when the prime minister urged Wilberforce to make the cause his own. While others, notably Clarkson, worked on gathering evidence and mobilizing public opinion through the committee for the abolition of the slave trade, Wilberforce complemented their work through his exertions in the House of Commons. Second, he meanwhile purposefully lobbied bishops and prominent laymen to secure the issue by the king on 1 June 1787 of a proclamation for the encouragement of piety and virtue; this followed earlier precedents, but reflected the perception of Wilberforce and others that the tide of vice and immorality was rising. He then in the latter part of 1787 engaged in hectic travelling around the country, soliciting the support of further notables. He successfully established a society to promote the implementation of the proclamation and hence to be an agency of moral reformation. On 28 October he wrote in his journal that 'God Almighty has set before me two great objects, the suppression of the slave trade and the reformation of manners' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 1.149). 
Wilberforce gave notice of a parliamentary motion on the abolition of the slave trade for early in 1788, but his exertions in 1787, following on the upheaval of his spiritual crisis of 1785-6, precipitated in February 1788 a serious stress-related illness, probably ulcerative colitis, that incapacitated him for several months. At one point he was thought to be dying, but he slowly recovered, spending his convalescence at Bath and Cambridge. At this time he began the regular moderate use of opium, which continued for the remainder of his life, and proved an effective treatment for his recurrent nervous and intestinal disorders. 
In Wilberforce's absence, Pitt advanced the anti-slave-trade cause by ordering an investigation by the privy council, and then, in May 1788, moving for one by the House of Commons. The subsequent debate revealed considerable support for abolition. Also passed was a bill, promoted by Sir William Dolben, to regulate the capacity of slave ships in order to improve the conditions of the slaves. Following the publication of the privy council report on 25 April 1789, Wilberforce marked his own delayed formal entry into the parliamentary campaign on 12 May with a closely reasoned speech of three and a half hours, using its evidence to describe the effects of the trade on Africa and the appalling conditions of the middle passage. He argued that abolition would lead to an improvement in the conditions of slaves already in the West Indies, and sought to answer the economic arguments of his opponents. For him, however, the fundamental issue was one of morality and justice. He concluded by moving twelve resolutions condemning the trade. These, though, were never discussed. Concerns about economic consequences rendered the house receptive to the stance of the trade's supporters: that more evidence was needed before a responsible decision could be taken. The matter was adjourned to the next session, but Wilberforce had convincingly launched the parliamentary campaign that dominated his life for the next eighteen years. 
In January 1790 Wilberforce secured a select committee to examine the evidence on the slave trade. Throughout the ensuing parliamentary session he assiduously participated in its proceedings, while his house in Old Palace Yard was a centre of activity for the abolitionists. The general election of June 1790, in which he was returned again for Yorkshire without a contest, prevented further progress that year. In October and November, however, his usual autumn wanderings were broken by an extended stay at Yoxall Lodge in Staffordshire, the home of his Cambridge friend Thomas Gisborne. Here, with the assistance of Thomas Babington, Wilberforce worked extremely hard to assimilate and condense the vast quantity of information generated by the select committee. 
The select committee resumed its deliberations in February 1791, and Wilberforce, encouraged by a letter from the dying John Wesley, returned to his assiduous gathering of material. On 18 April, in a four-hour speech that showed his mastery of the evidence and arguments, he moved for leave to bring in an 'Abolition Bill'. Subsequent debate was lively and extended over two evenings, but when the house divided at 3.30 on the morning of 20 April Wilberforce was defeated by 163 votes to 88. The outbreak both of revolution in France and, early in 1791, of a slave rebellion in the French colony of San Domingo (Haiti) had heightened insecurities and led the majority of MPs to oppose a measure that they perceived as potentially destabilizing. 
This set-back demonstrated that victory would not be easy, and so the anti-slavery campaigners sought to broaden their base of support. Wilberforce became more aware than hitherto that activity outside parliament was important. Hence in summer and autumn 1791 he worked with his close friend Henry Thornton to launch the Sierra Leone Company, which aimed to resettle former slaves on the west coast of Africa and to advance legitimate trade with the region. He also began to take a greater direct interest in the work of the committee for the abolition of the slave trade, attending one of its meetings for the first time in December 1791. 
On 2 April 1792 Wilberforce again moved in the Commons for abolition. The ensuing all-night debate was one of the memorable occasions of the unreformed parliament, drawing great eloquence from Pitt, Fox, and Wilberforce himself. The decisive intervention came from Henry Dundas, the home secretary, who proposed the compromise of gradual abolition, which passed by 230 votes to 85. Yet it proved a pyrrhic victory, partly because the word 'gradual' could be used as a cover for indefinite delay, partly because in the ensuing years further progress was obstructed in the Lords. Wilberforce's troubles were augmented by the threats of John Kimber, a slave-ship captain whom he had named in the Commons as having flogged a slave girl to death. Kimber was consequently arrested and tried for murder, but, having been acquitted because of poorly presented prosecution evidence, he pursued Wilberforce for an apology and compensation, menacing him with physical violence. 
Despite such frustration and antagonism, Wilberforce's commitment to abolition never wavered. On 26 February 1793 he narrowly lost a vote in the Commons whereby he had been hoping to put pressure on the Lords. During the sessions of 1793 and 1794 he unsuccessfully promoted a 'Foreign Slave Bill', which would have prohibited the use of British ships to carry slaves to the territories of other countries. 
Meanwhile, though, other interests developed. Wilberforce believed that insufficient efforts were made to prevent the outbreak of war with France in February 1793, a source of tension in his hitherto close friendship with Pitt. The war continued to concern him greatly, and he was also worried by radical agitation at home, although he did not identify with alarmist reactions. He was, however, the more convinced of the need for national moral and spiritual revival, and in autumn 1793 he began to write material for a 'tract' on 'practical Christianity' which he saw as a requisite response to the needs of the times. Meanwhile in May 1793 he took the opportunity provided by the renewal of the East India Company's charter to attempt to obtain a legislative commitment to the promulgation of Christianity in India. His clauses were initially included in the bill, but then struck out after lobbying from the directors of the company, who feared that religious confrontations would damage their commercial and political interests. 
Wilberforce's disquiet about the war increased, and on 30 December 1794 he moved an amendment to the address urging the government to try to secure peace. On 26 January 1795 he supported an opposition motion with a similar purpose. He thereby further strained his friendship with Pitt, but Wilberforce had no intention of making lasting common cause with the opposition whigs. His position was one of independence on the basis of convictions arrived at through prayer and belief in divine guidance. Pitt did not bear a grudge, and on 26 February supported Wilberforce when he proposed another unsuccessful motion against the slave trade. When Wilberforce again moved for peace on 27 May, Pitt was privately sympathetic, although more hawkish members of the government, notably Dundas and William Windham, remained antagonistic. 
By autumn 1795 Wilberforce and Pitt were fully reconciled, on the basis of a desire for peace but also a recognition that it was unrealistic in the short term, coupled with serious concern at growing unrest at home. Hence Wilberforce fully supported Pitt when in November he brought forward the 'gagging' bills against seditious meetings and treasonable practices. When Wilberforce received news that Christopher Wyvill was mobilizing Yorkshire against the measures, he made a dramatic dash up the Great North Road in a coach borrowed from Pitt. He arrived in York just in time to deliver a decisive speech at the county meeting on 1 December, when he claimed that the provisions of the bills had been misrepresented, and argued that they offered the best possible balance between 'the security of the constitution, and... every reasonable toleration to the subject'. His intervention was crucial in securing a loyal address rather than a hostile petition. 
Wilberforce's support for the government at this crucial juncture served to reduce fears that the anti-slave-trade campaign was potentially subversive. Certainly, when he renewed the parliamentary struggle in February 1796 he met with more success than in recent years, with his 'Abolition Bill' proceeding as far as a third reading on 15 March. It was then narrowly defeated because some of his supporters were at the opera. The session of 1796 was curtailed by the general election in June, when Wilberforce was again returned for Yorkshire without a contest. On 15 May 1797 he yet again proposed a motion against the slave trade, but once more lost the vote. 
Wilberforce's interests in social reform expanded during the mid-1790s. He energetically supported Jeremy Bentham in his abortive plans for a panopticon that would have improved conditions for prisoners. He encouraged medical and educational initiatives and also the Society for Bettering the Condition and Increasing the Comforts of the Poor, formed in 1796. For Wilberforce, though, the nation's most pressing needs were moral and spiritual, and in April 1797 he at last completed and published 'A practical view of the prevailing religious system of professed Christians in the higher and middle classes of this country contrasted with real Christianity'. This work was the tract begun in 1793 and now expanded into a full-length book. As the title implies, Wilberforce expounded his interpretation of 'New Testament' teachings as a basis for a critique of the lukewarm and inadequate practice of Christianity he observed around him. He called for religious revival as an essential means of reversing national moral decline. Despite its unfashionable theme and diffuse and discursive style, the book was extensively read and very influential. It was repeatedly reprinted and translated. It was both 'the manifesto of the evangelical party of the time' ('DNB') and Wilberforce's own personal testimony, which provided a powerful rationalization of his philanthropic and political exertions over the preceding decade. 
Wilberforce's single-minded commitment to his chosen causes led him during the late 1780s and early 1790s to resist romantic involvements, and there is little doubt that he remained not only single but celibate until his thirty-eighth year. Then on 15 April 1797, while at Bath, he met Barbara Ann (1777-1847), the third child and eldest daughter of Isaac Spooner of Elmdon Hall, Warwickshire, a Birmingham banker, and his wife, Barbara Gough-Calthorpe, the sister of the first Lord Calthorpe. Barbara had come to Wilberforce seeking spiritual advice. He was immediately smitten and, with characteristic impulsiveness, proposed within a fortnight of their first encounter. The couple were married quietly at Walcot church, Bath, on 30 May 1797. The relationship was characterized by enduring mutual devotion, and Barbara's attentiveness helped to sustain Wilberforce's increasingly frail health, although her associated tendency to a narrow-minded possessiveness was also a constraint upon him. Following a near-fatal attack of typhoid in 1800, her own health was never robust. The first child, William, had been born in July 1798, to be followed by Barbara (1799), Elizabeth (1801), Robert Isaac Wilberforce (1802), Samuel Wilberforce (1805), and Henry William Wilberforce (1807). Wilberforce loved children and was a devoted and playful father, cultivating a warm family life in the midst of his hectic political activities. Unusually for the period, all the children survived to adulthood. 
In 1792 Wilberforce had accepted an invitation from Henry Thornton to share his home at Battersea Rise in Clapham, an accessible refuge from his hectic life at Old Palace Yard. Following his marriage he leased Edward Eliot's nearby house, Broomfield, and after Eliot's death in late 1797 he bought it. Wilberforce, however, retained something of the nomadic spirit of his youth, and continued to travel extensively around the country during the parliamentary recess. His visits to Bath, beneficial to his health and appealing to his innate sociability, were frequent and prolonged. 
Wilberforce's Christian commitment remained fundamental to his life. Private prayer and 'Bible' reading were central to his daily routine, and his surviving diaries and journals illustrate the depth of his continual quest for holiness and obedience to the call of God. In the period after his conversion he regularly sought and received counsel from Isaac Milner and John Newton, and as the years passed he himself became a valued spiritual counsellor, notably to the agriculturist Arthur Young, who had been much stirred by reading the 'Practical View'. Wilberforce cultivated a strongly religious tone in family life through holding daily family prayers and anxiously watching over the spiritual development of his children. When in London he worshipped at the Anglican proprietary Lock Chapel near Hyde Park Corner, whose minister from 1785 was the biblical commentator Thomas Scott; at Clapham he attended the parish church, where John Venn was incumbent. Despite its intensity, Wilberforce's religion was never austere: while reverencing Scott's ministry he did not imbibe his Calvinism, and, while strongly upholding the observance of Sunday as a day of rest, he saw it as a time for recreation with family and friends as well as for spiritual duties. 
The 1790s and 1800s marked the heyday of what was later labelled the Clapham Sect, the group of wealthy evangelicals around Wilberforce and Henry Thornton whose other notable members included Edward Eliot, Charles Grant, Zachary Macaulay, John Shore (Lord Teignmouth), and James Stephen. Stephen's second marriage to Wilberforce's sister, Sarah, in 1800 meant that the two close friends became brothers-in-law, and the Wilberforces were linked to another leading religious and literary family. This circle of friends was of great importance to Wilberforce in providing emotional and practical support for the ongoing anti-slave-trade campaign. It was also a focal point for religious initiatives in which he played an important role, notably the formation in 1799 of what became the Church Missionary Society, the launch in 1801 of the magazine 'Christian Observer', and the establishment in 1804 of the British and Foreign Bible Society. 
Wilberforce was intensely loyal to the Church of England, seeing it as the essential safeguard of the Christian fabric of the state. Initially, therefore, he opposed the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. One of the key reasons for the success of the 'Practical View' was that its call for national spiritual and moral renewal could be read in broad Anglican as well as specific evangelical terms. At the same time he had a natural affinity with dissenters and Methodists, and in 1800 his influence was important in deflecting Pitt from a measure to restrict the licensing of preachers. 
Even before his conversion Wilberforce had been generous in his charitable giving, but after 1785 he became more energetic and systematic in sharing his considerable wealth with others. For example in 1798, the year after his marriage, he gave away more than $2000. He was willing to assist individuals in straitened circumstances even when he had not been previously acquainted with them. He also gave extensive support to Anglican clergy. In 1789, while staying with Hannah More, he had visited the Mendips, and his appalled reaction to the destitution and lack of education of the local people gave a further focus to his philanthropic aspirations. He undertook to fund More in promoting moral and social improvement in the neighbourhood, and maintained a long-term commitment to supporting her work. 
The closing years of the eighteenth century were unpropitious for the anti-slave-trade cause. Not only did a sense of national crisis engender a political atmosphere unreceptive to reform and innovation, but the passing in 1797 of a measure that referred the matter to the colonial legislatures further frustrated Wilberforce's efforts. Hence his annual motions in 1798 and 1799 were defeated by narrow majorities. In 1799, however, an act was passed that further restricted overcrowding on slave ships. In 1800 and 1801 Wilberforce refrained from proposing his normal motion, a change of tactics arising initially from hopes for an agreed suspension of the trade and then for an international agreement on abolition as part of a peace settlement. But such expectations proved unfulfilled, and Pitt's resignation in 1801 and replacement as prime minister by the less sympathetic Henry Addington was a further discouragement. In 1802 Wilberforce's readiness to defer to a motion by George Canning against the settlement of slaves in Trinidad meant that his own motion became a mere token gesture at the end of the session. 
Meanwhile the moral and social condition of Britain greatly concerned Wilberforce. He supported measures to contain unrest, including the further suspension of habeas corpus, and the 'Combination Acts' of 1799-1800. His sense of a parallel need for moral reform was evident in his disapproval of Pitt's duel with George Tierney in 1798 and in efforts to promote Sunday observance. When the bad harvests of 1799 and 1800 resulted in much scarcity of food and severe distress among the working class, he assiduously participated in the work of the parliamentary committee charged with finding solutions. His motivation was quite as much compassion as fear of disaffection: his vision was for a stable Christian social order in which the wealthy fully accepted their spiritual, moral, and financial obligations to those less fortunate than themselves. 
In the general election of July 1802 Wilberforce was for a fourth time returned unopposed for Yorkshire. The new parliament proved much readier than its predecessor to contemplate abolition of the slave trade, but in the short term any progress was further delayed by the fear of French invasion after the breakdown of the peace of Amiens in 1803. Wilberforce initially opposed the renewal of the war, believing British retention of Malta to be unjustified, but he came to accept that Napoleon's imperialistic ambitions made conflict inevitable. 
In the parliamentary session of 1804 the prospects for abolition at last improved. Pitt's return to Downing Street did not help much, but the anti-radical hysteria of the 1790s had receded, and the Irish MPs brought to Westminster by the union of 1801 helped to shift the weight of opinion in the Commons. Hence, on 20 May, Wilberforce obtained leave to bring in a bill by a margin of 124 to 49, and this bill passed through all its stages in the Commons before the end of June. Once again, however, the dawn proved false: it was too late in the session to attempt to get the bill through the Lords that year. Wilberforce had to reintroduce the measure in the Commons in February 1805, only this time to be defeated on the second reading. In the meantime Wilberforce in July 1804 persuaded Pitt to use an order in council to stop the slave trade to Dutch Guiana, which had been captured by Britain. Although the government procrastinated and did not issue the order until September 1805, it did suggest that the trade's days were numbered. A further promising development in 1805 was closer communication between Wilberforce and the whig abolitionists. 
Parliamentary resolutions in April 1805 for the impeachment of Lord Melville (Dundas), the first lord of the Admiralty, for condoning the misappropriation of naval funds, presented Wilberforce with a painful tension between his personal loyalty to Pitt and his independent upholding of public morality. Wilberforce, who feared for 'the purity of our political system' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 3.228), said that Melville's admission of the truth of the key charge against him gave him no option but to vote for the impeachment resolutions. His speech turned the finely balanced debate against Melville. It also greatly distressed Pitt, but the friendship between him and Wilberforce was unbroken, and the latter, profoundly moved by the prime minister's premature death in January 1806, carried a banner at his public funeral. 
Wilberforce supported the Grenville-Fox ministry formed after the death of Pitt. This reflected his general preference for sustaining the government of the day as far as was consistent with his own independence, but he also recognized that, with two longstanding supporters of abolition now in power, the situation was promising. Adopting a tactic suggested by James Stephen, he persuaded the government to reintroduce the unsuccessful 'Foreign Slave Bill' of the 1790s under the guise of procedural legislation to confirm Pitt's Guiana order in council of the previous year. The measure passed rapidly through both houses, and then, on 10 June 1806, Fox -- to whom Wilberforce deferred for the sake of the cause -- eloquently moved a resolution for general abolition. It too passed, and Wilberforce moved the subsequent address to the king. 
Fox's death in September again destabilized the political situation and was a set-back for abolition. Grenville called a general election with a view to strengthening his position, and after a tense campaign Wilberforce once more carried Yorkshire without a poll. He spent the time before parliament met working on 'A Letter on the Abolition of the Slave Trade'. Like the 'Practical View', his other substantial literary work, this was a pamphlet that grew into a book. It consolidated and restated the formidable array of evidence and argumentation against the trade that Wilberforce had developed over the previous two decades. Its publication on 31 January 1807 served to inform the final phase of the struggle, which had already begun with Grenville's introduction of an 'Abolition Bill' in the Lords. When it had passed the upper house by unexpectedly large majorities, Viscount Howick (Charles Grey) moved its second reading in the Commons on 23 February. Wilberforce, though, was the real hero of the evening, as it became clear that this phase of his labours was at last coming to a triumphant end. Eloquent tributes were made to his efforts, and the bill passed by 283 votes to 16. It received the royal assent on 25 March. 
Wilberforce's public standing in the wake of slave-trade abolition was immediately tested severely when the incoming tory government called another general election in May 1807, and for the first and only time in his career he faced a poll for Yorkshire. Confronting as he did the great wealth and influence of both the Fitzwilliam and the Harewood interests, it was a testimony to the personal esteem in which he was held, and to his effectiveness in representing the county over the previous quarter-century, that he was returned at the head of the poll. It was alleged, however, that Wilberforce had compromised his independence by a coalition with Henry Lascelles, the tory candidate. Wilberforce denied the charge and defended himself in a published letter to the electors. He acknowledged that some of his supporters had indeed also solicited votes for Lascelles, but this was without his sanction, and it would have been improper for him to constrain their actions. The experience appears to have confirmed Wilberforce's sense of the need for moderate electoral reform, which he continued to advocate. 
Wilberforce's continuing concern over slavery was now carried into creating the African Institution, which aimed to ameliorate conditions in the West Indies, and to develop the Sierra Leone project as a foundation for disseminating Christianity and civilization in Africa. He also sought to prevent slaves being carried in foreign ships. Freed, though, from the immediate pressures of the campaign for British abolition, he was able to exercise his strong moral authority in diverse ways. During these years members of the government readily sought and received his advice, but he maintained his independent stance, even after his friend and fellow evangelical Spencer Perceval became prime minister in 1809. He continued until 1812 assiduously to attend the Commons, with an influential voice on issues such as the duke of York scandal in 1809, the failure of the Walcheren expedition in 1809 and the subsequent parliamentary inquiry, and the regency arrangements consequent on the king's final breakdown in health in 1810-11. His role as leader of the group of evangelical 'Saints' in parliament was recognized but informal. 
In 1808, anxious to limit his expenses so as better to finance his philanthropy, and weary of continual commuting between Westminster and Clapham, Wilberforce had sold both Broomfield and Old Palace Yard. He purchased a lease of Gore House in Kensington (on the site where the Albert Hall was later built), which provided a relatively rural lifestyle within walking distance of parliament. It also became a centre for his burgeoning extra-parliamentary activities, helping many individuals and acting as an office-bearer and leading supporter for numerous evangelical societies. 
At the general election of 1812 Wilberforce, conscious of advancing age and declining energy, decided not to contest Yorkshire, and was returned instead for Bramber in Sussex, a pocket borough controlled by a cousin of his wife, Lord Calthorpe. This change greatly reduced his constituency responsibilities while enabling him to remain in the Commons and to continue to advocate his central concerns. He sat for Bramber for the remainder of his parliamentary career. 
Wilberforce's advocacy of religious liberty now came to the fore. He had agonized much on the Roman Catholic question, but now his dislike of perceived prejudice and his belief that concession would strengthen Irish loyalty led him in March 1813 to support emancipation, a stance that put him at odds with many of his evangelical supporters. The renewal of the East India Company's charter then gave him an opportunity to revive his campaign of 1793 to secure the admission of missionaries into India. For him this was a cause analogous to the abolition of the slave trade. He held that it would be the means to liberate India from the 'moral and social ignorance and degradation' that he saw as inherent to Hinduism, by opening the way to 'Christian light and moral improvement' (W. Wilberforce, 'Substance of the Speeches... on the East India Bill', 1813, 48, 106). He was supported by extensive petitioning, and on 22 June 1813, in one of his most compelling Commons speeches, he persuaded the house to pass the necessary resolutions. The foundation of the bishopric of Calcutta ensued. 
In the meantime Wilberforce maintained the campaign against slavery by promoting a bill, suggested by Stephen, to set up a register of slaves already in the West Indies so as to provide leverage for improving conditions and to make it easy to prevent additions by illicit trading. In 1814, as the war with France appeared at last to be ending, he strongly urged that a general abolition of the slave trade should be incorporated into the peace settlement. He addressed an open letter to Talleyrand on the matter, and also a lengthy personal letter to Alexander I of Russia, who was sympathetic and granted him a private audience when in London in June 1814. Already, however, Wilberforce had been bitterly disappointed by Castlereagh's initial failure to obtain such a provision. He led a campaign, supported by the African Institution and a wave of petitioning, to secure the revision of the treaty. On 27 June he proposed and carried unanimously an address to the regent that committed the government to the cause and ensured that, despite limited short-term success, it remained firmly on the diplomatic agenda, in relation to Spain, Portugal, and the United States, as well as France. A further dimension of Wilberforce's concern to improve conditions in the West Indies came between 1815 and 1820, when he supported and advised Henri Christophe, a former slave who had proclaimed himself king of Haiti, in efforts to promote the educational and religious advance of his people. 
In response to the hardship and unrest that followed the end of the Napoleonic wars Wilberforce reluctantly sided with the measures adopted by the Liverpool government. Although his philanthropic and compassionate impulses remained strong, he lacked a first-hand understanding of the extent of the distress of the poor, and regarded radical agitation as subverting the stability of the constitution. He also perceived it as linked to anti-Christian beliefs and believed that 'democrats' squeezed out spiritual interest by laying too 'great a stress on the concerns of this world' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 5.36). His vote in favour of the corn laws in 1815 led to fears that his house would be attacked. In June 1817 his support for the suspension of habeas corpus caused Sir Francis Burdett ironically to tag him 'the honourable and religious member', provoking Wilberforce into a robust defence of his own stance. In 1819 the Peterloo massacre heightened his fears of subversion, and he approved of the subsequent 'Seditious Meetings Act'. In 1820, when George IV's estranged wife, Caroline of Brunswick, sought her rights as queen, Wilberforce, preoccupied with the dangers to constitutional stability and public morality, tried unsuccessfully to mediate a settlement. Radical attacks on his perceived hypocrisy indirectly testified to his status as a national moral arbiter. 
These years saw failing health and painful bereavements. As he aged, Wilberforce's slight figure became increasingly hunched, and he began to wear a steel corset to support his body. His eyesight, never good, steadily deteriorated, he continued to have bowel problems, and he also suffered recurrent chest complaints. Henry Thornton, whom Hannah More judged 'a great part of himself' (Pollock, 248), died in 1815, Wilberforce's sister, Sarah, in 1816, and his elder daughter, Barbara, in 1821. Meanwhile in 1819 his eldest son, William, now grown into an amiable but feckless young man, distressed his father by his manner of life as a Cambridge undergraduate. 
Amid these public and private burdens Wilberforce, fortified by his Christian convictions, retained an underlying emotional equanimity and a brightness and warmth of manner that impressed his acquaintances. Radicals might dislike him, but he was enormously venerated by the evangelicals, and the appearance of his increasingly frail and bent figure at religious meetings was greeted with great adulation. 
By the early 1820s Wilberforce was limiting his public activities. In 1821 his decision to sell Gore House and move to Marden Park in Surrey, 15 miles from Westminster, signified a growing disengagement from parliamentary affairs. Conscious, however, that his active career was nearing its close, he still sought to give renewed impetus to the campaign against slavery. Hopes that the end of the slave trade would lead to an amelioration of conditions in the West Indies had been disappointed, and the proposal for a register of slaves failed to make progress. Emancipation appeared to be the only effectual way forward. In May 1821 Wilberforce approached Thomas Fowell Buxton to be his coadjutor and eventual successor in the Commons leadership of the campaign to free the slaves. Little was done until early in 1823, when the Anti-Slavery Society was formed, and Wilberforce published his 'Appeal to the religion, justice and humanity of the inhabitants of the British empire in behalf of the negro slaves in the West Indies'. In this pamphlet he dwelt on the moral and spiritual degradation of the slaves and presented their emancipation as a matter of national duty to God. It proved to be a powerful inspiration for the anti-slavery agitation in the country. It also stirred William Cobbett into a virulent published attack on Wilberforce for his alleged failure to acknowledge the extent of the deprivation and oppression suffered by the 'free British labourers' whose lot he had contrasted favourably with that of the slaves. 
Wilberforce's anxiety to participate in the parliamentary campaign was indicated by a move back to London, to Grove House in Brompton, but it was now Buxton who took the lead in the Commons, by moving a resolution against slavery on 15 May 1823. Wilberforce spoke in his support and also participated in anti-slavery debates on 16 March and 11 June 1824, when in his last speech in the Commons he urged that the matter should not be left to the colonial governments. While it was clear that he no longer had strength for protracted and extensive activity, he had provided an invaluable initial impetus to this new phase in the anti-slavery movement. 
Wilberforce suffered two bouts of serious illness in 1824, and early in 1825 he bowed to the inevitable and resigned his parliamentary seat. He purchased Highwood Hill, a house with a small estate at Mill Hill in Middlesex, in a rural situation but accessible to London, and moved there in 1826. Free from the stress of public life, his health improved somewhat, and he passed an active retirement, rejoicing in the beauties of nature, maintaining his extensive correspondence, continuing to travel extensively on visits to numerous friends, and cultivating his devotional life. Although generally withdrawing from politics, he retained his passionate commitment to the anti-slavery cause, offering counsel and occasional public support to its active leaders. 
Wilberforce's family was a source of both pride and pain. He delighted in the academic success of his three younger sons and in their decisions to take Anglican orders. Although Robert and Henry later converted to Roman Catholicism, during their father's lifetime the evangelicalism of the family appeared secure. Meanwhile, Wilberforce supported William in a speculative dairy business, the failure of which in 1830 caused him disastrous financial losses. The death of the younger daughter, Elizabeth, in 1832, brought further grief to her parents. 
The severe financial retrenchment forced upon Wilberforce in 1830 led him to let Highwood and to spend his closing years in a peripatetic existence, focused on the vicarages of two of his sons. He divided the bulk of his time between Brighstone on the Isle of Wight, where Samuel, later bishop of Oxford and Winchester, was incumbent, and East Farleigh in Kent, to which Robert had recently been presented by Lord Chancellor Brougham out of concern for Wilberforce's financial situation. 
Wilberforce's final decline in health began early in 1833 with a severe attack of influenza. He went to Bath, where the waters had so often in the past appeared beneficial to him, but this time he experienced no relief, suffering 'much from pain and languor' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 5.355). In mid-July he was moved to London, where for some days he seemed to improve. Late on 26 July he was thrilled to hear that the bill for the abolition of slavery had passed its third reading in the Commons, the culmination of his life's work. On the following evening he became much weaker, and after a series of fainting fits he died, early in the morning of 29 July at 44 Cadogan Place, Sloane Street. 
Wilberforce had wished to be buried at Stoke Newington with his sister and elder daughter, but following a requisition -- at the instigation of Lord Brougham, from many peers and MPs -- the family consented to interment in Westminster Abbey. The funeral took place there on 3 August, with the lord chancellor, the speaker of the House of Commons, and the duke of Gloucester among the pallbearers. The distinguished and numerous attendance from both houses of parliament and the extensive interest of the general public were 'exalted testimony of the esteem in which he was held... and of the friendship which his mild manners and noble qualities had won him' ('The Times'). He was laid to rest on the same day in the north transept, close to three other great parliamentarians of his generation: Pitt, Fox, and Canning. A striking seated statue by Samuel Joseph was erected in Westminster Abbey in 1840, and a commemorative column was erected in Hull in 1834. 
The five-volume life of Wilberforce by his sons Robert and Samuel was published in 1838. It was copiously documented, but thin on interpretation; strong on insight into its subject's religious life, weak on understanding of the context of his political achievements. It gave rise to an unedifying controversy with the veteran Thomas Clarkson, who felt that his own role in the abolition campaign had been denigrated. Two prominent tendencies in subsequent perceptions of Wilberforce had already been presaged during his lifetime. To evangelicals he was a seminal leader and inspiration, a man of committed faith and integrity, who at great personal cost followed the call of Christ to help the oppressed abroad and proclaim the moral and spiritual imperatives of the gospel at home. In the eyes of secular radicals and socialists, however, his concentration on overseas slavery, his spiritual and moral preoccupations, and his underlying social conservatism caused him to disregard the deprivation and injustice suffered by his own countrymen. Behind both perceptions, though, lay an awareness of his undoubted stature as a leader who stirred the conscience of the nation and upheld the human rights and dignity of the slaves. Many others contributed to the campaign against slavery, but Wilberforce's role was essential and unique precisely because he was a fully integrated and respected member of the political and social elite. While he challenged the attitudes of his class, he did not transcend them, but by his residual conformity he secured his enduring influence. In religion the legacy of his evangelistic zeal and spiritual earnestness helped to shape the Victorian age he did not live to see; in politics he maintained a courage, independence, and incorruptibility that has given lasting inspiration to British public life. 


@@@@@


doc= 29387


Wilbye, John (bap. 1574, d. 1638), composer and musician, was baptized at Diss in Norfolk on 7 March 1574, the third son of Matthew Wilbye (died 1605), a prosperous tanner and also, it seems, an amateur lutenist. Nothing is known of his early life or musical training. It was probably through the Cornwallis family of nearby Brome Hall that he was introduced to the Kytson family of Hengrave Hall, near Bury St Edmunds. Elizabeth Cornwallis was the wife of Sir Thomas Kytson, master of Hengrave, and Wilbye entered the Kytsons' service at some time during the early to mid-1590s, remaining at Hengrave until Lady Kytson's death in 1628. He also benefited from periods of residence in London, for the Kytsons had a house in Austin Friars which would have afforded him ready contact with London musical circles; it was from their town house that he inscribed his first publication, 'The First Set of English Madrigals to 3, 4, 5, and 6 Voices' (1598), dedicated to Sir Charles Cavendish, a son-in-law of Sir Thomas and Lady Kytson. Such a location also enabled Wilbye to involve himself with the capital's music business, and in 1600 he was involved with Edward Johnson (another musician and composer employed at Hengrave) in negotiations for the publication (and, subsequently, in the proof-reading) of John Dowland's second book of lute songs. The following year Wilbye contributed a madrigal, 'The Lady Oriana', to 'The Triumphs of Oriana', the collection of madrigals published in 1601 in praise of the aged Queen Elizabeth. 
Within the Kytson family itself Wilbye seems to have gained the status of an honoured retainer. By 1603 he had his own comfortably furnished room ('Wilbye's chamber': an inventory of that year enables the room to be identified), and in her later will Lady Kytson made him a substantial bequest of furniture and linen. Even before this he must have acquired considerable means, for in 1613 he obtained the lease of a valuable sheep farm in the neighbourhood. In the meantime his second, and final, collection, 'The Second Set of Madrigals to 3, 4, 5, and 6 Parts, Apt both for Viols and Voices' (1609) was published, and though he lived a further twenty-nine years this proved to be his last major publication. In 1614 he contributed two pieces to Sir William Leighton's 'The Tears or Lamentations of a Sorrowful Soul', but nothing else of his has survived except a handful of mostly unimportant compositions (many incomplete) for voices and/or instruments. 
Thus Wilbye's reputation rests squarely upon his two volumes of madrigals. His first volume appeared one year after that of Thomas Weelkes, who was about the same age. Though the two composers were the greatest of the English madrigalists, their personal biographies suggest they were very different characters. While Weelkes started brilliantly but finally declined into a sadly disordered state, Wilbye's life story suggests a worthy, thrifty man who won his employers' trust and respect to a degree far greater than might have been expected of a servant, and who ended his days in honoured and comfortable retirement. His music lends support to this view; where Weelkes's was sturdy, ground-breaking, and powerfully rhetorical, Wilbye's was balanced, polished, and refined, never seeking to startle, let alone shock, the listener. In his verse (whether written by himself or selected) he was the more discriminating. 
In his 1598 volume Wilbye started cautiously, appropriating, but then evolving further, the madrigal style as it had been naturalized into English music in the works of Thomas Morley. But already, especially in the four-voice works of this first collection, Wilbye showed a quiet enterprise that was turning the madrigal into something more characterful and individual, often in very simple but telling ways. To cite just one instance: in perhaps the most perfect piece in the whole thirty-work collection, 'Adieu, sweet Amaryllis', Wilbye perceived that a shift at the end into the major key for the final farewells would, far from brightening the mood, here bring a tone of resignation tinged with melancholy. It was a kind of subtlety that had no place in Weelkes's madrigals. Wilbye exploited this shift much more widely in his second volume. 
It is in this collection that Wilbye achieved his full stature, its thirty-four pieces adding up to the greatest of all the English madrigal volumes. In this remarkably consistent publication two works are nevertheless outstanding, between them exhibiting all the main virtues of his style. In the joyful love song 'Sweet honey-sucking bees' Wilbye employed the lightest of madrigalian idioms, but through his characteristic inventiveness, rhythmic variety, and (very important) constant contrasts in scoring and texture, he contrived to build a piece as impressive for its imposing scale as for its lively detail. 'Sweet honey-sucking bees' is another madrigal that, on its last page, slips its plangent music, here setting 'Ah, then you die!', into the major key -- surely a deliciously ambivalent touch that points the current 'double entendre' of 'die' -- that is 'to expire' or 'to achieve sexual intercourse'. But 'Draw on, sweet night', a work of pervasive melancholy, alternates major and minor, the latter colouring the poet's pain, the former fortifying the soothing balm of the darkness in which he seeks release. Wilbye's profoundly moving setting is probably the most perceptive treatment of a text among all the English madrigals, and it is this quality above all that makes 'Draw on, sweet night' surely the greatest of all English madrigals. 
There must be a strong suspicion that Wilbye's worldly affairs interested him increasingly after about 1610, which may account for his virtual abandonment of composition during his last three decades. But this may not be the whole story. By the first decade of the seventeenth century the fashion for the madrigal was already passing, and the newer trends emerging in English tastes were for a different kind of music employing more radical styles. It is perfectly plausible that Wilbye, whose beautifully poised and tasteful madrigals consistently suggest that their composer never had any interest in the more extreme technical and stylistic explorations going on around him, decided that he no longer had anything to offer. And so, his employers requiring no new compositions from him and himself being now in no need of supplementary income from his music, he fell silent. On Lady Kytson's death in 1628 the Hengrave establishment broke up, and for the last ten years of his life Wilbye was in the service of the Kytsons' daughter Mary, Countess Rivers, at her house in Colchester. Wilbye, who was unmarried, had a close friendship with the countess until his death, and it was almost certainly in Holy Trinity Church facing the house that he was buried in the autumn of 1638. His will (in which he styles himself 'gentleman'; previously he had designated himself 'yeoman') was made on 10 September and proved on 30 November. It shows that he died with substantial assets, for there were several legacies of property and land as well as two musical bequests: his 'best long bow' to a friend, John Barkar, and -- intriguingly -- his 'best viol' to the eight-year-old prince of Wales (the future Charles II). He also left some $400, which included a legacy of $20 to Countess Rivers -- a sign, perhaps, of the degree of personal friendship in his relationship with his nominal employer. 


@@@@@


doc= 29388


Wilcocks, Joseph (1673-1756), bishop of Gloucester and dean of Westminster, born on 19 December 1673 at Bristol, was the son of Joseph Wilcocks, a physician of Bristol. He entered Merchant Taylors' School in the City of London on 11 September 1684, and matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 25 February 1692. From 1692 to 1703 he held a demyship at Magdalen College, and from 1703 to 15 February 1722 a fellowship. He graduated BA on 31 October 1695, MA on 28 June 1698, and BD and DD on 16 May 1709. For a while from about 1709 he served as chaplain to the English factory and embassy at Lisbon, where his devoted ministry throughout an outbreak of smallpox earned widespread admiration. His wife, Jane (died 1725), was the daughter of John Milner, the British consul at Lisbon. On his return to England, Wilcocks was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to George I and preceptor to the daughters of the prince of Wales. On 11 March 1721 he was installed a prebendary of Westminster, and on 3 December 1721 he was consecrated bishop of Gloucester, holding his stall 'in commendam'. 
Over the next few years Wilcocks published several sermons, which reflected his enthusiasm for the Hanoverian succession and his keen interest in the work of the Society for the Reformation of Manners and the charity school movement. On 21 June 1731 he was installed dean of Westminster, and on the same day was nominated bishop of Rochester. He was a conscientious diocesan, who steadily refused further promotion, declining even the archbishopric of York. At Westminster he devoted himself to completing the restoration of the abbey and to finishing the building of Sir Christopher Wren's two west towers. He died on 28 February 1756, at Westminster and was buried on 9 March in Westminster Abbey under the consistory court, where his son erected a monument to his memory in 1761. 
Wilcocks's only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 29389


Joseph Wilcocks (1724-1791), antiquary and philanthropist, was born in Dean's Yard, Westminster, on 4 January 1724. He was admitted to Westminster School in 1731, becoming a king's scholar in 1736. He was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1740, matriculating on 10 June and graduating BA in 1744 and MA in 1747. He was scholarly by nature, winning several college prizes, and after leaving Oxford he undertook serious antiquarian work in Italy. 'An account of some subterraneous apartments, with Etruscan inscriptions, discovered at Civita Turchino in Italy' was published in 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1763, and the posthumously published 'Roman Conversations, or, A Short Description of the Antiquities of Rome' (2 vols., 1792), which contains many biographical details of himself and of his father, reflected his extensive knowledge of Roman history and archaeology. He was elected FSA in 1765. His considerable wealth, which was supplemented by the bequest of an aunt's lottery winnings, was largely devoted to works of piety and benevolence. During his time in Rome, Pope Clement XIII was said to have referred to him as 'the blessed heretick' (Bickerstaffe, xli), and he was noted for support of several hospitals and his kindness to the poor and to the animal creation. He lived for some time in Barton, Northamptonshire. His friends included Edmund Burke, Benjamin West, Granville Sharp, and Adolphus Kempenfelt, in whose estate at Hurley, Berkshire, Wilcocks had a life interest; he never married. He died of an apoplectic stroke at The Crown inn, Slough, on 23 December 1791, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 31 December, in his father's vault. 


