@@@@@


doc= 2883


Booth, James (1806-1878), mathematician and educationist, was born on 25 August 1806, the first of the three children of John and Ellen Booth of Lavagh, co. Leitrim. The Booths owned a small property and belonged to the Church of Ireland community of Annaduff parish. James obtained his early education in the small school of 'Parson Kane' at Drumsna, and was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1825. He graduated BA in 1833, and was awarded the Berkeley medal for Greek in 1834. He took fellowship examinations four times but though highly placed was not awarded a fellowship. 
Booth left Ireland in 1840 and became principal of Bristol College. The college failed chiefly on account of clerical opposition to its secular curriculum. In 1843 he became vice principal of the newly founded Liverpool Collegiate Institution, under the principalship of Dr W. J. Conybeare. There he joined the Liverpool Philosophical Society, becoming its president in 1846. Elected FRS that year on the strength of published papers mainly on the geometry of conics and curved surfaces, Booth was regarded as inventor of the tangential co-ordinates (the 'Boothian co-ordinates'); however, he later discovered that Professor J. Plucker of Halle University had already published on the subject. Throughout his life Booth continued mathematical work, republishing his papers with some new material in 'A Treatise on some New Geometrical Methods' in two volumes, one in 1873 and the other in 1878. 
Booth was ordained in the Church of England in 1842, served as curate for a time in Bristol, and was then appointed vicar of St Anne's, Wandsworth, in 1854. On 28 September of the same year he married Mary Watney, daughter of Daniel Watney the brewer. The couple had three children, John William Watney, Elinor, and another son. Booth established on the site of the present South Thames College the Wandsworth Trade School, first of its kind in the country, where among others Professor Henry Moseley and J. C. Buckmaster taught classes. The school failed through lack of funds, but Moseley took the idea to Bristol when he became residentiary canon of the cathedral, and founded the Bristol Trade and Mining School, eventually part of Merchant Venturers' College. Booth also assisted in founding St Anne's elementary school. In 1859 he was presented to the living of St John, Stone, Buckinghamshire, by the Royal Astronomical Society (to which the advowsons had been transferred by Dr John Lee, ecclesiastical lawyer, landowner, and amateur astronomer), and was also admitted fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. He persuaded Lee to found in Bishopstone a small school for the teaching of agricultural subjects, but it failed. 
Booth was noted as a preacher and had several of his sermons published. His chief object as theologian was to reconcile the 'Bible' with new scientific knowledge, arguing that science reveals physical truths, the 'Bible' axiomatic moral truths. His most important work, however, was the promotion of scientific and technical education, mainly through the agency of the Society of Arts, of which he became a fellow in 1852. It was on his suggestion that the society (today the Royal Society of Arts) founded its journal. He quickly rose to become its treasurer and in 1855-6 he was chairman of council. He was again chairman in 1857, but resigned his office late in the year, owing to serious disagreements with other members of council. 
The cause of the disagreement has been misunderstood and misreported in the society's histories. Most of Booth's energies at this time were absorbed into the society's examination project. Harry Chester, an official from the education committee of the privy council and chairman of the society in 1853, moved the original resolution in favour of an examination scheme. Accordingly, society historians allocated to him the credit of creating it. It was not so. Booth had in 1846 and 1847 published two influential pamphlets, the first in favour of industrial education and the other, 'Education the Province of the State', advocating state-run examination for all candidates for public, industrial, and commercial service. In 1853 he chaired and wrote the report of a committee of the society proposing examinations, and urging the government to spend money on industrial education. However Chester and Booth disliked one another. Booth therefore had no hand in the design of the first examination scheme, launched in 1855. Only one candidate appeared and the scheme was a failure. From then on Booth was put completely in charge, becoming chairman of the examination committee and an active promoter of a workable scheme. His first examination, in thirteen subjects, was held in June 1856 and attracted fifty-six candidates. Its success encouraged the society to extend its efforts and in 1857 examinations were held in London and Huddersfield, attracting 220 candidates who worked 546 papers. 
Booth was then re-elected chairman of council. He wished to have more centres, and called for the examinations to be placed on an independent, professional footing, with their own office, funds, and paid examiners. However in this he over-reached the intentions of the society and met with opposition, led by Chester, who also objected to inclusion in the examinations of a viva voce element. The examination committee and the council failed to support Booth: an impatient and irascible man, he forthwith resigned. 
Nevertheless, a national pattern of common examining now existed. In 1857 Oxford University imitated the society by setting up 'locals' for schools. Two years later the Department of Science and Art launched its 'payment-on-results' examination scheme, taking over most of the society's science examinations. Booth left London and did not return to the society, to some of whose members he had become 'persona non grata'. His wife, Mary, died in 1874 and he died at St John's vicarage, Stone, on 15 April 1878. He was buried at Stone. 


@@@@@


doc= 2884


Booth, James (1796/7-1880), civil servant, was the youngest of the four sons and two daughters of Thomas Booth (1749-1832), a prosperous merchant of Toxteth Lodge, Liverpool, and his wife, Esther Noble (died 1826). Henry Booth, the railway manager, was his elder brother. The family were Unitarians and prominent in the reform movement in Liverpool. James and his brothers campaigned for Lord Sefton, who stood against Canning in the general election of June 1818. He was admitted at Lincoln's Inn on 7 November 1818, when his age was given as twenty-one, and matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in Lent 1819, but did not graduate. He was called to the bar in February 1824, building up a successful practice in the chancery courts. In 1827 he married a cousin, Jane Noble (died 1872). He was among the remarkable group of lawyers and philosophic radicals who attended John Austin's lectures at University College, London, during 1828-30. Subsequently he became a member of the council of University College, and framed its constitution. 
In July 1833 Booth was appointed by the whig government as a member of the royal commission to inquire into municipal corporations; he and Charles Austin, brother of the jurist, investigated corporations in south and central Wales. In 1838 the speaker of the House of Commons, James Abercromby, appointed him to a temporary position preparing synopses ('breviates') conveying the substance of private bills for the use of select committees. He was appointed counsel to the speaker and examiner of recognizances in 1839 by Abercromby's successor, Charles Shaw Lefevre. He established general principles for the form of private bills and, in collaboration with Robert John Palk, drew up outline bills, known as model bills, for all the more important classes of bills. These were the basis for his most important achievement, the 'Clauses Consolidation Acts' of 1845 and 1847, which brought together the provisions common to all bills relating to compulsory land purchase, railway schemes, and company formations. As a result, individual railway bills were shortened by about 90 per cent, and select committees could very rapidly assess in which respects an individual bill deviated from general principles and raised questions of public policy. Booth's acts enabled parliament to deal with the great volume of bills generated by the railway boom of 1844-6, and made procedures cheaper and more convenient for railway promoters (who included his brother). In 1850 he assisted his friend Sir John Romilly, the attorney-general, in preparing the act to regulate the court of chancery in Ireland. 
Booth's post came under the scrutiny of a select committee on expenditure in 1848, and in 1850, fearing charges of sinecurism, Lord John Russell decided to abolish it (in the following year it was revived). On 10 October 1850 Booth accepted the office of secretary to the Board of Trade, in succession to Sir Denis Le Marchant, for which his experience of railway bills made him well qualified. During the long presidencies of Lord Stanley of Alderley (1852-8) and Thomas Milner-Gibson (1859-66), Booth and the other permanent officials decided most of the day-to-day issues which arose in the department. He retired from the secretaryship on 30 September 1865 and was created a CB on 6 July 1866. 
As an experienced official, Booth was appointed a member of the royal commission on trade unions in February 1867. He was in close sympathy with the chairman, Sir William Erle, also a whig lawyer, and Erle entrusted to him the drafting of the commission's final report. Booth's draft, which restated the classical economic objections to trade unions, advocated a labour market free from artificial restrictions; he saw combinations as a form of protection, at variance with the commercial policy of free trade. His conclusions formed the basis for the report of the majority of the commission in 1869. He published in 1871 a utilitarian critique of organized religion, 'The problem of the world and the church reconsidered, in three letters to a friend by a septuagenarian' (3rd edn, 1879), which argued that the church and its doctrines stood in the way of improving the material condition of mankind. Booth died at his home, 2 Princes Gardens, Knightsbridge, London, on 11 May 1880. He was survived by a son, George Booth (1829-1892). 


@@@@@


doc= 2885


Booth, John (bap. 1584, d. 1659), genealogist, was baptized on 10 July 1584 at Swettenham, Cheshire, the eldest child of John Booth of Twemlowe, and his wife, Isabella, daughter of Richard Lowndes of Smallwood. His ancestors had long been landowners in Cheshire, and he succeeded his father at Twemlowe Hall. He occupied his time in researching the pedigrees of Cheshire families, relying on visitations but also on original research in charters, as is apparent from his surviving notebooks. His collections for Cheshire, now largely preserved in the Chester archives, were consulted by heralds and antiquaries such as Dodsworth. Sir Peter Leycester frequently acknowledged his indebtedness to the work of Booth, whom he addressed as 'cousin' (Thacker, 75). He died unmarried in 1659 and was buried on 25 November at Goostrey, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 2886


John Booth (1779-1857), the eldest son of Thomas Booth, had his own ideas about breeding stock, and in the pastures near Richmond, Yorkshire, he found fresh crosses for his cattle. He also ran horses at Catterick, and his dog, Nips, won the Wensleydale cup in a coursing contest at Leyburn. For three seasons he was master of the Bedale hunt, and a constant attendant at the meets. Much of his time was occupied in acting as a judge at exhibitions of livestock. All his own stock were sold off on 21 September 1852, when forty-four lots averaged $48 12's'. 8died Booth married Miss Wright in 1819 and they had several sons. He died at Killerby on 7 July 1857, and was buried nearby, at Ainderby. Shortly afterwards a window to his memory was erected in Catterick church. 


@@@@@


doc= 2887


Booth, Junius Brutus (1796-1852), actor, was born on 1 May 1796 near Tottenham Court Road, London, eldest of the three children of Richard Booth, a lawyer, and Jane Elizabeth Game. He had a brother who died in childhood and a sister. His mother claimed kinship with the radical politician John Wilkes. In his youth, Richard Booth had left England intending to fight for American independence, and America remained his mecca. Junius was classically educated, and, after trying painting, printing, the navy, law, and sculpture, settled on acting. He first appeared with an amateur company, then joined the Penley and Jonas management, and made his professional debut as Campillo in 'The Honey Moon' on 13 December 1813 in Deptford. The next year he toured the Netherlands with the company. Reputedly cited in adolescence in two paternity suits, he eloped with his Belgian landlady's daughter, Marie Christine Adelaide Delannoy (1792-1858), and married her in London in 1815. They had two children. 
Booth made his debut at Covent Garden as Silvius in 'As You Like It' on 19 February 1816, but, seeing small chance of promotion, went to the Brighton and Worthing theatres, and on 25 September 1816 won notice substituting for Edmund Kean as Sir Giles Overreach. He was 5 feet 3 inches tall, slight, though muscular, with classical features, a pale complexion, brown wavy hair, and blue eyes, and resembled Kean in both physique and style; critics disagreed about whether he imitated Kean or both imitated nature. He returned to Covent Garden as Richard III -- Kean's most famous role -- but salary negotiations broke down, and he accepted Kean's invitation to join him at Drury Lane. He played Iago to Kean's Othello on 20 February 1817. Although he was outshone by Kean, young Booth's performance was applauded, and Hazlitt in 'The Examiner' called it the best support of Kean he had seen. Finding that Kean intended to confine him to subordinate roles, Booth returned to Covent Garden, which claimed legal right to his services and now offered him a salary equalling that at Drury Lane. Offended at his defection, audiences at first refused to hear him when he appeared on stage. At the season's end he toured the provinces. Tired of acting, he considered joining the army, and his frustration showed itself in excessive drinking by 1818, when Keats referred to his inebriation. At Covent Garden in 1820 he played King Lear for the first time since George III's madness had caused the play to be banned. According to Hazlitt he played it with life, spirit, and human interest, his acting 'animated, vigorous, and pathetic throughout' ('Complete Works', 18.328). 
In 1821 Booth eloped with Mary Ann Holmes (1802-1885), the daughter of a Lambeth seed merchant, and, having settled $50 a year on his wife, left England. They landed in Norfolk, Virginia, on 30 June, and Booth appeared in Richmond on 6 July as Richard III, winning acclaim for the last two acts, in which, William Winter said, he always displayed 'a prodigious force and an impetuous, fiery, terrible passion', appearing 'like a whirlwind' in the battle (Winter, 99). He settled the question of imitation by performing one night in his own style, the next in Kean's. After playing at the Park Theatre, New York, in October, he toured the south. Always drawn to seek seclusion, Booth applied for the post of Cape Hatteras lighthouse keeper, but settled for a farm outside Bel Air, Maryland, which he alternated -- between tours -- with residences in Baltimore for the rest of his life. He wrote a verse melodrama, 'Ugolino', which was produced in his lifetime and revived by his sons. 
For the 1825 season, Booth returned to England, where, to counteract scandal, he had his portrait painted with his wife and son. However, unfavourable economic conditions and newspaper hostility, combined with his refusing curtain calls, worked against his popularity. After touring the provinces and Amsterdam he returned to the United States. During the 1827-8 season, while stage manager at the St Charles Theatre, New Orleans, Booth played Oreste in Racine's 'Andromache' in French. Although drink and mental instability began to interfere with his work, and though sometimes he failed to appear when announced, he was repeatedly forgiven by both managers and audiences. In 1836-7 he was again in England, but continued to suffer comparisons with Kean, and now also with W. C. Macready and the American tragedian Edwin Forrest, also in England at this time. 
When his sister and her large family joined him in America, Booth was under increased financial pressure, and his drinking and mental aberrations increased. During fits he twice attempted suicide, and once broke his nose, damaging his voice; although he restored it through exercises, it remained somewhat nasal. He began taking his children with him as attendants on the road: Junius Brutus Booth Jr, Richard Junius Booth (his son by his Belgian wife), and, finally, Edwin Thomas Booth. His wife pursued him to America in 1846 and in April 1851 obtained a divorce. The next month Booth married Mary Ann, with whom he had produced ten children and enjoyed for many years what appeared a perfect marriage. He designed for his farm a stately residence, Tudor Hall (still standing), before travelling to California to act under his son Junius's management. On the way home he contracted a fever, and died on 30 November 1852. His body was shipped home and buried in Baltimore cemetery. In 1858 Edwin moved it to a family plot in Green Mount cemetery, Baltimore, where he erected a monument to 'matchless Booth'. 
Shy and unassuming, Booth was a gentle, devoted husband and father, happiest digging his garden, selling his vegetables, or giving small boys pony rides. He held all life sacred, and would not allow meat to be eaten in his house or animals to be killed on his farm. His public demonstrations for animal rights were notorious: he tried to arrange a funeral for slaughtered pigeons, and invited neighbours to the burial of his horse. He refused to own slaves. He attended both an Episcopal church and the Baltimore dockside sailors' chapel and reverenced all religions, seeing Christianity as 'a beautiful type of Man's approach to perfection' but Hinduism as nearer that ideal. He was proficient in classical languages, spoke French fluently, and knew German, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, Hebrew, and some Arabic. Three sons followed him as starring tragedians, and both Edwin and John Wilkes achieved noteworthy reputations. His daughter Asia Booth Clarke wrote several books, including three memoirs of him. The distortions of the Kean-Booth controversy, John Wilkes Booth's assassination of Abraham Lincoln, and the wide geographical spread of his reviews caused his fame after death to be eclipsed. He seems, however, to have been a theatrical genius, a founder of the Romantic style. He acted by inspiration, thrilled by magnetism. He was an expert fencer, notorious for chasing opponents off the stage. He was renowned for the beauty and variety of his voice, the excellence of his consonantal elocution, his use of silences and pauses. While watching Kean was like reading Shakespeare by flashes of lighting, Booth illuminated his text consistently. He was famed for villains -- Iago, Overreach, and Richard III -- remembered for such heroes as John Howard Payne's Brutus, and even succeeded in farce. He was remarkable for making his characters distinct individuals, and for electrifying audiences with conflicting emotion, terror, remorse, despair, scorn, hatred, and fury. In the dream scene of 'Richard III', the anonymous author of 'The Actor' recalls, 'He rushed to the footlights with face ashen and limbs trembling, eyes rolling and gleaming and face and form convulsed in excitement' ('The Actor', 105). James Murdoch said that he 'displayed the most wonderful combination of intellectual beauty and force with consummate skill which was ever exhibited in modern times' (Murdoch, 175). And, for Walt Whitman, 'The words, fire, energy, 'abandon', found in him unprecedented meanings' (Whitman, 2.597). 


@@@@@


doc= 2888


Booth, Laurence (c.1420-1480), bishop of Durham and archbishop of York, was the illegitimate and probably youngest son of John Booth of Barton in Eccles, Lancashire (died 1422). His mother is unknown. He was educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, from which he took degrees in both civil and canon law by 1448. In 1442 he received papal dispensation as a son of unmarried parents for promotion to holy orders, and was duly ordained priest in 1446. By then he had already been presented to the rectory of Cottenham, near Cambridge. In 1450, although not a fellow, he was admitted master of Pembroke, which he remained until his death. He was rarely resident; indeed in January 1450 he was living in London as a residentiary canon of St Paul's. 
Booth rose rapidly in the train of his elder brother William Booth (d. 1464), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield since 1447 and archbishop of York from 1452, to whom he owed most of his early promotion. He succeeded William as chancellor to Queen Margaret on 7 March 1451, and rapidly acquired benefices, receiving licence to hold with the archdeaconry of Stow (which he held only briefly in 1452) any three incompatible benefices up to the value of $100. While holding a series of prebends in London, and a prebend in Lichfield, he also, after William's provision to York, received the valuable prebend of Wistow in York Minster, became a canon of Beverley (and provost in 1457), and was archdeacon of Richmond from 17 August 1454. For two years (1456-8) he was also chancellor of the University of Cambridge. His income from the diocese of York alone was well in excess of $200 a year. 
Booth's political career advanced swiftly, matching his rapid ecclesiastical promotion. Service in the household of Queen Margaret led directly to his appointment as keeper of the privy seal on 24 September 1456 following the death of Thomas Lisieux, whom he also succeeded as dean of St Paul's. Booth's promotion was the preliminary step to a bid for power that Queen Margaret made at a general council meeting at Coventry in October. For the next four years he was closely linked with the resurgent court faction led by the queen, becoming a councillor of the prince of Wales and being found from time to time in the midlands where the queen concentrated her strength. However, Booth's principal service was to lie in the north following his provision to the bishopric of Durham on 22 August 1457. He was consecrated by his brother on 25 September, and received the temporalities on 18 October. 
Booth's promotion to Durham has usually been interpreted as entirely partisan. To an extent it was. He was able to bring to the support of the queen's cause the political authority of the palatinate and, at the same time, by succeeding Robert Neville, remove one of the props of the Yorkist cause in the north. Yet there was a long and respected tradition of promoting the keeper of the privy seal to this key northern diocese in the royal interest. In times less fraught the provision would not have been controversial. Indeed, there is some indication that at first Booth sought to retain the goodwill of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, whose handsome annuity from the revenues of the bishopric he continued to pay, and several of whose servants he kept in office. Yet, as the kingdom drifted towards civil war, it was almost inevitable that Booth would promote members of the family of Salisbury's enemy, the earl of Westmorland, and their servants to positions of authority, as well as committing the resources of his palatinate to the Lancastrian cause. He took immediate advantage of the rout of Ludford (13 October 1459) to seize possession of Barnard Castle, the lordship of Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, to which the bishops of Durham had ancient claims, claims confirmed subsequently in a proviso to the earl's attainder. 
Not surprisingly Booth was removed from the privy seal following the Yorkist victory at Northampton (10 July 1460), but following the comprehensive defeat of the Lancastrians at Towton (29 March 1461) he submitted to the victorious Edward IV, was received into his grace, and became his confessor. He was forced, however, to surrender Barnard Castle to Warwick. He remained loyal to his new master, rallying the men of the palatinate to defeat a Lancastrian incursion in June. Commissioned to treat with the Scots in 1462, he was rewarded by the king with the grant of the alien priory and manor of Tooting Bec in Surrey. Yet in December, when Edward IV was in Durham to counter a combined Lancastrian and Scottish incursion, he was stripped of his temporalities (that is to say the palatinate and episcopal estates) and removed to Pembroke College where he was obliged, for the only time during his tenure, to be its resident master. Booth was no doubt suspected of collusion with Margaret of Anjou, and since the episcopal castle of Norham was the only fortress then in English hands in the far north-east, the sequestration was, perhaps, a wise precaution. Yet there is no direct evidence of treason. It is as likely that he was the victim of Neville vindictiveness and resentment, for the Kingmaker and his brother, Lord Montagu, were the chief beneficiaries of his fall from favour. 
Booth was released in April 1464 and the temporalities restored shortly before peace was made with the Scots. But he was obliged to continue to accept Montagu (created earl of Northumberland in this year) as his lay steward, and it would appear that for the rest of the decade the palatinate remained under unwelcome Neville oversight. Warwick's flight in the spring of 1470 gave Booth the opportunity to recover his freedom of action, and Barnard Castle was restored to him. He survived the readeption of Henry VI to emerge a key figure in Edward IV's regime after 1471, becoming once again the councillor of an infant prince of Wales and being rewarded with the manor of Battersea. Admittedly he failed to hold on to Barnard Castle, which, after a complex tussle with rival claimants, was granted to the king's brother, Richard, duke of Gloucester, in 1474. He was prominent in Anglo-Scottish negotiations culminating in the treaty of Edinburgh of 26 October 1474, and served as chancellor of the realm from 27 July 1473 to 27 May 1474, resigning, it was said, because he became weary and tired by the endless task of managing parliamentary business. But he remained a royal councillor, being nominated to the body that ruled England during the king's expedition to France in 1475. He was rewarded with translation to York on 31 July 1476. 
Booth's four years at York were uneventful, noted more for the favour shown to his kinsmen than for any ecclesiastical acts. His nephew Ralph was appointed archdeacon of York soon after his translation and also became his clerk; a second nephew, Thomas, was collated to the prebend of Ampleforth in 1478; and a great-nephew, Robert, rose swiftly to be dean of York in 1477 and was collated to the lucrative prebend of Wetwang. Laurence died at Southwell on 19 May 1480, possibly after a long illness, for he drew up his will on 28 September 1479; he was buried alongside his brother in the chantry chapel dedicated to St John the Baptist which he had founded there, and which his executors were to complete. His tomb is now in the south aisle of the minster. He is credited with initiating the building of a new arts and canon-law school when he was chancellor of Cambridge, and he rebuilt the gate and adjoining buildings of the episcopal residence of Auckland Palace when bishop of Durham. He founded a chantry in Eccles parish church, Lancashire, and was a benefactor of Pembroke College. 
Booth's career is enigmatic. A great pluralist in his early years, he subsequently became, perhaps following the example of Pope Sixtus IV, a great nepotist, for which he has been much criticized. He has also been dismissed as a time-serving partisan. But this underestimates him. He was a stickler for the rights and prerogatives of every benefice he held. As early as 1455, as archdeacon of Richmond, he challenged the claim of St Mary's, York, to exemption from visitation in its appropriated churches within the archdeaconry. At Durham he soon came into conflict with the cathedral priory, over its similar claims to archidiaconal jurisdiction over appropriated churches, and his insistence on exercising his feudal prerogatives over its estates. The same obsession with feudal prerogative led to his assertion of the title of the bishop, as the successor of St Cuthbert, over Barnard Castle. It is not surprising that he made powerful enemies of the earl of Warwick and his brother George, archbishop of York, to whom the Durham monks appealed for support. Yet Booth stood by his principles, and after 1471 he was supreme in his palatinate. To him can be credited a reform of the administration that brought it more directly under the control of his officers, and also a brief revival of its mint. Perhaps not quite a latter-day Antony Bek, he was determined to be his own man in his palatinate. In this he was not discouraged by Edward IV, for whom ultimately, if only for a short while, he performed the traditional role of the bishop of Durham as the king's right-hand man in the far north. 


@@@@@


doc= 2889


Booth, Peniston (1679-1765), dean of Windsor, was baptized at Lusby, Lincolnshire, on 5 August 1679, one of at least two sons of Thomas Booth and his wife, Elizabeth. (Elizabeth's first husband was Anthony Penyston, whose daughter married Francis, sixth earl of Lincoln.) 
Booth was educated first in Lincoln and then at Magdalene College, Cambridge (1698-1701); he received a BA in 1701 and an MA in 1705. Ordained deacon in 1703, he became a priest in 1707. He was a perpetual curate of Apley, Lincolnshire, and rector of Hanworth from 1717. His only published work, a sermon entitled 'Of Baptism', appeared in 1718. He was prebendary of Lincoln (1719-1746). 
On 9 May 1722 Booth was appointed a canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor; on 26 April 1729 he was installed dean, an office which he held until his death. In addition on 23 July 1733 he was collated chancellor of London. Booth married Catherine Jones on 20 January 1729 in St George's Chapel. The couple had at least one daughter. By 1749 he had made many improvements in the deanery; and a detailed history of St George's Chapel was included in Joseph Pote's 'History and Antiquities of Windsor' (1749). Two of the plates in this work were inscribed to him and his canons. Booth died on 21 September 1765. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2890


Richard Booth (1788-1864), the second son of Thomas Booth, in 1814 moved a few miles south of his father to Studley Farm, which he soon stocked with shorthorns. He was a great believer in inbreeding, and by 1834 his best cows were fine animals in direct descent from his own bull, Twin Brother, to Ben, a bull bred by his father in 1790. He gave up Studley Farm in 1834, and sold off the whole of his herd except Isabella by Pilot, and retired to Sharrow, near Ripon. On the death of his father in the following year he succeeded to the estate and the shorthorn herd at Warlaby, and again turned his attention to breeding. The judges of those days had not yet learned to distinguish between flesh and fat, and although the Booth cattle did not always carry away the prizes, they made the best carcass meat. When the royal cattle shows began in 1844, though not approving of such exhibitions, Richard Booth felt obliged to exhibit; and although at first the quality of his cattle was not understood, it was not very long before his name was often found in the lists of those receiving medals and other rewards. He died at Warlaby on 31 October 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 2891


Booth, Robert (d. 1657), translator and Church of England clergyman, was probably born in Mixenden, Yorkshire, the son of the Revd George Booth (died 'c'.1636), vicar of South Kirkby, near Halifax, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Lister of Shibden. He was admitted sizar to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1603, graduated BA in 1607, became a fellow of Emmanuel College in 1609, and proceeded MA in 1610. At Cambridge, he developed pretensions of becoming a scholar. In April 1611, his translation into English of a work by Jean Barclay on the spiritual and temporal powers of the papacy, while apparently approved by the king and several bishops, brought trouble with the authorities. A compendium, 'Synopsis totius philosophiae', was dedicated to his master at Trinity College, Dr Thomas Neville. In 1614 he translated the 'Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus', which documented the Julich-Cleves succession dispute. 
The same year Booth was ordained deacon and priest in Peterborough and about 1615 he was elected curate at Sowerby Bridge, near Halifax. There he became a prominent nonconformist, under the patronage of John Favour, vicar of Halifax, and followed Favour in neglecting church ceremonies. During the next thirty years he helped consolidate the reputation of the Halifax area as a godly stronghold. In 1620 he completed 'Encomium Heroum', a medical work dedicated to Francis Bacon. On 25 July that year, he married Sarah Cocecrofte who survived him, at Halifax; the couple remained at Sowerby Bridge until 1648. He then moved to nearby Skircoate and became preacher at Halifax, where he was buried on 28 July 1657. 


@@@@@


doc= 2892


Booth, Sir Robert (bap. 1626, d. 1681), judge, was baptized on 2 July 1626 at the collegiate church, Manchester, Lancashire, the son of Robert Booth (died in or before 1637) of Salford in the same county, and Ann (died 1696), daughter of Oswald Mosley of Manchester. Following his father's death his mother married, in August 1637, Thomas Case, a puritan preacher in Salford. After attending Manchester grammar school Booth entered Gray's Inn in 1642, before matriculating from St John's College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner on 20 September 1644. He was called to the bar in November 1649 and practised in London. About 1651 he married Mary (died 1660), daughter of Spencer Potts of Chargrove, Bedfordshire. The couple had at least one child, a son Benjamin, who died aged eleven. 
Booth next appears in Ireland in 1657 upon becoming a member of King's Inns. His wife, Mary, died in 1660 and was buried in St Michan's, Dublin, on 7 September. On 1 December Booth became third judge of the Irish court of common pleas on the recommendation of Lord Chancellor Eustace. He was knighted at Whitehall on 15 May 1668 and made chief justice of common pleas on 30 January 1669. His second wife, Susanna, daughter of Sir Henry Oxenden of Deane in Kent, whom he married at an unknown date, died on 27 October 1669; the couple had four daughters. 
In 1673 Booth's nonconformist sympathies caused the king to veto his appointment as chief justice of king's bench. However, within six years the turmoil caused by the Popish Plot had made his religious convictions an asset to the beleaguered monarch, who promoted him to the post on 26 March 1679. Having inherited a large estate from his father Booth was able to add to it with purchases in Ireland. Although regarded as the ablest man in his profession in Ireland he was frequently ill with gout or absent in England. He died in January 1681 and was buried on 2 March in Salford. 


@@@@@


doc= 2893


Booth, Sarah (1789x94-1867), actress, was born in Birmingham of unknown parentage. Her father died when she was an infant, leaving a large family of which she was the youngest of three daughters. She claimed descent from the seventeenth-century actor Barton Booth but denied any connection with her contemporary, Junius Brutus Booth, whom she later tried to persuade to add an 'e' to his name to prevent misunderstanding. Her recorded career began in Manchester, where, about 1804, Sally and her sister Sophia appeared as dancers. She remained there under the management of the elder Macready, whose multiplicity of financial affairs soon proved embarrassing, but who promoted her to the performance of characters such as Prince Arthur in 'King John' and the Little Girl in 'Children of the Wood'. Her lack of education was said to have been rectified by the welcome she received as a visitor among several respectable families within the circuit of the Macready company. She subsequently went to Doncaster as a member of Tate Wilkinson's company and successfully took over the part of Alexina in Reynolds's 'The Exile' when Mrs Stephen Kemble ('nee' Elizabeth Satchell) dislocated a shoulder. R. W. Elliston, who was then managing the Surrey Theatre (formerly the Royal Circus), invited her to appear there in 1810 as Cherry in a burletta based on Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', in which he himself played Archer. In November of that year she performed for the first time at Covent Garden, as Amanthis in 'The Child of Nature', an adaptation from the French by Elizabeth Inchbald. She achieved some popularity: a poem 'To Miss S. Booth' appeared in the 'Theatrical Inquisitor', written by one J. G. of Edinburgh, who had seen this performance. She remained at Covent Garden in various trivial pieces and was occasionally allowed to assume a major character such as Juliet. However, the rising fame of Eliza O'Neill wrested from her the hope of distinction in tragic roles, and she left Covent Garden until her rival had retired. Elliston remarked that she performed melodrama to perfection but added that she 'was for several seasons the heroine of that multitudinous succession of trash... the Covent Garden managers delighted to insult the taste of the town with' (Raymond). She then appeared at the Olympic, Drury Lane, the Haymarket, and the Adelphi, as well as touring widely in the provinces, where, it was said, she visited 'every tolerable place in England' along with her sister, playing a few nights in each for a share of the house, and taking her benefit, which led to the accumulation of a substantial fortune. She retired from the stage about 1828 and last appeared in a benefit at the Marylebone Theatre in 1841. 
Sally Booth was a strict observer of her religious duties and a constant attender at church wherever she was performing. On one occasion a clergyman took advantage of her presence to criticize the stage, which reduced her to tears at the time but subsequently led to an increase in her local audiences. She was petite and pretty and was rumoured to wear false hair. Her dancing was her special attraction, and was described as full of grace, agility, and sylph-like lightness. She had a wide circle of friends, including Camilla Dufour Crosland, who in her 'Landmarks of a Literary Life' (1893) described visiting Sally Booth's dressing-room as a child, while she made up for the stage, and recalled her home in Bloomsbury Square. She lived in a cottage retreat in Highgate during her retirement, and died on 30 December 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 2894


Booth, Thomas (fl. 1594-1616), Church of England clergyman, was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he entered as a sizar in 1594, and graduated BA in 1598, MA in 1601, and BD in 1609. He became rector of Langdon Hills in Essex in 1611 and a prebendary of Lichfield Cathedral in 1615. The dates when his successors were appointed to both positions imply that he died in 1616. In 1611 he published (under his initials) 'Concio ad clerum jamdudum Cantabrigiae habita in Luc. cap. 5 ver. 10'. No copy of this sermon is known to survive in any major library. 


@@@@@


doc= 2895


Booth, Thomas (c.1755-1835), stock breeder, was the owner and farmer of the estate of Killerby, near Catterick, Yorkshire, but little is known about his origins. In 1790 he turned his attention to the breeding of shorthorn cattle, selecting his cows from Mr Broader of Fairholme, and the bulls from the stock of Robert and Charles Colling. His aim was to raise animals that would be suitable for both beef and milk production. In breeding them he tried to reduce the bone of the animal, especially the length and coarseness of the legs, the prominence of the hips, the heavy bones of the shoulders, and the shoulder points, which previously were great defects in the unimproved shorthorns. Booth was very successful, and for many years his cows and bulls carried away the top prizes at the chief exhibitions of stock. By 1814 he was considered to be the best cattle breeder in the area. 
Booth moved to Warlaby, Yorkshire, in 1819, and gave up the Killerby estate and part of the shorthorn herd to his eldest son, John Booth; he took the remainder with him to Warlaby, where he died in 1835. He and his wife, formerly Miss Bower, had two sons, also well known as cattle breeders. 






@@@@@


doc= 2896


Booth, William (d. 1464), archbishop of York, was possibly born in Eccles, Lancashire, a younger son of Sir John Booth of Barton-on-Irwell and his wife, Joan, daughter of Sir Henry Trafford. Details of his birth date and early education are lacking. His was a large and close family; especially his half-brother, Laurence Booth, followed closely in his wake -- he too occupied the archbishopric and was buried in the same church -- and both helped their nephew John Booth considerably in his career towards the bishopric of Exeter, which he held from 1465 to 1478. William Booth studied common law at Gray's Inn, the only fifteenth-century bishop to do so. In 1416 he was admitted to the prebend of Oxton and Cropwell in Southwell, Nottinghamshire, and perhaps already had the rectory of Wilmslow, Cheshire, which he resigned in July 1418. He secured the prebend of Dunham and Newport in Lincoln Cathedral on 10 October 1420. Shortly afterwards he began a long association with the London diocese as canon residentiary and prebendary of Consumpta-per-Mare in St Paul's from 28 May 1421, and archdeacon of Middlesex, from May 1429 to about November 1441, besides other local parish preferment. With a papal dispensation for plurality he collected useful supplementary preferment around the country. At St Paul's he found the chapter's estate administration in disarray; by 1447 he held almost every manor himself and even procured life leases on his promotion to bishop, an abuse that it took the chapter five years to undo. He had profited energetically from his tenure but had at least restored the manors -- and indeed the chapter's economy as a whole -- to stability and financial health. 
In the early 1440s Booth attracted the patronage of William de la Pole, earl (later duke) of Suffolk (died 1450), the emerging power at the king's side. In 1445 he was made chancellor to the newly arrived Margaret of Anjou. When the see of Coventry and Lichfield fell vacant in March 1447, both king and queen wrote to Pope Nicholas V ('r'. 1447-55) to recommend Booth; he was duly provided on 26 April and consecrated in St Paul's on 9 July. He continued to serve Margaret as chancellor, most notably in her foundation of Queen's (later Queens') College, Cambridge. He was, as a result, often absent from his diocese, but his register shows him as an efficient administrator with able deputies. 
In May 1450 Suffolk, impeached and widely hated, was murdered on his way into exile. Booth, like others, was tainted by association, his reputation smeared in satirical verses, and even his life threatened during Cade's revolt in May-July 1450. In November the parliamentary Commons demanded his expulsion from the king's court, along with some thirty others. Like these, Booth was not sacrificed by the crown; although no longer her chancellor (Laurence Booth now held the post), he was supported by the queen and by Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset (died 1455), the new power at court. On 21 July 1452 he was even translated to the archbishopric of York, such was the government's recovery of confidence, though he was not formally enthroned until 4 September 1453. Thomas Gascoigne (died 1458), the vitriolic theologian and commentator -- and himself a Yorkshireman -- condemned such a promotion as a grave disservice to God, but he often made such statements. In fact Booth seems to have been effective enough, if along conventional lines rather than by the preaching missions that the high-minded Gascoigne demanded (and, to be fair, practised). His York register shows that he was resident for two-thirds of the time, and otherwise attended on the affairs of the realm only as his status demanded. He chose able staff; three successive archdeacons of Richmond went on to become bishops themselves. 
From the summer of 1453 national affairs became permanently and dangerously factional, not least around York where the Nevilles and Percys took to violence. Booth, his fingers already singed by events in 1450-51, took care to steer a prudent path; in spring 1454 he was at Westminster when there was rebellion in Yorkshire against Richard of York's protectorate, and again in the autumn when the two local magnate families clashed once more; on 22 May 1455 he was in his diocese when York attacked and killed his enemies around the king at St Albans. Despite old loyalties he seems to have been cautious about joining Queen Margaret in her uncompromising revival of the Lancastrian regime in the following years. A week before she defeated and killed York and the earl of Salisbury at Wakefield on 30 December 1460 Booth was further south, at Southwell in Nottinghamshire; afterwards he still did not join her, and was indeed in London among her opponents, if not actively of them, by 27 January 1461, evidently not participating in her own invasion south to rescue her husband. There he remained until the final swing of the pendulum ended in Edward IV's victory at Towton in Yorkshire on 29 March. 
Booth returned to his diocese in late April and ordered his clergy to help prepare the defence against a Scottish invasion on Henry VI's behalf. On 28 June he joined Archbishop Thomas Bourchier of Canterbury (died 1486) in crowning Edward IV in Westminster Abbey, and in November participated fully in the king's first parliament. Over the next three years he was included in many royal commissions in his province and twice, in 1462 and 1463, prepared his clergy once more against invasion. He attended parliament at Westminster in April-June 1463, then twice acted on the king's behalf to prorogue intended sessions at York, in February and May 1464, as intended major campaigns by the king against Lancastrian resistance in the north and Scotland came to nothing. On 10 August 1464 Booth received an exemption for life from attendance at councils or parliaments because of his age and frailty. 
Booth made his will on 26 August 1464 at his favourite residence, Southwell. It was not complicated. He and all the Booth family had established a notable collective chantry to St Katherine in Eccles church in 1450, and another there to Jesus and St Mary the Virgin (the patron saint) in 1460. Now the archbishop made further financial bequests to both and provided for a house to be built for the chantry priests. He left his pastoral staff and mitre to York Minster but little else. He died at Southwell on 12 September 1464 and was buried there, as he requested, in the chapel of St John the Baptist in the collegiate church. No trace now remains of a tomb. All his life he was a quietly efficient and talented administrator, for a while notorious and abused only because his patrons were; but he was not a factious politician and, even in the heat of civil war, this came finally to be recognized. 


@@@@@


doc= 2897


Booth, Sir William (c.1634-1703), naval officer, was a son of Sir John Booth (1602-1678), of Woodford, Cheshire, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' St John, (died 1655). His paternal uncle was George Booth, first Baron Delamer, politician and leader of the royalist rising in Cheshire in 1659. He entered the navy, serving as a midshipman under Sir Roger Strickland in 1672 and being promoted rapidly, and at a remarkably young age, to command the fireship 'Pearl' in June 1673 through the patronage of Prince Rupert; the ship was expended during the battle of the Texel on 11 August 1673. Booth commanded the fireship 'Eagle' from 1675 to 1678 and, briefly, the 'Richmond' in May 1678. His command of the 'Adventure', chiefly in the Mediterranean, from July 1678 to January 1683 was the making of his naval career. He married Rosamond Harrison, 'nee' Littleton (died 1718) of Stepney on 14 May 1685. She and their sons Edward and William and daughters Mary and Elizabeth survived him; two other children, John and Dorothy, died in 1693. 
Booth fought several single-ship actions with larger corsair vessels, capturing the 'Golden Horse' of Algiers after a ferocious fight on 8 April 1681. Booth subsequently became involved in an acrimonious dispute over the prize claim to the 'Golden Horse' with Captain Wheeler of the 'Nonsuch', which had come to his assistance. Following his return to England Booth was knighted by the king on 12 November 1682. He was flag captain to George Legge, Lord Dartmouth, aboard the 'Grafton' in 1683-4, when Dartmouth took a fleet to evacuate and demolish England's short-lived colony at Tangier. During this time Booth became a confidant of Samuel Pepys and provided him with much information about the alleged corruption and perversions of the previous admiral commanding in the Mediterranean, Arthur Herbert, earl of Torrington. Dartmouth thought Booth 'a very knowing and active seaman and brave fellow', and Booth claimed that he had slept on deck for three years 'with nothing over him but a tarpaulin, that his seamen might be the better contented to do as he did' (Chappell, 135, 219). 
Appointed a commissioner of the navy in February 1688, Booth became controller of the storekeeper's accounts when the Navy Board was reorganized on 12 October. He took command of the third-rate 'Pendennis' on 25 September 1688 during the mobilization prompted by the invasion of William of Orange, but the success of the invasion -- and of his enemy Herbert -- made Booth consider the desperate expedient of defecting to France with his own ship and the 'Warspite'. In conversation with Captain Wilford of the fireship 'Eagle' on 16 March 1689 Booth claimed 'that he had thought of it 24 hours... let us push at our fortunes', and that no one would question his putting Wilford into the command of the 'Warspite' because 'I am a commissioner of the navy, and who will dispute it?' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5253, fol. 132). On being rebuffed, Booth snapped 'damn if you won't, I'll go up and trim' (ibid.), but he was unable to conceal his intended treason and was forced to flee to France. He attempted to return to England in 1696, and despite problems over his bail and willingness to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, he was living in London again by 1697, subsequently corresponding with the Jacobite Colonel James Graham and commissioning an artist to draw his old friend Pepys. Booth had also acquired a plantation on Barbados and seems to have spent at least part of his time there between 1689 and his death at Greenwich in February 1703. He was buried at Greenwich on 18 February 1703. 


@@@@@


doc= 2898


Boothby, Sir Brooke, seventh baronet (1744-1824), poet and writer, was born on 3 June 1744 at Ashbourne Hall, Derbyshire, the eldest son of Sir Brooke Boothby, sixth baronet (1710-1789), of Ashbourne Hall and Phoeby Hollins (1716-1788). In 1752 the family moved to Stafford, where Boothby attended the free school. They returned to Ashbourne Hall in 1761 and on 19 June that year Boothby was admitted as a pensioner to St John's College, Cambridge, but left without taking a degree. Boothby's father had wanted his son to follow a career in the law. Brooke, however, had set his heart on joining the army and was therefore sent to a military academy at Caen, Normandy. After completing his studies he was bought a commission in the Irish regiment of 18th light dragoons. Boothby accompanied Lord Hertford to Dublin and France and in 1767 joined the regiment at Irish county quarters. He retired from the army on half pay in 1772 and settled in his house in Lichfield. He joined the literary circle at Lichfield to which Anna Seward, Erasmus Darwin, Thomas Day, and the Edgeworths belonged, and was a member of a botanical society which Erasmus Darwin started there. One of Seward's odes and several of her printed letters are addressed to him. 
Boothby wrote that: 'From the age of thirty to that of forty my life was dedicated to the 'beau monde' at home & abroad. A member of the ladies club, of Brookes, the summers at Brighton, Cheltenham &c. & the opera and fine assembl[i]es - ten years of vanity and folly! (Mosley, 6)' In 1775 he travelled in Italy, visiting Turin, Florence, Rome, and Naples, and returning via Venice, the Tyrol, Strasbourg, and Paris. During his stay in Paris, Boothby called on Jean-Jacques Rousseau to renew a friendship that had begun when the latter had stayed at Wootton Hall, near Ashbourne, between 1766 and 1767. Boothby expressed his admiration for Rousseau in a letter to Lord Harcourt: 'During the six weeks that I was in Paris I passed much of my time with this 'divine man', & my love & respect are grown into absolute adoration' (ibid., 1). The well-known portrait of Boothby by Joseph Wright of Derby shows him holding a volume of Rousseau. In 1780, two years after Rousseau's death, Boothby published 'Rousseau juge de Jean Jacques: dialogue'. 
Boothby's period of vanity and folly ended with his marriage at St George's, Hanover, London, on 15 July 1784 to Susanna (1755-1822), daughter of Robert Bristow or Bristoe of Micheldever, Hampshire. The only child of this marriage, Penelope Boothby, died on 13 March 1791 at the age of six years, and was interred in Ashbourne church, where a monument by Thomas Banks RA was erected to her memory. It is said that Penelope's death caused Boothby and his wife to separate, never to be reconciled. In his daughter's honour Boothby published 'Sorrows Sacred to the Memory of Penelope' (1796). 
Boothby had succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father on 9 April 1789. In the next year he published 'A Letter to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke', a reply to Burke's 'Reflections on the Revolution in France'. Boothby followed this with his 'Observations on the Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs' (1792), in which he makes an earnest defence of Rousseau. Some time about 1794 he left England after suffering, as he put it in a letter to Lord Wellesley in 1806, 'pecuniary indiscretions which I have more cause to lament than be ashamed of', indiscretions which had caused him to be 'a solitary wanderer on the continent ever since' (Mosley, 2). Boothby's wanderings took him to Hamburg, Frankfurt, and Weimar, where, in 1804, he met Goethe, who recalled that 'His health was not good: he complained of our cold winters, disliked silk stockings, and could ride better than he danced' (ibid., 5). The winter of 1803-4 Boothby passed alone in a chateau on the banks of the Mein. His translation of Racine's 'Britannicus' appeared in 1803. Boothby was in Dresden in 1806 and in Edinburgh two years later. Another translation, 'Fables and Satires, with a Preface on the Esopean Fable', was published in 1809. According to Robert Pearse Gillies 'Sir Brooke's habits were insulated and secluded -- in his own phrase, he had done with the world, and his best philosophy seemed to consist in forgetting it altogether' (ibid., 5). He lived according to a routine he had adopted in Weimar: rising between four and five, dining at two, then, after finishing his writing, spending time on his watercolour drawings. At the end of the Napoleonic wars Boothby left Edinburgh for Brussels where he began to work on his memoirs. His wife died in Dover in 1822. Boothby lived on for another two years, dying on 23 January 1824, at Boulogne according to some sources, at Brussels according to others (ibid., 3). His corpse was returned to Ashbourne where it was buried in the church on Friday 13 February. He was briefly succeeded as baronet by his only brother, William, who died on 17 March 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 2899


Boothby, Hill (1708-1756), friend of Samuel Johnson, was born on 27 October 1708 at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, the only daughter of Brooke Boothby (died 1727) of Ashbourne Hall, Derbyshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth Fitzherbert, daughter of John Fitzherbert of Somersall-Herbert, Derbyshire. A woman of considerable ability, she made the acquaintance of Samuel Johnson in 1739 when he stayed in Ashbourne with John Taylor. She became reacquainted with Johnson in 1753, a year after his wife died. In March 1753 Miss Boothby's close friend Mary Meynell, wife of William Fitzherbert, died. As her executor Miss Boothby undertook the management of Fitzherbert's household and six children. On Easter Sunday 1753 Johnson wrote in his diary that he would 'try on Monday to seek a new wife'. Scholars believe the woman he had in mind was almost certainly Hill Boothby, but her duties in the Fitzherbert household prevented any serious thoughts of marriage. They did, however, correspond regularly. Johnson addresses her as 'my sweet angel' and 'dearest dearest madam', and writes, 'You know Des Cartes's argument, 'I think therefore I am' It is as good a consequence... 'I am alive therefore I love Miss Boothby'' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 1.118). When she was near death Johnson wrote: 'I love you and honour you, and am very unwilling to lose you'. In the same letter he included a remedy for 'indigestion and lubricity of the bowels' (ibid., 1.120-21), dried orange peel taken with wine, thus disclosing the mystery of the orange peel, which Boswell asked for in vain (Boswell, 'Life', 1 April 1775). When Miss Boothby died on 16 January 1756 Johnson 'was almost distracted with his grief' (Piozzi, 114). Her letters (thirty-three are extant) were collected and published by Richard Wright, of Lichfield, in 1805, in 'An Account of the Life of Dr. Samuel Johnson'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2900


Boothroyd, Benjamin (1768-1836), Independent minister and Hebrew scholar, was born at Warley, in the parish of Halifax, Yorkshire, on 10 October 1768, the son of a poor shoemaker there. He was sent to the village school, and left it when six years old, able to read the 'Old' and 'New' testaments. He helped his father to make shoes for a time, but when about fourteen years old he ran away with only a few pence in his pocket. Making for Lancashire, he found work with a Methodist, who treated him very kindly. Boothroyd stayed with him until, hearing things were not well with his parents, he returned to Warley to superintend his father's business. About 1785 he vowed to devote himself to religion: he attended and spoke at prayer meetings and read Doddridge's works. Eventually he was admitted as a student at the dissenting college at Northowram, where he immediately made a favourable impression. In 1790 he was chosen minister at Pontefract, and after being ordained there he attracted so large a congregation that a new chapel had to be built. 
At this time Boothroyd found that all that was left of his income, after paying expenses, was $20 a year, and he opened a shop as a bookseller and printer. In 1801 he was financially secure enough to marry a Miss Hurst (died 1832) of Pontefract, with whom he had four daughters and four sons. In 1807, having received notes for a history of the town from a Richard Hepworth, he added to them and brought out, at his own press, his 'History of the Ancient Borough of Pontefract'. His next project was the production of a new Hebrew 'Bible'. He mastered the language and printed the work himself, while his wife helped him in correcting the proofs. It was brought out in quarterly parts, the issue beginning in 1810 and finishing in 1813 under the title of 'Biblia Hebraica', and finally formed two volumes. Seven years were spent over this undertaking. At the same time Boothroyd preached diligently and published several excellent standard works, besides many sermons of his own. 
In 1818 Boothroyd (who had accepted the degree of LLD) became co-pastor at Highfield Chapel, Huddersfield, with William Moorhouse. In the same year he completed his 'New Family Bible and Improved Version', in three volumes. He printed many copies of this book at his own press. The University of Glasgow conferred on Boothroyd the degree of DD in 1824. In 1835 Boothroyd completed an octavo edition of his 'Family Bible'. On 10 January 1836 he became ill; he died on 8 September and was buried at Huddersfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 2901


Boott, Francis (1792-1863), physician and botanist, was born on 26 September 1792 in Boston, Massachusetts, the third son of Kirk Boott (1755-1817), merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Love. Kirk Boott was English and had emigrated with his Scottish wife from Derby to Boston in 1783. Boott attended Harvard College (1806-10), where he was contemporary with Jacob Bigelow and Edward Everett. For several years he journeyed between England and America pursuing his interests in art, literature, and botany, and in 1816 was persuaded to look after the family's business affairs in England. Unfortunately, having fraudulent advisers, Boott lost $200,000 of assets. Although the business eventually recovered, Boott was criticized by other family members and decided to settle in Britain. 
In 1820 Boott married Mary Hardcastle of Derby and they had a son and three daughters. To support his growing family Boott studied medicine with Dr John Armstrong, physician and teacher at the Webb Street School, Southwark, London. Boott graduated MD from Edinburgh (1824) and studied medicine and botany in Paris before returning to London and becoming a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1825. He rejoined the Webb Street School and after Armstrong's death in 1829 he wrote Armstrong's memoir to which he appended 'An enquiry into the facts connected with those forms of fever attributed to malaria or marsh effluvium' (2 vols., 1833-4) and so became known as an authority on fevers. His practice of using fresh air as a treatment drew strong criticism as nineteenth-century medical practice favoured restricting the patient to a hot and close room. In 1832 an inheritance provided Boott with enough financial security to retire from practice. He was elected to the council of University College in 1833 and in 1836 joined the senate, remaining a member until his death. 
Boott is remembered primarily as a botanist and his major contribution was to the knowledge and organization of botany in Britain. His principal study was of sedges, the genus 'Carex', a large and complex family of plants. Over a period of thirty years Boott studied about 600 varieties of sedges which were distributed worldwide and he published his results in 'Illustrations of the Genus Carex' (4 vols., 1858-67; 2nd edn, 1968). These were entirely self-financed publications and were acclaimed by contemporaries as outstanding advances in botanical knowledge. Boott's association with the Linnean Society began when Bigelow arranged for an introduction to Sir James Smith, physician and one of the founders of the society and its first president in 1788. Boott was elected fellow of the society in 1819 and became its secretary (1832-9), treasurer (1856-61) and vice-president (1861-3). Throughout his long association with the society he was an active and influential member instigating many reforms. 
Boott retained strong links with his native country and was a member of many literary and scientific societies in London and Massachusetts. It is no surprise therefore that in 1846, after the first experiments with the inhalation of ether had taken place in Boston, both Bigelow (then professor of the medical school at Harvard) and Everett (then president of Harvard) wrote to Boott of these developments. Boott lost no time in informing the London medical world. He sent Bigelow's letter to 'The Lancet' and also to Robert Liston, professor of clinical surgery at University College Hospital. On 19 December 1846 Boott witnessed the first use of ether in Britain in his own home in Gower Street. It was administered by James Robinson, a dentist, for a tooth extraction, and two days later Liston used ether at University College. The early introduction of ether to London owes much to Boott's enthusiasm and interest in scientific advances. 
Boott had an abiding interest in literature and art and gathered a substantial library and a notable collection of paintings. Henry Crabb Robinson, writer, was the closest of his literary friends and Boott was also an admirer of the poet Henry Kirke White, although he never met him. In 1819 Boott paid for a memorial to be placed above White's grave in All Saints' Church, Cambridge. The church was later demolished and the memorial moved to the chapel of St John's College, Cambridge. 
Boott was tall and thin and became well known in the 1830s for abandoning the traditional medical outfit of black coat, white neckcloth, knee breeches, and black silk stockings for the then fashionable outfit of a blue coat with brass buttons and yellow waistcoat. However, 'by outliving the fashion, as he had forestalled it, he came to be as well known in 1860 as he had been in 1830' ('Medical Times and Gazette', 16 Jan 1864). 
Boott never enjoyed robust health. In 1839 he suffered two attacks of pneumonia, mainly in his left lung, and afterwards suffered recurrent chest trouble. In June 1863 his right lung was struck by pneumonia from which he never fully recovered. Boott's final months were spent working on the last volume of 'Illustrations' at his home, 24 Gower Street, London, until his death there on 25 December 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 2902


Bordwine, Joseph (d. 1835), army officer and instructor, was born in America, and on 8 January 1801 he was appointed ensign in the 55th regiment, having previously served in the Canadian Volunteers. He was promoted lieutenant in the Royal Staff Corps on 22 December 1803 and transferred to the 88th regiment in October 1806. He served for some time under General Whitlock, but was deprived of his commission (a majority) in consequence of his having issued a pamphlet in which he criticized that general's conduct. He was made professor of fortification at Addiscombe College, Surrey, in 1811, having been assistant professor since 1809. 
In 1803 Bordwine was appointed an assistant in the quartermaster-general's department, and attached to the staff of the western district. A French invasion was expected, and Bordwine drew up a sketch of a new circular system of fortification for the defence of the country. He continued the work at intervals, and at last in 1809 published the 'Sketch', which apparently attracted very little attention at the time. He was, however, prompted by friends to take the subject up again in 1830, resulting in the large 'Memoir of a Proposed New System of Permanent Fortification' (1834). He retired from Addiscombe on account of ill health on 4 February 1835, and died at Croydon on 21 February 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 2903


Boreman, Robert (d. 1675), Church of England clergyman, was the son of William Boreman ('c'.1564-1646) of East Greenwich, a servant in the royal household under Elizabeth, James I, and Charles I, and probably of his wife, Jane (died after 1646). The date and place of his birth are unknown, but he had at least four sisters and three brothers, one of whom, Sir William Boreman ('c'.1614-1686), was clerk of the greencloth to Charles II. Robert Boreman was educated at Westminster School; he matriculated as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas 1627. He was elected scholar in 1628, and received the degrees of BA in 1632, MA in 1635, and BD in 1643. In 1633 he was elected fellow of Trinity College, was a tutor 1636-41, and for some time college lecturer in Hebrew. He was ordained priest at Peterborough on 18 February 1638. 
Boreman was ejected from his fellowship by the parliamentary visitors, but seems to have remained in the vicinity of Cambridge during the 1650s. Whether he held any living is unknown. At this period he published several polemical tracts on topical issues, defending tithes in 'The Country-Mans Catechisme' (1652), and the necessity of a university-educated ministry in ''Paideia-thriambos': the Triumph of Learning over Ignorance' (1653). The latter work had originally been delivered at Swavesey, near Cambridge, where his opponents, said Boreman, yielded to his arguments 'with thankfull acknowledgments' (sig. A4'r'). Also with political overtones was his warmly eulogistic funeral sermon for the ejected master of Trinity College, Thomas Comber, published as 'The Triumph of Faith over Death' (1654). 'A Mirrour of Mercy and Judgement' (1655) recounts the repentance and death of Freeman Sondes, a young man condemned to execution for the murder of his elder brother, to whom Boreman had ministered while on a visit to Kent. 
In 1660 Boreman was restored to his fellowship and created DD by royal mandate. On 15 October in that year he was admitted to the rectory of Blisworth, Northamptonshire, a living to which he was apparently again admitted on 31 July 1662. Further tracts and sermons published by Boreman after the Restoration include ''Autokatakritos', or, Hypocrisie Unvail'd' (1662), an attack on Richard Baxter, whom he notoriously accused of having slain 'a man with your own hand in cold blood' (15). Boreman claimed that his 'honest censures' were sincerely intended for Baxter's good, but Baxter, who was pursued by the accusation for many years, attributed the work rather to Boreman's ambition for preferment ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 'Calendar', 2.28, 26). 
Preferment did follow, and on 18 November 1663 Boreman was appointed rector of the crown living of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Westminster, which he held until his death, having resigned the rectory of Blisworth. As rector of St Giles he knew Pepys, who heard him give 'an account of two papists, women, lately converted' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.99); and his parishioners were to include Richard Baxter, and Alice, Duchess Dudley, whose funeral sermon he published as 'A Mirrour of Christianity' (1669). Although Boreman showed courage in remaining at work in his parish during the plague of 1665, he was not popular with members of his vestry, and in 1670 brought an unsuccessful case against them in the court of exchequer over the right to elect a churchwarden. On 19 December 1667 he was installed as prebendary of Westminster Abbey. He never married but, according to Anthony Wood, 'spent his time in celibacy' (2.55). Robert Boreman died at Greenwich on 15 November 1675 and was buried there on 18 November. The administration of his estate was granted on 20 December 1675 to his brother Sir William Boreman. 


@@@@@


doc= 2904


Borgard, Albert (1659-1751), artillery officer, was born at Holbaek, Jutland, on 10 November 1659 of unknown parents. He is generally referred to as Albert Borgard in English sources and Albrecht Borgaard or Borregaard in Danish. He joined the Danish army in the Queen's regiment of foot in 1675 during the war between Sweden and Denmark, when he saw much active service on land and sea. He was made a gunner in 1676 and was promoted 'fyrvoerker' or fireworker, a junior officer rank, in 1678. Described as one of 'de Conducteurer der forstaar Geometri' (cited in Rockstroh), that is, a land surveyor with a knowledge of trigonometrical surveying techniques, he spent 1680-81 as a land surveyor in Zealand. In 1680 he described in his memoir how he 'was ordered to Berlin in exchange of two Brandenburgher Fireworkers sent to Denmark to learn the difference of each Nations work, relating to all sorts of warlike and pleasant fireworks' (Hine, 130, from Borgard's memoir (fair copy), damaged by enemy action in 1940, remains preserved at Woolwich arsenal). He studied fortification in Strasbourg in 1681 and then returned as a lieutenant to his original regiment of foot. He served in 1683 at the relief of Vienna from the Turkish siege. He helped construct the fortifications at Christiansburg and then went on to serve at the battle of Gran and the siege of Buda. 
In 1688 Borgard left the Danish army and fled abroad. The reasons for his flight are not clear. In his memoir he states the reason to have been 'some Injustice done me in my promotion' (Hine, 131). 'Dansk biografisk leksikon', however, mentions that he had been implicated in a treasonable matter and also the threat of a duel, which resulted from his having been passed over in promotion (Rockstroh). Whatever the reason, the result was that between 1686 and 1692 he made his way round Europe fighting in various armies. He first went to Poland as a volunteer, but later accepted a commission in the Prussian guards, with whom he served on the Rhine and at the siege of Bonn. In 1692 he left the Prussian army with a commission to raise a regiment for the emperor, but failing in this he joined the army of Louis XIV and distinguished himself in the attack on Namur. He declined a commission in the French army, not least because of his resolute protestantism, and joined the English artillery. 
Though only thirty-three years old when he joined the English service, Borgard was one of the most experienced artillery and engineer officers in the world, having both theoretical and practical experience of all aspects of artillery, engineering, and surveying work. He was made a firemaster in the English service in 1693 and, having that year sought in vain to return to the Danish service, served thereafter with the English. He was made captain and adjutant of the artillery in Flanders in 1695 and saw action at the battles of Steenkerke and Landen and at the sieges of Huy and Namur. At the peace of 1697 he was one of only two foreigners retained by the English artillery. He went to England and in 1698 was made an engineer. In 1702 he helped to take the forts of St Catherine, Matagorda, and Durand. Having returned to England, he married in 1703 Barbara Bradshaw (died 1714); they had several children including George ('bap'. 1704) and Albert ('bap'. 1706). 
After serving in Flanders, Borgard was gazetted lieutenant-colonel of artillery in 1706 and sent to command the artillery in Spain and Portugal in the army of Lord Galway. He took Valencia de Alcantara, Ciudad Rodrigo, and Alcantara, and enabled Galway to advance into Spain. He superintended the reduction of the castle of San Felipe in Minorca. He was present with Stanhope at the battles of Almanza, Almanar, and Saragossa, where he was wounded, and at Villa Viciosa, where he was wounded, left for dead, and taken prisoner. On being exchanged he returned to England, and was appointed chief firemaster on 9 August 1712. On 7 July 1713 he 'made pleasure fireworks which was burnt on the River Thames in the Month of August over against Whitehall on the thanksgiving day for the Peace made at Utrecht' (Hine, 135). In 1715 he married Cathrine (died 1754), daughter of Georg Mikkelsen (died 1665), merchant and head of the Danish church in London, and his wife, Maria Bradshaw. Their children included Thomas Michael ('bap'. 1717), Cathrine ('bap'. 1718), Katharine Ambrosia ('bap'. 1727), Frederick ('bap'. 1728), and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1730). Borgard's will shows the complete confidence and trust he placed in his wife. 
In 1715 Borgard commanded the artillery train sent to the duke of Argyll in Scotland. In 1716 he was badly injured at Moorfields when metal from captured French guns which were being recast before a distinguished invited audience flew out of control, killing seventeen people and wounding others. In 1716 the Office of Ordnance was reorganized: to reduce expenditure a large number of obsolete posts and ranks were abolished while fighting capacity was enhanced. Individuals whose posts had disappeared were put on the sinking establishment until they could be assigned new duties. Starting in May 1716 Borgard was paid on the sinking establishment until in April 1718 he was made assistant surveyor of the ordnance. From 1717 to 1718 Borgard planned in very considerable detail the needs of the artillery in terms of 'materiel' and its laboratory, on which he had always laid particular emphasis. His object was to equip the artillery for all kinds of land and sea actions, and his planning led directly to the formation of the regiment of Royal Artillery, which is widely regarded as his greatest service to the English artillery. In 1719 he commanded the artillery in the expedition to Vigo, the success of which particularly pleased him and was in large part due to his plans and preparations. 
Borgard became the first colonel of the Royal Artillery regiment on 1 April 1722. He was promoted major-general in 1735 and lieutenant-general in 1739. He died at Woolwich, where he was living, on 7 February 1751 and was buried in the Danish church in Marine Square, near the Tower of London. (The date of 15 March 1750 for the proving of his will seems to be an error for 15 March 1751.) He had been a loyal member of the church, a considerable benefactor, and from 1704 a member of the church council. At his death Borgard left one of the finest corps of artillery in the world. It had benefited from his practical experience throughout Europe, but also from his considerable powers of organization, his understanding of the science of fortification, and his dedication to duty and to the education and training of the junior officers of whom he had charge. His legacy lies in the regiment itself, in some installations built to his specifications at Woolwich, and in papers of his at Woolwich and at the British Museum, which cast considerable light on the functioning of the artillery during his lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 2905


Borgarucci, Giulio (d. 1581), physician, came from Urbino, being one of four sons of Carlo Borgarucci, and his wife, Caliope: the heraldic 'Visitation of London' (Rawlins, 101-2), which describes Giulio's armorial bearings, identifies earlier generations. The other sons were Borgaruccio, the eldest; Prospero, the youngest, born in Canziano, who became professor of anatomy at Padua in 1564; and Bernardino, a jurisconsult. Giulio came to England as a protestant refugee, and was a member of the Italian church in London. In 1569, on a visit to Gravesend, his life was endangered by a Spaniard and two Italians, for religion. He obtained denization in 1562. The following year he was sent to 'Newhaven' (Le Havre), to aid Ambrose Dudley's besieged garrison, which was suffering from plague; but, becoming ill, he soon returned. 
Back in London, Borgarucci successfully treated the plague epidemic by blood-letting, and advocated the use of a balsamic ball ('pomo') for countering the effects of foul air. He lived in Wood Street, London, being assessed there for subsidy in St Alban's parish in 1564 on $70 and in 1572 on $50; by 1576 he had removed to St Botolph without Bishopsgate, where he was assessed on $60. In 1567 he was incorporated MD (as of Padua) in the University of Cambridge. He was paid for attendance on, and medication (some specified) used for, Sir Henry Sidney's family during 1568-75. From Spa, Christopher Hatton wrote to the queen (1573), saying, 'My dear Lady, I amend: some proof thereof hath Julio sent unto you' (Nicholas, 30). However, his chief patron was then the earl of Leicester (presumably, on his brother Ambrose's recommendation), who was alleged (Peck, 116) to have made malevolent use of Borgarucci's knowledge of poisons: hence, John Webster's 'White Devil' (1612) has a poisoner named 'Julio, a doctor'. By patent of 21 September 1573 he was made physician to the royal household for life, replacing the deceased Dr Bentley, with a fee of $50 per annum. 
Borgarucci married Alice, daughter of Thomas Nosworthy, of Chichester, but in October 1573 he wrote to Lord Burghley complaining that Sir William Cordell, master of the rolls, had for five months detained his wife in his house, nourishing her in his 'popish superstitions'. As late as 1576 Borgarucci wrote to Leicester, saying that 'the Archbishop of Canterbury [Grindal] had sworn I should never obtain this gentlewoman I have married' (Peck, 275). The latter was, presumably, his second wife, Eleanor (died 1581): in 1578 and 1579 both Dr Julio and Mrs Julio exchanged new year's gifts with the queen. 
In June 1578 the Spanish ambassador reported on 'a certain Julio' thought to be 'plotting some villainy' against Spain: bent, and 'of the colour of a Morisco... he usually looks on the ground... as he walks'. The fact that 'He speaks eight or nine languages beautifully and is closeted for hours every day with Leicester and Walsingham and sometimes with the queen' (Hume, nos. 502, 505) argues strongly that this was Borgarucci, who, his brother Prospero said, was 'huomo ueramente de nostri tempi' (Borgarucci, 59). 
In 1578 Giulio and Eleanor obtained a mansion with garden and orchard, part of the site of the dissolved St Mary Spital: they doubtless then occupied the property, as did Eleanor after Giulio's death. John Banister's 'The Historie of Man' contains Borgarucci's commendatory Latin epistle; and letters he wrote survive in the Public Record Office (SP 46.44, fol. 53) and the British Library. 
Borgarucci died on 7 January 1581, and was buried that day at St Botolph without Bishopsgate. By his will, begun on 26 December and completed on 30 December 1580, he bequeathed sums of money to his brother Bernardino's daughters Alicia and Isabella (in Venice, with their father), and to the poor prisoners in London; the residue was left to his wife Eleanor, who was executrix; the overseer was Giovanni Battista Castiglione. Probate was granted on 31 January 1581. Eleanor died on 10 August, and, as 'Mrs Elinor Julie', was buried with her late husband on 11 August 1581. 


@@@@@


doc= 2906


Borland, James (1774-1863), army physician, was born at Ayr, Scotland, in April 1774. He joined the army medical department as a hospital assistant on 20 December 1790, becoming surgeon's mate in the Royal Highland regiment in 1792, and took part in the duke of York's disastrous campaign in Flanders in 1793-5, during which general hospitals were established in addition to regimental hospitals. Borland emphasized the adverse effect of this development on regimental medical officers, who resented the appointment of civilian physicians and staff surgeons over their heads to run the general hospitals. He also rejected as 'fallacious and mischievous... the argument that civilian doctors were better educated' (Cantlie, 228). On 2 April 1794 he was appointed surgeon to the 23rd foot and sailed with the regiment to the West Indies, leaving it in September 1795 to act as staff surgeon on San Domingo until British troops withdrew in 1798. In 1799 he accompanied the expedition to The Helder in the Netherlands, and after its failure was sent by the duke of York to the headquarters of the French general Brune, with a flag of truce, to arrange for the exchange of the wounded. For this service he was promoted, on 5 December 1799, to the newly constituted rank of deputy inspector of army hospitals. He then became attached to Russian troops, who had co-operated with the British in the northern Netherlands and had been ordered to winter in the Channel Islands until the breaking up of the ice in the Baltic Sea allowed them to return home. His work was rendered more onerous by an outbreak of malignant fever in Guernsey, and, for his efforts, he received the thanks of the tsar. However, he declined an invitation to enter the imperial service. 
Borland was chief medical officer of the army in the southern counties, under the command of Sir David Dundas, at the time of the threatened French invasion. He became inspector-general of hospitals on 22 January 1807 and served at headquarters in London at a time when many improvements in army hospital organization were planned. During the ill-fated expedition to the Scheldt in 1809, he volunteered for the duty of enquiring into the causes of the sicknesses and deaths at Walcheren, being associated with Dr Lempriere, one of the physicians to the army, and Sir Gilbert Blane, who had then left the navy and was in practice in London. The report of these commissioners, on whose recommendation the fever-ridden troops were finally withdrawn, was ordered by the House of Commons to be printed among 'Accounts and Papers for 1810' as 'Papers Relating to the Scheldt Expedition' (fol. 2, no. 104). 
From 1810 to 1816 Borland was principal medical officer in the Mediterranean, responsible for organizing the hospitals of the Anglo-Sicilian contingent, the efficiency and unprecedented economy of which prompted a special official minute on the disbandment of the force. His services during an outbreak of plague at Malta also received praise from Admiral Lord Exmouth. He accompanied the force sent to assist the Austrians to expel Joachim Murat from Naples, and the troops which held Marseilles and blockaded Toulon at the time of the Waterloo campaign. On 25 May 1816 he retired on half pay, was appointed honorary physician to the duke of Kent, and received the order of SS Maurizio e Lazzaro of Savoy. For many years he lived at Teddington, Middlesex, where his sterling character and many kindly deeds won general esteem. He died at Bridgeman House, Teddington, on 22 February 1863, aged eighty-eight. He was survived by his wife, Susannah Frances, and son, Robert Spencer Borland. 


@@@@@


doc= 2907


Borlase, Edmund (c.1620-1682), historian and physician, was one of three sons of Sir John Borlase (c.1576-1648), a Cornishman who was appointed master-general of the ordnance in Ireland in 1634 and served as joint lord justice there from 1641 to 1644, and his wife, Alice. By his own account, Edmund Borlase was a member of Trinity College, Dublin, during the provostship of William Chappell (1634-40), but he is not known to have graduated. It is likely that he became a member of the Irish parliament which convened in March 1640: though his return is not recorded, Edmund Borlase was appointed to committees on ten occasions between 27 February 1641 and 9 April 1644. He is said to have been awarded the degree of doctor of physic at Leiden in 1650. He was incorporated as a doctor of medicine of Oxford in August 1660 and set up practice in Chester where Charles Stanley, eighth earl of Derby, was among his patients. 
In 1670 Derby was acknowledged in the dedication as the 'rise and original' of Borlase's first publication, an account of Latham Spaw in Lancaster, which was situated on Derby's estate. His second book, 'The Reduction of Ireland to the Crown of England', which was dedicated to Derby's widow and included an account of the provosts of Trinity, was a 'catalogue' of the governors of Ireland from the conquest to 1672 compiled from published works. It contained a brief vindication of the integrity of his father's government and this theme was developed extensively, though impersonally, in his next book, 'The history of the execrable Irish rebellion, trac'd from many preceding acts to the grand eruption, the 23 of October, 1641, and thence pursued to the Act of Settlement, 1662'. This work, published anonymously after severe cuts had been made by the licenser to the press, Sir Roger L'Estrange, was dated 1680, but it was in print by August 1679. 
In December 1679 Robert Clavell, who had published the two earlier works, reported a generally unfavourable reaction to the 'History', from the archbishop of Canterbury among others, specifying in particular complaints about 'the style and long parentheses of the book, and that in the end you leave people dissatisfyed': booksellers were already returning unsold copies and Clavell now regretted his investment (BL, Sloane MS 1008, fol. 239). The earlier part of the 'History', though turgid and syntactically odd, is thorough and usefully documented, and benefited both from personal knowledge and from access to the collection of depositions made by Dr Henry Jones in the 1640s. However, Borlase simplified the task of dealing with the later period, of which he seems to have had no direct knowledge. As he acknowledged in his introduction, he had met 'with a Manuscript, whence I was supplied with much of the latter part of this History'. Though the evidence suggests that Borlase was unaware of its authorship, this was the work of the earl of Clarendon, published in 1720 as 'The History of the Rebellion and Civil War in Ireland'. Despite his parliamentarian sympathies, Borlase incorporated it in his text with such telling minor changes as the substitution of 'Parliament of England' for 'English rebels' and with omissions, since 'a part of it was so weaved, as if justice could not have been done to some, without mutchthing of others, which we had reason to wave'. In 1682 John Nalson identified the source, described Borlase as having 'very artfully blended it with his own rough and unpolished Heap of Matter', and denounced him as a 'Plagiary' (Nalson, 2.viii). Borlase had already prepared a second edition, undoing the 'very many and large eradications and interpolations of the then corrector of the press', revising the text, and adding further documents. This remained unpublished and is now in the British Library (Stowe MS 82; quotation from flyleaf). 
Borlase had also become involved in the dispute between the earl of Anglesey and the duke of Ormond which had been triggered by the publication of the 'Memoirs' of the earl of Castlehaven in 1680 and Anglesey's anonymous reply, 'A Letter from a Person of Honour in the Country', a year later. At Anglesey's instigation, Borlase wrote his 'Brief Reflections on the Earl of Castlehaven's Memoirs', which was dedicated to the king over the initials E. B. and published posthumously in 1682. Although Borlase had commended Anglesey's 'Letter', he was not included in the English council's condemnation of the works of Castlehaven and Anglesey as scandalous libels. Borlase died at Chester on 5 January 1682 and was buried in the church of St John the Baptist in Chester. 


@@@@@


doc= 2908


Borlase, Henry (1806-1835), Plymouth Brother, eldest son of Henry and Ann Borlase, was born at Helston, Cornwall, on 15 February 1806, and educated by Dr Warren at Ottery St Mary, Devon, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1828. After taking orders he became curate at St Keyne, near Liskeard, about December 1830. At the end of 1832 he resigned his curacy and left the Church of England, explaining his actions in 'Reasons for Withdrawing from the Ministry of the Church of England', a pamphlet published in 1833. On taking up his residence in Plymouth he joined the newly formed Plymouth Brethren. He was a great friend and close associate of Benjamin Wills Newton, one of the originators of the movement. Borlase considered that the established church, as a human institution, had fallen into apostasy, and that separation from apostasy was no schism. In 1834 he became the editor of the 'Christian Witness', the first Brethren magazine. At the beginning of 1834 he broke a blood-vessel, and was subsequently in very precarious health. He died on 13 November 1835 at Plymstock, near Plymouth, having married Caroline Pridham. His contributions to the 'Christian Witness' were published as 'Papers by the Late Henry Borlase, Connected with the Present State of the Church' (1836). 


@@@@@


doc= 2909


Borlase, Sir John (c.1576-1648), army officer and politician, was born in Cornwall, the eldest son of Edward Borlase of London, mercer, and Suzannah Isham. He matriculated as a pensioner from King's College, Cambridge, about 1591 but did not graduate, being admitted to the Middle Temple on 19 October 1595. Pursuing a military career, he fought with distinction in the Low Countries before the 1608 truce, having been knighted in 1606. Thereafter he was frequently on the continent on various missions. In 1620 he was second in command of the expedition sent to the Palatinate and in 1624-5 was made commander of an English regiment serving in the Low Countries. After returning to England in early 1627 he was a military adviser to the government, residing at Medmenham, Buckinghamshire. He married Alice Ravis (died in or after 1649), widow of Thomas Ravis (d. 1609), bishop of London. They had three sons, the second being the historian Edmund Borlase. 
In June 1634 Borlase became master-general of the ordnance in Ireland after buying out the previous incumbent for $3000 with the encouragement of the lord deputy, Thomas Wentworth, who held him in high regard. His brief was to reform the Irish army, half of which would be in Dublin at any one time to exercise twice a week under him. His contacts in the Low Countries were also useful in purchasing arms and munitions there. He became an Irish privy councillor in 1638 and was MP for Enniskillen in 1634-5 and Belturbet in 1640-41. On the death of the lord deputy, Christopher Wandesford, he was made a lord justice of Ireland along with Sir William Parsons on 31 December 1640. The king had originally appointed Lord Dillon but as a close ally of Wentworth he was unacceptable to the English parliament. Borlase's appointment was more satisfactory for although he remained loyal to his fallen patron, testifying on his behalf during his trial in London in the spring of 1641, he was viewed as being more malleable. Although well versed in military matters, Borlase was no statesman and was frequently ill. Hence Parsons, a parliamentarian, was 'de facto' governor until he was replaced by the royalist Sir Henry Tichbourne in April 1643. Borlase remained lord justice with Tichbourne until the earl of Ormond's appointment as lord lieutenant in January 1644. 
Borlase appeared in London in the summer of 1645, petitioning parliament for a composition, which was granted on 4 October. From the summer of 1646 he advised parliament on Irish military matters. Towards the end of his life he was in financial difficulties, having borrowed money on his own account for the royal forces during his lord justiceship. He died in London on 15 March 1648 and was buried in the church of St Bartholomew-the-Great. His estate in Ireland had suffered so greatly during the rebellion that his wife was forced to petition parliament in 1649 for the cost of the funeral and for her own support. 


@@@@@


doc= 2910


Borlase, William (1696-1772), antiquary and naturalist, was born on 2 February 1696, the second son of John Borlase (1666-1755), landowner and twice MP for St Ives, and his wife, Lydia ('c'.1671-1725), youngest daughter of Christopher Harris of Hayne, Devon, at their home, Pendeen House, in the parish of St Just, Cornwall. The Borlases were said to be the descendants of a Norman family who had settled in Cornwall. He was sent to Christopher Pender's school in Penzance until 1709, when he started attending the Revd Mr Bedford's school in Plymouth. In March 1713 he entered Exeter College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1716 and proceeded MA in 1719. He was admitted into deacon's orders by Lancelot, bishop of Exeter, in 1719, and was ordained the following year. His father purchased for him the right of presentation to the rectory of Ludgvan, Cornwall, and, after some problems resolved with the assistance of Sir John Hobart, later the earl of Buckingham, he was presented to his living on 22 April 1722. He would spend the rest of his long life at the rectory at Ludgvan, also holding from 1732 the living of St Just. On 28 July 1724 at Illogan, Cornwall, he married Anne (1703-1769), eldest surviving daughter of the Revd W. M. Smith, rector of Camborne and Illogan, and his wife, Mary Farthing. They had six children, all boys, two of whom died in infancy. 
As well as having interests in 'gardening and planting' ('GM', 1115) and reading the classics, Borlase began collecting minerals and fossils. The copperworks of Lord Godolphin were in Ludgvan parish, and Borlase had access 'with the greatest ease' (ibid.) to such material. Friends to whom he sent various specimens 'encouraged him now first to think of studying the natural history of his native county, and look more narrowly into the structure and properties of the so much commended fossils, as well as trace the other, though less interesting bounties of nature. (ibid.)' These interests also stimulated a fascination with the 'many monuments of remote antiquity' (ibid.) which abounded in the region and which, he found, had either been overlooked or under-rated by previous examiners and writers. He became particularly interested in 'the study of the Druid learning; with the religion and customs of the ancient Britons before their conversion to Christianity, intending to describe and explain the several unknown, or hitherto ill understood, remains in Cornwall' (ibid.). He was assisted early on in these projects by his friend the Revd Edward Collins, the vicar of St Erth, as well as by his wife, who helped in the collecting and recording of samples. On antiquarian matters he corresponded with his friend Francis Wise, a fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, and later first Radcliffe librarian. Though Borlase was a good draughtsman and recognized the importance of making drawings and measurements of antiquities he was, however, mistaken in identifying natural rock basins as sacred structures built by the druids. 
Borlase sent samples of the minerals he found, including tin, copper, iron, and lead ores, to his friend John Andrew, an Oxford physician, who in 1735 went to Leiden to study under Herman Boerhaave. Andrew passed on samples to Boerhaave, Carl Linnaeus, and J. F. Gronovius, and Borlase entered into a correspondence with the last. Andrew returned to Britain in 1738 with a copy of Linnaeus's 'System of Botany' for Borlase. Through the introduction by their mutual friend William Oliver of Bath, in 1739 and 1740 Borlase also supplied samples of Cornish minerals to the poet Alexander Pope, who used them to decorate the grotto in his garden at Twickenham. Pope erected an inscription to Borlase in the grotto, and sent him a copy of his works as thanks. 
Borlase's studies were hampered, as he realized, by his distance from the centres of learning of London and Oxford, a problem he could never fully overcome. In 1740 he proposed to the archdeacon of Cornwall the establishment of a library at Truro for the use of clergy and gentry, but this suggestion would not be realized until 1792. In 1748 he met and made friends with the Revd Dr Charles Lyttelton and Jeremiah Milles, who were both influential fellows of the Society of Antiquaries of London. They assisted and encouraged him in the undertaking of his work on Cornish natural history and antiquities. In the same year he began a correspondence with Emanuel Mendes da Costa FRS, a naturalist and mineralogist from London of Portuguese Jewish descent, who visited him in 1749 to study mines and geology. In 1750 da Costa successfully proposed him for fellowship of the Royal Society in recognition of his essay 'Spar and sparry productions, called Cornish diamonds', which was published in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. Da Costa also put Borlase in touch with the antiquarian William Stukeley, who shared a similar fascination with ancient religion and druids, but their correspondence was only short-lived. 
Borlase spent the months between July 1753 and January 1754 in Oxford, supervising the printing and publication of his 'Observations on the antiquities historical and monumental, of the county of Cornwall. Consisting of several essays on the first inhabitants, Druid-superstition, and remains of the most remote antiquity, in Britain, and the British Isles' (1754; 2nd edn, 1769). This work was the first chronological account of the antiquities of the county, and the first book to describe, illustrate, and classify a significant number of them. It was divided into four sections: the early history of Britain with special reference to Cornwall; the rites and practices of the druids; the prehistoric monuments of Cornwall; and the Roman and later antiquities. An index included an English-Cornish vocabulary. 
In 1752 Borlase travelled with his friend Henry Usticke to the Isles of Scilly, where they measured and recorded barrows, stone circles, and rock basins. His account of the islands was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (vol. 48, 1758, p. 55), and enlarged into a book, 'Observations on the Ancient and Present State of the Islands of Scilly' (1756). This volume was praised by Samuel Johnson as 'one of the most pleasing and elegant pieces of local enquiry that our country has produced' ('Literary Magazine', 1/2, 1756, 91). Between 1738 and 1751 Borlase took the sons of local gentry into his home to educate, and many of these retained a close affection for their tutor. In the summers of 1744 and 1745 he came into conflict with John Wesley, who was successfully recruiting many of Borlase's parishioners to Methodism, and in his capacity as a magistrate he summoned Wesley before the local court. 
Between 1752 and 1757 (with the exception of 1754) Borlase made tours around central and eastern Cornwall gathering material for his next book. He had hoped to publish a topographical survey of the county, but this ambition was beyond the capacity of one man, by then in his sixties, and he abandoned the plan in 1757. But 'The Natural History of Cornwall' was published at Oxford in 1758, following which he donated his collection of fossils, minerals, and antiquities to the Ashmolean Museum. In acknowledgement of this gift, and in recognition of his achievements in literature and antiquarianism, on 23 March 1766 the university conferred upon him by diploma the degree of doctor of law. After this date Borlase devoted his time to more sedentary pastimes such as painting, and though a second edition of 'Antiquities' was published in London in 1769, he abandoned the publication of his 'Private thoughts concerning the creation and the deluge' (a reconciliation of the Mosaic account with the fossil record) while it was at the press. 
Borlase died at home in Ludgvan following a long illness on 31 August 1772, and was buried in the chancel of his church at Ludgvan on 3 September 1772. An obituary, probably written by his brother Walter, recorded that William 'was remarkably attentive to the affairs of his parish, and the regularity of his parishioners, was affable and easy of access... Though he was not admired as a preacher, yet several specimens he has left in manuscript, not unworthy of publication, prove that his studies were not confined to Antiquities or Natural History. (Walter Borlase MSS)' His wife predeceased him, and only two of his six sons survived him: the Revd John Borlase and the Revd George Borlase, casuistical professor and registrar of the University of Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 2911


Borough, Christopher (fl. 1579-1587), merchant, was the son of Stephen Borough (1525-1584), a mariner, of Northam, Devon. Stephen and his brother William Borough (bap. 1536, d. 1598) were both experienced navigators in European Arctic waters. Christopher acted as Russian interpreter for the sixth Muscovy Company trading venture, led by Arthur Edwards, which left Gravesend on 19 June 1579. The fleet arrived at St Nicholas (near the present port of Archangel) in the White Sea on 22 July and transferred to small craft for the journey up the northern Dvina and Sukhona rivers to Vologda. A short overland trek brought them to the Volga at Yaroslavl, where they again took ship. A month later, on 16 October, they reached Astrakhan, at the head of the delta, where they wintered. Leaving Edwards in charge at Astrakhan, Borough and his party embarked on 1 May 1580 on an English-built vessel headed into the Caspian Sea for the voyage south, making for Derbent, the chief emporium of that region. They were carried too far by adverse winds and stopped briefly near Baku before returning to Derbent, where they traded from 22 June to 3 October. 
As his descriptions of Derbent and Baku show, Borough was fully aware of the growth of Turkish power at the expense of the former Persian domination on the shores of the Caspian Sea, a region then hardly known to Englishmen. His nautical training under his father and uncle led him to take a series of observations for latitude during his travels -- probably the earliest made with reasonable accuracy by Europeans in these parts. 
At the end of the season the party picked up stragglers between Derbent and Baku, including two Spaniards who had escaped from captivity near Tunis, and returned to Astrakhan on 4 December. They wintered there, left the following April, and reached St Nicholas on 16 July 1581. The merchandise which they had acquired was embarked on the 'William and John', which arrived in the Thames on 25 September 1581. Borough's account of the venture, compiled from various letters and reports sent to the Muscovy Company and to his uncle, was published by Hakluyt in the first volume of his 'Voyages' in 1582. 
Borough remained in Russia when Edwards's party left, and he continued to visit the company's houses between St Nicholas and Astrakhan. He was certainly there in 1584, when he carried letters from Moscow to Yaroslavl, but probably went home soon afterwards, for a letter written in March 1586 by Queen Elizabeth to Tsar Feodor states that he was then in England. 
It is likely that Borough returned again to Russia, as in 1587 he submitted a lengthy report to the Muscovy Company regarding their affairs, and particularly exposing the devious policy of Sir Jerome Horsey in Moscow, who was busy making his private fortune at the company's expense. Borough also spoke of Horsey's harsh treatment of J. Peacock and other agents sent by the company in 1585 to investigate these matters. He ended his report by recommending that the company should close its houses in Moscow and elsewhere and transfer all business and traffic to the house at St Nicholas, in order to prevent private trading and political intrigue. 
Borough's linguistic expertise is shown by two manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, which he brought back and had elegantly bound in England, perhaps for presentation to Queen Elizabeth. MS Seld. superius III is an orthodox catechism, which includes elements of Church Slavonic Russian. MS Laud misc. 45 is a sixteenth-century copy of the pseudo-Aristotelian 'Secret of Secrets', written in Great Russian and signed twice by Borough, who may also have been the copyist. It is paginated with Europeanized arabic numerals and uses oriental arabic numerals in the text. Both manuscripts employ hyphens where words break at the ends of lines, and catch-words. These features were unknown in contemporary Russian scribal practice. 
Borough had travelled with Persian merchants and lodged with them at Astrakhan. He had also recognized, and commented on, an Armenian inscription seen on the way to Astrakhan, and his writing reveals his general interest in languages and customs. The Bodleian manuscripts show that Borough was able to distinguish Church Slavonic and Great Russian from West Russian and Ukrainian. Nothing is known of Borough's later years, nor of the circumstances of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 2912


Burgh, John (fl. 1370-1398), theologian, is first recorded as a master of arts at Cambridge in 1370, when he served as proctor of the university. He continued his studies at Cambridge, and was a doctor of theology by 1384. In that year he was appointed chancellor of the university, a post he held until 1386. He was probably the chancellor who in 1384 ordered the scrutiny for heresy and error of William Nassington's religious poem 'Speculum vitae'. In 1388 he was rector of the church of Collingham, Nottinghamshire, and he still held that benefice when he was made vicar of Newark, Nottinghamshire, in 1398. On 12 January of the same year he was licensed to hear confessions in York diocese. It is not known when he died. 
Some time probably between 1380 and 1385 Burgh composed a very influential work of pastoral theology entitled 'Pupilla oculi'. It survives in more than forty manuscript copies and was printed at least four times before 1500. The 'Pupilla oculi', like the 'Oculus sacerdotis' (1320-23) of William Pagula, of which it is an explicit adaptation, seeks to make available to parish priests the theological and canonical teachings necessary for administering competently the pastoral care of souls. Its first eight books treat the church's sacraments, and include an exposition of the mass and a guide to hearing confessions. Book 9 deals with such practical matters as tithes, residence, burials, and wills, and book 10 gives a programme of religious instruction -- the fourteen articles of faith, the ten commandments, the seven sins, and so forth -- such as was required by Archbishop John Pecham in the constitutions of Lambeth of 1281. 'Pupilla oculi' may, indeed, have been partly intended to act as a restatement of orthodox doctrine in response to Wycliffite teachings circulating at the time of its composition. 


@@@@@


doc= 2913


Borough, Sir John (d. 1643), antiquary and herald, was the son of John Borough of Sandwich, Kent, and his wife, a daughter of Robert Denne of Dennehill, Kent, who inherited land in The Hague. His grandfather William Borough was apparently married to a Dutchwoman, and his father was described by contemporaries as a Dutch gardener or brewer. He should not be confused with Sir John Burrough, a professional soldier, who was killed at La Rochelle in September 1627. 
In 1611-12 Borough was a student at Gray's Inn, the inn of Sir Francis Bacon. He had a position in Bacon's household before 1618 and served Bacon in the Lord Chancellor's Office. Borough also held office as keeper of the ancient records in the Tower of London, a position amenable to his antiquarian interests. In this capacity, with the prominent lawyer and antiquary John Selden, Borough assisted the disgraced Bacon with archival research for his 'History of the Reign of Henry VII'. 
Borough sat in the parliament of 1621 as MP for Sandwich. He was accused in the session of accepting bribes along with his employer, Bacon, but escaped censure when Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel and earl marshal of England, called upon him to assist the countess of Arundel, who was then in Europe. Arundel joined them the next year as ambassador to Venice with Borough serving as his secretary. Arundel himself had a strong antiquarian interest and patronized Selden and Borough's cousin, Sir Robert Cotton, for whom Borough purchased books and manuscripts in Venice. 
In 1623, presumably in connection with his stewardship of the records in the Tower and reputation for knowledge of historical precedents, Borough was appointed one of the extraordinary clerks of the privy council. Arundel brought Borough into the College of Arms as Mowbray herald-extraordinary that same year, and by June 1624 Borough had advanced to Norroy king of arms; he was knighted in July of that year. Borough sat in the parliaments of 1624, 1625, and 1626 as MP for Horsham, Sussex, on Arundel's interest. Although a relatively inactive member of the House of Commons he kept detailed notes of the proceedings in these parliaments, an activity in line with his antiquarian interests. 
Borough's expertise led crown officials to consult him on virtually all matters that might have historical precedents: in 1631 on the office of lord admiral, in 1634 on coat and conduct money, and also on ship money and other financial measures of the personal rule. Borough dabbled in writing verse, but his only published work resulted from his ship money research, 'The Soveraignty of the British Seas', written in 1633 although not printed until 1651. Borough accompanied Charles I on his coronation trip to Scotland in 1633 and the following year became Garter king of arms, the principal herald of the College of Arms and principal officer of arms to the chivalric Order of the Garter. He took a leave of absence from the college to serve in Arundel's embassy to the Holy Roman emperor in 1636, and achieved unpopularity with his fellow heralds when he obtained a grant from the king maintaining his income from the office and suspending all heraldic visitations while he was away. In 1639 Arundel as earl marshal convened a court of inquiry into charges of corruption brought by Borough against Norroy and the Somerset herald, whom Arundel subsequently dismissed from the college. 
The name of Borough's wife is unknown, but he was said to have had two sons and two daughters. One son, perhaps named Cassius, accompanied him in the 1636 embassy. The son travelled also in Italy with a son of the principal secretary of state, Sir Francis Windebank. It was presumably the same son who accompanied Borough and two of Windebank's sons in the bishops' war of 1639 against the Scots. Borough was in the king's entourage in his capacity as chief herald, but was also called on to clerk for the privy council when Sir Thomas Meautys fell ill. Borough reported to Secretary Windebank that he himself was ill and in any case had been excluded from all council meetings concerning military matters. The war came calling on Borough, however, when his tent in the king's camp was shot through twice. Despite his claim of having been excluded from proceedings, it was Borough who recorded for posterity most of the important negotiations in the bishops' wars, for example the pacification of Berwick and the treaty of Ripon. Borough was also consulted by the secretaries of state on how to call and hold a great council of peers, which he attended at York in September 1640, once again providing detailed notes of its proceedings. 
Borough was a faithful royalist who followed the king in the civil war. At the royalist headquarters of Oxford he was created a doctor of civil law of the university in August 1643, and died there the following October. He was buried in the divinity chapel adjoining the choir of Christ Church. In the same month his post of keeper of the ancient records in the Tower was awarded by the Long Parliament to Selden. Borough's eldest son, John, was a lawyer in the court of chancery. He was knighted by Charles II, but lost his legal practice with the passage of the 'Test Act'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2914


Borough, Stephen (1525-1584), explorer and naval administrator, was born on 25 September 1525 at Borough House, Northam Burrows, Northam, Devon, the elder son of Walter Borough (1494-1548) and Mary Dough; his younger brother was William Borough (d. 1598). 
With his uncle, John Borough (d. 1570), Stephen probably participated in the first measured surveys of south Devon and Cornwall in 1538; these survive in the British Library. The greatest influence on his childhood was undoubtedly John Borough, who until the late 1530s (when he began to undertake surveying tasks for Henry VIII) had sailed regularly from Bideford, Topsham, and Bristol to trade in Sicily, Crete, and the Levant. Stephen learned thereby to master a wide range of navigational and pilotage skills as a child, while his uncle must also have taught him useful linguistic skills using a Castilian 'Bible', a Castilian rutter (or book of sailing instructions), and another compiled in Portuguese. As a youth Stephen Borough also gained firsthand knowledge of the hazards of the Bay of Biscay; writing in 1563 of ships lost on voyages to Andalusia he noted that: 'some were lost on the coast, others have perished upon cape Finisterre in Galizia and also others upon the strymes and coast of Brittaine. The chiefest of these losses (as I am able to approve) hath happened throughe ignoraunce of the Arte [of navigation] and the presumption of the unskyllful. (BL, Lansdowne MS 116, fol. 7)' In consequence Borough matched his navigational skills with a speaking knowledge of Spanish, which later fitted him well for the first Muscovy voyages to which Sebastian Cabot brought the best of long-distance navigational and organizational practice from Seville. 
On 20 May 1553 Stephen Borough sailed in the expedition that Cabot had prepared as master of the 'Edward Bonaventure' (160 tons) under John Dee's talented tutee, Richard Chancellor, who had been appointed pilot-general of the fleet of three ships, including the ill-fated 'Bona Esperanza' (120 tons), which under Sir Hugh Willoughby's command was trapped in the ice along with the 'Bona Confidentia' (60 tons). So it was Borough's ship alone that was ready to open trade past the North Cape and through St Nicholas (Archangel). Chancellor journeyed overland to Moscow to formalize relations before both pilots sailed her back the next spring through the Kara Sea and past the fishing settlements at the mouth of the Dvina River. In 1589 Richard Hakluyt published Borough's exploratory voyage of 1556-7 as 'The Navigation and Discoverie towards the River Ob'. Borough had bravely taken the pinnace 'Searchthrift' as far as the Kola River, having been escorted by the Russian ketch 'Pechora' until 15 July 1556. On 31 July Novaya Zemlya and the treacherous 35 mile wide Viagatz Strait were sighted. Borough stayed there until 23 August (with the result that it was named the Burrough Strait on admiralty charts until the late nineteenth century), recording with Richard Johnson's and William Borough's assistance the hostile icy environs of the Viagatz Strait in the late summer of 1556 before returning to Kholmogory on 11 September where Borough wisely chose to winter. Hakluyt records that Borough started his homeward voyage on 23 May 1557, travelling via Ribachi (Fisher Island, Finland), where he encountered Norwegian vessels with Dutch crews trading strong beer for stockfish. At Dronten (Trondheim) he learned of the loss of the 'Bona Confidentia' and of the recovery of her sails by the town's mayor, and of the alleged loss of the 'Philip and Mary', although she had safely arrived in the Thames in April 1557. The real loss was of his colleague, Richard Chancellor, captain of the 'Edward Bonaventure', which had foundered in Pitsligo Bay, Scotland, on 10 November 1556. 
In 1557-8 Dee and Borough worked on the technical problems of preparing a chart of the far northern waters explored by the latter in 1556. Later Dee compared Mercator's maps with 'my friend Stephen Borough, his platt' (BL, Cotton MS Vitellus C.vii, fol. 60'v'). Stephen Borough's specialist navigational knowledge acquired on that route meant that he was ideally placed to go to Seville in 1558, in response to covert diplomatic arrangements made by Philip and Mary; his knowledge of the near Arctic was to be exchanged for an insight into the training of Spanish pilots. He later described to Hakluyt the organization of navigational training in Seville as he witnessed it in 1558. Hakluyt's dedication to 'Divers voyages' (1582) asserts that Borough was treated with great honour by the Spaniards, and presented with a pair of perfumed gloves worth 5 or 6 ducats. 
These gloves were the symbols of qualification and office to which the examined pilots were admitted. Borough was present there despite the formal prohibition on foreigners made at the instance of Charles V in 1547. When Borough arrived in Seville, Sebastian Cabot had only just died, although Alonso de Chaves had succeeded to his former office as pilot-major in 1552. This unique chance to be treated on a par with Cabot as an expert on Arctic waters was not lost on Borough, who wisely restricted himself to interest in the theoretical and scientific content of Martin Cortes's training manual 'Breve compendio del arte de navegar', completed in 1545 but not published until 1551. Borough clearly thought that Cortes's manual was a model document, and on his return to England ensured that the manual was made available to generations of English seamen, instrument makers, and hydrographers through translation by Richard Eden and publication by the queen's printer, Richard Jugge, as 'The Arte of Navigation' in 1561. Stephen Borough's wisdom and achievements are commended in Eden's preface, written in 1561: 'he is neither malicious nor envious of his arte and science, in that he desireth the same for the common profite to be common to al men: And for the same intent was the first that moved certain worshipful of your company, as Syr William Garrerd, Maister William Merrick, Maister Blase Sanders, and Maister Edward Castlen to have this work translated into the English tongue.' Eden adds in praise of Borough's initiative that: 'whereas the same hath ben discovered unto you even to the mighty Ryver Ob, that falleth into the Scithian Ocean... A voyage of such difficultie, and in maner impossibilitie, that consyderyng the infinite dangiours thereof (as I have learned by th information of Steven a Burrugh, that was then the Chiefe Pilot of the same Voyage) that it may seme impossible that they should ever have escaped, excepte the mightye hand of God by the expert skilfulnesse of so excellent a pilot had delivered them from those daungers.' 

With a right, as an assistant adventurer mentioned in the charter of 1555, to carry on personal trade within the Muscovy Company, Borough served as chief pilot in the 'Swallow' in May 1560, taking a cargo of broadcloth, kerseys, salt, sack, and raisins, plus a pipe of sherry for Tsar Ivan IV marked by two round compasses on the bung. He returned from St Nicholas with Anthony Jenkinson after his epic overland journey into central Asia. He was back in Russian waters in May 1561, carrying Jenkinson as Queen Elizabeth's ambassador to Persia. His trips were part of a complex strategy to expand trade without operating in conflict with Spanish naval ambitions. While Lord Admiral Fiennes de Clinton and the privy council considered how to reorganize the navy following the loss of Calais in 1558 and Le Havre in 1562, Borough petitioned Queen Elizabeth to replicate the organization of the Casa de Contratacion in Seville. Dated 1562, Borough's first draft set out both the form of his own experience and the need for change (BL, Lansdowne MS 116, fols. 3-7). This was followed by a later draft for the grant of the office of pilot-major to Borough, dated January 1564. Borough's clear appreciation of the value of the Casa's practice comes through. Although his case for the office of pilot-major was never accepted, he was soon afterwards made one of four keepers of the queen's ships on the Medway. 
Hostility towards Stephen Borough's interests in the Arctic trade gradually emerged during the 1560s, with resentment growing inside the Muscovy Company that he, along with three other pilots, was allowed to undertake personal trade. The king's remembrancer's customs accounts for 1564 and later port books record the beginning of the controversy, which was created by Borough's embarking with private trade as chief pilot on voyages via the North Cape route in 1564, 1565, 1567, and 1568. Drapers' Company accounts show that in 1569 he shipped a private cargo of fourteen chests of 'brimstone' (saltpetre) in the 'Swallow' of London. In 1571 his private adventure on the voyage to St Nicholas consisted of the export of seventy-two broadcloths, worth about $2000. John Hoddesdon's petition over prosecution for his own trade in furs in 1586-7 brought adverse if posthumous comparison of Borough's legitimate private trade, alongside more censorious criticism of the private trade of William Borough and Christopher Borough, Stephen's son who had made six trips to Russia by 1579. 
In 1574 Michael Lok reported that Stephen Borough was one of three members of the Muscovy Company appointed to treat in London with Martin Frobisher, Lok, and Christopher Hall about near polar voyaging to Cathay. Meanwhile he had found a safer career that allowed him to refocus on his domestic life at Chatham. He had unexpectedly lost his first wife, Elinor ('nee' Smith), in 1562. On 26 March 1563 he married Johanna Overy (died 1604), a widow, in St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. His children included Christopher, Judith, and two other much younger daughters, Anne and Elizabeth, mentioned in his brother's will of 1598. From 1563 until his death Stephen took on naval duties which increasingly tied him to work on the king's ships moored on the Medway between Rochester and Gillingham, and on the new dockyard facilities at Chatham, especially following a disastrous waterfront fire there on 4 August 1576. While this job overlapped with the formal duties of the elder brethren of Trinity House, any implicit conflict was amicably resolved with his election as a much respected master of Trinity House in 1572. Improvements he saw effected at Chatham included the acquisition of Upnor Castle for the specialized local storage of naval ordnance in 1568, the acquisition of land, plus the planning and construction of a massive store finished in 1580 with a new wharf alongside and a ropery 380 feet long completed in 1586. Fear that the complex was vulnerable to naval raids led to the insertion of defensive stakes in St Mary's Channel in 1574 and to the planning of a heavy chain barrier costing $250 deployed over two huge wheels, five lighters, and some smaller pinnaces, which had cost a further $360 to commission by January 1586. His responsibilities for twenty-nine berths for warships and the associated dockyard facilities all appear on an anonymous map of Chatham, perhaps drawn by him in 1584 (BL, Cotton MS Augustus I.i.52), showing the moorings for the whole fleet in ordinary. 
Stephen Borough's advancement in 1572 to be master of Trinity House marks the point whereat his brother took over the responsibilities of the Muscovy Company's chief pilot, notably for shipping on the dangerous North Cape route. Stephen's duties at Trinity House entailed responsibility for organizing coastal pilotage and giving advice about which ships to accept into naval service. His status there conferred opportunities to promote improvements in navigational instruction with Richard Hakluyt. Hakluyt published his advice, along with more from Dee, about the conduct of voyages past the North Cape in 'Principall Navigations' in 1589, and Borough's 'Instructions given to the masters and mariners of the ships of the Muscovie Companie, sayling towards the Bay of St Nicholas' of 3 May 1557 in the 1598 edition of 'Principal Navigations'. Closely derived from Borough's experience is BL, Harley MS 167/2, mostly in one hand, comprising navigational instruction and diagrams, English translations made in 1578 of Spanish rutters for routes to Brazil, the Caribbean, and Mediterranean ports, and 'Borough's rules' for the passage from Orfordness, past the North Cape, to Russia's northernmost seaports. 
Borough died on 12 July 1584 at Chatham where he was buried the following day at St Mary's. An engraved Elizabethan brass placed on his tomb in the chancel reads thus: 'He in his lifetime discovered Moscovia, by the northern sea pasage to St Nicholas, in the yere 1553. At his setting forth of England he was accompanied in his ship by Sir Hugh Willoughbie, being Admirell of the fleete, who, with all the company of the said two shippes, were frozen to death in Lappia the same winter. After his discoverie of Roosia and the costes adjoyning to wit Lappia, Nova Zembla, and the cuntry of Samoyeda etc: he frequented the trade to St Nicholas yearlie, as chief pilot for the voyages, until he was chosen one of the four principal Masters in ordinarie of the Queen's Majesties royall Navy, where in he continued in charge of sundrie sea services till time of his death. (memorial brass)' 



@@@@@


doc= 2915


Borough, William (bap. 1536, d. 1598), explorer and naval administrator, was born at Borough House, Northam Burrows, Northam, Devon, to Walter Borough (1494-1548) and Mary ('nee' Dough) and baptized on 18 August 1536 in St Mary's, Northam. His childhood experiences included voyages made with his elder brother, Stephen Borough (1525-1584), under the command of their uncle John Borough (d. 1570). William later wrote that 'my mind earnestly bent to the knowledge of Navigation and Hydrography from my youth'. Next he claimed that in May 1553: 'I was in the first voyage for discoverie of the partes of Russia, which began in Anno 1553 (being then sixteen yeeres of age). Also in yeere 1556 when the coasts of Samoed, and Novaya Zemlya with the straights of Viagatz were found out; and the yeere 1557 when the coast of Lappia and the Bay of St Nicholas were more perfectly discovered. (Hakluyt, 1598, 1.418)' The earliest extant chart signed 'W. Borough' is of the north-east Atlantic and dates from 1558, but only part of it survives in an atlas at Trinity College, Dublin (MS 1209/23). In the early 1560s John Dee taught Borough to draw and use 'paradoxall compasses' or circumpolar charts. Borough showed he had mastered this in drafting 'Necessary rules for a voyage to Pecharia, Bass Indiae and Cataye' for an expedition planned by the Muscovy Company for 1568. By 1568 he had produced at least two more charts of the Norwegian and Russian shores for atlases assembled by William Cecil. One is in BL, Royal MS 10 D3, fol. 124; the other is bound into a Saxton atlas at Hatfield. William succeeded his brother as chief pilot from 1572 to 1582. In 1580 he took a major part with Dee and Cecil in the briefing of Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman for their attempt on the north-east passage. 
While his brother Stephen had persevered until 1571 with the North Cape route, William Borough exploited his increasing familiarity with an alternative route through the Baltic to Narva where the Eastland Company (unlike the Muscovy Company) allowed him to trade; in 1566 he adventured eleven numbered long cloths, two chests packed with haberdashery, and two barrels of sweet oil in the 'Harry' of London. The same Drapers' Company records show he also carried a private adventure that way for Anthony Jenkinson in 1566. The dangerous passage along the Gulf of Finland past 'Lyfland' (Estonia) appears on his signed chart of the North Sea and Baltic (NMM, MS G215.1/5). His mission of 1574-5 had required him to set down alternative ways to and from Moscow from Narva and St Nicholas and 'with great care and diligence, true observations and notes and descriptions of countreys, Islands, coastes of the sea, and other things requisite to the artes of Navigation and Hydrographie' (Hakluyt, 1598, 1.418). Hakluyt adds an account of Borough's beating off six Danske (Danish) pirate ships near the Tuttee in the gulf, and the capture of their leader, Hans Snarke. Borough made a short deposition to the Muscovy Company, which was passed first to the privy council, about alderman William Bond's illicit trade to Narva in 1576. Hakluyt used it in the 1589 edition of 'Principall Navigations' alongside Borough's advice to the whaling trade and 'to disuade the use of a trade to the Nave by way through Sweden'. The direct route to Moscow via Narva had already been abandoned in 1581. 
Although Stephen Borough had been consulted about Martin Frobisher's plans for exploring a possible north-western passage to Cathay in 1574, his younger brother was reported by Michael Lok to be: 'not so well persuaded of the voyage, that he would enter his money therein; yet in respect of the service of his country, did take paynes to procure a master and many mariners for the ships; and gave good advice in the furniture of the ships; and did consent unto the opinion and mynde of the capitayn in the direction of the ships course in the voyage. (BL, Cotton MS Otho E.viii, fol. 42)' Exchequer records show that William Borough not only sold his own mariner's astrolabe to the venture in 1576 for $3 10's.', but that he also sold on a wooden cross-staff with a case for 13's'. 4died and several ruled-up charts, one of which survives as signed by him in 1576 (Hatfield House, Cecil papers/maps, CPM 69). This was used by Christopher Hall to navigate to Kodlunarn, off Baffin Island, in 1576, 1577, and 1578. In 1578 Borough allowed Lok to charter his new ship, 'Judith' (100 tons), for $320 and took out an adventurer's stake of $25. Instructed by the privy council in 1579 to pursue debtors to the venture, Borough as its new treasurer took legal action against his predecessor, Lok, having him imprisoned in Newgate from November 1581 to May 1582. 
Meanwhile Borough, who had kept to himself a version of Eden's translation of Taisnier's study of terrestrial magnetism and one of Pellegrine de Maricourt's 'De magnete' of 1558, put them into print through John Kingston in 1581 in 'A Discourse on the Variation of the Compasse', reprinted in expanded form in 1585 and 1596. Apart from comments on Mercator's map and projection, Borough's published ideas were largely taken from Spanish teachers or his brother's thoughts. But his preface to the 1585 edition (sig. A3) advised it was 'inadvisable to be tied to Portugale or Spanish marine platts'. His academic and commercial ethics were criticized in cipher by Luke Ward during Edward Fenton's Atlantic voyage in November 1582: 'William Burrows is one who could fill his honeycombs with someone else's honey so far is he accustomed to feed French dogs while they bring in hares' (BL, Cotton MS Titus B.viii, fol. 44). The same year, and acting privately, Borough devised instructions to a potential colonial surveyor of Virginia, Thomas Bavin. In 1592 he was made an assistant of the Levant Company, having given them advice before their new charter was issued. 
In 1580 Borough had escaped his difficult duties as treasurer to the Cathay Adventurers with the award of the post of comptroller of the queen's ships, which he shared initially with William Holstock at a salary of $100, plus allowances for two clerks and other expenses. Appointed with Benjamin Gonson as clerk of the queen's ships for life on 24 March 1582, he gained thereby a further annual income of $133 plus expenses. On 15 August 1582 he was asked, as clerk of the ships, to carry out a detailed survey of all naval ordnance, saltpetre, and powder in the hands of the officers of the ordnance. He would later identify the proportions and uses of three main types of ship and compile 'Tables of the prices and lengths of masts' (BL, Harley MS 306, fols. 20-21). He made the case for extensive timber shoring at Deptford on 19 June 1584. His appointment as warden of the Trinity House of Deptford Strond in 1581 was followed by service in 1585-6 as its master. From 6 November 1588 Borough was regularly consulted about naval estimates by the privy council; on 25 October 1597, for instance, he detailed victualling costs associated with taking 540 troops from St Valery to assault Ostend. On 28 May 1598 the acts of the privy council approved payment to him of arrears of $1546 for 900 troops he had sent to Waterford. Until his resignation from naval office on 6 July 1598 he exerted a strong influence on naval procurement policy. 
Borough's career as a naval administrator was not without controversy. He wrote in critical detail about the proposals of Sir John Hawkins and William Pett to refit and build ships for the navy in 1584, and criticized Sir William Wynter in 1587. Yet from 1582 onwards his advice appears gradually to have won the respect of Hawkins and the naval establishment, especially during 1588-9. Consequently his rejection of proposals to convoy ships from London to Bordeaux was not disputed in 1591-2. He also authoritatively resolved disputes with Hanse merchants over the suitability of different types of canvas for ship's sails in 1592, and other issues concerning the English monopoly of the supply of sails in 1596-8. His numerous technical contributions appear in the state papers; other survivals illustrate his compassion, including certificates of disability issued to seamen. His correspondence with Lord Burghley in 1595 and 1596 made the case for new fortifications at Plymouth. In the face of another Armada threat in 1596 he prepared two identical charts to show offshore sandbanks and tidal patterns from Goring to London, and the siltation that adversely affected the port of Rye and exploitation of the Rother valley's naval supplies. One of those charts earned him a commendation from the queen in November 1596. 
Borough was unable to confine himself to official paperwork and writing. In June 1583 he was at sea acting as a comptroller of the navy in taking 'outragious sea rovers' and ten pirate ships into custody, and ensuring that all ten masters were hanged at Wapping. In December 1585 he took charge of a squadron sailing from Harwich to Flushing to view the newly garrisoned port and its readiness to support the earl of Leicester's army. In August 1586 he sailed to the Azores with Sir John Hawkins in the 'Golden Lion'. In 1587 he sailed with Sir Francis Drake but was indicted for mutiny and cowardice. His response to Lord Burghley shows he was put in irons by Drake well before the crew's mutiny. His defence rested mainly on a chart he drew of the battle before Cadiz on 29 April 1587 showing the dangers of the station assigned to the 'Golden Lion'. Duly acquitted, Borough was given the galley 'Bonavolia' to patrol the Thames in 1588 lest invaders 'may come in at half tide' as his chart of the estuary shows. On 26 February 1589 he penned a strategic 'Discorse of what course were best should be taken for the resistance of the Spanish navy' (BL, Lansdowne MSS 52/40, 52/42, 52/43). A letter written from Chatham on 28 August shows he was occupied by 'the great business for the dispatch of Sir Martin Frobisher's ships to the sea... in commission for the late Portugayle voyage' (BL, Harley MS 6994/104). It mentions too the 'business' (ibid.) of 'getting a good wife'. This was 'Lady Jane Wentworth, widow' ('b'. 'c'.1541), the third wife of Thomas, Lord Wentworth (died 1584). The marriage took place on 8 September 1589 at St Dunstan's, Stepney. 
On 31 October 1590 Borough received an anonymous letter threatening his life, which he countered by giving it to Lord Burghley. His continuing concern for his family's security is manifest in his will. He left his wife much more than the value of her own dowry, worth about $74 a year, assigning her rents from the White House at Mile End in Stepney and from another house in Tower Street, Rotherhithe. His will of 26 July 1598 mentions his first wife, Judith Jones, 'nee' Pike (died 'c'.1583), a widow of Stepney, whom he had married on 17 November 1571 and at whose side he was buried at St Dunstan's, Stepney; his son Walter, who would inherit $500; and his daughter, Mary, who could receive up to $2000 on marriage, and $60 a year before that. Borough had died at Stepney by 28 November 1598 when his will was proved. It shows his protestant faith, and that his pastoral concerns ranged from the poor of Stepney, granted $20, and the poor of Northam, also granted $20, to the victims of the 'Swallow''s loss. The will also provided for his brother's widow and her three surviving daughters. The brethren of Trinity House were remembered with $10 towards a dinner. 


@@@@@


doc= 2916


Borrell, Henry Perigal (1795-1851), numismatist, after learning business in London established himself as a trader at Smyrna, where he lived from 1818 until his death. He devoted much of his attention to the discovery of inedited Greek coins, in which he was remarkably successful. The results of his discoveries were given in papers contributed to the 'Revue Numismatique', the 'Numismatic Chronicle', and various German numismatic periodicals. In 1836 he published at Paris a 'Notice sur quelques medailles grecques des rois de Chypre'. His articles entitled 'Coins in Andeda in Pisida' and 'On the coins reading 'OKOKLIEON'' were published in 1839 and 1841 respectively in the 'Numismatic Chronicle'. 
Borrell was an associate member of the Numismatic Society of London from 28 November 1839 until his death at the age of fifty-six, at Smyrna on 2 October 1851. His collection of coins, antiquities, and gems was sold by Sotheby and Wilkinson of London in 1851 and his numismatic library was sold at Sothebys on 28 February 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 2917


Borrer, William (1781-1862), botanist, was born at Henfield, Sussex, on 13 June 1781, the eldest of the three sons of William Borrer of Hurstpierpoint, landowner and sometime high sheriff of Sussex, and his wife, Mary, daughter and coheir of Nathaniel Lindfield of Dean House. He received his early education in private schools, at Hurstpierpoint and at that run by John Morphew at Carshalton in Surrey. Although he left school at an early age he continued his studies under tutors and obtained a good knowledge of the classics, French, and theology. 
In spite of his own inclination for medicine, Borrer joined in his father's farming business. At first this involved supplying forage to troops stationed around Sussex and for these journeys he travelled on horseback, examining and collecting the plants which he passed. Initially encouraged by some of the military officers, he became acquainted with many of the first botanists of the age, including Joseph Banks, Dawson Turner, and W. J. Hooker. He developed an extensive botanical correspondence in Britain and on the continent. 
Borrer travelled widely in the study of plants, in 1810 visiting Scotland with Hooker, who was also his companion on an excursion to Normandy. He made repeated journeys in all parts of Britain, seeking out species reported in unlikely locations and always vigilant for new discoveries. He endeavoured to cultivate every critical British species and all the hardy exotic plants he could obtain, having at one time 6660 species in his garden. By planting species which were only with difficulty distinguished next to one another he made faithful determinations of their distinct qualities. 
Borrer's herbarium of British plants, which went on his death to Kew Gardens, was esteemed as one of the best. It was especially rich in the flora of Sussex, which had received little prior attention. His specimens were very reliably named but often lacked date or locality. The comprehensiveness of the herbarium was attributed to Borrer's own application and his willingness to share his knowledge with others, who returned his kindness with specimens. 
Borrer's first contribution to the literature was a comprehensive list of and critical notes on Sussex flowering plants, ferns, fungi, lichens, and algae which appeared in Turner and Dillwyn, 'Botanist's Guide' (1805), along with some records for Kent, Surrey, and Hampshire. On his own, however, he published little: a few notices in the 'Phytologist'; some descriptions in the supplement to 'English Botany' (1830), especially of lichens, 'Salix', 'Rosa', and 'Rubus'; and, with Dawson Turner, the privately printed 'Lichenographia Britannica' (1839). His method for the genus 'Salix' was adopted by Hooker in 'Flora Britannica' (1830), as were his descriptions of 'Myosotis', 'Rosa', and 'Rubus'. 
Borrer is credited with the identification of twenty-one species of flowering plants, which ranged in location from Cornwall to Caithness, and in addition worked on ferns, lichens, and algae and made several discoveries of rare seaweeds. 
Expertise on British plants was Borrer's strongest recommendation: he was considered a reliable authority on the correctness of localities assigned to plants and a good judge of their claims as native productions. His work was characterized by precise description and meticulous detail. The want of a major publication associated with his name has, however, limited the subsequent recognition of his contemporary importance. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1805, and of the Royal Society in 1835, and was also a member of the Wernerian Society. Several plants were named after him. 
On 28 March 1810, Borrer married Elizabeth, the daughter of Nathaniel Hall, a banker in Brighton. They had five daughters and three sons who survived to adulthood. He served as a justice of the peace for Sussex. While never gregarious, Borrer always welcomed without introduction those who wished to consult his herbarium or garden. He also made many charitable contributions to his community, especially in the development of schools. He helped to establish national schools in Henfield, built a school for girls and one for infants on his own land, and personally undertook the education of three or four boys, subsequently finding them employment. He was active in and generous to the local church. 
Borrer's personal fortune made it possible for him to devote his time to those things which interested him. However, in botany, his gentlemanly amateurism was enhanced by application, attention to detail, and precision. He was both zealous and able. He died at his home, Barrow Hill, Henfield, on 10 January 1862 from pleurisy, having been in failing health for a decade. 


@@@@@


doc= 2918


Borrow, George Henry (1803-1881), writer and traveller, was born on 5 July 1803 at East Dereham in Norfolk, the son of Captain Thomas Borrow (1758-1824), adjutant of the West Norfolk militia, and his wife, Ann (1772-1858), daughter of Samuel Parfrement, a farmer. His elder brother was John Thomas Borrow. 
The Napoleonic wars ensured that the family put down no roots. The West Norfolks were posted up and down the country, and even after Waterloo saw service in Ireland. Borrow's schooling was sporadic: a year at the high school in Edinburgh in 1813-14 and another at Norwich grammar school in 1814-15 represented his longest continuous periods of education until, in May 1816, the family at last settled in Norwich. 
Borrow returned to Norwich grammar school, but in March 1819 he was articled to a firm of solicitors. He did not apply himself to the law, preferring to visit the Gypsies on Mousehold Heath and to study a variety of languages. One of his tutors was William Taylor, Norwich's foremost intellectual and iconoclast, who turned Borrow's thoughts to the literary field. Borrow also showed signs of being fired by Taylor's radicalism, but that did not last. Translations by Borrow -- from German, Swedish, Danish, Dutch, and Spanish -- started appearing in Sir Richard Phillips's 'Monthly Magazine', and he longed to live by his pen. Two days after his articles expired, and a month after his father's death, he took the coach to London on 1 April 1824. When it became obvious that there would be no other employment than ill-paid hack work for Phillips, the depression from which he had suffered intermittently since childhood returned to plague him. His main task, under Phillips's direction, was to compile 'Celebrated Trials' (6 vols., 1825). He also contributed to Phillips's periodicals and brought out a translation of Klinger's 'Faustus' (1825); but a year in Grub Street convinced him that he must escape from London. In 'Lavengro', he would describe writing 'The Life and Adventures of Joseph Sell, the Great Traveller' in order to find enough money to do so. None of the attempted identifications of this claimed work has proved valid. 
Then came several obscure years, the first few months of which were treated with a liberal seasoning of imagination in 'Lavengro' and 'The Romany Rye'. Whether there was, in life, someone as important to Borrow as Isopel Berners was to Lavengro is an unsolved puzzle. For the most part Borrow drifted along, alternating between Norwich and London. Much time was spent fruitlessly on translations; only his 'Romantic Ballads, Translated from the Danish' appeared in print (1826). Stories of extensive foreign travel must be heavily discounted. Borrow was almost thirty before he found, in 1833, employment with the British and Foreign Bible Society. In maturity, he always expressed allegiance to the Church of England, and a strong antipathy for Roman Catholicism: but in introducing him to the Bible Society, his sponsor said Borrow was 'of no very exactly defined denomination of Christians'. Borrow impressed the society not just by his appearance -- he was an imposing 6 foot 3 inches, with prematurely grey hair -- but by his linguistic capacities. They sent him to St Petersburg (1833-5) to oversee the printing of a Manchu version of the 'New Testament', and then to Portugal and Spain (1835-40) to distribute the scriptures. In Russia and the Peninsula Borrow worked energetically, and sometimes heroically, on the society's behalf. In Spain, civil war made his expeditions risky, while the hostile attitude of the authorities, coupled with his own provocative approach, led twice to his imprisonment. He was still able to pursue his linguistic and translating interests. In St Petersburg he produced 'Targum', a volume of translations from thirty languages, and 'The Talisman... with other Pieces', from Russian and Polish (both 1835). In Madrid the Bible Society financed the printing of St Luke's gospel translated into Spanish Romani by Borrow and Gypsy friends, and also a Basque version, where Borrow's editorial role was minor (both 1838). 
By the time his last Spanish tour began, it was clear that Borrow's future with the Bible Society was limited. Increasingly he concerned himself with his own affairs, completing the groundwork for a few books, and thinking up new territory to explore. In mid-1839 he was joined, in the large house he rented in Seville, by a 43-year-old widow and her 21-year-old daughter, Mary and Henrietta Clarke, with whom he had become acquainted shortly before entering the Bible Society's service. Mary Clarke needed to escape from family litigation at home; but all along, she seems quietly to have taken the initiative with Borrow. When he at last complied with the Bible Society's recall, he sailed in the company of the Clarkes. Three weeks later, on 23 April 1840, he married Mary Clarke in London. 
Borrow settled on his wife's little estate on the shores of Oulton Broad in Suffolk and began turning his experiences to literary account. After a modest start with 'The Zincali' (2 vols., 1841), a book about the Gypsies of Spain and elsewhere, he had a runaway success in 1843 with 'The Bible in Spain' (3 vols.), a stirring account of his adventures in the Peninsula which also satisfied the evangelical temper of the 1840s. He then turned to his earlier life, gradually discovering that he had to transform reality into his own apprehension of the truth. He had set himself a standard of unusual incident which was difficult to maintain, and had dropped hints of further adventures which he was ill placed to substantiate. In 1844, dogged by low spirits, he embarked on his last foreign journey, a solitary expedition across Europe to Constantinople, seeking to compose his mind and find new material. Relief was no more than partial and temporary. In the end, he fashioned two books which followed episodically, from birth to early manhood, the fortunes of a complex character (not necessarily always himself as he was or had been), with much satirical comment on society and religion. Only by stopping in mid-narrative was he able to send the part he called 'Lavengro' to John Murray, his impatient publisher. When it appeared in 1851, its intermingling of imagination and reality puzzled many readers and irritated others. The sequel, 'The Romany Rye' (1857), seemed an even greater mystification. 
In 1853 Borrow moved to Great Yarmouth with his wife and stepdaughter, without abandoning their home at Oulton. The Yarmouth years were punctuated by walking tours in which he covered many hundreds of miles in Norfolk, Cornwall, Wales, the Isle of Man, Scotland, and Ireland. From one of them 'Wild Wales' emerged (1862) -- a classic on Wales and the Welsh, seen through the eyes of a very unusual Englishman. At the same time he completed 'Celtic Bards, Chiefs and Kings', published in 1928, long after his death. He also published a translation of Ellis Wynne's 'The Sleeping Bard' in 1860 just before he moved to London, where he did little writing apart from working at translations and the like. After his wife died in 1869, there were few people to turn to for company, and a proposal of marriage to Lucy Brightwell, a Norwich friend from childhood, was declined. He delivered his swansong, 'Romano Lavo-Lil', to Murray and went back to East Anglia -- 'to die', he said. The book, published in 1874, was poorly received by the new generation of Romani scholars who were following the trail he had blazed. It was the only one of his principal works to make no money during his lifetime; his income from the others amounted to $3366 over forty years. 
Borrow died at Oulton on 26 July 1881 (of 'decay of nature' according to his death certificate) and was buried beside his wife in Brompton cemetery. His reputation had long been in decline, but revived towards the close of the nineteenth century. Borrow's bibliography is swelled by articles, reviews, compilations, and, above all, his beloved translations: but his enduring legacy was a handful of original works unlike any others, episodic narratives capturing the imagination with strange and at times superbly presented characters and powerful picaresque sketches. Pervading them all is the opinionated but compelling personality of their narrator. 


@@@@@


doc= 2919


Borstale, Thomas (supp. fl. 1290), supposed Augustinian hermit, is said by Bale to have come from Norfolk and to have studied in England, and taught theology at the University of Paris 'c'.1290. Bale adds that Borstale died at the Augustinian convent in Norwich and was buried there; he notes further that Borstale was among the earliest masters in Paris of his order, which would certainly be true if Borstale was indeed a teacher there; the first Augustinian master, Giles of Rome, held his chair from 1285 to 1291. Bale says that he is basing himself on 'the chronicles of the Augustinians', and Bale did have access to some early Augustinian chronicles now lost. Yet Bale's account, followed uncritically by those historians who have noted Borstale's existence, appears to be entirely unsupported by any surviving early evidence, either among the Augustinians' records, or those of the University of Paris -- a very strange circumstance if Borstale had the important status of master of theology. Bale attributes to him a commentary on Peter Lombard's 'Sentences' (which would have been part of the requirements for becoming a master of theology), and the regular and quodlibetal disputations that would have been part of the teaching of most masters of theology. No copies survive or are recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 2920


Borthwick, David (d. 1581), lawyer, was the eldest son of the Haddington burgess David Borthwick. A determinant at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1525, he became a burgess of Haddington in July 1531 and within months was one of the bailies of the burgh. He accompanied James V to France in 1536 in the train of the royal secretary, Sir Thomas Erskine, and was rewarded for his services the following year by being appointed captain of Tantallon Castle, where in 1538 he played host to the king. In 1540 he presented a royal letter to the burgh council requiring it to accept a replacement for Archibald Borthwick, prebendar of the burgh's kirk, who was to remain in the king's service. David's career as an advocate grew during the 1530s, while in the following decade he was appointed by the king's advocate, Henry Lauder, as one of his substitutes to act in his absence on the king's behalf. By 1549 Borthwick was one of the nine leading advocates licensed to act before the college of justice. Links to the earl of Arran in the 1540s brought suspicion of protestant sympathies. In 1554 he, along with others including Adam Borthwick, received a remission for treasonably acting against the governor ''super mora de' Glasgow' (Livingstone, 4.2611), presumably with the earl of Lennox when the earl was active against the government in April 1544. However, in 1553 he was appointed to a commission to meet an English delegation in the borders. 
Borthwick was retained by Edinburgh town council to act as one of its assessors in 1562 and in the same year he subscribed to raise funds for the building of a new poor hospital within the burgh. During this period he acted as advocate on behalf of the burghs of Aberdeen and Dundee, and also appears to have been advocate for the church. His professional success is reflected in the fact that he was assessed at the highest rate ($100) in Edinburgh council's tax of 1565. In 1573 Borthwick succeeded John Spens as king's advocate and on 20 October became an 'ex officio' lord of session. The following year he accompanied the regent, the earl of Morton, to Aberdeen and served on the commission for framing a constitution for the Church of Scotland. Borthwick acquired considerable estates in Haddington and Berwickshire. In 1540 he was given lands in Berwickshire by the commendator and convent of Kelso, and a decade later he and his wife were made jointly infeft in the lands of Lochhill within the constabulary of Haddington. These were augmented in 1553 and 1557 when Borthwick obtained the lands of Fenton in Haddingtonshire in gifts from the crown. 
Borthwick died, a wealthy man, on 30 January 1581, leaving a total estate of $11,576 Scots. He married first, before 1550, Marion Blyth (died 24 March 1571) and second Marion Guthrie, who was the executor-nominate of his estate. He had at least two sons from these marriages, David, the elder (died September 1575), and James, and he and Marion Blyth had two daughters, Agnes and Isobel. 


@@@@@


doc= 2921


Borthwick, Peter (1804-1852), newspaper editor, only son of Thomas Borthwick of Edinburgh, was born at Cornbank, in the parish of Borthwick, Midlothian, on 13 September 1804; he graduated at the University of Edinburgh, and was the private pupil of James Walker, bishop of Edinburgh and Glasgow, and afterwards primus of the Episcopal Church of Scotland. He undertook some tutoring and, despite the objections of her uncle and guardian, married on 8 January 1827 his pupil Margaret (died 1864), daughter of John Colville of Ewart, Northumberland; they had three children. Although he was married, Borthwick matriculated from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1828, migrating in February 1830 to be a fellow-commoner of Downing College. While at Cambridge, he published 'A Brief Statement... Concerning the Second Advent of our Blessed Lord' (1830); at that time he contemplated ordination. He was a good-looking man with an olive complexion and a 'profusion of black hair' (Escott, 187). 
In 1832 Borthwick began a series of speeches opposing the abolition of the slave trade, which gained him rapid fame and the thanks of various slave owners and Conservative associations. His views were contested in a lively series of responses by Samuel Bowly and others. Borthwick unsuccessfully stood for Evesham as a Conservative in 1832, but was elected in 1835. He lost the seat on petition in 1838, but was elected for it in 1841. He associated with the Young England group, opposed the move to free trade, and in the general election of 1847 contested -- unsuccessfully in both cases -- St Ives and Penryn as a Conservative. Borthwick's political career did not reflect his early promise. His speeches 'were apt to provoke not so much cheers as yawns' (Escott, 186). However, he amended the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' through what became known as the 'Borthwick clause', by which married couples over the age of sixty were not required to separate when living in the workhouse. 
On 28 April 1847 Borthwick was called to the bar at Gray's Inn. His career at the bar made little headway, and in the late 1840s he failed in his attempt to enter the Foreign Office. In 1849 he resorted to journalism, becoming manager of the 'Morning Post'. After a complex series of financial intrigues, he became editor in 1850. Described in 1849 by Lord Malmesbury as 'a paid spy of Palmerston's', Borthwick as editor strongly supported Lord Palmerston, though without estranging Conservative readers (Koss, 80-81) and still supporting protection. Already ill when he became editor, Borthwick's health declined, and he died from pleurisy at his home, 11 Walton Villas, Brompton, London, on 18 December 1852. The editorship of the 'Morning Post' soon passed to his son, Algernon Borthwick, Baron Glenesk. 


@@@@@


doc= 2922


Borthwick, William, fourth Lord Borthwick (b. before 1491, d. in or before 1544), nobleman and courtier, was the son of William Borthwick, third Lord Borthwick (c.1460-1513?) ['see under 'Borthwick family], and his wife, Margaret Hay, daughter of John Hay, first Lord Hay of Yester. Borthwick's father died supposedly at Flodden on 9 September 1513, at which time William succeeded to his estates and was soon afterwards appointed to serve as a guardian to the young James V at Stirling. He maintained his guardianship of both the king and his younger brother, the duke of Ross, after the duke of Albany's siege of Stirling Castle on 4 August 1515, sharing these duties with Earl Marischal, Lord Fleming, and Lord Erskine. Borthwick was continuously listed in the exchequer rolls as the king's guardian until 1 May 1522. In 1524 he severed his links with Albany's regime by taking an oath of loyalty to James, whom he continued to serve at Edinburgh Castle. 
Borthwick's personal devotion to the king was rewarded in 1532. When Borthwick became involved in a legal dispute with James Beaton, archbishop of St Andrews, over a lease of Stow church, James wrote personally to Pope Clement VII to prevent further difficulties for his servant, whose house had already been brought 'very low financially' ('Letters of James V', 250). Borthwick and his wife, whose name is unknown, had five children: Thomas, master of Borthwick (died 1528); John, who became fifth Lord Borthwick; and three daughters, Katherine, Janet, and Margaret, wife of the reformer Sir John Borthwick. William Borthwick died some time before 19 February 1544. 


@@@@@


doc= 2923


Borthwick, William (1760-1820), army officer, was the eldest son of Lieutenant-General William Borthwick, Royal Artillery, and entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1772. He became a second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, in 1777, lieutenant in 1779, and captain-lieutenant in 1790, serving in Flanders. As brigadier-general he prepared the siege train with which Wellington bombarded Ciudad Rodrigo in January 1812, and was severely wounded during the siege; for this he later received a gold medal. He also prepared the siege train for the final attack on Badajoz; but in April 1812 he was promoted major-general, and had to hand over his command to Colonel Framingham, because the number of artillerymen in the Peninsula was insufficient to require a general officer. He died at Margate on 20 July 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 2924


Borton, Sir Arthur (1814-1893), army officer, was born on 20 January 1814 at Blofield, near Norwich, the youngest son of John Drew Borton (1769-1847), rector of Blofield, and of his wife, Louisa, daughter of the Revd Thomas Carthew of Woodbridge, Suffolk. Educated at Eton College, he received a commission as ensign in the 9th (East Norfolk) regiment on 13 July 1832; he became lieutenant-colonel on 10 June 1853, colonel on 28 November 1854, major-general on 1 January 1868, lieutenant-general on 19 October 1875, colonel of the 1st battalion of the West India regiment on 22 May 1876, and general on 4 December 1877, and was transferred to the colonelcy of the Norfolk regiment on 17 October 1889. 
Borton joined his regiment in Ireland accompanying it to Mauritius in 1833 and on to India in 1835. He came home in 1838 to study in the senior department of the Royal Military College, and obtained a certificate in November 1839. After his return to India he served with his regiment in Afghanistan under Major-General George Pollock in 1842. He took part in forcing the Khyber Pass on 5 April, when the 9th was broken into detachments which had the honour of leading the columns of attack; he was also engaged in the victory over Muhammad Akbar Khan at the Tezin Pass and the Haft Kotal on 13 September, when, at the head of a party of the 9th, he made a gallant charge. After the force's arrival at Kabul on 15 September he accompanied the column under Major-General John McCaskill into Kohistan, and took part in the assault and capture of the strongly fortified town of Istalif on 29 September. Borton returned to India in October with his regiment, which formed part of the rear-guard and was involved in some fighting in the passes. 
Borton served with his regiment in the 5th brigade of the 3rd infantry division in the Sutlej campaign of 1845-6, and was present at Mudki on 18 December 1845, and at Ferozeshahr on 21 and 22 December. In this he succeeded to the command of his regiment when Lieutenant-Colonel A. B. Taylor was killed, and was himself very severely wounded in the right elbow (he never recovered the complete use of his arm). For his services in this campaign he received the brevet of major and a pension for his wound. 
The 9th returned home in 1847, and Borton served with the regiment at Winchester until the end of 1848, and during the next six years in Ireland, succeeding to the command on 10 June 1853. He embarked with the regiment for Malta on 18 February 1854, and went on with it to the Crimea on 19 November, where he commanded it at the siege of Sevastopol. He led the regiment in the assault on the Redan by the column under Major-General Eyre on 18 June 1855 and was mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted colonel in the army on 17 July, and made a CB, military division, on 27 July. At the end of the war he received the order of the Mejidiye (third class) and the Legion d'honneur (fifth class). He was also awarded a good service pension. 
From the Crimea, Borton took his regiment to Canada in 1856, and brought it home in November of the following year. On 1 March 1865 he was appointed a colonel on the staff to command the troops at Colchester. On 1 April 1866 he was given the command of the infantry brigade at the Curragh, Ireland, with the rank of brigadier-general, until his promotion to major-general on 1 January 1868. On 9 September 1870 Borton was appointed to the command of the Mysore division of the Madras army, which he held for five years. He was promoted to KCB, military division, on 2 June 1877, and on 13 May 1878 was appointed governor and commander-in-chief at Malta. He was made a GCMG on 28 May 1880, and on relinquishing the government of Malta was made GCB, on 24 May 1884. 
Borton married, on 9 April 1850, at Drumbanagher, co. Armagh, Caroline Mary Georgina (who survived him), daughter of the Revd John Forbes Close, rector of Mourne, co. Down, and of his first wife, Mary Sophia Brownlow, sister of the first Lord Lurgan. They had two sons: Arthur Close, lieutenant-colonel 13th Somerset (Prince Albert's) light infantry, and Charles Edward, major 9th Norfolk regiment, who served in the Second Anglo-Afghan War. Borton died on 7 September 1893 at his residence, 105 Eaton Place, London, and was buried on 9 September at Hunton, near Maidstone, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 2925


Boruwlaski, Joseph, styled Count Boruwlaski (1739-1837), travelling performer and memoirist, was born in November 1739 near Halicz, Galicia, Poland, the third son of a lower gentry family. The principal source for his life is his own memoirs, published in several editions between 1788 and 1820. When he was nine his father died, leaving a widow with five sons and one daughter. Three sons were very tall, but three children suffered from achondroplasia, an inherited condition in which the cartilage in the bones fails to grow. Boruslawski's eldest brother was 41 inches tall, and his younger sister was even smaller. Jozef (known familiarly as Joujou) grew very slowly. At fifteen he had grown to 2 feet 1 inch, at twenty-one he was 2 feet 4 inches, at twenty-five he was 2 feet 11 inches, and at thirty reached his maximum height of 3 feet 3 inches. Boruslawski's mother, left poor, had her achondroplasic children adopted into noble households. Anastasia was 2 feet 4 inches high when she died of smallpox, aged twenty. The eldest brother was at Castellan Inowlowski's wife's court until his death. 
Boruslawski was entrusted first to Madame Jaorlicka, widow of the starostin de Caorliz, one of sixteen regional officers of state, and was well treated and educated. When he was fifteen Madame Jaorlicka married Count de Tarnon, and he was transferred to Madame Humiecka, described as 'Lady sword bearer' (that is, wife of the sword-bearer); she was not a countess as stated in Boruslawski's memoirs. Madame Humiecka travelled Europe with her household, introducing Boruslawski to the most famous European salons. She dressed him as a lieutenant of a great Polish regiment, and her drawing-room contained his diminutive sofa, table, chair, billiard table, and other games. Among the courts they visited were that at Vienna in 1752, where Boruslawski was presented to the empress Maria Theresa and learned dancing from Angelini, the electoral court of Bavaria at Munich, and the court of Stanislaw Leszczynski, former king of Poland, at Luneville in Lorraine. Here he met Count de Tressan, who described his manners and exceptional intelligence in the 'Encyclopedie' in 1766. King Stanislaw introduced Madame Humiecka to his daughter Queen Maria at Versailles, where Boruslawski entertained Louis XV's court. There Count Michal Oginski, grand general of Lithuania, began to teach him music, and arranged further tuition from the leading guitarist Gaviniesa. Music would become a vital source of income. 
In 1760 Madame Humiecka took her entourage to The Hague, from where a report on Boruslawski was sent to the 'Annual Register' in London, noting his graceful manners, wish to be treated as a nobleman, and his wit, liveliness, memory, and literary and linguistic abilities. When they returned to Warsaw, Madame Humiecka conceded that he was now an adult and he was allowed visits to theatres and parties alone. This independence proved to be limited when Madame Humiecka disapproved of his dissolute companions and threatened to withdraw her protection. 
About 1778 Boruslawski fell in love with Izalina Barboutin ('c'.1763- 'c'.1790/91), an attractive dark-haired girl of fifteen, of normal stature; of French descent, she had joined Madame Humiecka as a companion. She mocked him initially; but his persistence and showers of love letters convinced her he was serious. Courtship followed late in 1779, but Madame Humiecka dismissed them both in anger. They married in 1780, under the protection of Prince Kazimierz Poniatowski and his brother, King Stanislaw II. The king granted Boruslawski a carriage and an annual pension of 120 ducats, and may also have allowed him to call himself a count, although there is no evidence for this beyond the memoirs. The couple left for Krakow, where a daughter was born. 
Boruslawski had known that the pension would not be enough to support his growing family, and he began the precarious business of earning a living. Madame Humiecka had exhibited him to a select audience as a novelty; as his own man he attempted to be taken seriously as an impoverished gentleman and as a musician, but his diminutive proportion would always be the factor that aroused curiosity. In Vienna in February 1781 a concert was cancelled as the city was still mourning Maria Theresa, but Sir Robert Murray Keith, the British ambassador, suggested that Boruslawski visit England, and provided letters of recommendation. The 1820 edition of the memoirs states that Boruslawski then travelled through the Balkans, Arabia, and Asia as far as Kamchatka and the Bering Strait, but this would have been an impossible journey in the time allowed and is probably an example of the exaggerated traveller's tales he entertained his audiences with in later life. The 1788 memoirs suggest instead that he earned his living seeking hospitality at minor German princely courts. 
In late 1781, while visiting Christian Friedrich, margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, at Triersdorff, Boruslawski revived the plan to visit England. The margrave agreed to care for his eldest child, and Boruslawski and Izalina left with introductory letters to George III's brothers, William, duke of Gloucester, and Henry, duke of Cumberland, and to William Cavendish, fifth duke of Devonshire, and more importantly to his wife Georgiana, the leading whig political hostess. The Boruslawskis landed at Margate on 21 March 1782 and proceeded to London where Boruslawski was for a period taken up by the Devonshires. The duchess found him accommodation and the duke gave him a suit embroidered with silver and precious stones, and a silver sword. At Devonshire House he met the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV) and the duke of Gloucester, to whom he presented his letter from the margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach. The Polish ambassador arranged a visit to the royal family on 23 May. There he was treated as a Polish nobleman, and he discussed his travels with George III. 
The press reported wrongly that the king gave Boruslawski money. As he needed more than presents, Georgiana arranged a supposedly spontaneous meeting between him and the Irish giant Charles Byrne, known as O'Brien, who was 8 feet 4 inches tall. The publicity failed to have a great effect on Boruslawski's income. Society soon tired of him, and it may have been the need for popular acclaim that led him to simplify his name. Advertisements in the 'Public Advertiser' for his concerts on 7 June 1782 and 19 June 1782 at Carlisle House described him as 'Count Boruwlaski'. The concerts were priced at 10's'. 6died; he later wrote that prices were forced down to 5's'., and then to 2's'. 6died He needed to leave London to earn more, as he now had three daughters, and estimated that he needed $500 annually for travelling, organizing concerts, and hiring rooms for entertaining. 
Joined by Izalina's uncle, de Trouville, Boruwlaski and his family left for Bath, but his initial success was eclipsed by a trained pig. He returned to London, where a collection for his benefit failed, the duchess of Devonshire (succumbing to a widespread superstition) refused to admit him lest the sight of him dwarf her expected child, and a concert was unprofitable, partly through the lack of interest of the prince of Wales. 
In April 1783 Boruwlaski travelled to Ireland, where he was able to renew his success. Thanks to introductions to Frederick Howard, fifth earl of Carlisle, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and his successor, Charles Manners, fourth duke of Rutland, leading Irish families entertained him. Boruwlaski said he spent two years in Ireland, a stay protracted by Izalina's pregnancy, but he was in Cheshire in November 1783 when he became a freemason. Boruwlaski may have realized that it was unlikely that he would enjoy permanent favour from the nobility, and on his return to England, perhaps in early 1785, concentrated his attention on the provinces. He and his family travelled through Liverpool and Manchester to Leeds, and late in 1785 arrived in Birmingham. There Boruwlaski lodged in a house belonging to a man called Hutton where, as usual, he entertained guests for a small admission fee. The Boruwlaskis were invited to Christmas dinner by the Huttons, and Boruwlaski established a lasting friendship with Hutton's daughter, Caroline. She noticed that Boruwlaski had little English but great charm and good manners. Izalina spoke good English, was talkative, laughed easily, and sang French songs, but Caroline thought her character made her an unsuitable wife for Boruwlaski. With them were their pretty middle daughter and the youngest, a baby, the eldest being still at the court of the margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach. From Birmingham the Boruwlaskis returned to London via Oxford, where Boruwlaski was taken to Blenheim Palace and gave a pair of his shoes to George Spencer, fourth duke of Marlborough, for the duke's collection of curiosities. By 27 March 1786 Boruwlaski was in London, where, as 'Sieur Boruwlaski', he advertised his presence in the 'Morning Post'; visitors were invited to call on him at 162 Strand, for the price of 1's'. An anonymous letter includes a sketch of his guitar performance before the sultan of Turkey, two guards, and three ladies of the harem, indicating that tales of his travels, real or imagined, were an established part of his repertory. His old friend Oginski was now in London, an exile from a Poland torn by political factions and about to be partitioned, and supported a concert on 30 June 1786; the prince of Wales was invited but, although he had lunch with Boruwlaski beforehand, failed to attend. There was a good audience but only Oginski's subsidy averted financial failure. Boruwlaski's long absence from Poland led to his pension being cancelled, as it was rumoured that he had great investments in Britain. Another Polish exile, Princess Lubormirska, arrived in 1787 and generously paid his debts of 50 guineas, when creditors threatened him. 
In 1788 'Memoires du celebre nain Joseph Boruwlaski' with a parallel English translation by A. J. Des Carrieres was published in London. The subscription list of hundreds of names includes the prince of Wales, members of the aristocracy, and several distinguished Poles. It was dedicated to the duchess of Devonshire, perhaps in a bid to renew Boruwlaski's association with the fashionable world, but publication did not improve his finances. A German translation appeared in Leipzig in 1789. 
Boruwlaski's advertisements in 1786 had forecast his imminent return to Poland, but he remained in England, probably for financial reasons. His wife, her uncle, and her children disappear from his memoirs at this point; they may have deserted him, perhaps to return to Poland; his regret for neglecting 'a generous man' ('Memoires', 1st edn, 245) with Polish connections, in favour of bad advisers, could refer to de Trouville. His narrative, as continued in the 1792 edition, mentions periods at Norwich (where the diarist James Woodforde saw him in 1788) and Edinburgh, the latter visit supported by the family of the earl of Dumfries; the aristocracy was still his preferred milieu. However, the 1820 edition emphasizes his renewed acquaintance in Cambridge at this time with Margaret Metcalfe and her unmarried sisters, whom he had met in London in 1782; they helped to promote successful concerts in Cambridge and on their family estate at Bury St Edmunds. The Metcalfes, presumably of lower gentry or middle-class origin, would be more typical of Boruwlaski's enduring admirers. 
From Edinburgh, Boruwlaski travelled south to France, collecting money on the way. He arrived in spring 1789, and performed in Boulogne, in Lille, and in Paris, but attributed his lack of success to the outbreak of revolution that July and two thefts. He returned to England, via Cherbourg and Guernsey, in spring 1790. He then made a final visit to Poland, in 1790 or 1791; his wife died about that time. 
On returning to England in 1791 in poverty, Boruwlaski tried the west midlands, where he was unknown, and appeared successfully in Hereford. With a depleted income, he resorted to a paid appearance with a giant. He then returned to Birmingham, where 'guests' paid 1's'. admission. At the Huttons, Caroline noticed his melancholy and the absence of his wife and family. He was now fifty-three years old with no prospects. Two new editions of the memoirs appeared in Birmingham in 1792, one in French, the other in English, updating the 1788 publication. 
According to the 1820 edition of the memoirs Boruwlaski spent much of the succeeding decade in Ireland, where he visited most of the major towns. The account in the memoirs is highly anecdotal and peppered with humorous stories about his Irish servant Noad and observations on the French invasion attempts by Hoche in 1796 and Humbert in 1798. The invasion panic and threat of rebellion 'made such an impression on my strongbox' ('Memoirs', 4th edn, 327) that he left Ireland, probably in 1798, for the Isle of Man and then England. 
Boruwlaski then toured the north of England; James Ballantyne published a further edition of the memoirs at Kelso in 1801, probably with the northern English audience in mind. The connections that Boruwlaski made in the north of England at this time were to secure his future. With the help of General Archibald Dickson, he writes, he staged a successful concert at Newcastle, and was introduced by Dickson to Thomas Ebdon, cathedral organist at Durham, who in turn introduced him to 'Mr Smelt', an old friend of George III. The chronological sequence of events in Boruwlaski's memoirs may be confused; a letter in 'The Times' in September 1802 states that Boruwlaski stayed with Dickson that May, but if 'Mr Smelt' is Leonard Smelt, the former sub-preceptor to the prince of Wales, as seems to be implied, then these events must have taken place before Smelt died on 2 September 1800. To confuse the matter further, the memoirs place Smelt's death after the death of William, duke of Gloucester (in 1805), and an attack of insanity suffered by George III (presumably that same year). It was Smelt who began raising a subscription to provide funds for Boruwlaski's retirement. Boruwlaski, in the meantime, travelled to London, intending to emigrate to America. He was dissuaded from doing so by Margaret Metcalfe and her sisters, who began their own fund for Boruwlaski's retirement; the sums collected in the north and in London were joined so that he was able to buy an annuity. In 1812 he retired to Banks Cottage, South Bailey, Durham, where he lived with the daughters of Thomas Ebdon and paid 2's'. annual rent to the dean and chapter. The house is illustrated in the 1820 edition of the memoirs. 
The annuity, yielding $138 annually, was invested with a local shopkeeper who expected his early demise. Boruwlaski, however, enjoyed excellent health. He enjoyed teasing the shopkeeper, an elderly man many years his junior, asking him how he was, and adding that his own health could not be better. He told his friend the actor Charles Mathews (as related by Mathews's wife, Anne): 'Oh 'poor devel', poor 'hold' body. It 'macks' me 'laffing', poor 'hold hanimal'. Oh, he say prayer for me to die, offen when he 'slip'. He 'calcoolated dat' dwarf, not live it long 'et' I live it forty year to 'plag' him... He fifty year 'younger den' 'Boruwlaski''; minitime' he dead sooner as me... Boruwlaski NEVER die, you may depend. (Mathews, 3.224-5)' The shopkeeper died first, leaving his heirs to continue payments.Boruwlaski became an honorary member of the Marquis of Granby lodge of freemasons in Durham in 1806, but attended only three times. Another member was the actor Stephen Kemble. The huge Kemble and tiny Boruwlaski became fast friends and were a familiar sight walking on the river banks. 
In Durham, Boruwlaski elaborated the earlier text of his memoirs, continuing it to his staying with the Ebdons. The new text was edited by another benefactor, the writer and colliery owner William Burdon, who died before its publication in 1820. This version of the memoirs is the most obviously anecdotal, adding a number of extraordinary travellers' tales to the 1788 text, and reducing the prominence of Izalina, but also placing less emphasis on Boruwlaski's friendships with the higher nobility, instead thanking his lasting, less socially exalted admirers. 
Visiting London in July 1821, he wished to call on George IV to present his new book. Although it was the eve of the coronation, Mathews secured an interview. The king greeted him warmly and asked about his wife. Boruwlaski replied: 'Isolina ['sic'] die thirty year. Fine woman! Sweet, beauty body! You have no 'idea', Majesty' (Mathews, 3.219). The king gave him a watch and chain, accepting the book as a souvenir, and interrogated both Boruwlaski and Mathews about Boruwlaski's financial well-being. Mrs Mathews reported that George IV said: 'If I had a dozen sons I could not point out to them a more perfect model of good breeding and elegance than the Count, who really is a most accomplished and charming person!' (ibid., 3.222). 
Until the year before his death Boruwlaski visited London annually to stay with the Mathews and other friends. The journalist Peter George Patmore saw him at Mathews's house in 1823, reporting that at eighty-four 'he played in the house and the garden like a nice puppy or a happy child, gay as a bird' (Mathews, 3.231). He was dignified, however, with strangers. 
In the 1830s Boruwlaski became increasingly frail and had to be carried to some of his many social engagements. He continued to correspond with friends such as Caroline Hutton, to whom he wrote in 1833: '
Poland was my cradle, 

England was my nest, 

Durham is my quiet place, 

Where my weary bones shall rest. 

' He died on 5 September 1837 at his home, Banks Cottage, South Bailey, Durham, and was buried near the north tower stair door of Durham Cathedral, at a spot marked by the initials 'J. B.'. Canon Ebdon, Thomas Ebdon's nephew, composed an inscription to which the dean and chapter objected; but it appears on a marble wall slab within the west end of St Mary-the-Less where Canon James Raine, Boruwlaski's friend, was rector. 
Boruwlaski was said to have retained the cheerfulness, serenity of temper, and even playfulness, of early youth. He was abstemious, never touched alcohol, had perfect sight, and spent much of his time reading, writing, studying alchemy, and conducting scientific experiments. He was commemorated in Durham by a permanent display of his garments at the town hall, and by the name 'Count's House' given to the folly with a Doric portico erected on a bend of the River Wear, probably designed by Ignatius Bonomi. In death as in life his reputation depended on curiosity towards his physical condition, and both amusement with and respect for his hard-won and carefully maintained dignity. 


@@@@@


doc= 2926


Bosa (d. 706), bishop of York, was trained in the religious life at the monastery of 'Streanaeshalch' (Whitby) under Abbess Hild. In 678 or 679 he was intruded into the much reduced see of York, in place of Wilfrid, at the instance of King Ecgfrith and Archbishop Theodore. It was perhaps then that Acca, later one of Wilfrid's leading followers, became a member of his household. When Wilfrid was reinstated, in 686 or 687, Bosa was expelled from York. What became of him then is unknown; with Wilfrid's second expulsion, 'c'.691, he was, however, restored, remaining at York until his death. Although commanded by the pope in 704 to attend the council convoked to settle Wilfrid's claims to a diocese covering the whole of Northumbria, it is not certain that he was present at the synod eventually held by the River Nidd in 706; he was probably already a sick man, for he died that year, shortly afterwards. 
Bede, who presumably heard about Bosa from Acca, writes of him very warmly, praising his great holiness and humility. The bishop was also remembered with affection at York, where in the time of Alcuin (died 804) he was reputed a 'staunch and upright teacher', who endowed the fabric and caused his clergy to live apart from the common people. 
Bosa was commemorated in the late eighth-century metrical calendar of York on 2 October. Later, his feast day was 9 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 2927


Bosanquet, Charles (1769-1850), merchant and writer, was born at Forest House, Leyton, Essex, on 23 July 1769, the second son of Samuel Bosanquet (1744-1806), a Huguenot merchant, and his wife, Eleanor ('c'.1745-1819), the daughter of Henry Lannoy Hunter of Beechill, Berkshire. John Bernard Bosanquet was a younger brother. When he was seven he was sent to school in Hackney, then from the ages of sixteen to eighteen he was placed in a merchant's house in Lyons. Later, in partnership with J. P. Anderson, he went into the West Indian trade. At the height of the City's fears of attack from France, in 1794, he was gazetted lieutenant of the London and Westminster light horse volunteers. By 1796 he wrote, 'considering myself as well established both in income and respectability, I paid my addresses to Miss Charlotte Holford' (Lee, 81). On 1 June 1796 he married Charlotte Anne (died 1839), the daughter of Peter Holford, a master in chancery; a son and six daughters were born, but five of the daughters died in infancy or youth. 
From 1809 Bosanquet was a member of Lloyds (he was also a member of the committee of its patriotic fund) and in 1814 he became trustee to William Balston's paper manufactory. He was sub-governor of the South Sea Company from 1808 to 1838, then governor until 1850. He was appointed a director of the West India Company, which was set up in 1825 to relieve the economic plight of planters in the British Caribbean. He also played an active public role; from 1823 to 1836 he was chairman of the exchequer bill office, and he was governor of the Canadian Land Company and instrumental in bringing vast tracts of land in western Canada into cultivation. 
Bosanquet wrote four economic pamphlets, chiefly relating to the sugar and rum trade of the British Caribbean. These included 'A letter on the proposition submitted to government for taking the duty on muscovado sugar ad valorem' (1806) and 'A Letter to W. Manning, Esq., MP, on the Depreciation of West India Property' (2nd edn, 1807), in which he argued against proposals to tax sugar on the basis of quality and against the discriminatory duties which protected the British Caribbean monopoly of the home market. He advocated the sole use of British West India rum by domestic distilleries and by the navy to boost sales and to exclude foreign competition. His 'Thoughts on the value to Great Britain of commerce in general, and the colonial trade in particular' (1807) asserted the importance and profitability of the West India trade, to which William Spence replied in 'Radical Cause of the Present Distresses of West India Planters Pointed out' (1807). His 'Practical Observations on the Report of the Bullion Committee' (2nd edn, with supplement, 1810) ranks among the most effective statements of the anti-bullionist position and provoked a brilliant rebuttal, which was later upheld as a model essay on political economy, by David Ricardo in 'Reply to Mr Bosanquet's Practical Observations on the Report of the Bullion Committee' (1811). 
Bosanquet acquired in 1804 a London residence at The Firs, Hampstead, and the former Holford estate at Rock in Northumberland, the gift of his brother-in-law Richard Holford, with its large manor house which had been badly damaged by fire. He set about restoring the house, which served as a summer retreat until his retirement from business, when it became his permanent home. In 1828 he was high sheriff of Northumberland, where he was also justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant. He owned the living of Bolingbroke with Hareby in Lincolnshire, together with stock in the Royal Exchange Assurance Company, and his bequests included $19,000-worth of annuities in the South Sea Company. In old age he underwent treatment for cataract. He died at Rock on 20 June 1850 and was buried in the church there, monuments being placed there and at Hampstead. He was survived by his son, the Revd Robert William Bosanquet, and his daughter Mary Anne, the wife of the Revd Robert Fielde. 


@@@@@


doc= 2928


Bosanquet, James Whatman (1804-1877), banker and biblical historian, was born on 10 January 1804, the second son of Samuel Bosanquet (1768-1843), banker, and his wife, Laetitia Philippa (1774-1855), daughter of James Whatman of Kent. Samuel Richard Bosanquet was his elder brother. The Bosanquets were a numerous Huguenot family descended through intermarriage from several ancestors who had fled the Cevennes region of France to avoid religious persecutions. Samuel's prosperity derived in part from his bank, founded in 1796 as Bosanquet, Beechroft, and Reeves, of Lombard Street, in the City of London, and although he owned various properties, he was well known as a philanthropist. His own children grew up in the lordly setting of Dingestow Court, Monmouthshire. 
James Bosanquet entered Westminster School in 1814 and left in 1817. In 1822 he became a partner in his father's bank, then known as Bosanquet, Pitt, Anderson, and Franks. He subsequently became a governor of the Bank of England and chairman of the income tax commission under Sir Robert Peel, and his earlier publications related to these matters. They included 'Metallic, Paper, and Credit Currency' (1842), as well as a 'Letter to the Right Hon. G. Cornewall Lewis on the Bank Charter Act of 1844' (1857). 
Bosanquet's other interest lay in biblical and Assyrian chronology, reflected in his later writings for the Society of Biblical Archaeology, to which he gave generous financial support, serving as a member of council and treasurer. His third wife and several close relatives were also members of this society. His 'Chronology of the Times of Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah' appeared in 1848, and was followed by other works, on the fall of Nineveh, the prophecies of Daniel, and the dating of Assurbanipal and Lachish. Bosanquet was described by the president of the society as 'the Maecenas of Assyriology' ('DNB'). He was also a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society and communicated his findings on solar eclipses in biblical times to the Astronomer Royal. 
Bosanquet was married three times, first, on 16 May 1840, to Merelina (1815-1852), daughter of Sir Nicholas Conyngham Tindal MP, in a major society wedding, the service being conducted by the bishop of London. The couple had five sons and three daughters. His second marriage, on 15 July 1854 to Frances Georgiana Elizabeth ('c'.1817-1862), elder daughter of Lord John Thomas Henry Somerset ['see under 'Somerset, FitzRoy James Henry, first Baron Raglan], was childless. His third marriage, on 25 August 1864, to Emily Dorothy, daughter of James Best of Kent, produced three daughters. They resided at Claysmore, Enfield, Middlesex, where he died of enteric fever and bronchitis on 22 December 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 2929


Bosanquet, Sir John Bernard (1773-1847), judge, was born at Forest House, Waltham Forest, on 2 May 1773, the youngest son of Samuel Bosanquet (1744-1806) of Waltham Forest and Dingestow Court, Monmouthshire, governor of the Bank of England in 1792, and his wife, Eleanor ('c'.1745-1819), daughter of Henry Lannoy Hunter of Beechill, Berkshire. Charles Bosanquet was his elder brother. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 9 June 1795 and MA on 20 March 1800. Admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 22 January 1794, Bosanquet was called to the bar on 9 May 1800 and joined the home circuit. He also attended the Essex sessions, of which his father was chairman. Before being called to the bar, with Christopher Puller he jointly founded 'Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the Court of Common Pleas and Exchequer Chamber, and in the House of Lords', which appeared in two series, the first in three volumes from 1796 to 1804, and the second in two volumes from 1804 to 1807. 
In 1804 Bosanquet married Mary Anne, the eldest daughter of Richard Lewis of Llandeilo Gresynni, Monmouthshire; they had only one son, who predeceased his father. Family influence ensured early success in Bosanquet's career at the bar and he was appointed standing counsel to the East India Company (1814) and to the Bank of England (1819). On 22 November 1814 he was made a serjeant-at-law, and in thirteen years conducted numerous bank prosecutions, which were widely reported. In 1824 he declined the appointment of chief justice of Bengal, and in 1827 was made king's serjeant. On 16 May 1828 he was appointed to the commission inquiring into the practice of the common-law courts, a committee which he presided over for three years. On the retirement of Sir James Burrough, Bosanquet was made a judge of the court of common pleas on 1 February 1830, and was knighted on the following day. On 4 September 1833 he was sworn a member of the privy council, and from then until 1840 he sat regularly on its judicial committee. 
On the resignation of lord chancellor Lyndhurst, Bosanquet, together with Sir Charles Pepys, the master of the rolls, and Sir Lancelot Shadwell, the vice-chancellor, was appointed lord commissioner of the great seal. This commission lasted from 23 April 1835 to 16 January 1836, when Pepys was made lord chancellor. 
After eleven years of judicial work Bosanquet was compelled by ill health to retire in 1842. He died at The Firs, Hampstead Heath, on 25 September 1847 and was buried at Llandeilo Gresynni. 
Bosanquet was remembered not simply for his abilities as a judge but also as a man of considerable learning with a taste for biblical scholarship. In an anonymous tract, entitled 'Letter of a Layman', he attempted to demonstrate a connection between the books of 'Daniel' and the 'Apocalypse'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2930


Bosanquet, Samuel Richard (1800-1882), legal and religious writer, was born on 1 April 1800 at Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London, the eldest of six sons of Samuel Bosanquet (1768-1843), of the Forest House, Essex, and the family seat of Dingestow Court, Monmouthshire, and his wife, Laetitia Philippa (1774-1855), youngest daughter of James Whatman of Vinters, Kent, and his first wife, Sarah. The Bosanquets were descended from a Huguenot family that came to Britain after the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685 and became naturalized by private act of parliament in 1703. They subsequently acquired various banking interests: the author's grandfather, also Samuel Bosanquet ('c'.1747-1806), was a deputy governor of the Levant Company and director of the Bank of England, while generations of the family were employed in the bank of Bosanquet & Co. Samuel Bosanquet was educated at Eton College before matriculating at Christ Church, Oxford, on 17 November 1818. He subsequently gained a second class in classics and a first in mathematics, graduating BA in 1822 and MA in 1829. 
Bosanquet entered the Inner Temple as a barrister on 5 May 1826, and was one of the first revising barristers appointed to oversee electoral registration after the passage of the 1832 'Reform Act'. He began to write leading articles for 'The Times' and published a series of legal commentaries, 'New Rules of Pleading' (1835), 'The Tithe Commutation Act' (1837), and lastly 'The Poor Law Amendment Acts' (1839), which insisted that popular hostility to the new poor law was caused by the wilful misapplication of its provisions by the commission's district agents, and argued that the right of interpretation ought properly to belong to JPs, overseers, and boards of guardians. Bosanquet's localist impulses, religious convictions, and pronounced sympathy with the poor briefly aligned him with the high-Anglican paternalism then propounded in the 'British Critic' magazine, in Tractarian hands since John Henry Newman's accession to the editorship in 1838. Two of his typically trenchant articles, 'Pauperism and almsgiving' (July 1840) and 'Private alms and poor-law relief' (October 1840), were subsequently revised and published in 1841 as 'The Rights of the Poor and Christian Almsgiving Vindicated', in which Bosanquet employed Mendicity Society reports to demonstrate the hopeless inadequacy of working-class wages and insisted that indigence was overwhelmingly attributable to economic dislocation rather than individual failing. Along with evangelical critics such as Thomas Chalmers and Tractarian commentators such as Thomas Mozley and Frederick Oakeley, Bosanquet insisted that individual charity should vastly supersede public provision, and mourned the effacement of squirearchical by bourgeois values. His 'The age of unbelief', which appeared in the 'British Critic' in January 1842, was also published in revised form as part of his 'Principia: a Series of Essays on the Principles of Evil Manifesting Themselves in these Last Times in Religion, Philosophy, and Politics' (1843), a virulently anti-liberal polemic which interpreted 'the condition of England' as a portent of the second coming. His 'Letter to Lord John Russell on the Safety of the Nation' (1848) was animated by the same hostility to political Liberalism and 'laissez-faire' capitalism, and Bosanquet's hallmark reassertion of local paternalist mechanisms in place of the agencies of a centralizing state. 
Bosanquet's abhorrence of secular political economy and all things progressive increasingly took him towards theological and philosophical questions. But if his contemporary commentary found a ready audience, Bosanquet's philosophical and biblical studies never enjoyed comparable notice. His first foray into these realms, 'A New System of Logic' (1839), added classical humanism to his extensive demonology and endeavoured to displace the 'heathen system' of Aristotelian logic with one of Christian ethics, while a second edition of 1870 appended two lengthy further sections setting out the practical application of his system. Anti-rationalist in spirit and idiosyncratic in method, they were typical of Bosanquet's philosophical 'oeuvre'. His ''Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation': its Argument Examined or Exposed' (1845) denounced the pre-Darwinian book of that name written by Robert Chambers and published anonymously the previous year, and two lengthy biblical commentaries, 'The First Seal: being Short Homilies on the Gospel According to St. Matthew' (1854) and 'The Fourth Seal: being Short Homilies on the Gospel According to St. John' (1856), along with 'Excelsior' (1865) and 'The Bible: its Superiority in Character, Composition, Information, and Authority, to all Uninspired Literature' (1866), evinced an antagonism towards contemporary biblical scholarship which was to preoccupy his subsequent work. Bosanquet began to learn Hebrew in his sixties in order to study the 'Old Testament', and produced a stream of works asserting the inapplicability of reason to revelation, such as his somewhat vainglorious 'Interpretation, being Rules and Principles Assisting to the Reading and Understanding of the Holy Scriptures' (1874), and exemplifying his brand of figurative and typological exegesis, such as 'The Successive Visions of the Cherubim Distinguished and Newly Interpreted' (1871), 'An Exposition of the First Twenty Chapters of Exodus' (1876), 'The Prophecies of Zechariah, Interpreted and Applied' (1877), and 'The Interpreter: some Selected Interpretations of Scripture' (1878). Bosanquet's own churchmanship was stoutly Anglican but tolerationist: his 'Eirenicon: Toleration, Intolerance, Christianity, Christian Unity, the Church of England and Dissent' (1867) is its clearest expression. His final published work took him towards the interests of his younger brother James Whatman Bosanquet, the writer on biblical and Assyrian chronology. Entitled 'Hindu Chronology and Antediluvian History' (1880), it was an annotated reprint of the first part of the orientalist Alexander Hamilton's 'Key to Hindoo Chronology' of 1820, and attempted to synchronize the two subjects by connecting Indian mythology with early biblical characters. 
Bosanquet married Emily Courthope (1809-1869), eldest daughter of George Courthope of Whiligh, Sussex, on 4 February 1830. They had nine children, like Bosanquet's siblings all of them boys, and all but one survived him, among them their third son, Admiral George Stanley Bosanquet (1835-1914), veteran of the Crimea, the Taiping uprising, and the Egyptian campaign, and subsequently aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria in 1884, and their fourth son, Sir (Frederick) Albert Bosanquet (1837-1923), common serjeant of the City of London, 1900-17. At the death of his father in 1843 Samuel Bosanquet succeeded to the family estates at Dingestow Court. For the ensuing thirty-five years he energetically practised the squirearchical paternalism he always preached, serving (like his father before him and his son after) as JP and then chairman of the Monmouthshire quarter sessions from 1846, and acquiring a high reputation for beneficence to the poor and for the support of myriad local institutions, among them the Monmouth board of guardians, working men's institute, and school and highway boards. He died after a short illness, probably influenza, at Dingestow Court on 27 December 1882 and was buried on 1 January 1883 in the parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 2931


Boscawen, Edward (1711-1761), naval officer and politician, was born on 19 August 1711, the third of five sons of Hugh Boscawen, first Viscount Falmouth (c.1680-1734), politician and courtier, and Charlotte (died 1754), eldest daughter of Charles Godfrey and his wife, Arabella, sister of the duke of Marlborough. He ranks among the most important of the navy's officers in the mid-eighteenth century. 
Edward Boscawen entered the navy in 1726 and sailed for the West Indies on 9 April in the 'Superbe' (60 guns) as part of the squadron under Vice-Admiral Francis Hosier. After service in the 'Superbe' lasting nearly three years he served on the 'Canterbury', 'Hector', and 'Namur' in home waters and the Mediterranean. After his promotion to lieutenant on 25 May 1732 he was appointed successively to the 'Hector' and 'Grafton' and then on 12 March 1737 to the command of the 'Leopard'. In June 1738 he was appointed to the command of the 'Shoreham' (20 guns), and a year later he was ordered to the West Indies where he was stationed at the outbreak of hostilities with Spain. Shortly afterwards the 'Shoreham' ran aground near Cape Antonio at the western end of Cuba, and was forced to jettison her guns and stores. As a consequence she was refitting at Jamaica in November 1739 when Admiral Edward Vernon sailed to attack the Spanish at Porto Bello. Boscawen served as a volunteer on the flagship and, after a successful attack, assisted Captain Knowles in the destruction of Porto Bello's fortifications. He spent 1740 cruising with the 'Shoreham' off Tortuga and Havana, capturing a small Spanish privateer and in August recapturing two colonial ships. In early 1741 Boscawen took part in Vernon's expedition to Cartagena, commanding seamen and marines in a successful night attack on shore batteries, spiking the guns, and destroying the platforms and carriages. In a letter to the governor of Jamaica, Vernon commented that 'Captain Boscawen, all say made a prudent general in the disposing his men landing in as good order as could be expected for night work in an unknown country' (Ranft, 195-6). He was then put in charge of the destruction of the fortifications at Boca Chica. During the expedition Boscawen was promoted captain and succeeded Lord Aubrey Beauclerk in the command of the 'Prince Frederick' (70 guns). Shortly after his return to England in May 1742 he was appointed to the 'Dreadnought' (60 guns). On 11 December he married Frances Evelyn Glanville (1719-1805) ['see 'Boscawen, Frances Evelyn], great-great-niece of the diarist John Evelyn. They had three sons and two daughters. George, the third son, became third Viscount Falmouth on the death of his uncle. 
Having been promoted captain in 1742, Boscawen spent the spring of the following year cruising off the Azores with the 'Dreadnought' and the 'Deptford' to intercept the Spanish trade. Later in 1743 he was attached to the Home Fleet under Sir John Norris. Before any official declaration of war a French fleet commanded by De Roquefeuil cruised in the channel to assist in an invasion on the Thames from Dunkirk. On 24 February 1744 Norris found the French anchored off Dungeness but as the wind was foul he could get no closer to the enemy than 8 miles. Both fleets were dispersed by a gale the following day. On 7 March the 'Dreadnought' was ordered to convoy Dutch troops to England. In the following April the 'Dreadnought' joined Sir Charles Hardy's squadron escorting victuallers bound for the Mediterranean clear of Brest. On 24 April south-west of Ushant, the French 'Medee' (26 guns) was sighted and the 'Dreadnought' and 'Grampus' were detached in pursuit. After a chase of fifty hours the 'Medee' was taken. She was subsequently purchased and fitted out as the 'Boscawen', privateer. May found the 'Dreadnought', in company with the 'Prince Frederick', stationed off Cape Clear to intercept privateers and to warn the homeward trade of the declaration of war with France. On 11 July both ships fell in with a French squadron of thirteen ships 85 leagues south-south-west of the Lizard. The 'Dreadnought' kept up a constant fire from her stern chasers as the two ships were pursued throughout the night and into the afternoon of the following day. It was during this skirmish that an incident occurred that would dissuade Boscawen from allowing his officers standing cabins in all his future commands. He remarked that on 'taking down the officer's Cabins to clear ship and bring the stern chasers to bear on the enemy, I found much bottled liquor which being directed to be thrown overboard much of it was drunk by the seamen, that when I engaged soon after were so drunk as not to be able to do their duty, and had the French done theirs, I must have inevitably been taken' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/90, fol. 275). 
At the end of the year Boscawen commanded the guardship 'Royal Sovereign' at the Nore until appointed to the 'Namur' (74 guns) in January 1746. The 'Namur' was attached to the western squadron first under Admiral William Martin and then George Anson. The fleet cruised to intercept returning French squadrons and Boscawen was entrusted with the command of an advance squadron. In October 1746 Anson returned to Plymouth leaving Boscawen on station. From letters found in a prize Boscawen anticipated Anson's orders to cruise off Cape Clear and intercept Admiral d'Anville on his return from America. Having been rejoined by Anson, the 'Namur' chased and captured d'Anville's hospital ship, the 'Mercure', on 25 November; however, the French, learning that the British fleet lay in wait off Brest, steered for Rochefort and safety. 
On 3 May 1747 the first decisive sea battle of the war took place off Cape Finisterre. At about nine in the morning the 'Namur' signalled that a fleet was in sight to the south-west. This was Admiral De la Jonquiere escorting the India and Canada convoys. Anson signalled a general chase during which the 'Namur' was one of the leading ships. According to Boscawen the 'Namur' 'came very near three or four of them where we were warmly engaged on both sides for about three-quarters of an hour... we then shot ahead and about half past four engaged the Serieux (flag) within pistol shot more than half-an-hour when she struck to us' (Richmond, 3.92). Boscawen was close to the top of the captains' list and due for elevation to flag rank and Anson ensured his promotion by writing to the duke of Bedford at the Admiralty: 'Boscawen got a shot in the shoulder, but is almost well; his behaviour in the action pleased me, and I hope your Grace will make him a rear-admiral' ('Correspondence', 1.214). Such was his professional esteem that Boscawen's name had already been suggested for the overall command of an expedition to India even before the news of the battle off Finisterre reached the Admiralty. 
With a squadron of six ships of the line, including the 'Namur', several smaller vessels, fourteen East India Company ships, and an army of 1200 men and 800 marines, Boscawen sailed for the Cape on 4 November 1747. His instructions were not binding but recommended that he proceed from the Cape to take Rodriquez, then Mauritius, proceed to Isle Bourbon and Madagascar, and next sail to the Coromandel coast to take Chandanagar and Mahe. Reaching Mauritius on 23 June, the expedition discovered that with advance warning the French had erected defences along the coast, and after one unsuccessful attempt a council of war agreed that the attack on Mauritius should be abandoned in favour of more important objectives. Accordingly Boscawen proceeded to Fort St David, arriving on 26 July, and after being joined by Admiral Griffith's squadron sailed immediately to attack Pondicherry. The initial attack was repulsed with heavy casualties due to faulty intelligence, provided by the engineers, on the strength of the defences. Cannon were landed from the fleet and the advance defences were eventually taken. The French commander, Dupleix, settled down to a siege knowing that the monsoon would create such difficulties for the British that the siege could not last. Fever soon broke out among the British forces and when the rains began at the end of September Boscawen abandoned the attack and withdrew the army. In any event a peace had been negotiated between Britain and France before the siege of Pondicherry had commenced. Boscawen received news of this in November but was instructed to remain on station until a peace was concluded. While off St David's on 12 April 1749, the 'Namur' was lost with all hands in a hurricane. Boscawen and his staff were ashore at the time. He left for England in October and arrived there in April 1750. 
In 1749 Boscawen had purchased the estate of Hatchlands near Guildford in Surrey. He had the existing Tudor house demolished and in 1756 began a new house said by Boscawen's wife to have been built at the expense of his country's enemies. This was completed in 1758, and is now a property of the National Trust. Boscawen was appointed a commissioner of the Admiralty on 22 June 1751 and in the same year an elder brother of Trinity House. Boscawen retained his place at the Admiralty despite the political troubles on the formation of the Devonshire ministry in 1756, and again in 1757 when Anson returned to the Admiralty. He had been advanced to the rank of vice-admiral on 6 February 1755 and had developed an unshakeable reputation that was about to see him become one of the foremost naval officers of the time. 
In 1755, as relations between Britain and France rapidly deteriorated, Boscawen was placed in command of a secret expedition to intercept a French squadron bound for Louisbourg in Canada but also carrying troop reinforcements to the French position in Ohio where the war had already broken out. He sailed on 21 April 1755 with his flag on the 'Torbay' (74 guns). On passage across the Atlantic the squadron exercised regularly at gun drill and on 3 June encountered thick fogs. On 9 June three large ships were sighted. Boscawen hoisted French colours but when he failed to answer their private signal, the three vessels bore away. They were the 'Alcide' (64 guns) and the 'Lys', the latter fitted as a transport, and the 'Dauphin Royal'. The 'Dunkirk' (Captain Howe) led the chase and coming alongside the rearmost hailed her to shorten sail and speak with the admiral. The French asked if it was peace or war to which Howe replied peace but added that they should prepare for war. Boscawen then made the signal to engage at which point the 'Dunkirk' opened her fire, and as the 'Torbay' came up to engage the 'Alcide' struck her flag. The 'Lys' surrendered after a two-hour running fight with the 'Defiance' and the third ship escaped. By an unfortunate turn of luck the 'Alcide''s captain, Hocquart, who had also been taken in the 'Diamant' at the battle of Cape Finisterre in the last war and in the 'Medee' in 1744, now found that he had been captured by Boscawen for the third time. 
The news of the engagement was popular with the public but placed the government in an awkward situation. Most of the French armament had arrived safely in Canada and by capturing only an insignificant part of it, Britain was now seen as an aggressor but without the benefit of a successful pre-emptive blow against her enemy. Hardwicke, the lord chancellor, was of the opinion that Boscawen had 'done too much or too little' (Corbett, 1.57-8). He had not been made aware of the political and diplomatic consequences of his instructions though he may have guessed at them. In any event he was not blamed for executing his orders nor is it likely, given the circumstances, that Boscawen would have declined an engagement with the French. He was not to know that the bulk of the French expedition had already reached Louisbourg or that the three ships in sight were not part of a larger fleet still at sea. Retiring to Halifax after the engagement, the squadron was very sickly and suffered the loss of 2000 men before returning to Spithead. 
On 6 May 1756, with his flag on 'Invincible' (74 guns), Boscawen joined Edward Hawke's fleet off Ushant. As in the previous year his crews were regularly exercised at the guns with live firing at targets. Writing to his wife on 24 June he mischievously commented, 'we are at this minute practising firing, it being calm and many of the fellows hit the mark, 'note nobody is firing at them'' (Kemp, 229). It was while off Ushant that Boscawen heard of the debacle of Admiral John Byng and the loss of Minorca. He has been noted as having a share in the responsibility for the trial and execution of Admiral Byng and was therefore a consenting party to his death ('DNB'). Even though he was involved Boscawen was not one of the judges at the court martial and would have gladly avoided any part in the proceedings. His letters, however, make his feelings clear. The conduct of Byng's fleet was a 'scandal' and 'Byng's letters would have written him coward before any jury in the world'. He also expressed the opinion that 'if more regard was had to the characters of men before they are put in the way of high commands, the Service would make a better figure'. Yet he also wrote that if Byng 'was to blame, he was not the only person to be blamed' (Kemp, 228, 231-2, 218). 
On 29 July 1756 Boscawen transferred his flag to the 'Royal George' (100 guns). The health of the fleet was a preoccupation of many senior officers who appreciated that fresh provisions, adequate rest, and healthy conditions for the men were a prerequisite for efficient operations. However, long cruises in search of enemy squadrons and convoys as well as the close blockade of French naval arsenals required an almost constant presence at sea. Boscawen paid particular care to the health of his officers and men though he was not aware of the precise causes of scurvy. He had Dr Hales's ventilators installed in the 'Royal George' and later in the 'Namur'. (Hales was his wife's cousin.) These provided a means of circulating fresh air below decks. He was convinced that bad air contributed to the sickness of the men, having had three sailors in the 'Torbay' suffocate in the bad air from the well. In August 1756 many of his squadron were sickly, and writing to John Clevland, the secretary of the Admiralty, he gave it as his opinion and that of some of his captains that the sickness among the men was due in part '... to their want of rest when their ships are sent in to clean, being hurried again to sea before they are recovered' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/90, fol. 60). It was also Boscawen's belief that something in the sailors' diet rather than something missing from it was the cause of scurvy; 'I eat very little meat and therefore it is impossible the sea scurvy should ever take hold of me' (Kemp, 245). Many of the measures introduced into the flagship had a positive effect. In September he wrote, 'This ship has now been at sea twelve weeks, which is longer than I ever knew any first-rate ever at sea' (ibid., 248). 
On 7 February 1758 Boscawen was made an admiral of the blue and appointed to command the fleet sent to capture Louisbourg as a preliminary to the conquest of Quebec. The expedition sailed on 23 February but due to foul winds and calms took eleven weeks to reach Halifax where the entire fleet at last assembled on 24 May. The French meanwhile had managed to reinforce their position and when Boscawen appeared off Louisbourg on 2 June, the British faced 6000 Frenchmen and five ships of the line anchored to defend the harbour. Landings were made south of Louisbourg at Gabarus Bay. Generals Jeffrey Amherst and James Wolfe laid siege to the town, impeded by the fire of the French warships. On 21 June one of these, the 'Celebre', caught fire and the flames spread to two of the other ships. By 25 June the town was so battered that only the two remaining warships, the 'Bienfaisant' and 'Prudent', were able to maintain a resistance. Boscawen ordered them to be cut out and that night both were boarded, the 'Prudent' being set alight and the 'Bienfaisant' towed out of the harbour. After the surrender of Louisbourg, Amherst and Wolfe were anxious to press on to Quebec but Boscawen raised objections. Provisions were short, he had 5000 prisoners, and it was late in the season so the descent on Quebec was postponed until the following year. Returning to England with the 'Bienfaisant' prize, Boscawen, on 27 October, encountered the homeward bound Quebec squadron, commanded by Du Chaffault, with a captured Indiaman. Boscawen pursued the French, recapturing the Indiaman. 
On 2 February 1759 Boscawen was sworn of the privy council, and in April he sailed with six ships for the Mediterranean with his flag on the 'Namur' (90 guns). There he joined Vice-Admiral Broderick and took overall command of the fleet off Toulon. His instructions were to protect trade, secure Gibraltar, and above all prevent the Toulon fleet under de la Clue from passing the strait and joining the French Atlantic squadrons in their attempt to support an invasion of England. He was further instructed to follow the French if they succeeded in breaking out, but how he carried out these orders was left to his discretion. Boscawen was forced to withdraw to Gibraltar to water and refit his ships, arriving there on 4 August. Two frigates were detached to watch for the French. Meanwhile de la Clue had sailed from Toulon on 5 August with twelve ships of the line and hoped to pass Gibraltar undetected by following the north African coast. He was seen by the 'Gibraltar' frigate on 16 August and on the following evening the alarm was raised. The British squadron was busy refitting and largely unprepared to sail with many officers and men ashore. There followed a 'stampede' to get on the ships and within three hours, at about 10 p.m., Boscawen with eight ships of the line was in pursuit of the French who were now steering for Cape St Vincent. During the night the French rearguard made for Cadiz, leaving de la Clue with seven ships of the line which were sighted by Boscawen the following morning. At first the French admiral imagined that the British ships were his missing rearguard, but he soon realized his mistake. Off Lagos he was overtaken and at 2.30 p.m. the action opened. At about 4 p.m. Boscawen engaged the French flagship 'Ocean', the 'Namur' losing her mizzen mast. With the 'Ocean' making off, the 'Namur' joined the 'Culloden' in the capture of the 'Centaur'. Boscawen next shifted his flag from the damaged 'Namur' to the 'Newark' (80 guns) and continued the chase through the night. At daylight the remaining four French ships were seen making for Lagos Bay. Here the French admiral ran his flagship ashore: she and the 'Redoubtable' were then burnt. The 'Temeraire' and 'Modeste' were captured despite being at anchor in neutral waters. Boscawen then took up station off Cape St Vincent to intercept the remainder of the French; not seeing them, he sailed to join the Channel Fleet as his instructions directed and anchored at Spithead on 1 September. Boscawen's violation of Portugal's neutral waters raised a diplomatic storm but his actions received the full approval of his superiors and the public. For his service he was made a general of marines with an annual salary of $3000. During 1760 Boscawen commanded the fleet in Quiberon Bay where his ships received fresh meat and vegetables from Ireland. Regular fresh provisions made extended operations at sea possible. In June Boscawen wrote: 'The ships are healthy and I hope to keep them so... As the Monmouth now goes in, not sickly, to clean, she will be in a very short time in a good condition for any service' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/90, fol. 255). 
Boscawen was a member of parliament, having represented Truro since 1742. The Boscawens were already an important and popular family in local politics, especially as the admiral could provide places and career opportunities for local sons, creating what his wife termed 'a little navy of your own making' (Rodger, ''A little navy''). In 1753 Boscawen had attempted to break the monopoly of tory families in the county representation by putting up a third tory candidate who subsequently withdrew. In October 1760 Boscawen took the initiative and declared himself a candidate. He was supported by James Buller, one of the sitting members, the other withdrawing from the contest. Boscawen took this action without consultation with his brother, Viscount Falmouth, or any of the political managers, displeasing those who felt that the opinion of the county should have been sought before any change was made. Controversy was avoided by the admiral's death. Boscawen's having taken so much care over the health of his men, it was a cruel twist of fate that he should die of a fever at his home at Hatchlands, on 10 January 1761, depriving Britain of the service of one of its finest naval officers. He was buried that year at the church of St Michael Penkevil, in Cornwall. 
Boscawen was a determined and confident officer who ensured that those who served him were properly trained and cared for. In his personal life he was devoted to his wife and children. His letters home indicate a happy family life, a sense of humour, and a constant attention not only to the happiness of his family but also to the detail and management of his house and estate. Like every great leader he combined resolution with compassion, single-mindedness with understanding. He had a close working relationship with John Clevland, the secretary of the Admiralty. He applied to Clevland for a sixty-year-old French prisoner-of-war to be exchanged, regarding the man, because of his age, as no great enemy to the nation. He would take the trouble to write to Clevland about the quality of shoes supplied to a marine on one of the ships of his squadron. He would use his own banker to help some of his men to remit their wages to their families, thus saving them expense (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/384, 10 April 1759; 1/90, fols. 45, 17; Rodger, 'The Wooden World', 132). He took a constant care over the well-being of his officers and men yet personal feelings and inclinations would not stand in the way of duty. William Pitt remarked to him that 'when I apply to other officers respecting any expedition I may chance to project, they always make difficulties: you find expedients' (Corbett, 2.101). Nicknamed Old Dreadnought by his sailors, he gave his personal following loyal support yet would not suffer fools gladly. His circle of professional friends and followers included John Brett, Francis Geary, and Savage Mostyn with whom he had a fond and effective working relationship. He held an unfavourable opinion of officers like John Byng and Francis Holburne. Holburne had 'contrived to insinuate himself into the good graces of Lord Anson,... I don't like him, nor ever did, having known him from my first entering into the service' (Kemp, 194). Nor would he brook the least action which impaired the efficient running of his squadron. In 1759, when getting under way from St Helens, the fireship 'Salamander' failed to weigh anchor. It transpired that the captain was on shore without the admiral's leave. Boscawen not only called for a court martial on the captain but also her lieutenant: 'I think the Lieutenant as much to blame for not making sail, when he saw he must lose company with me by staying behind. I desire that they both be tryed at a court martial for their behaviour' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/384, 20 April 1759). In terms of ability and professionalism, Boscawen prefigured many of the great names that would emerge later in the century. This is well illustrated by the fact that, along with Hawke, he was regularly chosen for the most important commands. He was also the only officer to retain his position at the Admiralty throughout the 1750s, a feat even Anson could not equal. Boscawen was a thoroughly professional naval officer in all respects and his early death was a great loss to his country. 


@@@@@


doc= 2932


Boscawen, Edward, first earl of Falmouth (1787-1841), politician, son of George Evelyn Boscawen, third Viscount Falmouth (1758-1808), and Elizabeth Anne (1764-1793), only daughter of John Crewe of Cheshire, was born in London on 10 May 1787. He was educated at Eton College, and became an ensign in the Coldstream Guards. He was MP for Truro in the conservative interest (1807-8), but may not have taken his seat. On succeeding to his father's titles in 1808, he left the army. On 27 August 1810 he married Anne Frances (1789-1864), elder daughter of Henry Bankes of Kingston Lacy, Dorset. They had one son. 
On the coronation of George IV (1821) Falmouth was created an earl, and throughout the reign was constant in his attendance in the House of Lords. He was an ultra-tory, and resisted parliamentary reform and the passage of the 'Catholic Emancipation Bill', acting as Lord Winchilsea's second in his duel with the duke of Wellington over this issue on 21 March 1829. 
Falmouth was the last recorder of Truro, and wrote 'A letter on the subject of re-establishing and extending the stannary courts of the dutchy '['sic']' of Cornwall' (1836). He died suddenly on 29 December 1841 at Tregothnan House, Truro, which he had rebuilt, and was buried at St Michael Penkevil. His son, George Henry, succeeded him as second earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 2933


Boscawen, Hugh, first Viscount Falmouth (c.1680-1734), politician and courtier, was the eldest surviving son of Edward Boscawen (1628-1685), a wealthy Turkey merchant and MP, and his wife, Jael (died 1730), the daughter of Sir Francis Godolphin. Both parents were of prominent Cornish landed families, and their connections at the very heart of politics ensured the future path of Boscawen's own career. His mother was the sister of Lord Godolphin and a friend of Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, while his uncle Hugh Boscawen, a county MP for Cornwall, served as a privy councillor under William III. At a young age Boscawen inherited his father's considerable fortune and Cornish estates. In 1698, a year after matriculating at King's College, Cambridge, he was appointed a groom of the bedchamber to the young duke of Gloucester. His marriage took place on 23 April 1700 in Henry VII's chapel, Westminster Abbey, to Charlotte (died 1754), the daughter of Colonel Charles Godfrey, master of the jewel office. The couple had eighteen children, including Edward Boscawen (1711-1761), admiral. It was a promising match, for Boscawen's mother-in-law, Arabella Churchill, was the sister of the earl of Marlborough. The death of his uncle Hugh in 1701 brought Boscawen possession of extensive Cornish estates worth $3000 per annum as well as influence in many of Cornwall's twenty-two parliamentary boroughs. 
At Queen Anne's accession in 1702 Boscawen was appointed a groom of the bedchamber to Prince George and entered parliament for the family borough of Tregony. Not surprisingly, he was a devoted supporter of the Godolphin-Marlborough ministry (1702-10), and throughout the reign he co-ordinated the whig electoral campaigns in Cornwall, frequently at his own expense. Having been elected for the county in 1705, he was in 1708 appointed warden of the stannaries and high steward of the duchy of Cornwall. His career was curtailed under Oxford's tory ministry (1710-14), when he served once more as a borough MP, first for Truro (1710), then for Penryn (1713), but upon the accession of George I his services in the whig cause were acknowledged in his appointment as comptroller of the household and as a privy councillor. In 1717 he received the lucrative sinecure appointment of joint vice-treasurer of Ireland. Having supported the Sunderland-Stanhope ministry, he was created Viscount Falmouth in 1720, but lost his position at court. Beyond the realms of electoral management his exploits as a politician were invariably blundering, and he was little valued by Sunderland's successor, Walpole. Smouldering annoyance finally goaded him into joining the opposition in the House of Lords in 1733. He died suddenly of an 'apoplexy' on 25 October 1734 at Trefusis, Cornwall, a few months after being dismissed from his remaining offices, and was buried on 6 November at St Michael's, Penkevil. His wife, previously a maid of honour to Queen Anne, died on 22 March 1754 and was buried at Penkevil on 2 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 2934


Boscawen, William (1752-1811), lawyer and writer, was born on 28 August 1752, the younger son of General George Boscawen and Anne Trevor, and nephew of the admiral Edward Boscawen (1711-1761). He was educated at Eton College, where he was said to have been a great favourite of Dr Barnard. On 10 October 1770 he became a gentleman commoner of Exeter College, Oxford, and on settling in London about 1773 studied law under a Cornish lawyer, Mr Justice Buller, and went on the western circuit. 
Boscawen published two or three law treatises, and was appointed a commissioner in bankruptcy. In 1785 he was made a commissioner of the victualling office. He was much attached to literary pursuits, and translated first the 'Odes', 'Epodes', and 'Carmen seculare' of Horace (1793), then the 'Satires', 'Epistles', and 'Art of Poetry' (1797), the notes for which he was indebted to Dr Foster of Eton College. In 1792 he published a 'Treatise on Convictions on Penal Statutes', and in 1798, 1800, and 1801 some original poems and other works. He was also a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and to the 'British Critic'. In 1812 T. J. Mathias deprecated Boscawen's translating skills as displaying an 'unresisting imbecility' (Mathias, 260). 
With his wife, Charlotte, daughter of the Revd Dr Ibbetson, Boscawen had five daughters. About seven years after his wife's death Boscawen died of asthma on 8 May 1811 at Little Chelsea, and his will was proved there on 2 July of the same year. He was of an affectionate and benevolent disposition, and wrote the annual verses for the Literary Fund until within five years of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 2935


Bosgrave, James (c.1548-1623), Jesuit, was born at Godmanstone, Dorset, of a staunchly Roman Catholic family. At an early age he was taken to the continent so that he could be brought up in the old faith. After studying humanities at Louvain he found his way to Rome, where he entered the Society of Jesus on 17 November 1564. He made his noviciate and early university studies in Rome, during which time he was a student of Christopher Clavius, the renowned Jesuit astronomer and mathematician. 
In 1573 Bosgrave was sent, like many other English Jesuits of his day, to central Europe. Just as the Low Countries and France were the sites of seminaries devoted to training missionaries to evangelize protestant England, so Poland was the site of missionary institutions which trained priests to evangelize the Scandinavian countries and Finland. In November 1573 he was ordained a priest in Krems (Austria). After that he taught Greek and rhetoric at Olomouc in Moravia, PuLtusk in Poland, and Vilna in Lithuania. About this time he seems to have been restless and suffering from bad health. He wrote to the Jesuit general asking for a new assignment. To breathe one's native air was a standard medical cure-all in those days. This might be the reason he set out for England in the summer of 1580, though Bosgrave himself, as far as we know, complained about his health only once in England and that was when he was brought before the privy council. 
On his way to England, Bosgrave met John Rogers, an English diplomat on a trade mission to Denmark and Poland. Suspicious of Bosgrave, Rogers intercepted his mail and discovered that he was a Jesuit. This was the summer of the arrival of Persons and Campion in England and anything Jesuit attracted attention. Rogers sent word to England, probably by the same boat on which Bosgrave had taken passage, that he should be arrested on his arrival. This was effected by the mayor of Orford, Suffolk. 
Bosgrave was taken to London where he freely admitted that he was a Roman Catholic and a Jesuit. Brought before the privy council he was asked whether he would attend the established church. He agreed to do so and was set free. He was plainly out of touch with the English religious scene. It was a common thing for Catholics in religiously divided countries to visit other churches. But in England for a Catholic to go to another church was almost equal to apostasy. When he was reproached by English Catholics, he repented of his mistake. Afterwards he wrote an eloquent short piece which was appended to William Allen's 'A True Report' (1583), entitled 'The Satisfaction of M. James Bosgrave'. In it he stated that one of the reasons he attended Church of England services was to recover his ability to speak his native tongue. Bosgrave then refused to 'go to church'. He was once more arrested and came to trial in November 1581 with Edmund Campion and a dozen others for the crime of plotting the assassination of Queen Elizabeth 'in Rome and Rheims'. Bosgrave had some trouble making himself understood when he spoke in his own defence because of his imperfect English. Campion eloquently finished some of the points Bosgrave was trying to make. All the accused were found guilty, but the very day on which Campion, Sherwin, and Briant were executed at Tyburn, Bosgrave and the others convicted with him were sent back to prison. 
Bosgrave's case had aroused some interest in Poland, especially in the towns where the English government was trying to negotiate trade agreements. In January 1583 the king of Poland, Stephen Batory, wrote to Queen Elizabeth asking for toleration of Catholics in general and the release of Catholics in prison, particularly his friend James Bosgrave. In January 1585 Bosgrave and twenty-one others imprisoned for religious reasons were released and shipped into exile. Back in Poland, Bosgrave returned to Vilna. But his health was not good and he moved to Braniewo and then to Poznan where he taught Hebrew and mathematics. He died in Kalisz on 27 October 1623. 


@@@@@


doc= 2936


Boso (d. 1178?), papal official and cardinal, was by the sixteenth century thought to be an Englishman, but was more probably a Tuscan by birth, from Lucca or Pisa, and may have been a canon of Bologna. The only argument in favour of the tradition that he was related to Pope Adrian IV is that he appears in the curia as scriptor and datary of papal letters in 1149, the year when the future pope Adrian was appointed cardinal-bishop of Albano by Eugenius III. There is also the tradition that he accompanied the cardinal-bishop of Albano on his legation to Scandinavia in 1152-4, and it is certainly true that in this period there is no evidence of Boso's presence in Rome. However, Boso's English contacts may not have been made in the course of this journey but rather through Cardinal Guido da Pisa. Six months after the death of Cardinal Guido (1149), who had been papal chancellor, he is found dating papal letters. He was created cardinal-deacon of Santi Cosma e Damiano in 1156. Whether or not he was English has not been finally resolved. He was later said to have been the friend of successive archbishops of Canterbury, Theobald and Thomas Becket. But these acquaintanceships may have been made during Canterbury legations to Rome, rather than in England. Boso was, however, a firm supporter of Becket's cause in the 1160s. 
Boso came to prominence in the important office of papal chamberlain, to which he was appointed by Pope Adrian IV, to whom he was certainly close in temperament and purpose. He conducted a vigorous campaign to restore the papal patrimony in the Campagna and Sabina. He received the oaths of fealty from papal vassals and he had troops at his command. Between 1157 and 1159 Boso, as chamberlain, was effectively the head of the papal household and representative of the pope in both the city and the patrimony; this position explains the important part that he played on the death of Pope Adrian in September 1159, when he tried to secure the election of a pope who would continue Adrian's policies. Boso ceased to be chamberlain under Alexander III, but he accompanied Alexander to France during the schism which followed the disputed election of 1159, and, in 1177, to Venice on a mission to make peace with the emperor Frederick Barbarossa. He was promoted cardinal-priest of Santa Pudenziana by Alexander. His importance to curial administration is attested by his revision of the 'Liber censuum' but he is also of crucial importance for his revision of and contribution to the 'Liber pontificalis'. The biographies of Eugenius III, Anastasius IV, Adrian IV, and Alexander III are first-hand accounts and without Boso, knowledge of the twelfth-century popes would be meagre indeed. His account of Alexander III ends at Easter 1178 and, as he ceased to subscribe as cardinal after July 1178, it may be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that he died in that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 2937


Bossam, John (fl. 1550), painter and draughtsman, is of unknown parentage. Bossam had the honour of being noticed by the distinguished limner Nicholas Hilliard, in whose 'Treatise Concerning the Arte of Limning' the following account appears: 'If a man be so endued by nature, and live in time of trouble, and under a savage government wherein arts be not esteemed, and himself but of small means, woe be unto him as unto a timely birth! For mine own knowledge it hath made poor men poorer, as among others (many) the most rare English drawer of story works in black and white, John Bossam; one for his skill worthy to have been Serjeant Painter to any king or emperor, whose works in that kind are comparable with the best whatsoever, in cloth, distemper colours, or white and black. Who, being very poor, and belike wanting to buy fair colours, wrought therefore for the most part in white and black; and growing yet poorer by charge of children etc; gave painting clean over; but being a very fair conditioned, zealous and godly person, grew into a love of God's divine service, upon the liberty of the gospel at the coming in of Queen Elizabeth, and became a reading minister: only unfortunate becasse he was English borne, for euen the strangers would otherwise have set him vpp. (Hilliard, 67-8)' Of Bossam's work, nothing is known to survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 2938


Bossewell, John (d. 1580), author, was apparently a member of the family of Bosvile, from near Doncaster, and possibly the son and heir of Thomas Bosvile of Stainton. The course of his life is unrecorded, but his will and inventory, both drawn up in 1580, shed valuable light upon the circumstances of his later years. He claimed the status of gentleman, and in his will describes himself as a notary public, then living in the Hampshire parish of Kingsclere. He records the name of his wife as Joan, and makes her his sole executor. They seem to have had no surviving children, but there are legacies to a second John Bossewell and to the latter's brother William, 'whom I have brought up of a Childe', as well as to seven godsons. He left to William all his apparel, his silver notary's seal, and all his law books. There were also bequests for a funeral sermon, for a peal of bells before and after his obsequies, and for a distribution of alms to the poor. His goods were assessed at a total value of $ 72 15's'. 10died Bossewell directed that he was to be buried in Kingsclere church, where his armorial brass was recorded in 1911. 
Bossewell is remembered today as a heraldist. His book, 'Workes of Armorie', was published by Totell in 1572, and the inventory of his possessions lists a number of the writings cited in it, for instance those of Alciatus and Froissart. It also records his ownership of 'The olde boke of blazon of Armes', which directly concerns a major topic of Bossewell's book, namely the description of coats of arms in the heralds' traditional Norman-French blazon, which he often illustrates in his text with small attractive woodcuts intended to clarify the technicalities of heraldry. However, although 'Workes of Armorie' draws heavily on the writings of his older contemporary Gerard Legh, whom Bossewell terms 'a very fruteful and worthy writer' (Bossewell) in his dedicatory epistle to Lord Burghley, Bossewell's work never achieved the popularity of Legh's 'Accedens of Armory', and it was reprinted only once, in 1597. 
Like Legh's book, Bossewell's treatise has been censured as being of little value 'even from an heraldic point of view'. Thomas Moule, writing early in the nineteenth century, considered the book 'strangely connected with the Ancient Mythology, and the Virtues personified' (Moule, 21), and it is true that Bossewell is as interested in the symbolism of the heraldic charges he discusses as he is in blazon. Yet for all its mixture of history, mythology, and mineral and animal lore (mainly in the bestiary tradition), Bossewell's 'Workes of Armorie' is an interesting essay in linking heraldry with virtue. He draws on numerous Latin texts, as well as French writers, cites such English authors as Lydgate, Gower, Sir Thomas Eliot, and Richard Grafton, and quotes extensively from Chaucer, including the Wife of Bath on gentility. Arcane and full of remarkable, if implausible, information, Bossewell's work is none the less interesting as an example of the sort of learning that delighted Tudor antiquarians. 


@@@@@


doc= 2939


Boste, John (1544-1594), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was born at Wellyng Manor, Dufton, Westmorland, the younger of two sons of Nicholas Boste, of Wellyng Manor, and his wife, Janet Hutton, of Hutton Hall in Penrith. Boste went to Queen's College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 9 July 1568, was appointed a taberdar on 29 January 1568, and proceeded MA on 18 June 1572. He was elected to a fellowship the same year (31 October 1572). In the winter of 1573-4 he taught at Appleby grammar school, Westmorland. Boste received Church of England orders and subscribed to the royal supremacy. After becoming a Roman Catholic in 1576, presumably at Browne Hall, Suffolk, the house of Sir Thomas Cornwallis, he was expelled from his fellowship for 'ministerium abnegando' ('forsaking his ministry') and contradicting 'sanae et Christianae religioni' ('sound Christian doctrine'; Pollen, 222; Queen's College, register G, fol. 35). 
In 1580 Boste left England for the Low Countries. He was a tutor to Gerard Clibborn, with whom he arrived at the English College, then at Rheims, on 4 August 1580. Boste received minor orders in the winter of 1580, and was deaconed (21 February 1581) and priested (4 March 1581) at Chalons-sur-Marne. He was sent back to England soon after (11 April 1581) 'for avoidinge of daunger' (Pollen, 65) associated with the revocation of Englishmen studying abroad. He landed at Hartlepool and commenced his mission to the northern counties and Scotland. He was among the most sought-after priests in the north. Various failed attempts to capture him caused the earl of Huntingdon (lord president of the north) to search Kingston upon Hull for 'John Bost, alias Harckley' (Stanewell, 158). 
Boste was eventually betrayed by Francis Ecclesfield, a renegade Catholic, in the house of William Claxton, at Waterhouses near Brancepeth, co. Durham, on 10 September 1593. Sent to Windsor on 2 October 1593, he was examined by Richard Topcliffe on behalf of the privy council a week later. In order to reveal his associates Boste was 'often most cruelly rack'd, insomuch so that he was afterward forced to go crooked upon a staff' (Challoner, 202). His torturer reported that 'since ther Honors knew the world, they never hearde a more resoluyt Traitor' (Pollen, 217). Boste was kept in prison until the summer of 1594 when he was sent back to Durham and tried together with another priest, John Ingram, and a Catholic layman, George Swallowfield. On 24 July 1594 he was accused of leaving and re-entering the country without permission. Later that day he was condemned and hanged, drawn, and quartered in Durham, the others two days later at Gateshead and Darlington. 
An incident at Boste's trial speaks of his conviction and courage: Swallowfield, also a former Church of England clergyman, was about to recant his Catholic beliefs, when Boste urged him to stand firm. When Swallowfield asked for forgiveness for his wavering faith Boste gave absolution in open court. Boste was canonized by Pope Paul VI in 1970, and his two companions were beatified by Pope Pius XI in 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 2940


Bostock, John (1744?-1774), physician, was born in England, but educated at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MD in 1769. His inaugural dissertation is his only published work. He dedicated it to William Cullen, under whom he had studied. The dissertation is on gout, and in it Bostock quotes extensively from Thomas Sydenham. He also acknowledges that his work is heavily influenced by Cullen. Bostock became an extra licentiate of the College of Physicians of London in 1770, and began to practise immediately after in Liverpool. He was appointed physician to the Royal Infirmary, and married shortly afterwards Elizabeth (1749-1819), the youngest daughter of John Ashton of Liverpool; the couple had a son, John Bostock (1772-1846). 
Suffering from an incurable disease, Bostock died on 10 March 1774, 'calmly resigning the sweetest blandishments of life, and in his last moments emulating the exit of a Socrates or a Seneca' (Munk, 2.287). Some of his collection of books were preserved in the library of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society in London, among them a copy of his dissertation, 'Tentamen medicum inaugurale de arthritide' (1769). Three years after her husband's death Elizabeth married the Unitarian minister John Yates (1755-1826). 


@@@@@


doc= 2941


Bostock, John (1772-1846), physician and medicinal chemist, was born in Liverpool, the son of John Bostock (1744?-1774), a physician, and Elizabeth (1749-1819), youngest daughter of John Ashton of Liverpool, who later married the Unitarian minister John Yates (1755-1826). He grew up in Liverpool as a member of the town's Unitarian community. In 1792 he attended Joseph Priestley's course of chemical lectures at Hackney College, Middlesex. After returning to Liverpool he studied as an apothecary prior to his move to Edinburgh, in 1794, where he was elected president of the Medical Society. At this time his tutors included Thomas Hope and Joseph Black, joint professors of chemistry, whose lectures were much influenced by H. Lavoisier and J. Dalton. Bostock graduated MD in 1798, having submitted a thesis on bile secretion. 
Following graduation Bostock returned to Liverpool, where he became a physician to the General Dispensary. He played key roles in the formation of the botanic gardens, the Fever Hospital, and in 1812 the Liverpool Literary and Philosophical Society. He was also a member of the medical committee of the School for the Blind. Over the next few years Bostock wrote many of the medical and scientific articles for the 'Monthly Review' and a large number of original papers for the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal', William Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy, Chemistry and the Arts', and the 'Transactions' of the London Medico-Chirurgical Society. An early interest in physiology led to his 'Essay on Respiration' (1804). This in turn led to a commission to write many medical articles for David Brewster's 'Encyclopaedia'. Bostock published pamphlets on the new 'Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia' (1807), and wrote 'Remarks on the Nomenclature of the New London Pharmacopoeia' (1810), which criticized the basis of its terminology in favour of one based on more structured chemical and botanical terms. This had limited effect. One of the last papers he gave in Liverpool was in 1817, to the Liverpool Literary and Philosophical Society, entitled 'The best means of obviating the nuisance arising from the smoke of steam engines', which showed an early awareness of the serious implications of chemical pollution. 
Despite having developed an extensive medical and chemical consulting practice in Liverpool, Bostock moved to London in 1817 and gave up the practice of medicine in favour of a full-time career in science. He succeeded his university contemporary and friend Alexander Marcet as chemical lecturer at Guy's Hospital, and for two years he co-edited the 'Annals of Physiology'. Later at Guy's he was to work with Richard Bright and Thomas Addison. His works on the chemical composition of body fluids give him a claim to be one of the founders of English chemical pathology. The breadth of his work on normal and pathological urine was unprecedented and he was the first to realize the relationship between the fall of urea in the urine as it 'appeared' in the blood, while the albumin in the blood disappeared as its level in urine increased. 
However, it is for a short presentation to the London Medico-Chirurgical Society in 1819 that Bostock is best remembered. His 'Case of a periodical affection of the eyes and chest' ('Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 10, 1819, 161-5) is the first recorded description of what became known as catarrhus aestivus or hay fever. Bostock described how he had personally suffered since childhood from a then unknown affliction. Each year at the beginning of June he developed the symptoms of a cold which lasted for about two months and was associated with profuse nasal discharge, repeated paroxysms of sneezing, itching of the eyes, and difficulty in breathing. He described the unique character of the condition. This description is the more remarkable coming from an ex-dispensary physician who would have been very familiar with a wide range of everyday disease, and it provides compelling evidence for the view that hay fever is a post-industrial-revolution disease, with a major environmental component. In the following nine years he collected details of a further twenty-eight cases, and he published these in 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' in 1828, in an article entitled 'On the catarrhus aestivus or summer catarrh'. 
During his early years in London, Bostock published 'An Account of the History and Present State of Galvanism' (1818), and between 1824 and 1827 he produced his three-volume 'Elementary System of Physiology', a book which was popular and influential at the time and which had reached a fourth edition by 1844. His interest in chemistry also remained active and in 1829 he published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' 'On the purification of Thames water', in which he discussed the nature of a number of chemical impurities. In addition, in 1828 he had published an incomplete translation of Pliny's 'Natural History' and in 1835 he published 'A Sketch of the History of Medicine from its Origin to the Commencement of the 19th Century', which formed part of the introduction to John Forbes's journal, the 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine'. Bostock's widening scientific activity and reputation were reflected in his appointments as council member of the Royal Society (elected in 1829, vice-president in 1832), president of the Geological Society (1826), and treasurer of the Medico-Chirurgical Society of London. In addition he served on the council of the Linnean, Zoological, and Horticultural societies and of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Bostock married Anne Yates (died 1863), with whom he had a daughter, Elizabeth Anne Bostock (1817-1898), who became a promoter of women's education. Bostock died of cholera on 6 August 1846 at his home, 22 Upper Bedford Place, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2942


Kirkestede, Henry (b. c.1314, d. in or after 1378), prior of Bury St Edmunds and bibliographer, was known to early modern biographers as Bostonus Buriensis or John Boston of Bury. Kirkestede came from the Bury dependency of Kirstead ('Kirkestede' and 'Kerkestede' in Bury documents) in Norfolk, not from Kirkstead in Lincolnshire as was previously believed. He was ordained priest at Ely in 1338. If he was then twenty-four, the earliest age canonically permitted, he would have been born in 1314. Ordination normally took place seven years after the completion of the novitiate. Kirkestede would have entered the abbey at Bury as a novice monk between the ages of seventeen and twenty-one ('c'.1331- 'c'.1335). His activities at Bury can be reconstructed from the numerous notes, some of them signed, that he wrote in Bury manuscripts. 
Kirkestede's life can be divided roughly into two parts. The first was a relatively peaceful period between 1338 and 1361, in which should be situated his work as novice master and librarian as well as most of his written work relating to these occupations, the 'Speculum' and the 'Catalogus'. The second part, a turbulent period from 1361, when he became prior, until his death in or after 1378, was dominated by the effects on the abbey of the black death, which visited Bury in 1349, 1361, and 1368. 
By 1346 Kirkestede was one of the abbot's chaplains, doubtless involved in defending the abbey against accusations of corruption by Bishop Bateman of Norwich. He was also one of the monks who served as novice master, to judge from his annotations in treatises concerning the novitiate, the education of monks, and the life and miracles of St Edmund. From an early date Kirkestede was responsible for the abbey's books, an occupation that he continued throughout his life. Bury's library had grown rapidly in the thirteenth century and amounted to approximately 1500 manuscripts by 1338. Kirkestede reorganized the library. He gave each codex an ex-libris, a pressmark (consisting of a letter of the alphabet for the author or subject and an arabic number), and a table of contents. He drew up an inventory of the books, the first since the late twelfth century. The inventory does not survive but there are contemporary references to it. He also rehoused the books, because of the destruction caused by the uprising of 1327. 
Kirkestede became prior of Bury in 1361, after the deaths from plague of his predecessor Edmund Brundish and the abbot-elect Henry Hunstanton. He records that, in addition, eighteen monks died of plague in that year alone. He remained prior until some time before 1374. During his tenure he presided over the rebuilding of the great bell-tower which had collapsed in a storm in 1362. He was present at the visitation of the abbey 'c'.1368 by Thomas de la Mare, abbot of St Albans, to inquire into the murder of a monk. Despite his administrative burdens and the difficulties of the times, Kirkestede pursued his interests in the novices and the library. The latest datable note in his hand is an annotation at the death of Gregory XI in 1378. 
Kirkestede probably wrote two works, both biobibliographies. He was evidently responsible for the enlargement of the 'Speculum coenobitarum', with its list of monastic writers and their works. This compilation represents the earliest known use of the Franciscan 'Registrum'; it is presumably the treatise on the history of monks and monasticism attributed to Bostonus Buriensis by John Bale. 
Kirkestede's main work, the 'Catalogus scriptorum ecclesie', compiled for the use of Bury novices, was a substantial bibliography of ecclesiastical writers and their works in the tradition of the patristic 'De viris illustribus'. The catalogue was assembled from early medieval works of this type by Jerome, Gennadius, and Isidore, from Cassiodorus's 'Institutes', from Dominican lists of their writers, and from the mine of biobibliographic information in Vincent of Beauvais's 'Speculum historiale'. Kirkestede supplied each author with a brief biographical notice and a list of their works. To the lists of titles he added the opening and closing words, most often taken from Bury manuscripts. In addition he absorbed virtually the whole of the early fourteenth-century English Franciscan location list of books known as the 'Registrum Anglie de libris doctorum et auctorum veterum', including its system of noting the location of copies of texts by means of arabic numerals which correspond to a numbered list of 189 libraries. He used a manuscript of the 'Registrum' that is no longer extant. Kirkestede also visited a number of libraries in East Anglia, among them St John's and St Botulph's, Colchester, Ramsey, St Albans, St Benet of Hulme, Holy Trinity, Aldgate, Peterborough, Crowland, and Pipewell. For these and other houses and for Bury itself, the 'Catalogus' provides a valuable record of their books. Drafts of the biobibliographic entries for Bede, Boethius, Cassian, Chrysostom, Petrus Tripolitanus, and Raoul de Flaix survive in his hand on the flyleaves of Bury manuscripts. Kirkestede's entries for many writers, Englishmen among them, preserve the earliest efforts to compile a list of what that author wrote, forming the origin of a bibliographic tradition that descends to early modern times through Bale and Thomas Tanner. The 'Catalogus' affords modern scholars a view of the legacy of ancient, patristic, and medieval Latin writing that was known in fourteenth-century East Anglia. 
Bale acquired a copy of Kirkestede's manuscript of the 'Catalogus' from a pensioned Bury monk soon after the dissolution of the abbey, and made extensive extracts from it for his 'Scriptorum illustrium maioris Britanniae... catalogus' (Basel, 1557, 1559). Bale created the identity of Bostonus Buriensis from references in the prologue and the colophon in this manuscript. Bale's manuscript passed through James Ussher and Thomas Gale to Tanner before it vanished. It was the source of Tanner's transcript, now CUL, Add. MS 3470. The entries pertaining to English authors were published in 1748 in the preface of Tanner's 'Bibliotheca Britannico-Hibernica'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2943


Boston, Thomas (1676-1732), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 17 March 1676 at Duns, Berwickshire, the youngest of seven children of John Boston (1631-1701), a cooper, and his wife, Alison Trotter (died 1691). Although he laboured in obscure parishes Thomas Boston of Ettrick became a national figure through his involvement in the Marrow controversy and through the evangelical Calvinism of his popular writings. He was a staunch Presbyterian from the time of his conversion. As a small boy he spent time in the local prison with his father, who was incarcerated for failing to conform to the Church of Scotland, then under episcopal governance. During adolescence he accompanied his father to worship services held by Scottish covenanters in nearby fields, later dating his Christian conversion to the open air preaching of Henry Erskine in the summer of 1687. Boston attended the grammar school in Duns between 1685 and 1689. After a brief stint as a notary's assistant there he was sent to Edinburgh University in December 1691 from where he graduated MA in 1694 and to where he returned in the following year to study divinity for four months. His early career was unsettled. He served, in turn, as a schoolmaster in Glencairn, a private tutor in the household of Lieutenant-Colonel James Bruce of Kennet, and as an itinerant preacher in vacant parishes in the presbytery of Stirling. After a series of failed attempts to secure a regular pulpit in the Scottish border country he was finally ordained on 21 September 1699 at Simprin, Berwickshire. 
Within the year (on 17 July 1700) Boston married Katharine Brown (1674-1737), whom he had met previously at Barhill, Culross. He was deeply devoted to his wife, especially during the unspecified 'heavy trouble' which began in 1720 and frequently confined her to bed. Although the couple had ten children in all, six died in early childhood, and Boston's 'Memoirs' (1776) contains touching accounts of his grief over their loss. One of the sons who survived was Thomas Boston (1713-1767), who succeeded his father as minister at Ettrick (1733) and became a founder of the Relief church in 1761. Thomas Boston the elder was translated to Ettrick, Selkirkshire, on 1 May 1707, the first day of the Union between England and Scotland. In 1717 he was called to the parish of Closeburn, but managed to persuade the presbytery to allow him to remain in Ettrick, where his ministry was finally beginning to make an impression on village life. He was diligent in his pastoral duties, believing that 'ministers by carelessness become the murderers of the souls of their people' (Aberdeen, Boston MS 3245/2.157). Though sometimes discouraged and often in poor health, he never failed to appear for a worship service in more than thirty years of public ministry. In addition to preaching twice on the sabbath and once during the week he visited every household in the parish twice annually for personal conference and catechetical instruction. 
It was not Boston's activity as a rural pastor, however, but as a theologian which made him a familiar figure in the Scottish church. He played a significant role in each of the major ecclesiastical controversies of the early eighteenth century. This was the result of conviction rather than design; by his own admission his natural temperament was 'timorous and hard to enter on, but eager in the pursuit once entered' ('Complete Works', 12.10). Among the laity Boston became popular for opposing the abjuration oaths of 1712 and 1719 which he refused to take, at risk to health and property, because they affirmed the legitimacy of the Church of England in its episcopal form. He was equally unbending in his opposition to the heresies of John Simson, professor of divinity in the University of Glasgow. Simson was first censured in 1717 by the Church of Scotland's general assembly for attributing 'too much to natural reason and the power of corrupt nature' ('Acts of the General Assembly, 1638-1842', 518). A decade later he was found guilty of Arianism and was eventually suspended from his academic duties. Boston stood alone in the 1729 assembly to issue his dissent. He argued that the sentence was too lenient to express 'the dishonour done by the said Mr. Simson to our glorious Redeemer, the great God and our Saviour' by casting doubt on the deity of Jesus Christ ('Complete Works', 12.384). 
Boston was also at the centre of the most famous ecclesiastical dispute of his day, the Marrow controversy (1717-23). This dispute was prompted by a doctrinal proposition which the Auchterarder presbytery required ministerial candidates to sign: 'It is not sound and orthodox to teach, that we must forsake sin in order to our coming to Christ, and instating us in covenant with God' ('Complete Works', 12.291). Although the Auchterarder creed was intended to preserve Calvinist orthodoxy by establishing the priority of faith over repentance, it was abolished by the 1717 general assembly. Boston 'believed the proposition to be truth, howbeit not well worded' ('Complete Works', 12.291). His own convictions about faith and repentance had been shaped by his reading of Edward Fisher's 'The Marrow of Modern Divinity' (1645), a work he discovered in the cottage of a parishioner about 1700. The 'Marrow' contained a series of dialogues largely quoted from protestant reformers and English puritans. The book was sympathetic to the theology of the Auchterarder creed and showed how orthodox Calvinism could offer assurance of faith without falling into legalism. Boston thus recommended it to James Hog of Carnock, who had it republished in 1718. The 'Marrow' aroused opposition from a majority in the church, led by Principal James Hadow of St Mary's College, St Andrews, who considered it antinomian in tendency. The 1720 general assembly condemned the 'Marrow' and required ministers to warn their parishioners against it. Boston joined others in drafting a 'representation and petition' protesting the assembly's action. After due process the 1722 general assembly overwhelmingly reaffirmed their prior action and the moderator issued a formal rebuke to the Marrow men. This was the end of the controversy proper, although in 1726 Boston published a carefully annotated edition of the 'Marrow' using the pseudonym Philalethes Irenaeus. He later came to believe that the ecclesiastical notoriety he received as a Marrow man prevented him from advancing to a more prominent pulpit. Nevertheless, the controversy helped secure his popularity in the Scottish border country, where the assembly's condemnation had the unintended result of stimulating greater interest in the Marrow theology. 
Although Boston's theology sometimes has been viewed as an attempt to moderate the severity of orthodox Calvinism, it is better understood as a recovery of vital Reformation doctrines, including the 'free offer of the gospel' which became a hallmark of his evangelical preaching. Like the protestant reformers, he taught that assurance of salvation rests on what Christ did rather than on what the Christian does. But this was not to minimize the importance of holy living, which is prompted by the gift of God's grace, not by the fear of God's law. Good works provide, in turn, still further assurance through what Boston termed 'the reflex act' of faith. Boston's popular reputation was further enhanced by his books, the most famous of which was 'Human Nature in its Fourfold State' (1720, 1729). The 'Fourfold State', as it was called, became the most frequently reprinted Scottish book of the eighteenth century, going through well over a hundred editions in all. The book consists of a collection of sermons preached early in Boston's ministry and revised throughout his lifetime. It takes its structure from the four conditions of humanity first posited by Augustine: creation, fall, grace, and glory. Boston termed these the states of innocence, nature, grace, and eternity. This simple, practical, and memorable summary of Christian doctrine became a commonplace among Scottish Calvinists. The 'Fourfold State's' emphases on the totality of sin, the necessity of being born again, the desirability of being united to Christ, and the reality of the life to come also made it a central text for the rise of evangelicalism in Britain and America. It was a best-seller during the Great Awakening, in part because it came highly recommended by both John Wesley and George Whitefield. The American theologian Jonathan Edwards considered its author 'a truly great divine' ('Works of Jonathan Edwards', 2.489). Nearly all the rest of Boston's writings were published posthumously and are included in his 'Complete Works' (1854). They are distinguished by their simplicity, for Boston had mastered the plain homiletical style so admired by the puritans. His contemporaries lauded his 'peculiar talent for going deep into the mysteries of the gospel, and at the same time for making them plain' ('Complete Works', 12.451). Most notable among the other writings are 'A View of the Covenant of Grace' (1734) and 'A View of the Covenant of Works' (1772). Boston's unique contribution to the history of covenant theology was to show that the covenant of redemption (between God the Father and God the Son) and the covenant of grace (between God and his people) are one and the same: God the Father makes a gracious covenant with God the Son, who keeps the covenant as a representative for his people. Although he frequently lamented the inadequacy of his library, Boston was well versed in the literature of international Calvinism. He conducted painstaking independent research into the accent marks of the Hebrew 'Bible', eventually writing a learned treatise interpreting their significance and defending their divine inspiration ('Tractatus stigmologicus', Amsterdam, 1738). In addition to numerous individual sermons, many preached on sacramental occasions, Boston wrote a lengthy exposition of the Westminster shorter catechism ('An Illustration of the Doctrines of the Christian Religion', 3 vols., 1755), as well as shorter treatises on divine providence ('The Crook in the Lot', 1737) and evangelistic preaching ('A Soliloquy on the Art of Man-Fishing', 1773). He also produced a spiritual autobiography, primarily for the benefit of his children. These 'Memoirs' have become a classic of Calvinist spiritual devotion. They reveal a man earnest in ministry, melancholy in disposition, scholarly in interest, modest in aspiration, sober in judgement, sensitive in conscience, and devout in prayer. It is not surprising that his colleagues greatly admired his 'deep and high sense of divine things' ('Complete Works', 12.451). Thomas Boston's commitment to his sacred office is perhaps best illustrated by the way he persevered in his pastoral duties during the illness which claimed his life on 20 May 1732. He delivered his final sermons from his deathbed, as the people of Ettrick gathered around the window of the manse to hear their beloved minister preach. He was buried in Ettrick churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 2944


Boston, Thomas (1713-1767), a founder of the Relief church, was born at Ettrick, Selkirkshire, on 3 April 1713, the youngest son of Thomas Boston (1676-1732) and Katharine Boston, 'nee' Brown (1674-1737). After receiving his early education from his father and his brother John, he attended the grammar school in Hawick. In 1728 he entered Edinburgh University, returning home in January 1729 to be educated by his father. In December 1730 he returned to the university to 'attend the school of divinity' ('Memoirs', 453). He was licensed by the presbytery of Selkirk on 1 August 1732 and ordained to Ettrick on 4 August 1733. On 26 April 1738 he married Elizabeth Anderson (died 1787) of Tushielaw, Tweedsmuir; they had one son, Michael, and four daughters. In 1749 Boston moved to Oxnam in Roxburghshire, where he began his ministry on 10 August. 
Soon after the death of their previous minister the elders of the parish of Jedburgh, along with the town council, indicated to their patron, the marquess of Lothian, that they would like Boston to be their next pastor. Oxnam was only 3 miles from Jedburgh, and Boston was a popular preacher. It would appear that a personal dispute had offended the marquess and he presented John Bonar, another member of the popular party within the Church of Scotland. Following various delays the general assembly in May 1756 took the decision that John Bonar should not be called as minister of Jedburgh. The next candidate to be presented and then called was John Douglas, minister of Kenmore. The people of Jedburgh objected to Douglas and Thomas Boston demitted his charge at Oxnam on Sunday 4 December 1757, informing the presbytery of his decision only on the following Wednesday. The fact that he first made his decision known to the kirk session rather than to the presbytery may indicate his own conviction that he was accountable to the local congregation, the community which called him, rather than the presbytery. His appearance at the presbytery on 7 December drew so large a crowd that the Jedburgh church was damaged. A large meeting-house had already been built and Boston was admitted as pastor of the new church on 9 December 1757. 
Boston made it clear that his actions were not to be interpreted as being a final break with the Church of Scotland. In a letter to the presbytery of Jedburgh he stated his desire to 'hold ministerial and Christian communion with all who faithfully avouch the Gospel system' and justified his 'partial secession as being a response to the unlawful use of patronage'. When he was inducted to his new independent congregation, he promised to 'hold communion with... his brethren in the Lord, if an opportunity shall be afforded him' and added that he intended to keep himself from 'Sectarianism' (Morren, 2.155-7). 
The general assembly of May 1758 prohibited any minister of the Church of Scotland from assisting Boston in any ministerial function. Therefore, when the Jedburgh church decided to celebrate its first communion season in August 1758 Boston turned to Thomas Gillespie, who had been deposed from the ministry in 1752 because of his opposition to the law of patronage. In 1761 Boston joined with Thomas Gillespie to induct Thomas Colier as minister of the Relief congregation in Colinsburgh in Fife and to form the presbytery of Relief and serve as its first moderator. The three men were clear in their conviction that every member of every congregation should have a vote in the election of their own minister. In an age of increasing division among Presbyterian groups within Scotland, the presbytery of Relief sought to maintain fellowship with all Christians within every section of the church. The Relief church became a symbol of the liberality of the grace of God which it preached, and expressed the Enlightenment concepts of toleration and freedom, virtues which would eventually bring about the healing of some of the divisions within Scottish presbyterianism in 1847. 
In 1765 a large Relief congregation in Glasgow attempted to call Boston as their minister. Initially he declined the invitation because he was not in good health. A fresh approach was made in which it was suggested that his son, Michael, might be appointed as an assistant minister and successor. The proposal was accepted and Boston went to Glasgow to preach, but the congregation then voted against issuing a call to him. A popular speaker, he was described by David Brogue as being 'the most commanding preacher he had ever heard' (Struthers, 150). 
Boston's several published sermons give some indication of the ministry which he exercised as a pastor. One of his most significant publications was the printing of his father's essay on schism (1758), with a preface by Boston, in which he justified the foundation of a separate Presbyterian denomination in Scotland which avoided the censorious attitude of the Original seceders towards the Church of Scotland. Boston died on 13 February 1767 and was buried in the tower at Jedburgh Abbey. He was survived by his wife, who died on 21 June 1787 in the home of her youngest daughter, Margaret, who was married to William Campbell, minister of the Relief congregation in Dysart, Fife. Two more daughters married ministers of the Relief church and his fourth daughter, Christian, moved to South Carolina to marry Dr Tucker Harris in Charleston. Boston's son Michael became minister of the Relief congregation in Falkirk. 


@@@@@


doc= 2945


Bosville, William (1745-1813), society host and radical, was born on 21 July 1745, the eldest son of Godfrey Bosville of Gunthwaite, Yorkshire, and his wife, Diana, the eldest daughter of Sir William Wentworth, baronet, of West Bretton. Bosville was able to trace his family back to the reign of William I and proved to be the last male descendant of Richard Bosville, who had inherited Gunthwaite during the reign of Henry VI. He was educated at Harrow School, and received a commission in the Coldstream Guards on 24 December 1761. He rose to the rank of lieutenant in January 1769, and served with the regiment during the early stages of the American War of Independence. On retirement from the army in June 1777 he returned to England with a son of Edward, Baron Hawke, via France, Italy, and Morocco. 
Back in London, Bosville established a reputation as a generous, if somewhat inflexible, host at his house on Welbeck Street. On each weekday he received no more than twelve guests to dine with him at 5 p.m. precisely. Visitors who missed the appointment by even a couple of minutes were refused entry, a measure Bosville justified with a favoured maxim: 'Some say better late than never; I say better never than late' ('Memoirs', ed. Sinclair, 2.183). Among his regular guests, who were expected to sign their name on a slate kept in the hall, were Sir Francis Burdett, the Revd Charles Este, lords Oxford and Hutchinson, and the radical and philologist John Horne Tooke. Tooke repaid Bosville's generosity by including him as one of the circle who visited his Wimbledon house, Chester Lodge, to dine on Sundays during spring and summer. 
Politically Bosville was a committed supporter of Tooke, assisting his campaign for the Westminster election in 1796 and acting, unsuccessfully, as an intermediary between Tooke and Charles James Fox. An original member of the Friends of the People (formed in April 1792), Bosville was adjudged soon after his death to have been 'one of the most ultra-liberal spirits of the time' (Sinclair, 2.183). With others from his dining circle, he contributed to Tooke's dwindling finances during the late 1790s as well as donating $1000 to William Cobbett, whom he visited during his imprisonment in Newgate between 1810 and 1812. 
Sartorially Bosville proved rather more conservative, indeed eccentric, dressing only in the outmoded powdered wig and frock coat of a mid-eighteenth-century courtier. His clear preference for metropolitan life meant that he made few journeys to his considerable estates in the north of England, notably that of Thorp Hall near Bridlington, which he refused to visit lest he become involved in the responsibilities of landowning. His stories of travelling -- to the Isles of Scilly and to Rome during the final days of Clement XIV -- were fictions to entertain guests at Welbeck Street. In his will the unmarried Bosville left the majority of his property, including Thorp Hall, to his nephew Godfrey Macdonald, later third Baron Macdonald. He also left 'a large sum of ready money' ('European Magazine', 64, 1813, 553) and, in addition to landed estates, bequeathed $19,000 to friends including Charles Este. 
Though in increasingly poor health, Bosville continued to hold daily dinner parties at Welbeck Street until 16 December 1813, when, with his guests due at 5 p.m., he died earlier in the day. He was buried eight days later in the chancel of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2946


Boswell, Alexander, Lord Auchinleck (1707-1782), judge, was born at Auchinleck, Ayrshire, on 1 March 1707 NS, the eldest of three sons of James Boswell ('c'.1676-1749), laird of Auchinleck and advocate, and Lady Elizabeth Bruce, the youngest daughter of Alexander Bruce, second earl of Kincardine. Like his father Alexander Boswell studied law at Leiden University, where he passed advocate on 22 July 1727. He was named sheriff of Wigtownshire in 1748 but resigned in 1750, though he was proud that he had been in the first group appointed by royal warrant rather than the holder of a heritable jurisdiction. 
On 15 February 1754 Boswell was appointed to the court of session and on 22 July of the following year to the court of justiciary, the highest courts in Scotland for civil and criminal causes respectively. He took his title, as was the custom, from the estate he had inherited in 1749, an extensive barony in Ayrshire which James IV had conferred on Thomas Boswell in 1504. The estate had 600 tenants and yielded an annual income of $1000, to which Lord Auchinleck's judicial appointments added $900 p.a. In 1780 he resigned from the court of justiciary because of ill health but he retained his seat as an ordinary lord, despite diminished faculties, until his death in 1782. 
In April 1738 Boswell married his first cousin once removed, Euphemia Erskine (1718-1766), the youngest daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Erskine, deputy governor of Stirling Castle, and his third wife, Euphemia Cochrane. Five children were born to the Boswells, of whom three sons survived: James Boswell (1740-1795), advocate and biographer of Samuel Johnson; John (1743- 'c'.1798), briefly lieutenant in the army and periodically deranged from the age of nineteen; and David, later known as Thomas David, or T. D. (1748-1826), merchant in Spain, banker, and finally inspector in the navy pay office. The family lived on the fourth storey of Blair's Land, Parliament Close, Edinburgh, where Boswell himself had grown up. After 1749 they moved during court recesses to Auchinleck, where in 1762 Lord Auchinleck built a beautiful mansion in the Adam style, the third (and surviving) house on his estate. 
On 25 November 1769, aged sixty-two and three years a widower, Lord Auchinleck married again, in Edinburgh; his second wife was his cousin, Elizabeth Boswell ('bap'. 1729, died 1799), the second daughter of John Boswell of Balmuto, Fife. (His outraged son James married his cousin Margaret Montgomerie on the same day.) In January 1782 Lord Auchinleck bought a handsome house in the New Town, Edinburgh, and willed his wife the life-rent, thus further incensing James Boswell. He died in Edinburgh on 30 August 1782, after long suffering from stricture of the urethra, and was entombed on 4 September in the catacombs of the family church at Auchinleck. 
Lord Auchinleck was a widely respected judge, upright, learned, hard-working, and skilful at clarifying complicated matters. Stern but reputedly impartial, he spoke broad Scots from the bench and leavened his sobriety with straightfaced irony. He was a staunch whig and a strict Presbyterian, as the world knows from the argument with Samuel Johnson that James Boswell reported, circumspectly, in 'Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides'. 
Though 'perhaps too anxiously devoted to utility' (James Boswell to William Johnson Temple, 17 April 1764, MS Yale L 1220), Lord Auchinleck was a fine classical scholar and accumulated an impressive library, as attested by the catalogue that Margaret Montgomerie compiled shortly after she had been made mistress of Auchinleck House (the manuscript is at Yale University Library). A cautious laird in an age of improvement, Lord Auchinleck pioneered an industrial village, chiefly dedicated to weaving (unprofitable to the inhabitants), and divided and enclosed farms, but except for distinctive plantations of trees he was slower than his neighbours in adopting new agricultural methods. 
Since the publication of James Boswell's papers in the twentieth century Lord Auchinleck has been identified as the embittered father in a classic struggle: well-meaning and generous on his own terms but authoritarian, cold, and harsh -- 'If my sons are idiots, can I help it?' ('Laird of Auchinleck', 467). As he lay dying his heir 'wept; for alas! there was not affection between us' (ibid., 477). 


@@@@@


doc= 2947


Boswell, Sir Alexander, first baronet (1775-1822), poet and politician, was born on 9 October 1775 at James's Court, Edinburgh, the first son of James Boswell (1740-1795), the biographer of Samuel Johnson, and his wife, Margaret (1738?-1789) ['see 'Boswell, Margaret Montgomerie], daughter of David Montgomerie of Lainshaw, Ayrshire. When his father moved the family to London in 1786 Alexander briefly attended an academy in Soho Square with his younger brother, James Boswell (1778-1822); but problems of health and temperament led to his being privately tutored until he went to Eton College in 1789 soon after his mother's death. He entered Edinburgh University in 1792 but did not take a degree. He was nineteen when his father died in May 1795, leaving him a handsome inheritance in land and money. He went to Leipzig to continue his legal studies, but soon gave them up and, after visits to Dresden and Berlin, returned to Britain in 1796. On 23 November 1799 he married, in Edinburgh, Grisel (died 1864), daughter of the late Thomas Cuming, a banker of the city. They had a son, James (1806-1857), and two daughters, Janet Theresa (died 1836), who married Sir William Francis Eliott of Stobs and Wells, seventh baronet, and Margaret Amelia (died 1890), who married General Rawdon Vassal. 
A tall, muscular man, fond of field sports, Boswell practised improving agriculture on his estates and was an active officer of the Ayrshire yeomanry, of which he became lieutenant-colonel in 1816. He had inherited a full measure of his father's literary proclivities. As a young man he composed a number of songs, including 'Jenny's Bawbee' and 'Jenny Dang the Weaver', which were published anonymously in 1803 as 'Songs Chiefly in the Scottish Dialect'. He also produced that year the poems 'The Spirit of Tintoc' and 'Epistle to the Edinburgh Reviewers'. His later poems, which were based on the traditional ballad style, included 'Edinburgh, or, The Ancient Royalty' (1810), 'Clan-Alpin's View' (1811), and 'Sir Albon' (1811). From the Auchinleck archives he published 'A Breefe Memoriall of the Lyfe and Death of Dr James Spottiswood, Bishop of Clogher in Ireland' (1811) and a reprint of John Knox's 1561 disputation with Quintin Kennedy, 'Ane Oratione' (1812). He contributed to George Thomson's collections of Welsh (1809), Irish (1814), and Scottish (1817) songs. In 1815 he established a private press at Auchinleck, which printed his own poems, 'The Tyrant's Fall' (1815), 'Skeldon Haughs' (1816), and 'The Woo' Creel' (1816). Among the works which he published as editor and printer were 'Dialogus pius et festivus inter Deum (ut ferunt) et Evam', 'Dialogus inter Solomon et Marcolphum', the 1598 edition of 'Poems by Richard Barnfield', and reprints of old poems, which were issued at intervals and subsequently grouped in volumes as 'Frondes Caducae'. One of Sir Walter Scott's circle, he became a member of the Roxburghe Club in 1819. He campaigned for a monument to be erected to Robert Burns, whom he venerated, and on 25 January 1820 he laid the foundation-stone of the monument on the banks of the Doon. 
In July 1816 Boswell obtained the seat in parliament which had eluded his father by buying one for Plympton Erle, Devon, at a rate of $1000 a session, on the Treby interest. He came in again at the general elections of 1818 and 1820. A thoroughgoing tory who regarded the whigs as dangerous maniacs, he gave general support to Lord Liverpool's administration. In his maiden speech on 10 March 1817 he stated that Scottish landowners had no wish for parliamentary reform. He opposed reform of the royal burghs on 23 March and 6 May 1819, although on the first occasion he paid lip service to the notion of giving the inhabitants some control over municipal expenditure. In 1819 he introduced a short bill to repeal two old Scottish acts forbidding duelling, which reached the statute book on 3 July (59 Geo. III c. 70). Walter Scott recalled him as a 'proud' and 'very high-spirited man', who 'thought that his father [had] lowered himself by his deferential suit to Johnson' (Croker, 2.32). In 1818 Boswell developed a grudge against ministers, especially Liverpool, for what he perceived as their failure to pay him due attention. In response to the circular requesting attendance for the emergency session of November 1819 he asked the home secretary, Lord Sidmouth, who had evidently been willing to court him, for permission to stay away in order to be ready to deal with any radical disturbances in Ayrshire. However, he was prevailed upon to attend to support the government's coercive legislation. In early 1820 he was conspicuous at the head of his yeomanry in quelling local disaffection, with a mixture of force and reason. Liverpool's well-publicized refusal of his request for a baronetcy in recognition of these services intensified his sense of grievance. Further aggravated by his increasing financial problems, created by rash land purchases and compounded by loss of rental income and heavy expenditure on his parliamentary seat and his yeomanry, Boswell decided to take the Chiltern Hundreds on 7 February 1821, the day after voting in defence of ministers' conduct towards Queen Caroline. Through Sidmouth's influence he obtained the coveted baronetcy on 16 August 1821 as reward for his 'loyalty' in 'supporting his Majesty's ministers in difficult times' (Farington, 'Diary', 16.5713). 
Henry Cockburn wrote of Boswell that he was 'able and literary; and when in the humour of being quiet, he was agreeable and kind. But in general he was boisterous and overbearing, and addicted to coarse personal ridicule. With many respectable friends, his natural place was at the head of a jovial board, where everybody laughed at his exhaustless spirits, but each trembled lest he should be the subject of the next story or song. ('Memorials... by Henry Cockburn', 373)' Boswell's relish for expressing his party rancour through vulgar personal abuse brought about his nemesis. In 1821 two scurrilous Scottish newspapers, 'The Beacon' and 'The Sentinel', published a series of pasquinades vilifying the whig James Stuart of Dunearn as a bully and a coward. An unedifying squabble arose between 'The Sentinel's' proprietors, Robert Alexander and William Borthwick, who was imprisoned for debt; and early in 1822 Stuart took advantage of this dispute to gain access to office documents which revealed Boswell as the author of the squibs. On his return to Edinburgh from London, where he had been taken by the sudden death of his brother, he was challenged by Stuart. He refused either to deny authorship or to apologize. They met at Auchtertool, near Kirkcaldy, Fife, on 26 March 1822. Boswell deliberately fired wide, but in trying to follow suit Stuart, who had never before handled a gun, sent his shot through Boswell's collar bone. He was removed to Balmuto, Fife, where he died the following day. He was buried at Auchinleck. Stuart was tried for murder on 10 June 1822 and unanimously acquitted. Boswell's financial affairs were found to be in great disarray, with liabilities of over $72,000 set against assets of only $10,000. He was succeeded by his son, on whose death without an heir in 1857 the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 2948


Boswell, Claud Irvine, Lord Balmuto (1743-1824), judge, was born on 23 May 1743 at Kinghorn, Fife, the son of John Boswell of Balmuto, Fife, writer to the signet, and his wife, Margaret Henderson. Boswell's father died while he was still an infant. He was sent at the age of six to Mr Barclay's school at Dalkeith, finished his education at Edinburgh University, and was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates on 2 August 1766. On 25 March 1780 he was appointed sheriff-depute of Fife and Kinross, until the death of James Burnett, Lord Monboddo, whom he succeeded, taking his seat on the bench as an ordinary lord of session, with the title of Lord Balmuto, on 21 June 1799. 
Boswell married on 28 April 1783 Anne Irvine, who by the death of her brother and grandfather became the heir of Kingussie; they raised a son and two daughters. The scientific writer Mary Somerville, who as a child used to visit the family, described Boswell as a large coarse man with black hair and beetling eyebrows, a loud voice, and a hot temper. Fond of telling his own jokes, a habit he sometimes indulged in on the bench, he did not enjoy being the butt of other people's wit. Mrs Somerville recalled an occasion when Boswell's son, who had a notion for chemistry, caused a considerable explosion, and she also remarked that Boswell kept his daughters so confined when they were in Edinburgh that one of them, Elizabeth, eloped with her art master, Patrick Syme (1774-1845). 
Boswell never fully recovered from the shock brought about by the death, in his house, of his kinsman Sir Alexander Boswell, following a duel. He died at Balmuto on 22 July 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 2949


Boswell, Edward (1760-1842), antiquary, was born at Puddletown, Dorset, on 5 April 1760. He was articled to a solicitor, John Waller of Dorchester, and in 1792 took up practice in Sherborne. In 1793 he was appointed clerk to the lieutenancy of Dorset. In 1794 he joined the Dorset regiment of militia. The following year he began practice in Dorchester. 
In 1803 Boswell married Edith, daughter of John Feaver, vicar of St Mary Church, Devon; they had one daughter. 
Boswell's major work was 'The Civil Division of the County of Dorset' (1795), of which a second, revised edition appeared in 1833. It became the standard account of the civil administration of the county. 
Boswell died at Dorchester on 30 October 1842, and was buried in Holy Trinity Church there five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 2950


Boswell, James (1740-1795), lawyer, diarist, and biographer of Samuel Johnson, was born in Edinburgh on 29 October 1740, probably at the family's house on the fourth storey of Blair's Land, Parliament Close, the eldest son of Alexander Boswell, Lord Auchinleck (1707-1782), and his first wife, Euphemia, 'nee' Erskine ('bap'. 1718, died 1766). He was heir to the Auchinleck estate in Ayrshire. His two brothers were Lieutenant John Boswell (1743- 'c'.1798), who enlisted in the army but, mentally unstable, spent much of his adult life in supervised confinement; and David Boswell (1748-1826), who later took the name Thomas before David, a merchant and business agent who eventually purchased the estate of Crawley Grange in Buckinghamshire. Boswell prized his distinguished Scottish family connections, especially his mother's descent from the earls of Mar, and cherished his position in the sequence of lairds of Auchinleck descended from Thomas Boswell ('c'.1487-1513), to whom James IV of Scotland awarded the estate in 1504. But the periods of intense depression (usually called 'hypochondria') from which Boswell suffered throughout his life had, as he noted, family precedent; given their generational recurrence modern opinion assigns them a medical basis and deems them hereditary. 
In his adult writings about his earliest years, chiefly an 'Ebauche de ma vie' ('Sketch of my life', Yale L 1108; trans. as chap. 1 of Pottle, 'Earlier Years'), written in 1764 for Rousseau, and in its drafts and outlines (Yale L 1109-1112), Boswell characterized his boyhood as isolated, lonely, and timid, and described his mother's anxiously loving attentions to him and the simultaneously disturbing effects of her severe Calvinist piety and the Scottish kirk's form of worship. From the age of five to eight he attended James Mundell's academy in Edinburgh's West Bow, where he was unhappy; thereafter a succession of domestic governors tutored him at home. The most influential of them, John Dun (1723/4-1792), taught him from the age of eight to twelve. In later life Boswell deplored the social narrowness of his boyhood governors, holding them in part responsible for feelings of social insecurity and inadequacy, but his confessional 'Ebauche' credited Dun with moderating the effects of his mother's Calvinism, and with delighting him by introducing him to Latin poetry and 'The Spectator' essays. Twice in his adolescence Boswell became seriously ill with nervous distresses and was sent to Moffat spa to recover. He was enrolled in his thirteenth year at the University of Edinburgh, where he attended classes from 1753 to 1759. Here he formed friendships, which remained his closest, with John Johnston of Grange, and William Johnson Temple. With Johnston he shared a warm nostalgia for the Scottish customs, institutions, and buildings whose importance had diminished since the Union of 1707, and an emotional attachment to the Scottish Jacobites. Temple introduced Boswell to the Anglican form of worship, which Boswell continued to prefer to the presbyterianism of his boyhood education. His second bout of nervous distress was at least in part an episode in his continuing adolescent religious crisis, connected with the perplexities into which he was thrown by John Stevenson's course on logic. There he encountered ideas which long disturbed him of divine foreknowledge and the human freedom to choose -- the question, as he phrased it, of liberty versus necessity. 
During Boswell's second visit to Moffat spa (summer 1757), the sociability -- pleasant encounters with new adult acquaintances -- helped restore him, and his recovery brought with it a growing rebellion against the strict propriety of his upbringing and his father's expectations that he would follow him into a Scottish legal career. He developed deepened ambitions to be a writer and published author. A restless hunger for literary and social fame and the company of the famous, especially in London, governed much of the conduct of the rest of his life. He began to write and publish verse, and took a delighted interest in the Edinburgh theatre, whose patron, James, Lord Somerville, befriended him and encouraged his writing. Boswell was electrified by the performances of West Digges, leading man of the Edinburgh company, especially as Macheath in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', which would remain a lifelong favourite play, and Digges's elegant social deportment served as a model for Boswell's own. In autumn 1758, while travelling with his father on the northern circuit, Boswell began to keep a journal. He sent the journal to his friend the actor-manager James Love, whose suggestion it had originally been. In continuing recoil from his boyhood Calvinism, Boswell became attracted at about this time to the idea of converting to Roman Catholicism. He had begun writing theatrical reviews, and in February 1760 published in London pseudonymously ('By a Society of Gentlemen') a pamphlet of fifty pages, 'A View of the Edinburgh Theatre During the Summer Season, 1759', dedicated to Digges. Now ebulliently convivial, he grew fond of clubs and societies, moved in his parents' circles of eminence, and became popular among the literati and leading figures of the Edinburgh Enlightenment. In August 1759 he was admitted a freemason in the Canongate Kilwinning (St John's) lodge, of which his uncle, Dr John Boswell (1710-1780), later president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, was depute grand master that year, and he remained an enthusiastic freemason: he was master of his lodge from 1773 to 1775, and in 1776 he was chosen depute grand master of the freemasons in Scotland (when the banker Sir William Forbes was grand master), and re-elected in the following year. Lord Auchinleck, greatly displeased by his son's life, abruptly removed him in 1759 to the University of Glasgow (which city had fewer distractions, and little or no theatre). Though impressed by Adam Smith's lectures in rhetoric and 'belles-lettres' and by Smith's social manner, Boswell grew despondent in college life and, on 1 March 1760, fled from the university to London, with a vague plan of becoming a Catholic priest or monk. 
In London, Boswell sought out a priest, saw mass celebrated for the first time, and received communion. But eager to experience other delights in London, he explored it, as he later wrote, 'in all its variety of departments, both literary and sportive' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.456) in the company of Samuel Derrick. Lord Auchinleck sought the assistance of Alexander Montgomerie, tenth earl of Eglinton, an Ayrshire neighbour then at his London residence, who diverted Boswell's thoughts from Catholicism and the priesthood by introducing him into the circles of his high-born and rakish friends, including the young duke of York (brother of the future George III). Eglinton's suggestion that he seemed fitted for life as an officer in the guards took a deep hold, as Boswell had long been fascinated by military display, and thought that as a guards officer he could have a permanent base in or near London. He wanted particularly to meet Samuel Johnson, having read his works with awed delight, and having heard descriptions in Scotland of his imposing social presence and conversation. Derrick promised him an introduction, but failed to bring one about. But Boswell met, among other notables, David Garrick, and the actor turned bookseller Thomas Davies, and visited Laurence Sterne, then the literary toast of London. Giddily exhilarated, Boswell found himself moving among those he termed 'the great, the gay, and the ingenious' ('Memoirs', 234). He consorted for the first time, as habitually in later life, with prostitutes, and as a consequence suffered the first of his many bouts of venereal disease. 
Brought back to Edinburgh by Lord Auchinleck, under whose personal instruction he listlessly studied law, Boswell continued his writing and his social escapades and resumed the journal (now private, usually in condensed notes, some in shorthand and some in cipher). He had several clandestine love affairs. He copiously wrote and published poetry, both serious and humorous, and some prose pieces. At about this time he was invited to join the Select Society of Edinburgh, whose members then included Hugh Blair, Sir David Dalrymple, David Hume, Lord Kames, and William Robertson. He had amassed a copious body of juvenilia, most of it, especially the poetry, of little merit, though often biographically revealing. His conduct exasperated his father, and anguished his pious mother. Lord Auchinleck, who was acquiring new lands and having a new mansion house built at Auchinleck, began to talk of disinheriting him and selling the estate, and drew up a document empowering himself to vest the estate after his death in trustees of his choosing. Boswell signed, inaugurating a pattern in which, despite his rebelliousness, he would never fully evade his father's domination, and his father in exchange agreed to provide him with an annual allowance. On 30 July 1762 Boswell passed the private examination in civil law, and earned his father's reluctant consent to return to London to try to pursue a commission (which Lord Auchinleck refused to purchase) in the foot guards through influence. First, he set out from Auchinleck in the autumn for a short tour with Lord and Lady Kames through the border counties of Scotland and England, and he kept a lively and observant 'Journal of My Jaunt, Harvest 1762', his first expansive and fully written journal, for his friends Johnston and William McQuhae. 
Boswell left exuberantly for London on 15 November 1762, ostensibly to seek a guards commission, but more actually impelled by his longing for fame and the company of the eminent, and determined to keep a full diary of his sojourn to be sent to Johnston in Edinburgh, and then carefully preserved. He renewed his acquaintance with Eglinton, Garrick, and with the elocution expert Thomas Sheridan, whom he had met in Edinburgh and through whom he hoped now to meet Johnson. As planned, he kept a vivid diary of his activities (supplemented by a series of private daily memoranda, urging himself to a moral programme of discipline and self-improvement) and sent it in weekly packets, with covering letters, to Johnston, reporting his social, literary, and sexual adventures, chief among these last being an affair with a Covent Garden actress, called 'Louisa' in the journal. With his Scots companions, Andrew Erskine and George Dempster MP, he concerted to damn their disliked compatriot David Mallet's tragedy 'Elvira' on its opening night, and, though the attempt was unsuccessful, they published 'Critical Strictures on the New Tragedy of 'Elvira'' (January 1763). 
Boswell persuaded Erskine to join him in a lively and irreverent volume of correspondence, 'Letters between the Honourable Andrew Erskine and James Boswell, Esq.' (1763), the first of his publications to bear his name, and one which, in its deliberate violation of norms of public decorum (with the insertion of private and personal material into the domain of publication) is an important early anticipation of Boswell's innovative approach to biography in his later Johnsonian works. Boswell's hopes to meet Johnson through Sheridan came to nothing, as Johnson and Sheridan had become estranged, and the eventual famous first meeting came unexpectedly, when Johnson suddenly entered as Boswell was drinking tea in Davies's back parlour (16 May 1763). Despite Johnson's memorably amusing snub, Boswell began recording in his diaries the distinctive conversational style and opinions that would form a defining part of the 'Life of Johnson', shook off Johnson's initial rudeness, and persisted in his resolve for acquaintance. At later meetings Boswell poured out his soul, described his religious and spiritual perplexities, his restless ambitiousness, and his feelings of being thwarted by his father's will, and listened intently to (and recorded) Johnson's authoritative but sympathetic precepts. Johnson warmed to the charm of Boswell's openly sincere admiration and earnest wish for guidance, and Boswell found a formidable stability and wisdom in one who, unlike his father, remained capaciously tolerant of human waywardness and frailty, despite a tone of moral asperity. Unlike Lord Auchinleck, Johnson valued diary-keeping, and warmly encouraged Boswell in the practice. The diary Boswell kept at this time, unexpectedly recovered among other private papers in the early twentieth century, became an international best-seller on its publication in 1950 as 'Boswell's London Journal, 1762-1763', and has remained the most popular portion of the journal. 
By mid-1763 Boswell had abandoned his guards scheme and again capitulated to his father, who agreed that if he would study civil law at Utrecht, he might make a European tour before returning to practise at the Scots bar. Once in Utrecht, Boswell suffered an attack of melancholy so severe that he feared for his sanity, and wrote anguished cries for help in letters to his friends. But he recovered, roused and comforted in part by reading several of Johnson's 'Rambler' essays, and took a formal course in civil law, studied languages, and conceived a plan of compiling a Scots dictionary (which project he never completed). Late in 1763 he first took notice of Belle de Zuylen (later, as Mme de Charriere, famous as a novelist). The pair met frequently, and afterwards exchanged letters exploring their feelings for one another, and debating gender and marital roles. Boswell, both attracted and disconcerted by her intellect and unconventional moral outlook, considered her a marital prospect, until the correspondence lapsed in 1768. He left Utrecht in June 1764. In the company of George Keith, tenth Earl Marischal, he set off to visit the court of Brunswick, and then see Potsdam. He hoped, vainly, to add Frederick the Great to the list of the many eminences he met, whose characters and conversations he recorded in his journal. At various moments of despondency in Europe, thoughts of Johnson would sometimes restore him, and he urged himself to be 'firm and stable' in imitation of him (Boswell, memorandum, 16 Aug 1764). He wrote from Wittenberg and 'vowed to Mr Johnson an eternal attachment' (30 Sept 1764). After parting company with Lord Marischal, he visited numerous other courts, towns, and cities in the German territories, and, having determined to visit Rousseau and Voltaire, he travelled to Neuchatel and then to the nearby village of Motiers. Rousseau -- at this time ill and reclusive -- was charmed by Boswell's approach, and Boswell visited him, seeking advice on the conduct of his life, four times in December. He wrote and left his 'Ebauche' for Rousseau to read, and recorded in detail in his journals his lively and at times bantering exchanges with the philosopher. From Motiers he journeyed to Ferney, saw Voltaire later that month, had himself invited to spend two nights under his roof, and conducted a spirited debate with him on the truth of the Christian religion. 
His meetings with Rousseau inspired Boswell to make a bold journey to Corsica to meet General Pasquale Paoli, leader of the insurgents seeking the island's independence from the Genoese. In January 1765 Boswell crossed the Alps into Italy, making his way to Naples, where he stayed three weeks with the outlawed John Wilkes, whose wit, gaiety, and knowledge of the classics delighted him in spite of his qualms about Wilkes's political views, disrespect for religion, and libertine conduct. He stayed in Rome until the middle of June, during which time he commissioned a portrait of himself from George Willison. He was much with Andrew Lumisden, and others in the exiled Jacobite circle, and commissioned from Gavin Hamilton a painting, 'Mary Queen of Scots resigning her Crown', a scene chosen from William Robertson's 'History of Scotland'. In the company of John Stuart, styled Lord Mountstuart, Bute's eldest son, he travelled to Venice and several other cities. While in Siena (one of his motives in visiting Italy was the hope of amorous intrigues) he won the passionate love of Girolama Piccolomini (1728-1792), wife of the city's capitano di popolo (equivalent to mayor), with whom he had an affair, and from whom he continued to receive affectionate correspondence until 1767. He sailed from Leghorn for Corsica in October. After a difficult inland journey he met and had conversations (22 to 27 October) in Sollacaro with Paoli, who at first suspected he was a spy, but who quickly came to like his improbable young visitor, saw an opportunity for promotion of the Corsican cause in Britain, and consented to a series of interviews. Boswell's trip was both arduous and dangerous. He suffered painfully from ingrowing toenails, the result of trudging long distances in inadequate boots, and he contracted malaria, but the experience none the less exhilarated him. He remarked in 1783: 'I had got upon a rock in Corsica and jumped into the middle of life' ('Boswelliana', 328). 
While in Paris on his way homeward in January 1766, Boswell learned from a newspaper notice of his mother's death. He then gave up a scheme he had formed to travel again to Utrecht to propose formally to Belle de Zuylen, and began preparations to return to Scotland. Rousseau, whom he had hoped to see again in Paris, had already left for England. Therese le Vasseur, Rousseau's companion, accepted an offer from Boswell to serve as her escort across the channel, and she and Boswell had a shipboard sexual affair. On arrival in London he delivered her to David Hume, then next day took her to Rousseau at Chiswick. Boswell's ardour for Rousseau and Voltaire cooled quickly. He hurried to London, and to Johnson, who received him affectionately. Boswell lingered in London, saw much of Johnson, whose conversation he now carefully recorded, as well as Oliver Goldsmith and William Johnson Temple, and discussed Corsica in an interview, which he wrote up in detail afterwards, with William Pitt. He left for Edinburgh early in March, travelling almost immediately to the new mansion at Auchinleck with his bereaved father, who began coaching him for the private examination in Scots law, which Boswell passed on 11 July. On 26 July he passed advocate. He continued work, already begun, on his 'Account of Corsica', and set about establishing his legal practice. For much of 1767 he worked as a passionate volunteer in the Douglas interest in the great Douglas cause, and published several pieces in connection with it: 'The Douglas Cause' (a short poem) and a companion piece, 'The Hamilton Cause'; also 'Dorando: a Spanish Tale'; 'The Essence of the Douglas Cause'; and 'Letters of... Lady Jane Douglas'. 
His interest in theatre still active, Boswell supported David Ross in his bid to become patentee and manager of Edinburgh's new Theatre Royal, and wrote a prologue for the opening of the theatre on 9 December 1767. His first important work, 'An Account of Corsica, the Journal of a Tour to that Island, and Memoirs of Pascal Paoli', appeared on 18 February 1768. With its reports of the gallant islanders and a Plutarchan depiction of Paoli paralleled with several classical heroes, it was an immediate success. The work was widely read and translated, stimulated great interest in Paoli and the Corsican cause, brought its author wide fame in Britain and Europe, and found an interested readership among the Americans. It attracted the notice of the French government (which had a translation made), and though Boswell's ambition for British intervention was not to be fulfilled, he probably influenced Britain's decision to send secret supplies of arms to the Corsicans. To enjoy his new authorial fame, he set out in March for a three months' jaunt to London, and visited Johnson in Oxford where (though Boswell seems not to have known it, as the matter was long kept secret) he was helping Robert Chambers to prepare his Vinerian lectures. Boswell now wished specifically, among other topics of concern, to consult Johnson on his moral scruples about the profession of law in the Scottish courts (Boswell, journal, 26 March 1768). In London, much acclaimed as the author of the 'Account of Corsica', he received many calls, while confined with another attack of venereal disease (a result of his again consorting with prostitutes), from friends as well as new acquaintances his book had brought him. Amid rumours that France was about to take over Genoese claims to Corsica, Boswell began further newspaper campaigns, and writing and collecting essays by various hands which he brought out as 'Essays in Favour of the Brave Corsicans' in December. He published a letter anonymously in the 'Public Advertiser' (6 July) urging a voluntary subscription for the Corsican cause. He and his Edinburgh colleague Andrew Crosbie purchased $700 worth of ordnance from the Carron Company for shipment to Corsica. Eventually an estimated $20,000 was raised by subscription and public gift for the Corsicans, before their submission to the French in summer 1769, with Boswell directly or indirectly responsible for all of this aid. In September he attended Garrick's Shakespeare jubilee at Stratford and made a spectacular appearance at a masked ball as an armed Corsican chief. He was known popularly by the designation 'Corsica Boswell' for many years, and he won Paoli's lifelong friendship and gratitude. 
By the end of July 1769, after half-hearted pursuits of several eligible young women, and after numerous clandestine affairs (two of which resulted in illegitimate children, one and probably both of whom, to his distress, died in infancy), Boswell was formally engaged to his cousin and close friend and confidante, Margaret Montgomerie (1738?-1789) ['see 'Boswell, Margaret Montgomerie] of Lainshaw. The Lainshaw estate had deteriorated and Margaret was virtually penniless. Lord Auchinleck bitterly disapproved of the match and was never reconciled to it, and he distressed Boswell by confirming rumours that he himself intended to remarry. On 22 September, on a last bachelor jaunt south, Boswell was joyously reunited in London with Paoli, now beginning his exile, and set about introducing him to his London acquaintances, among them Sheridan, Garrick, and Johnson. Boswell met Sir Joshua Reynolds, inaugurating another of the most significant of his London friendships, among his closest after Johnson's death (Reynolds would be the 'Life''s dedicatee). The following month he became a co-proprietor of the 'London Magazine', continuing as a partner until late 1784, a year before it ceased publication. On 25 November 1769 Boswell and Margaret Montgomerie were married at Lainshaw, Boswell evidently having chosen the same day on which, in Edinburgh, Lord Auchinleck remarried. Relations between the two families were never anything other than strained. A visit to Auchinleck in 1770 led to an outright rift between Margaret Boswell and her parents-in-law, and she did not visit again (and was probably not invited) during Lord Auchinleck's lifetime. In Edinburgh, Boswell and his wife took up residence in a house in the Cowgate, and moved in May 1770 to a more commodious house in Chessel's Land in the Canongate. They moved once more in May 1771 to a house in James's Court on the north side of the Lawnmarket (it was owned by Hume and had once been his home). In 1773 they moved downstairs to a more spacious house in the same building. 
Boswell worked diligently at the law, and in December 1769 was admitted to practise at the bar of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. But in an anonymous three-part essay, 'On the Profession of a Player' ('London Magazine', August-October 1770), he expressed again his moral qualms about the profession of law, exploring in particular the theatrical character of a barrister's courtroom conduct. Early the following year Alexander Donaldson brought out an edition of Shakespeare's plays, to which Boswell contributed a fulsome dedication to Garrick. Though he built a creditable practice, he grew restless and unhappy in his Edinburgh life, and developed the habits of heavy convivial drinking and frequent social drunkenness for which he became notorious in his own lifetime, and which linger as an inseparable part of his reputation. They were habits against which, for the rest of his life, he struggled with only intermittent success despite frequent pledges and resolutions. Paoli toured Scotland in September 1771, with Boswell as guide, and Boswell contributed an account to the 'London Magazine'. The visit prompted him to resume his journal (a gap from 28 October 1769 to 4 September 1771 being the longest in the surviving journal from its beginning in 1761 until his death). 
From March to May 1772, during the court's spring recess, Boswell returned happily to London, where on 14 April he made his maiden speech at the bar of the House of Lords. He had, and carefully recorded afterwards, many lengthy conversations with Johnson, and wrote in his journal for 31 March: 'I have a constant plan to write the life of Mr. Johnson'. The plan, referred to openly here for the first time, had formed earlier, perhaps as early as September 1764, when Boswell wrote to Johnson from the German territories that if Johnson died before him he would endeavour to do honour to his memory. He had written to Wilkes from Venice: 'Could my feeble mind preserve but a faint impression of Johnson, it would be a glory to myself and a benefit to mankind' (Boswell, letter, 13 July 1765, Yale L 1286). He also determined on a plan of visiting London annually during spring court recesses. In Edinburgh he believed himself drudging in provincial obscurity, and longed for the brilliant social company in which he moved in London. He kept up a frequent correspondence and a prolific miscellaneous journalism, acting as Edinburgh correspondent for several London newspapers and magazines. The collapse of the Ayr Bank led to a twenty-five-page pamphlet, 'Reflections on the Late Alarming Bankruptcies in Scotland', a wide-ranging indictment of Scottish manners and culture, written and published in early November. He became sufficiently established in his profession to be made an examiner of the Faculty of Advocates, but his 'constant plan' for Johnson's biography remained active. On 10 September 1772 he wrote to Garrick: 'If I survive Mr Johnson, I shall publish a Life of him, for which I have a store of materials' ('Correspondence', 4.45). 
On 15 March 1773 the Boswells' first surviving child, Veronica (1773-1795), was born. Boswell set out later that month for a six-week jaunt to London, having written beforehand to many of his London acquaintances, including Thomas Percy, Garrick, and Goldsmith. He saw Johnson frequently, and began asking about and recording the details of his early life in Lichfield and his first coming to London. Boswell was now more fully practised in his recording, and large portions of this journal were used almost verbatim in the 'Life'. He canvassed assiduously for election to the Club, later briefly known as the Literary Club, and on 30 April he was admitted to membership under Johnson's forceful and enthusiastic sponsorship. Johnson delighted Boswell during this visit by committing himself to a long-proposed scheme to visit Boswell in Scotland later in the year and make a tour of the highlands and Western Isles (the Hebrides). Boswell returned to Edinburgh, reported for the 'London Magazine' a series of 'Debates in the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland', and worked as one of Donaldson's counsel in the landmark case on literary property. He prepared his notes on the case for publication, and in early February 1774 brought out 'The decision of the court of session upon the question of literary property... published by James Boswell, esq., advocate, one of the counsel in the cause', in time for Donaldson's successful appeal to the House of Lords against an earlier decision against him of the court of king's bench in London. This case ('Donaldson v. Becket') long remained the basis of British and American copyright law. 
Johnson arrived in Edinburgh three days after the rising of the court of session in August 1773, and spent three days at the Boswells' home receiving social visits. For seven weeks of September and October he and Boswell travelled about the highlands and Inner Hebrides, the rugged and at times dangerous travel punctuated by periods of gracious hospitality from the 'great, the learned, and the elegant' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.269). On 22 October they returned to the mainland, then spent an enjoyable six days at Auchinleck, invited by Boswell's father, a visit marred near the end by a violent argument between Johnson and Lord Auchinleck, who, Boswell noted, 'was as sanguine a Whig and Presbyterian, as Dr Johnson was a Tory and Church of England man' ('Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides', 2 Nov 1773, Boswell, 'Life', 5.376). Boswell resumed legal work almost immediately, while Johnson stayed at the Boswells' home another ten days, receiving social visits. Margaret Boswell acted as hostess at many of them, despite her disapproval of Johnson's 'irregular hours and uncouth habits' and her opinion that 'he had too much influence over her husband' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.269). Lord Auchinleck, talking with a colleague in Edinburgh at the court of session, famously dubbed Johnson 'Ursa Major' (ibid., 5.384). The notes and journals Boswell kept on this trip, revised after Johnson's death with the help of Boswell's friend and editor, Edmond Malone, served as the basis for his innovative travel memoir and the first instalment of his Johnsonian biography, 'The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides' (1785), through which (and Johnson's own 'Journey to the Western Isles') this tour has become one of the most famous of literary journeys, its steps often retraced by later travellers. It had been a remarkable coup to coax the little-travelled Johnson, who passed his sixty-fourth birthday on the trip, to Scotland, against which he had often expressed a prejudice. It affords the most extended and remarkable instance of the many ways in which Boswell as biographer actually broadened his subject's range of experience and acquaintance. Johnson himself read most of Boswell's journal up to the mid-entry for 22 October, and Boswell several times recorded his pleasure and praise and compliments on its accuracy. The tour, as well as Johnson's admiration for the journal, deepened the friendship between the pair, and increased Johnson's respect for and confidence in Boswell as a future biographer. 
Johnson proved a robust but demanding companion, and the tour proved an immense strain on Boswell, leaving him fatigued and depleted. He wrote in June 1774: 'After Mr. Samuel Johnson left me... I was long in a state of languor. My mind had been kept upon its utmost stretch in his company. I had exhausted all my powers to entertain him' (Boswell, journal, 'Review of my life', June 1774, 'Defence', 197). He suffered his first severe depression since his marriage. A dispute with his father festered over the entailing of the estate, and Lord Auchinleck, like Margaret Boswell, ridiculed the association with Johnson, and spoke disparagingly of him. Ideas of transferring to the English bar took a deeper hold. On 20 May the Boswells' second daughter, Euphemia (1774-1837), was born. He did not undertake his usual spring jaunt to London, but remained in Scotland for the whole year, concerned with political activities in Ayrshire. Hopes that he might represent his county as an independent member in parliament remained with him until his last years, despite several ineffectual forays into Ayrshire elections motivated both by a desire to reverse the proportions of his year (to live in London, and visit Scotland) and a sincere disapproval of the way elections were arranged and controlled at this time. The latter half of the year was dominated by his most emotionally wrenching criminal trial, that of a sheepstealer, John Reid, who had in an earlier trial (1766) been his first criminal client. Despite Boswell's strenuous efforts both in court and after the verdict, Reid was hanged, proclaiming his innocence; the case left Boswell profoundly shaken. On his next spring jaunt to London he began to fulfil the requirements for one term's residence at the Inner Temple as a first step towards transfer to the English bar. In summer 1775 he wrote: 'My father's coldness to me, the unsettled state of our family affairs, and the poor opinion which I had of the profession of a lawyer in Scotland, which consumed my life in the mean time, sunk my spirits woefully; and for some of the last weeks of the session I was depressed with black melancholy.... I thought myself disordered in mind. Yet I was able to discharge my duty as a lawyer. (Boswell, journal, 'Review of my life during the summer session', 1775, 'Ominous Years', 158)' On 9 October 1775 Boswell's son Alexander Boswell (1775-1822) was born. Pleased by the arrival of a male heir, Boswell resumed his journal with greater diligence than at any time since 1763. He followed closely at this time and later the events of the American War of Independence, his feelings -- resembling those that produced his youthful attraction to the Corsicans -- steadily pro-American. On his spring jaunt of 1776 he accompanied Johnson to Oxford, Stratford upon Avon, Birmingham, Lichfield, and Ashbourne, studying Johnson now in the scenes of his youth. In London, on 22 April, his interest in celebrity (in this case, a glamorous criminal notoriety) having been piqued by press reports of the forgery trials of Margaret Caroline Rudd and her accomplices, Boswell called on her at her lodgings. He wrote a detailed account of his interview, and called on her again several more times. On 15 May occurred the famous dinner at the Dillys', at which he contrived, after much astutely manipulative negotiation, to bring together Johnson and Wilkes, whose libertine morals and politics Johnson found abhorrent -- one of the most notable of the many occasions in which Boswell manoeuvred Johnson into complex and even confrontational situations to study his reactions and record his responses. On this occasion, Wilkes's sly tact dissolved Johnson's initial discomposure into pleasant cordiality, and the episode, which Boswell wrote up from brief notes many years later, would become one of the 'Life''s best known. 
On 7 July 1776, after his return to Edinburgh, Boswell visited the dying Hume, whose 'infidel' scepticism both fascinated and disturbed him, and recorded their exchanges, enlarging the record from memory on 3 March 1777. Hume died tranquilly on 25 August, and Boswell himself remained long disconcerted by Hume's placidity. Further distresses followed: in the same month Boswell capitulated again to his father's will, and agreed finally to sign the estate entail long sought by Lord Auchinleck (now recurrently ill and in acute pain). On 15 November another son was born, but died in March the following year, and Boswell gave up any idea of a spring jaunt to London. Margaret Boswell had now begun to show symptoms of consumption. In September when Boswell resolved to visit Johnson in Ashbourne, he described himself as 'one going upon a pilgrimage to some sacred place' (Boswell, journal, 10 Sept 1777). After his return to Edinburgh his most important journalism now took the form of his series of monthly reflective essays, eventually seventy in number, for the 'London Magazine' in the melancholic persona of 'The Hypochondriack'. The Hypochondriack essays would continue, without a break, from October 1777 to August 1783. Gently meditative in tone, addressed sympathetically to the Hypochondriack's 'atrabilious brethren' (Boswell, 'Hypochondriack', 1.v, February 1778) -- his fellow sufferers from inexplicable periods of depression -- these essays offer some of Boswell's most considered thoughts on a wide range of moral, social, and political issues, including many of most pressing concern to himself: death, executions (which he attended compulsively throughout his life), war, diary-keeping, marriage, and drinking, among others. In March 1778 Boswell set out for London, where he spoke at the bar of the House of Commons for the first time. Johnson was now at work on his 'Prefaces: Biographical and Critical' ('Lives of the Poets'), for which Boswell provided various pieces of research assistance. 
On 15 September the Boswells' second surviving son, James Boswell (1778-1822), was born. In March of the next year Boswell left once more for London. There, his fascination with criminal notoriety again active, he attended the trial and execution of James Hackman (murderer of Martha Ray, mistress of the earl of Sandwich). He met Hackman in prison, and wrote sympathetic letters about him in the London newspapers. His return to Edinburgh was, as usual, dispiriting. Lord Auchinleck was kept away from the court of session by his illness. In July the Boswells were saddened to hear that Lainshaw, Mrs Boswell's family home, had been sold, and Boswell quarrelled later with his former teacher, Adam Smith, over his public eulogy of Hume. He brightened on a jaunt with Colonel James Stuart, Mountstuart's brother, to visit his regiment at Leeds, the journal of which trip Boswell described as a 'log-book of felicity' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.415). He was in London for about two weeks in October and had, as he put it, his only 'second crop' of Johnsoniana in one year (ibid., 3.399-400). In spring 1780 Lord Auchinleck resigned his justiciary gown, and Boswell published anonymously 'A letter to Robert Macqueen, Lord Braxfield, on his promotion to be one of the judges of the high court of justiciary', urging that the circuit criminal courts be conducted 'in the most solemn, exact, and regular way'. The letter testifies to the admiration and regard in which, in spite of their years of bitter contention, he still held his father. 
On 15 June 1780 the Boswells' fifth surviving child, Elizabeth 
(Betsy; 1780-1814)
, was born. In March 1781 Boswell set off for London to appear as counsel for Hugh Montgomerie (whose election for Ayrshire had been disallowed in favour of Sir Adam Fergusson) before the house committee. The death of Henry Thrale during this visit (on 4 April 1781) aroused Boswell's complex anxieties about Hester Thrale, the rival intimacy which had developed between her and Johnson, and the possibility of a marriage. He composed the scurrilous 'Ode by Dr Samuel Johnson to Mrs Thrale upon their Supposed Approaching Nuptials'. He returned to Edinburgh, and to the law, and spent portions of time at Auchinleck with his ailing father. Both his wife and his father were now critically ill, and Boswell was more eager than ever to leave his 'narrow sphere' and secure a remunerative place in London. Lord Auchinleck died on 30 August 1782 at his house in Edinburgh. 'Wept', Boswell wrote in his journal, 'for alas! there was not affection between us' (Boswell, journal, 29-30 Aug 1782, 'Laird', 477). Boswell, though proudly ninth laird of Auchinleck, was ill-trained in estate management, already heavily in debt, and stunned to discover the extent of Lord Auchinleck's settlements on his widow. He was faced for the rest of his life with an impossible financial strain. He and his wife and children came to Auchinleck, which his children had never seen, to take up residence on 18 September. Boswell sought advice from Alexander Fairlie of Fairlie, the agricultural improver, promoter of the successful Fairlie Rotation. Fairlie returned annually until 1789, and again in 1791 and 1794. Despite his love of London, Boswell was fiercely proud of his ancestral estate. He was generally lenient to his tenants, and enlarged and beautified Auchinleck. As one of the late eighteenth-century's 'improving' lowland lairds, he continued his father's campaigns of plantation and development of mining, and introduced new agricultural techniques to supplement the outmoded practices still in operation in the time of his father. But when he made his next spring visit, in 1783, to London -- where he was to appear in an appeal before the House of Lords -- he consulted his friends with greater earnestness about a transfer to the English bar. Most, including Johnson, advised against it. 
In the autumn of 1783 at Auchinleck, Boswell resumed his laird's duties, became a JP, and was chosen praeses of the quarter sessions at Ayr. Still vainly hoping to attract political notice, he wrote 'A Letter to the People of Scotland' in support of the king and Pitt the younger in their opposition to Fox's East India bill, and in Ayrshire the next spring he presented to the county a loyal address to the king, as part of another ill-formed campaign to supplant Sir Adam Fergusson as MP. He set out for London soon afterwards, but hearing of the dissolution of parliament hurried back to Scotland to present himself (in vain) as a candidate. He set out again in April, and while in Lichfield he tried, without success, to flirt with Anna Seward, of whose verse-novel 'Louisa' he wrote a fulsome review for the 'Public Advertiser' (3 June 1784). This friendship soured later over the 'Life of Johnson', and the pair became embroiled in a lively paper war, since, with mixed feelings about Johnson and on some matters hostile to him, Anna Seward was among those who believed Boswell's estimate of Johnson too generous. 
Boswell accompanied Johnson to Oxford, Johnson's first trip since a long confinement through illness, and spent much of the time interviewing William Adams, master of Pembroke, about Johnson's earlier years, and noting his answers. This pleasant Oxford jaunt was to be their last together. Back in London, talk of Johnson's wintering in Italy for his health prompted Boswell to write to Lord Chancellor Thurlow, requesting an increase in Johnson's pension to help with the expense, a gesture that left Johnson deeply moved. Thurlow undertook to press as far as he could, but the application was not granted. On 30 June 1784 Boswell took his last parting from Johnson. He learned in Edinburgh on 17 December 1784 of Johnson's death. Seriously ill himself, he wrote in his journal: 'I was stunned, and in a kind of amaze... My feeling was just one large expanse of stupor. I knew that I should afterwards have sorer sensations' (Boswell, journal, 17 Dec 1784, 'Applause', 271). Letters arrived in quick succession from his publisher Charles Dilly, inviting him to be the editor of Johnson's works, and pressing him to produce his biography. Confronted now with the weight of public pressure and expectation, as well as many years' worth of unsystematic accumulation, and the prospect of many more years of research into the time before he knew Johnson, Boswell resolved that in the spring he would go to London to revise and publish his journal of the Scottish tour, 'a good prelude to my large work, his life' (Boswell, 'Register of letters', 23 Dec 1784). On Fairlie's advice he engaged Bruce Campbell ('c'.1734-1813), his second cousin, a pioneer breeder of the Ayrshire cattle, to see to the needs of his estate farms. 
Another political disappointment followed in February 1785. The post of knight marshal of Scotland having become available, Boswell wrote to Henry Dundas to apply for it, and was rejected. He set out for London in late March, and wrote a second 'Letter to the People of Scotland', opposing Ilay Campbell's bill for reducing the number of the lords of session, and venting his considerable anger at Dundas, whose rise to 'prodigious power' in Scotland had both impressed and infuriated him. On 29 April he dined with Malone, the beginning of the critical literary association of the last decade of Boswell's life, one that proved vital to the eventual achievement of both of his Johnsonian masterworks. Malone soon became Boswell's closest London friend and an invaluable prompt and editor. For some months they met several times a week, revising the 'Tour' journal. He returned to Scotland and arrived at Auchinleck on 3 October, ending what had been his longest London stay since 1762-3. The 'Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides', seen through the press by Malone (to whom it was dedicated), was published on 1 October 1785, and was the second of Boswell's major publications to be an instant success. The whole impression, of 1500 copies, was sold out by the 17th of that month. Long extracts were published serially in newspapers and magazines, and more space was given in reviews and letters to editors than to any other book (1785-6). Some reviewers were inevitably baffled by its novelty and personal candour, and hostile to its attention to minute quotidian detail, but its success increased Boswell's confidence in his closely personal and anecdotal approach to biography. In letters he and Malone began revising for a second edition, of which Malone supervised the printing while Boswell was in Scotland, and this edition was published on 22 December. A third was published in October 1786, which edition (there were several thereafter) was the last to include revisions by Boswell himself. 
Boswell remained at Auchinleck for a month, collecting rents and paying and receiving social visits, then set out in November 1785 for London via Edinburgh. In London he heard again from Margaret Caroline Rudd, and the interest they had shown in each other at their first meetings in 1776 grew into a sexual affair. This affair, with a widely recognized criminal celebrity, shocked even friends such as Reynolds, long accustomed to Boswell's frequent infidelities. When, typically, he confessed it to Margaret Boswell, then gravely ill, it caused her a sharper distress than all his other extramarital affairs and habitual whoring. On 9 February 1786 he completed the requisite number of meals in the Temple commons for admission to the English bar, to which he was called on 13 February, and he joined the northern circuit as junior member. Soon after he had left for the northern circuit, Mrs Piozzi's 'Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson' were published. He left the circuit early in order to attend the House of Lords for an appeal in which he was counsel, and he published a reply to Mrs Piozzi in the newspapers, along with 'Piozzian Rhymes', signed 'Old Salusbury Briar'. In May he took a house at 56 Great Queen Street. His journals record further miserable vacillation about transferring to London and conscientious attendance at courts, but (as he had not actually studied to acquire English law) little or no legal business. His entry for 5 June marks the first explicit mention in his journal of work on 'sorting materials' for the 'Life of Johnson', and the entries for 9-11 July show him as beginning to write it. On deciding finally to move to London, he returned to Scotland, having spent less than three of the previous seventeen months with his family, and on 20 September 1786 he left with his wife and their five children, and took up residence in Great Queen Street. 
In November, Boswell wrote to the earl of Lonsdale, whose notice he had attracted with complimentary references in his second 'Letter to the People of Scotland' (1785) and the 'Tour', seeking the position of recorder of Carlisle. Lonsdale responded by asking if he could go at once to Carlisle as counsel for the mayor at the coming by-election. Boswell accepted, travelled to Carlisle, and saw the election through, but recorded much in his journals of Lonsdale's violently tyrannical manner and the subordination in which he kept his entourage of dependants. In March 1787 there appeared Sir John Hawkins's 'Life of Johnson'. This, the most significant and substantial of the several biographies of Johnson before Boswell's, he had been anxiously awaiting, as Hawkins had known Johnson for some forty years and was one of his executors. In May Boswell announced in the 'Public Advertiser' that he had delayed his own book in order to see other promised works, and that his own biography would 'correct' the 'erroneous Accounts' of Hawkins and Mrs Piozzi. Mrs Boswell's health worsened seriously in London, and he resolved to take her to Auchinleck with him for a short visit late in August, after which they set off once more for London, where Malone now urged him to put the writing of the 'Life' ahead of attendance at courts and other considerations. But he applied again to Lonsdale for the recordership of Carlisle, which, on 20 December, Lonsdale offered, asking him to set out the next day. Boswell complied, but again grew rapidly disheartened with his patron and recorded more in his journals of Lonsdale's brutality and ill temper. On 11 January 1788 he was elected recorder of Carlisle. 
Mrs Piozzi's 'Letters to and from the Late Samuel Johnson' prompted Boswell to publish his irreverent 'Ode by Dr Samuel Johnson to Mrs Thrale'. He had been disappointed by the 'Letters', in which he found 'less able and brilliant writing than I expected', 'proof' of what he saw as Johnson's 'fawning' on Mrs Piozzi, and of Johnson's 'treating me and other friends much more lightly than we had reason to expect'. Even though he found two days later that they 'improved on me', the experience had temporarily 'cooled my warmth of enthusiasm for 'my illustrious friend'' (journal, 7 March 1788, 'English Experiment', 194, 196). None the less Boswell resumed work on the 'Life', and by May he could speak of having only his journals of the last two years of Johnson's life to revise. But Mrs Boswell was distressed by the now obviously terminal nature of her illness. In May he yielded to her entreaties, and set out for Auchinleck, where work on the 'Life' stalled, and Boswell was often away from home as, having been a declared candidate for the county, he began his canvass. He wrote an address to the real freeholders of Ayrshire dated 30 June, and published it in the 'Edinburgh Advertiser' (1-4 July). In October he set out for the Michaelmas quarter sessions at Carlisle, where Lonsdale joined him, and he spoke before the grand jury as recorder. Later that month he left Auchinleck with his sons for London, and was little in Scotland after this date. Work on the 'Life' resumed, and by the beginning of 1789 he had nearly finished a first rough draft. In January he took a smaller house at 38 Queen Anne Street West, Cavendish Square, but in April, having received alarming accounts of Mrs Boswell's health, he headed north, with his eldest daughter, Veronica. He again resumed local political activities. On 5 May, as praeses of the general quarter sessions at Ayr, in another attempt to court political notice he proposed and had carried an address to the prince of Wales, expressing 'a grateful sense of his public conduct with regard to the Regency'. Word from Lonsdale came that he wished Boswell to accompany him to London to appear as recorder in an action brought against the Carlisle corporation in the court of king's bench. Boswell hesitated, anguished by, but unwilling and unable fully to confront, his wife's mortal illness, and uncertain about whether to adhere to the association with Lonsdale he had so assiduously sought, and which he thought might yet bring him into parliament. He set out, pausing at Carlisle to meet Lonsdale. He had been in London less than a week, and Lonsdale's case had not yet come on, when letters reached him with the news that Mrs Boswell was sinking. From 4 June he and his sons posted night and day, arriving at Auchinleck to find that his wife had died on the morning of the day he left London. 
Guiltily disconsolate, berating himself for his conduct as a husband and for having valued Margaret insufficiently, and inadequate under the burden of sole responsibility for their five children, Boswell set out at the end of the summer once more in pursuit of business on the northern circuit, but, he told Temple, his 'mind was so sore from my late severe loss' that he avoided the 'roaring, bantering society of lawyers'. He continued: 'Every prospect that I turn my mind's eye upon is dreary... The law life in Scotland amidst vulgar familiarity would now quite destroy me. I am not able to acquire the law of England. To be in Parliament unless as an independent member would gall my spirit. To live in the country would either harrass me by forced exertions, or sink me into a gloomy stupor... 'The Life of Johnson' still keeps me up. I 'must' bring that forth... (23 Aug 1789, 'Great Biographer', 11)' After attending to further business in Carlisle, he set out on 1 October for London with Veronica, James, and Elizabeth, and Alexander joined them at Carlisle. Veronica boarded with a schoolfriend in London, Euphemia went to a boarding-school in Edinburgh, Alexander went to Eton, James continued as a day boy at the Soho Academy in London (and went later to Westminster), and Betsy was sent to a boarding-school in Chelsea. In mid-October in London, Boswell returned to a final burst of work on the 'Life'. On 7 December the court of king's bench saw the trial that had been in the offing since Lonsdale called Boswell from the dying Margaret's bedside. Boswell appeared before Lord Kenyon, the lord chief justice, as one of two counsel for the Carlisle corporation. The trial resulted in a victory (though only a temporary one) for Lonsdale. 
Boswell worked assiduously at this time, with others of his friends, to erect a monument to Johnson in Westminster Abbey (eventually it was placed in St Paul's Cathedral) and his long association with Paoli, who was returning to Corsica, now neared its end. Paoli had remained, during his London exile of some twenty-one years, an unswerving source of friendship, moral advice, wisdom, and hospitality. Boswell gave a farewell dinner for Paoli on 22 March 1790, and translated Paoli's speech to the Corsican general assembly and published it in the 'London Chronicle' for 30 November. He enjoyed a temporary easy sociability with Lonsdale in the aftermath of the trial victory, and felt pleased with his progress on the 'Life'. He and Malone had devised an arduous programme of revising later manuscript sections even as the earlier ones were being printed. He launched newspaper campaigns promoting his forthcoming book, and disparaged Mrs Piozzi's. But among other complications Thomas Percy, having grown anxious about the appearance he was to make in Boswell's work, disconcerted him by asking not to be named in it. Boswell altered some material, but rejected the request for anonymity, and Percy long remained profoundly offended by his eventual depiction in the 'Life'. Then Boswell found himself summoned (in the middle of a visit from Temple, whom he had not seen since 1783, and his eldest daughter) by Lonsdale to accompany him to his seat at Laleham in Middlesex. Lonsdale, evidently offended when he asked to be excused because of the arrival of his old friend, later spoke abusively, and Boswell 'inwardly resolved to withdraw myself from all connection with him'. But he noted in his journal for 20 May: 'I was now in absolute poverty'. He soon heard enough to know that Lonsdale had no thought of bringing him into parliament or employing him in Westminster Hall. The simmering hostility between them mounted, and the pair came to a violent open quarrel. On the journey north Lonsdale insulted Boswell grossly, Boswell sought pistols from some officers at an inn, and they came almost to a duel before Lonsdale's temper abated and they reached an uneasy calm. Boswell discharged his various legal duties, resigned the recordership (effective 12 July 1790), and his political association with Lonsdale ended. 
In London, Boswell found that Malone had supervised the printing of another forty pages of the 'Life'. He was 'put in train again', and resumed his typical patterns of convivial dinners, revising with Malone, and visits to prostitutes. He, Malone, Reynolds, and John Courtenay MP were so often in each other's company that they became known as 'the Gang'. Later in the year he arranged with his brother Thomas David to attend to estate business at Auchinleck as his deputy, on whose recommendation he appointed as overseer Andrew Gibb, a younger brother of Gavin Gibb, to succeed James Bruce, a childhood friend, who had died in August. (Gibb would serve Boswell, his son, and grandson, on the estate for a total of forty-six years.) Still closely and emotionally engaged in estate affairs, Boswell bought, despite his desperate financial state, nearby Knockroon at a cost of $2500. Fairlie lent him $1500 on the security of the land, but how to raise the other thousand remained a persistent anxiety for the winter of 1791. Eventually Dilly and his printer, Henry Baldwin, lent him the money in anticipation of royalties on the 'Life'. In November, still vainly hoping for Pitt's interest, he sang his 'William Pitt, the Grocer of London' at the lord mayor's feast in the Guildhall, celebrating Pitt's recent success in a favourable trade convention with Spain, and published it in the 'Public Advertiser'. In April 1791 he published anonymously a lengthy verse pamphlet, 'No Abolition of Slavery, or, The Universal Empire of Love', containing in part an attack on abolitionism. 
In January 1791, as printing of the 'Life' proceeded, Boswell moved to 47 Great Portland Street, his home for the rest of his life. On 13 May forty-one London booksellers purchased more than 400 sets (of two large quarto volumes), and on 16 May, the twenty-eighth anniversary of his first meeting with Johnson in Davies's back parlour, the biography was published. Sales exceeded all expectations. Of a total of 1750 sets printed, 800 were sold in the first two weeks, 1200 by the end of August, 1400 by December, and 1600 by August 1792. When he settled accounts with Dilly, the transaction was (he noted) 'very flattering to me as an author' (Boswell, journal, 24 Nov 1792, 'Great Biographer', 201). To promote interest in the 'Life', he wrote a third-person biography of himself in the 'European Magazine', published in two parts in the May and June issues. As tributes to the 'Life' poured in from his friends, Boswell continued to attend Westminster Hall, but knew that his transfer to the English bar had been a failure. Convivial dinners, a remarkably extensive and varied range of social acquaintance, frequent heavy drinking, prostitutes, fitful but never plausible schemes of remarriage, and his children's continuing love for him, despite his difficulties as a widower in supervising their lives, punctuated the time which, since the publication of the 'Life', had become essentially idle. In July Reynolds, now in his own last illness, and valuing Boswell's companionship highly, arranged for his election to the honorary post of secretary for foreign correspondence in the Royal Academy, which led later to his joining the Royal Academy Club. On 28 August 1791 he returned to Auchinleck, where he had not been since October 1789, attended desultorily to estate business, and left again in October for London, where he often visited Reynolds, now in rapidly failing health. Reynolds died on 23 February 1792, and Boswell felt his loss severely. 
In summer 1792, shortly before a visit with his two elder daughters to Temple and his family in Cornwall, Boswell's characteristic sympathy for impoverished criminals was roused again by the plight of Mary Bryant (or Broad) and the other four survivors of an escape from the penal colony in New South Wales, now confined in Newgate. He appealed on their behalf to Dundas, now home secretary, who set in motion the granting of a royal pardon for Mary Bryant. In October 1793 Boswell arranged for Mary to rejoin her relations in Fowey, and, after seeking to raise money for her through subscriptions, he paid most of a promised annuity of $10 personally. At Auchinleck in spring 1793 he devoted great care and attention to the choice and the appointment of a successor to John Dun, who had died the preceding October, as parish minister. Aware of the kinds of angry broils parish appointments could lead to (they had been pilloried in the poems of his fellow Ayrshireman, Robert Burns), Boswell yielded to his parishioners' choice and presented the Revd John Lindsay to the parish in March. Immediately thereafter he left for London by way of Edinburgh, where he had not been since his move to the English bar in 1786, and this short visit was the last time he saw his native city. In London he worked hurriedly, as publication time drew near, to prepare his second edition of the 'Life'. Much new material, including a number of original letters, had come to him, and he added many lengthy new notes, and prefatory matter. The second edition appeared on 17 July, in three octavo volumes, 'corrected and considerably enlarged by additional Letters and interesting Anecdotes...'. The 'Corrections and Additions' were later issued separately to accommodate purchasers of the first edition. 
Temple visited London, and on 27 September the friends saw each other for the last time. Boswell continued despondent that he had had never fulfilled his hopes of 'attaining both to consequence and wealth'; 'I tried to soothe myself with the consideration of my fame as a writer' (Boswell, journal, 13 Feb 1794, 'Great Biographer', 287). The entry for 12 April 1794 marks the end of his full journal (only a few later fragmentary notes survive). As secretary for foreign correspondence of the Royal Academy he campaigned in support of William Mitford's candidacy for the professorship of ancient history (having admired his conservative 'History of Greece'), in opposition to John Gillies. He returned to Auchinleck in June 1794 with his two elder daughters, who had not been there since their mother's death in 1789, where Alexander (now studying at Edinburgh University) received them. Betsy remained in London at a boarding-school in Soho Square, and James at Westminster. Archibald Montgomerie, eleventh earl of Eglinton, as lord lieutenant of Ayrshire, named Boswell one of his deputies, but Boswell declined the office, having differed with him earlier in Ayrshire political matters, and he yet nurtured hopes of a seat in parliament or a place in government or diplomacy. 
In March, Boswell wrote to Dundas, asking to be made minister or commissioner to Corsica, but was rejected, and he wrote to Paoli in Corsica asking that he and his brother T. D. might be remembered, should positions become open in the new administration there. He left Auchinleck for London on 12 January 1795, intending to return in August, and spent his time after his long absence characteristically 'relishing the Metropolis with avidity' (to Le Fleming, 3 March, 'Correspondence', 2nd edn, 2.450) but essentially, as he had been since the first edition of the 'Life', idle, and regretting again that he had never risen to political consequence. The last surviving letter written fully in his hand (13 April 1785), to Malone, concerns Samuel Parr's inscription for Johnson's monument in St Paul's. On 14 April Boswell was taken violently ill at a meeting of the Club, and had to be carried home to Great Portland Street. After about five weeks of severe pain, but without knowing his danger, he died there at 2 a.m. on 19 May 1795, attended during his last illness by Veronica, Euphemia, James, and his brother T. D. A twentieth-century diagnosis names uraemia as the cause of death, 'the result of acute and chronic urinary tract infection, secondary to postgonorrheal urethral stricture' (Ober, 28). His sons set out for Auchinleck to superintend funeral arrangements, and he was interred in the family vault at Auchinleck church on 8 June 1795. 
In his will made on 28 May 1785 Boswell had named Sir William Forbes executor. He left debts amounting to about $9000. An addition to his will (12 October 1791) nominated his brother T. D. Boswell, along with Forbes, guardian of his children. He left the care of his voluminous private diaries and correspondence and other papers to Forbes, Temple, and Malone, who were to inspect them and decide which if any should be published for the financial benefit of the children other than his heir, Alexander. Temple died the year after his friend, without having inspected the private papers. Forbes and Malone, although they never met, made inspections and corresponded with care and in detail, then left a decision about whether anything in the private writings warranted publication to Boswell's younger son, James. He when he came of age concurred with the executors' general opinion, against publication. In a codicil to his will, Boswell had left particular care of the 'Life' to Malone, who discharged his trust with immense dedication, as much a friend to Boswell and the biography as he was in Boswell's lifetime. With occasional help from Forbes he brought out the third edition, 'revised and augmented', in four octavo volumes in May 1799 and the fourth (1804), fifth (1807), and sixth (1811) editions. Boswell's son James contributed notes to the third edition, and read over and corrected the whole of the sixth, which was many times reprinted throughout the nineteenth century. Other major re-edited editions appeared steadily. G. B. Hill's edition of 1887 represented the high point of a long Victorian fascination with Boswell's book, and brought to a vernacular English text for the first time a complex and comprehensive editorial apparatus on a scale then normally reserved for the classics. L. F. Powell's 'revised and enlarged' edition of Hill appeared in six volumes from 1934 to 1964 (the fifth volume containing the 'Tour to the Hebrides' and other material, and the sixth volume a comprehensive index). This edition, usually referred to as Hill-Powell, held its position as the standard scholarly version of the work throughout the twentieth century. 
Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' remains the most famous biography in any language, one of Western literature's most germinal achievements: unprecedented in its time in its depth of research and its extensive use of private correspondence and recorded conversation, it sought to dramatize its subject in his authorial greatness and formidable social presence, and at the same time treat him with a profound sympathy and inhabit his inner life. Boswell both elevated the life of the writer to epic stature, and attended to the minute details of life as lived to provide a steady disclosure of character through their long gradual accretion. To the task of life-writing, Boswell brought his forensic and evidence-sifting habits from his Edinburgh legal training, and the practised journalist's touch for popularizing and rendering accessible a body of complex material. To the conversation scenes (which, based mostly on revisions of his journal entries, remain the best remembered, while making up only about half of the 'Life') he brought the avid eighteenth-century theatregoer's sense of character revelation through dramatically rendered social self-articulation. But though the 'Life' has delighted many, putting Johnson's thunderous aphoristic pronouncements into permanent quotable circulation, it remains -- like the biographer who produced it -- as controversial as it is famous. It has been attacked, in equal measure, for embodying a servile hero-worship and for offering a portrait grotesquely unflattering. While Boswell has been praised for keeping Johnson's name and greatness alive long after a taste for reading him faded, some Johnsonian scholars allege that Boswell's vision of a deeply troubled, frequently combative, and opinionated conversational colossus has unfairly eclipsed in the popular imagination Johnson's own writing, where it is said an intellect far more meditative, capacious, and analytically flexible is to be found. None the less, later scholarship has properly supplemented but never supplanted the 'Life''s basic vision, and has drawn upon Boswell's work as a central source even in those challenges to aspects of its representation. 
Boswell's private diaries, letters, and other papers -- long suppressed, unsystematically stored, and in some places expurgated by his heirs -- came to light in the early twentieth century when his descendants, the Talbots of Malahide, near Dublin, became interested in their literary and commercial value. These papers, and others from later unexpected recoveries from Malahide, then from Fettercairn House, Kincardineshire (home to the descendants of Forbes), and other sources, were eventually assembled after long effort by the American collector Ralph Heyward Isham (1890-1955), who sold his collection (later much augmented) to Yale University in 1949. In that year, under the inaugural general editorship of Frederick A. Pottle (1897-1987), the 'Yale Boswell Editions' were established, and made the publication of selections of the Boswell papers one of the great editorial undertakings of modern times. It brought Boswell a second, posthumous, wave of fame, detached him from the popular myth of a life lived in more or less constant attendance on Johnson, and brought notice to the crowded variety of his own life. It overturned the famously demeaning appraisal of Boswell made by Macaulay in his review of Croker's edition (1831) of the 'Life', which had done much to fix a distorted image of Boswell in the Victorian popular imagination. A reading edition of Boswell's journal, supplemented as needed by letters and other material, with the popular and bestselling 'London Journal, 1762-1763' (1950) appearing as the first in the sequence, ran eventually to fourteen volumes, the last being 'Boswell: the Great Biographer, 1789-1795', edited by Marlies K. Danziger and Frank Brady (1989). The main work of the Boswell editions, the parallel 'Research Edition' series, designed for a specialist scholarly readership, of volumes of correspondence, journals, and a genetic transcription of the manuscript of the 'Life of Johnson', continued into the twenty-first century. 
Boswell stood about 5 feet 6 inches tall, and his weight in 1776 was recorded as 11 stone 12 lbs. He had a very dark complexion and a thick crop of very dark hair. His portrait by Willison, in 1765, shows a young Boswell, in Pottle's description, 'odd, eager, egotistical, boyish, sensual -- and attractive' (Pottle, 'Earlier Years', 222), and in Brady's, 'a silken Boswell in furred scarlet and green, with graceful hands, a soft alert face, and some determination about him' (Brady, 'Later Years', 293). Reynolds's portrait (1785) shows Boswell aged forty-five in 'blue coat, white stock, and powdered wig, steady and dignified'. Here the 'face has taken on assured and self-conscious importance... [S]ome hint of cheerfulness lingers about the mouth, and the eyes remain always alert' (ibid., 293). George Dance's sketch, of April 1793, shows a 'well-set, double-chinned' Boswell, as does an undated semi-caricature from about the same period by Thomas Lawrence (Yale U., Beinecke L.). Boswell was an ebulliently animated social presence, a fine singer, an energetic anecdotalist, and an entertainingly gifted mimic. In October 1790 Frances Burney, not having seen him for some time, agreed to meet him knowing she would derive 'amusement from his oddity and good humour', and reported that his 'comic serious face and manner' had 'lost nothing of their wonted singularity' ('Journals and Letters', 1.181-2). 
Boswell was and remains a divisive personality, even for modern readers who find the fluent, precise, demotic prose of the journals compelling: an unstable amalgam of vibrant self-advertising vanity and self-tortured insecurity; an able but reluctant Edinburgh lawyer who marred his chances for judicial promotion with over-zealous and occasionally frenetic defences of poor criminal clients, with whom he felt a particular sympathy; a loving but erratic husband; a lenient, beloved, but overburdened father; a kind and improvement-oriented lowland laird who longed for life in London; a sentimental Jacobite who developed an extraordinary veneration for George III; libertinistic, but guilt-stricken at his own recurrent drunkenness and compulsive whoring. The unflinching confessional candour of his journals has found readerships both attracted and disconcerted. 'I have a strange feeling,' he wrote, 'as if I wished nothing to be secret that concerns myself' (journal, 4 Jan 1776). Yet these self-scrutinizing records -- like the biography of Johnson -- disclose at the same time Boswell's capacious and generous fascination with the mystery of the other, an engagement with men and women striking or distinctive in whatever way. In his travels and social conduct he sought to collect acquaintances and cultivate friendships with the high and the low, the famous, and the notorious, and his collections are drawn -- contrary to his Victorian reputation for mere toadying and tuft-hunting -- as much from the regions of the humble and the abject as from the eminent and accomplished. Boswell's drive to record himself and others, and his pertinacious pursuit of his two greatest claims on posterity's attention -- the journal and his biographical attachment to Johnson -- were not explicable to those closest to him: his Edinburgh legal fraternity, his father, or his wife. Others, like Johnson and Malone, understood and encouraged, and Boswell left behind a window on them all, and a record of his times, unrivalled in detail, accuracy, and social range. 


@@@@@


doc= 2951


Boswell, James (1778-1822), barrister and literary scholar, was born on 15 September 1778 at James's Court, Edinburgh. He was the fourth child and second surviving son of James Boswell (1740-1795) of Auchinleck, advocate, diarist, and biographer of Samuel Johnson, and his wife, Margaret ['see 'Boswell, Margaret Montgomerie (1738?-1789)], daughter of David Montgomerie, originally Laing (died 1752), of Lainshaw, Ayrshire, and his wife, Veronica Boswell (sister of Alexander Boswell, Lord Auchinleck). After the family's move to London in 1786, his father, eager for him to have an English education and intending him for the bar, enrolled him in an academy in Soho Square kept by Dr William Barrow, later archdeacon of Nottingham, and sent him to Westminster School in 1790. The elder Boswell's diaries and letters, in which the younger Boswell appears as Jamie, testify to a deep reciprocated affection between father and son, who as a boy consoled his father in his frequent despondencies and frustrations and urged him to take pride in his literary achievements and eminent social circle. He attended his father on his deathbed, and the last letter from the biographer to his closest friend, William Johnson Temple, was dictated to his son. 
Raised in his father's circles of friendship, the younger Boswell showed literary aptitudes early, and among his surviving juvenilia are numerous unpublished plays, squibs, poems, and comic operas -- including 'The siege of Carthage', in five acts, written when he was ten. His adult correspondence shows continuing cordiality with such figures as the Corsican general Pasquale Paoli, John Courtenay MP, Bennet Langton, his father's publisher Charles Dilly, and in particular Edmond Malone, who became a guardian, mentor, and virtually a second father. Malone wrote of him in 1796, 'He grows every day very like his father, but will not have his vivacity or wit; on the other hand he will be more studious and more steady' (Buchanan, 8). The elder Boswell, in a codicil to his will, had given Malone charge of the 'Life of Johnson' (first published 1791), to which Malone, with help from the younger Boswell, added new material and brought out its third (1799), fourth (1804), fifth (1807), and sixth (1811) editions. Boswell went to Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1797, and was admitted to the Inner Temple in January 1799. While still a student at Brasenose, he contributed notes to the third edition and further notes to the sixth, the entire text of which he read and corrected. He was awarded the degrees of BA (1801), and MA (1806), and was made a Vinerian fellow in 1812. He was called to the bar of the Inner Temple in 1805, acted as counsel on the home circuit and Surrey sessions, and was appointed a commissioner of bankrupts, but chose also to pursue his scholarly interests, largely under Malone's direction. His father's executors entrusted to him the decision as to whether the biographer's mass of private papers warranted publication, and when he came of age, he concurred with the executors' general opinion that it did not; the appearance in print of the elder Boswell's journals had to await the twentieth-century rediscoveries at Malahide and Fettercairn. 
Boswell joined the Albemarle Street circle of the publisher John Murray, and was elected a member of the Roxburghe Club at its first anniversary dinner in 1813. He wrote a memoir of Malone for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of June 1813, which he reprinted the next year for private circulation. Malone had assigned him work in collecting materials for his vast revised edition of Shakespeare, which at Malone's request Boswell completed and brought out in twenty-one volumes in 1821, nine years after Malone's death. For this edition, commonly referred to as Boswell-Malone or the 'third variorum', Boswell contributed notes, a long preliminary advertisement, a completion of Malone's 'Essay on the phraseology and metre of Shakespeare and his contemporaries', and a 'glossarial index', and reprinted his memoir of Malone. The second volume contained Malone's important biography of Shakespeare, assembled by Boswell from materials left in fragmentary form at the time of the editor's death. 'That Malone's life of Shakespeare is available to us in any form we owe to Boswell. He coped heroically with an impossible task' (Schoenbaum, 176). 
Boswell died suddenly on 24 February 1822, after a short illness described in a letter by his uncle as an 'inflammatory sore throat', in his rooms at 3 Garden Court, Middle Temple (T. D. Boswell to William Boswell, 25 Feb 1822, Boswell MS C542.7). He had never married. His brother, Sir Alexander Boswell, travelled to London to settle his affairs, only a short time before his own death from a gunshot wound in a duel, after which in Sir Alexander's pocket book was found his poem to James's memory which concluded, 'He never lost one friend, nor found one foe'. 
The Boswell-Malone edition of Shakespeare, reprinting significant earlier prefaces and judiciously selecting material for its annotation from editions as early as Pope's, with substantial new contributions from Malone and Boswell and a wide network of friends and informants, marked a notable advance in the development of the modern comprehensive variorum edition, and is cited in twentieth-century editions as an authoritative summation of eighteenth-century Shakespearian editing. 
Modern scholarship has shown the nature of Boswell's Shakespeare editing, and the breadth of his interests, to have been under-regarded. Malone-Boswell, on its appearance, 'was easily the most complete and valuable edition of Shakespeare yet to be published' (Sherbo, 'Shakespeare's Midwives', 154), and Boswell's careful, firm but tactful, and wide-ranging contributions -- far more than simply bringing Malone's work to completion -- point clearly to his sophisticated classical and antiquarian scholarship, in particular a thorough knowledge of early English dramatic and non-dramatic literature, and his informed sensitivity to both textual and critical issues. Volume 20 of the edition contained, unusually for editions of the time, Shakespeare's poems, with several important notes by Boswell attesting to their merit and defending them against disparaging assessments made by earlier commentators. His detailed remarks on the sonnets in particular made 'a lasting impression on later scholarship' (ibid., 179). The sale catalogue of his impressive library, moreover, shows Boswell to have had, among much else, a knowledgeable interest in opera, music, and continental literature, and to have been a capable Hispanist, and indicates the depth and range of his intellectual and collecting interests, as well as the breadth of his acquaintance with books, both old and current, and eminent literary people. 


@@@@@


doc= 2952


Boswell, John (1698-1757), author and Church of England clergyman, the son of John Boswell or Bozwel, of Puddletown, Dorset, was descended from a Gloucestershire family, and was born at Dorchester on 23 January 1698. After attending the school at Abbey Milton under the Revd George Marsh, he matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1715, but migrated to Balliol, where he proceeded BA in 1720. Before taking his bachelor's degree he acted as tutor to Lord Kinnaird. He was ordained deacon at Oxford and priest at Wells, and in 1727 was presented to the vicarage of St Mary Magdalene, Taunton. He was also, from 1736, prebendary of Wells Cathedral. He proceeded MA at King's College, Cambridge, in 1732. 
Boswell's published works reveal him as a vehement tory high-churchman. 'A Method of Study' (2 vols., 1738-43), written 'to assist the poor Clergyman in his studies, and to encourage the young Gentleman to look into books' (1.iii), commended the influential 'Reflections upon Learning' (1699) by the nonjuror Thomas Baker and reflected severely upon Paul de Rapin's whiggish 'History of England' (1726). When John Jones, vicar of Alconbury, revived debate about changes to the Church of England liturgy in 1749, Boswell responded immediately. 'Remarks upon a treatise, intituled Free and candid disquisitions relating to the Church of England' was a substantial work which appeared in two parts, in 1750 and 1751. In language that frequently recalled the 'church in danger' alarms of the Queen Anne period, Boswell rejected arguments for change, contending that the existing prayer book embodied the excellence of primitive liturgical practice and guarded against the puritan impulses that had produced 'the dreadful Scene of Misery, which we suffer'd in the last Century' ('Remarks', 1.75). For similar reasons he justified the restrictions on private conscience imposed by the 'Test Act', defended the practice of demanding subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' from all clergy, and argued for continuing the frequent public recitation of the Athanasian creed. Like many other high-churchmen of his time, Boswell was devoted to the memory of Charles I. His two-volume study, 'The Case of the Royal Martyr Considered with Candour', published posthumously in 1758, provides a remarkable example of the enduring vigour of old high-tory instincts. This book was provoked by two works. The first, 'A Letter to a Clergyman Relating to his Sermon on 30 January', was written by George Coade, a wool-stapler of Exeter, and published in 1746; the second, Thomas Birch's 'Enquiry', appeared in 1747. Boswell's volumes, which drew heavily from the 'Life of James, Duke of Ormonde' (1736) by Thomas Carte, the Jacobite historian, provided detailed refutation of old whig claims that Charles I was a tyrant whose disregard for the welfare of his subjects had been demonstrated supremely during the earl of Glamorgan's negotiations with the Irish Catholics in 1645. 
Boswell, who never married, died in June 1757. There is a Latin inscription to his memory in the church of St Mary Magdalene, Taunton, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 2953


Boswell, Robert (1746-1804), Glasite preacher, was a descendant of the Auchinleck family in Ayrshire. He received a classical education and became a writer to the signet in Edinburgh. While still young he became a Glasite, or Sandemanian, and was chosen by the church in Edinburgh to be one of their teaching elders. He published 'The Book of Psalms, in Metre; from the Original' in 1784. In his preface he explains his intention of producing as literal a translation as possible, based on Benjamin Kennicott's edition of the Hebrew 'Bible'. 
Boswell was on a visit to friends in London when he died in a chapel while preaching a sermon on the text 'All flesh is as grass' on Sunday 1 April 1804; this was probably the Sandemanian chapel, near the Barbican, where Michael Faraday later officiated as elder. 


@@@@@


doc= 2954


Boswell, Sir William (d. 1650), diplomat and patron of learning, was born in Suffolk. He matriculated from Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1600, graduating BA in 1604, becoming a fellow in 1606, and proceeding MA in 1607; he was incorporated at Oxford in 1608. In December 1614 he was granted a pass to travel abroad for three years but he remained absent from England for a total of eight despite remaining a fellow of Jesus until 1629. From at least April 1619 to July 1621 Boswell served as chief secretary to the English ambassador in Paris, Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Cherbury; Boswell and the poet George Herbert were dedicatees of Herbert's 'De veritate' in December 1622. 
Following his return to England Boswell became secretary to the new lord keeper, John Williams, bishop of Lincoln, dealing especially with episcopal revenues. On 11 November 1622 he was appointed clerk to the privy council in extraordinary, specializing in military and naval matters. He also served as MP for Boston, Lincolnshire, in 1624 and 1625, and acted as senior proctor for the University of Cambridge in 1624-5, during which time he liaised with Sir Dudley Carleton in an attempt to persuade the Dutch humanist Gerardus Joannes Vossius to take up a lectureship in history and political science at Cambridge. As secretary, he accompanied James Hay, earl of Carlisle, on two diplomatic missions: to France in 1624, and to Savoy (via Switzerland, Flanders, the Low Countries, and France) from May 1628 to February 1629. Soon after returning he married his cousin Margaret Boswell or Bosvile, a relation of Sir Ralph Bosvile of Eynsford in Kent, described as already 'well advanced in years' (Davies, 25), although probably aged thirty-four; the marriage appears to have been childless. During 1630 Boswell was absorbed by the appeal of his brother Thomas to be made proctor of Cambridge University. On 21 January 1631 Boswell, Inigo Jones, and Patrick Young were charged with the ordering of the king's ancient coins and medals, while on 12 April 1632, with Peter de Liques, he was created receiver-general of revenues from America. His services were also in demand by the privy council as 'a kind of literary intelligence officer' (Rees, lxxiv), employed in the verification of documents, and in seizing and examining the libraries of Sir Robert Cotton, Captain Henry Bell, Denzil Holles, Sir John Eliot, and John Selden. 
Boswell's most important appointment came in July 1632, when he succeeded Sir Dudley Carleton as England's resident agent in the United Provinces at The Hague, arriving in September 1632 and remaining until 1650 (excepting visits to England in 1634 and 1640). On 25 July 1633 he was knighted by Lord Vere at Bokstel, in Brabant. Intimately involved in the household of Elizabeth of Bohemia, he was recalled to England to discuss the case of Elizabeth's servant Francis Nethersole in 1634, and in early 1635 travelled to Germany to invest the elector palatine Charles Louis with the Order of the Garter. Boswell was instrumental in the publication of a tract describing a Jesuit plot to incite Scotland to rebel and overthrow Charles I, which was brought to his attention by Andreas ab Habernfeld; Boswell communicated it to Archbishop Laud, and received royal praise for his actions. He was also active in local religious controversy, although he collaborated with Vossius, professor of history at the new Athenaeum Illustre in Amsterdam. After civil war broke out in England Walter Strickland was dispatched by Cromwell to ensure the Netherlands' support for the parliamentary party; Boswell, an ardent royalist, used his influence to secure the country's neutrality; he also attempted to raise funds by pawning the queen's jewels, and to induce Dutch supporters to land an army in England. 
A respected diplomat, Boswell was also noted as a patron of learning, bibliophile and manuscript collector, and the hub of an impressive continental network of lettered men. He attributed 'all his proficiency in learning, whatever it be, to the goodness' of John Dee's preface to Euclid, (Worthington, 'Diary', 59-60): and was remembered as 'an excellent philosopher and mathematician' (Worthington, preface), but his interests ranged more widely: from Anglo-Saxon and oriental literatures to the latest scientific experiments. One of the early followers of Galileo in England, Boswell counted among his intellectual contacts William Camden, James Ussher, Henry and John Spelman, John Selden, Thomas Lydiat, Theodore Haak, John Pell, Lodewijck Huygens, Robert Cotton, G. P. Vossius, Fabri de Peiresc, Joseph Mede, Pierre Dupuy, Henry Wotton, Samuel Hartlib, John de Laet, Meric Casaubon, and Simonds D'Ewes; only a tiny proportion of his correspondence survives in two volumes in the British Library (Add. MSS 6394, 6395). Boswell was renowned for his manuscript collection, which contained prized and as yet unpublished works by John Dee, William Gilbert, and Francis Bacon, who had appointed him his literary executor; some of these passed after his death to Isaac Gruter, who published them with the Elsevier press in Amsterdam. 
By the time of Charles I's execution Boswell was ill; he died at The Hague in May 1650; much of his library apparently disappeared. His widow, Margaret, died in 1682 at the age of eighty-seven, leaving two Sir William Boswell scholarships to Sevenoaks School boys to attend her late husband's college in Cambridge. In Dr John Worthington's words, Boswell was 'a learned man, a great encourager of learning, zealous for the Church of England, faithful in the execution of his embassy, and highly valued by eminent persons' (Worthington, 'Diary', 59-60). 


@@@@@


doc= 2955


Bosworth, Joseph (1787/8-1876), Old English scholar, the third son of Thomas Bosworth of Etwall, Derbyshire, was born at Etwall and was baptized there on 1 June 1788. He was educated at Repton grammar school, and then at the University of Aberdeen, where at an early age he took the degree of MA, and subsequently that of LLD. He later became a member of Trinity College, Cambridge. He was ordained deacon in 1814, and priest in 1815. After serving as curate of Bunny in Nottinghamshire, he was in 1817 presented to the vicarage of Little Horwood, in Buckinghamshire, a preferment that he held for twelve years. 
In 1821 Bosworth published two educational works entitled 'Latin Construing, or, Lessons from Classical Authors' and 'An Introduction to Latin Construing', the former of which went through six and the latter through five editions. In 1823 appeared his 'Elements of Anglo-Saxon Grammar', which was the earliest work of its kind in the English language. It showed no more scientific knowledge of the structure of the language than did the works of Hickes and Lye, from which it was compiled, but it served to awaken among English speakers an interest in the earliest form of their native tongue. In 1826 Bosworth published 'A Compendious Grammar of the Primitive English or Anglo-Saxon Language', an abridgement of the former work, with some improvements. The author had become acquainted with the epoch-making grammar of Rasmus Christian Rask (1787-1832), and was able to correct several of the most important errors of the original 'Elements', though his grasp of the philological discoveries of the Danish scholar was very imperfect. 
During his residence at Little Horwood, Bosworth took great interest in proposals for tackling poverty, and published several pamphlets on this subject. In 1829 he became chaplain in the Netherlands, first at Amsterdam and then in 1832 at Rotterdam. In 1831 the degree of PhD was conferred on him by the University of Leiden. He lived in the Netherlands until 1840, and made occasional visits to England. In 1834 he took the degree of BD at Trinity College, Cambridge, and in 1839 that of DD. While in the Netherlands Bosworth wrote his principal work, the 'Anglo-Saxon Dictionary' (1838), to which is prefixed 'An essay on the origin of the English, German, and Scandinavian languages and nations' (reprinted separately in 1848) and a sketch of Old English grammar. The latter, which is condensed from Rask and Grimm, is well arranged and in general accurate; but the dictionary itself shows that the author had only a very superficial acquaintance with the new philology. Nevertheless, despite its unscientific character, and its many errors of detail (partly due to the author's lack of access to English public libraries), the work was a great advance on previous dictionaries in English. Bosworth also published while in the Netherlands 'The Origin of the Dutch, with a Sketch of their Language and Literature' (1836); 'Scandinavian Literature' (1839); and a translation of the 'Book of Common Prayer' into Dutch, the copyright of which he made over to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. In 1840 Bosworth became vicar of Waith in Lincolnshire, and in 1848 he published, under the title of 'A Compendious Dictionary of Anglo-Saxon', an abridgement of his larger work, omitting the references, but supplying many additional words and corrections (reprinted in 1852, 1855, 1859, and 1882). In 1855 he published an English translation of King Alfred's Old English version of 'Orosius', and also a facsimile of part of its two manuscripts, with a literal English translation and notes. In 1857 he was presented to the rectory of Water Stratford, in Buckinghamshire, and was incorporated a member of Christ Church, Oxford. In 1858 he was appointed Rawlinson professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford, and in the following year he issued an edition of the Old English text of Alfred's 'Orosius'. His only subsequent publication of importance was an edition in parallel columns of the Gothic and Anglo-Saxon gospels, and the versions of Wycliffe and Tyndale. 
Bosworth's works realized for him (according to his own statement quoted in 'The Academy' of 10 June 1876) the sum of $18,000. In 1867 he gave to the University of Cambridge $10,000 to establish a professorship of Anglo-Saxon. 
After being appointed professor, Bosworth resided either at Oxford or at his rectory of Water Stratford. He was married three times, though the details of his first wife are unknown. On 8 December 1853 he married, at Leckhampton, near Cheltenham, Anne Margaret Elrington (died 1863), daughter of John Elliot and widow of Lieutenant-Colonel John Hamilton Elrington. After Anne's death he married, on 5 November 1867, Emily Stonhouse ('b'. 1821/2), widow of Henry Stonhouse, fellow of New College, Oxford. There were no children from his marriages. Until a few days before his death, which occurred when he was eighty-eight, at 20 Beaumont Street, Oxford, on 27 May 1876, he was accustomed to work from nine in the morning until six in the evening, principally on the new edition of his larger dictionary, the publication of which had been undertaken by the Clarendon Press. He also left a mass of annotations on the Anglo-Saxon charters. Bosworth was a fellow of the Royal Society, and a member of many learned societies both at home and abroad. He was buried in the churchyard of St Giles, Water Stratford, on 2 June 1876. 
After Bosworth's death the Old English dictionary was committed by the delegates of the Clarendon Press to the editorship of Professor T. N. Toller, of Manchester, and the first and second instalments of the new edition appeared in 1882. Unfortunately Bosworth's material, much of which had already been printed, was very far behind current philological knowledge, and the work was received with general dissatisfaction, especially as the long-standing announcement of its appearance had prevented the preparation of any rival dictionary. 


@@@@@


doc= 2956


Bosworth, William (d. in or before 1651), poet, is known only for a volume of verse published posthumously in 1651 by R. C. (and reissued two years later). The volume is entitled 'The Chast and Lost Lovers Lively Shadowed in the Persons of Arcadius and Sepha'. The text is prefaced by a dedicatory epistle to John Finch and an epistle to the reader by R. C., and by five verses -- by L. B., F. L. (Francis Lovelace), E. G. (Edmund Gayton), S. P., and L. C. -- which lament Bosworth's early death. 
The chief poem of the volume, 'Arcadius and Sepha', is followed by 'Hinc lachrimae, or, The Author to Aurora', verses 'to the immortall memory of the fairest and most vertuous Lady, the Lady -- ', and 'to his dear Friend, Mr John Emely, upon his Travells'. In the epistle to the reader R. C. states that Bosworth studied to imitate Ovid, Marlowe (from whose mythological poetry Bosworth takes 'the strength of his fancy, and the shadowing of his wit', Sidney, and Spenser. In his dedication R. C. declares that Bosworth was only nineteen when he wrote the work and that 'had he lived, [he] might have been as well the Wonder as the Delight of the Arts, and been advanced by them amongst the highest in the Temple of Fame'. 
An engraving dated 1637, by G. Glover of a young man aged thirty, was identified by Francis Allison in 1811 as a likeness of Bosworth ('GM', 1st ser., 81/2 1811, 124-5). He wrote that the poet was born in 1607 into an ancient and illustrious family of Boxworth, Cambridgeshire. These facts became standard in accounts of Bosworth's life throughout the nineteenth century but the emphasis in the 1651 volume on the poet's nineteen years and early death makes a birth date of 1607 unlikely. 


@@@@@


doc= 2957


Boteler, Edward (d. 1670), Church of England clergyman, was born at Barnwell St Andrews, Northamptonshire, and was probably the son of Noel Boteler, gentleman, and thus brother of William Boteler. He attended Oundle School in 1627 and matriculated from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1635. He graduated BA in 1638 and proceeded MA in 1642. He was ordained deacon in 1641 and priest in 1646. He became a fellow of Magdalene, but on 8 April 1644 he was ejected from his fellowship by the parliamentary visitors. He must have been married by 1655 or 1656, when his son Noel was born. Before 1658 Boteler became rector of Winteringham, Lincolnshire. In that year he preached a funeral sermon for the second earl of Mulgrave, published the following year as 'The Worthy of Ephratah'. In 1660 he petitioned the crown, apparently successfully, for presentation to the rectory of Titchmarsh, Northamptonshire, which he claimed he had been given by the patron, the earl of Manchester. 
Boteler was a strong, though not an active, royalist. On the return of Charles II he preached a sermon of rejoicing in Lincoln Cathedral, and a similar one at Hull on the occasion of the coronation. He was made one of the king's chaplains. On 29 September 1665 he was installed in the prebend of Southscarle, in Lincoln Cathedral; this he exchanged on 12 October 1668 for the prebend of Leicester St Margaret's, also in Lincoln. He died in 1670. 


@@@@@


doc= 2958


Butler, Nathaniel (b. 1577, d. in or after 1643), colonial governor and maritime author, was the elder son of the second marriage of John Butler (died 1614) of the Toft, in Sharnbrook, Bedfordshire, and Mary, daughter of James Gedge and widow of Christopher Harris. On John Butler's death the family's holdings in Sharnbrook passed to Butler's elder half-brother, Sir Oliver. Butler joined the Virginia Company, where he became a supporter of Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick. On 28 April 1619 he was elected, by 297 votes to three, governor of the Virginia Company's sister organization, the Bermuda Company. His elevation was the result of a bargain struck between Warwick and another leading Virginia Company member, Sir Edwin Sandys. Warwick helped Sandys to become the company's treasurer, and in return Sandys delivered the votes of his followers to Butler, who shortly afterwards was also appointed to the board of the Virginia Company (9 June 1619). Butler's governorship of Bermuda lasted three years, during which time he began work on his 'Historye of the Bermudaes'. At his departure on 25 October 1622 he journeyed to Virginia, evidently on behalf of Warwick, who had now turned against Sandys. There Butler helped to lead an expedition of eighty men against local natives, but his main purpose in travelling to the colony was to gather evidence of its deteriorating condition and misgovernment. When he eventually returned to England, in 1623, Butler presented his findings to the privy council in a 900-word paper entitled 'The unmasked face of our colony as it was in the winter of the year 1622' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/526/98). His scathing criticisms, reinforced by additional findings gathered by Warwick, persuaded the king to establish a commission of inquiry into Virginia's government in May 1623. 
Like Warwick, Butler was a Hispanophobe, and when in 1624 war with Spain was imminent he proposed that Bermuda should be used as a base from which to attack the Spanish West Indian fleets. His idea was not taken up but when hostilities began in 1625 he was appointed captain of an armed merchantman, in which capacity he participated in the ill-fated expedition to Cadiz. On 27 October the expedition's commander, Sir Edward Cecil, ordered him to organize the fleet's boats in preparation for the evacuation of the troops from Port Puntal. He returned to England by way of Ireland and on 27 June 1626 he was appointed captain of another armed merchantman in the fleet led by Robert Bertie, Lord Willoughby. The expedition sailed in October but was quickly abandoned after encountering severe storms in the Bay of Biscay. Shortly afterwards Butler wrote, but did not publish, a treatise entitled 'A discourse of the miscarriages of our two late expeditions, and the cares propounded for the future'. Again he advocated using Bermuda as a springboard from which to intercept the Spanish West Indian fleets, and this time strongly hinted that he himself possessed the qualities needed to take charge of such a base. He also argued for the capture of Gibraltar, an idea which Cecil had considered and rejected in 1625. However, if Butler's views were brought to the notice of the government they were ignored. In the following year he commanded yet another merchantman, this time on the expedition to the Ile de Re when he lay off the western side of the island. His final naval service, between 10 June and 31 December 1628, was as captain of one of the king's own ships, during which time he participated in the earl of Lindsey's unsuccessful expedition to relieve the Huguenots of La Rochelle. 
In 1634 Butler was invited by the head of the admiralty commission, Richard Weston, first earl of Portland, to apply for a captaincy in the forthcoming ship money fleet, but by the time he did so in March 1635 Portland had died and he had missed his opportunity. 1634 also saw Butler complete a series of six 'dialogues', of which two were based on his treatise of 1626/7. These took the form of an extended conversation between a fictional admiral and a captain on a wide range of maritime topics, including the naval expeditions of the 1620s. Butler did not regard this work as finished, however, and continued to revise it into the early 1640s. It is not known whether he continued to seek naval employment after 1635. 
On 23 April 1638 Butler was appointed governor of Providence Island, a colony 110 miles off the east coast of Nicaragua. His former patron the earl of Warwick was a member of the Providence Island Company, of which Warwick's brother Henry Rich, earl of Holland, was governor. Providence Island was intended as a 'godly' colony on a similar model to Massachusetts, but, to protect it against Spanish dominance in the Caribbean, required military and financial adventures that were often contrary to its religious aspirations. Butler's military experience was cited by the company at his appointment, as the company sought to defend those privateers who used the island as a base safe from the dominance of the Spanish fleet. Butler's appointment saw administrative powers over the militia and public works transferred from the council of the island to a new council of war, deviating from the usual custom in English colonies where both were controlled by civilians. He also brought new colonists with him to the island, probably with the intention that they would replace or dilute the influence of those colonists who were illegally appropriating company property. In May 1639 he began an expedition in the Caribbean, and on 6 June 1639 seized Trujillo, in Honduras, but the town was almost empty and offered few prizes. He sailed north to Cuba but his crews were largely ignorant of the Caribbean, and he was lucky to return to Providence by September. Meanwhile the island was riven by dissension over its administration and economic development; on 23 February 1640 Butler left the island to answer charges laid against him by his opponents among the colonists in the company's general court. After a hearing on 19-20 June 1640 he was cleared of misconduct, but his claim to have ransomed Trujillo for 16,000 pieces of eight was dismissed. He disappears from the record thereafter, but evidence from one version of his 'Dialogues' suggests that he was still living in 1643. 
Butler may never have married. His place of settled residence in England has not been established, but his letter to Portland of March 1635 was written from Coventry. His 'Dialogues' were not published until 1685, while his 'Historye of the Bermudaes' did not appear in print until 1882. Boteler, the more archaic spelling of his surname, was adopted by his 1685 publisher, Moses Pitt; he himself spelt his name Butler. 


@@@@@


doc= 2959


Boteler, William Fuller (1777-1845), judge, was born on 5 January 1777, the only son of William Boteler FSA (1745/6-1818) of Brook Street, Eastry, Kent, and his first wife, Sarah (1747/8-1777), daughter of Thomas Fuller, of Statenborough, Kent, who died shortly after giving birth to him. The family had lived at Eastry for many generations and his father was a collector of antiquarian records relating to Kent. He had five half-brothers who rose to high office in the army and navy, and a sixth who was a clergyman. Boteler was educated under Dr Raine at Charterhouse from 1795. He went on to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman for 1799; the same year he graduated BA and was elected a fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge. He proceeded MA in 1802. Admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 19 November 1801, he was called to the bar on 23 November 1804 and joined the home circuit; he also practised as an equity draftsman and conveyancer. Though his advancement at the equity bar was slow, he eventually became the leading tithe lawyer of the day. 
Boteler attended the quarter sessions in Kent and in 1807 he became recorder of Canterbury; he was subsequently appointed recorder of Sandwich, Hythe, New Romney, and Deal, as well as high steward of Fordwich -- posts which he held until his death. He was made a king's counsel in Trinity term 1831, and became a bencher of his inn on 27 May 1831 and treasurer in 1843-4. On 29 November 1808 at Betteshanger in Kent, he married Charlotte (1771/2-1839), daughter of James Leigh Joynes, of Mount Pleasant, near Gravesend; they had three sons (William and Richard, the younger sons, died as infants), and six daughters. 
On 16 December 1844 Boteler was appointed senior commissioner of the district court of bankruptcy at Leeds. He died on 23 October 1845 from injuries sustained in a railway accident at Masborough on 20 October 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 2960


Botfield, Beriah (1807-1863), antiquary and industrialist, was born at Earl's Ditton, Shropshire, on 5 March 1807, the eldest son of Beriah Botfield (1768-1813) of Norton Hall, Northamptonshire, and Charlotte, daughter of William Withering MD. Botfield was educated first at Harrow School, where he subsequently established a medal for the encouragement of foreign languages, and then privately. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1824, and graduated BA in 1828. He became MP for Ludlow in 1840 and held his seat until 1847 when he was defeated. In 1857 he was again returned for that borough and held the seat until his death; he was a liberal conservative, and described as one 'who wanted to promote 'the greatest happiness of the greatest number'' ('WWBMP', 41). From 1850 he alone controlled the Shropshire collieries and ironworks that were the basis of the Botfield fortune. The family's foundry at Old Park was once the second largest in England. Botfield married Isabella (died 1911), second daughter of Sir Baldwin Leighton, bt, on 21 October 1858, at Alberbury, Shropshire. There were no children. 
Botfield produced a number of volumes that reflected his interests in early printed books and manuscripts. His 'Notes on Cathedral Libraries of England' (1849) contained the fruits of much careful examination of what were then little-examined collections. His edition of 'Catalogues of the Library of Durham Cathedral' (1840, for the Surtees Society) is also of value. He edited a number of other works: for the Roxburghe Club (of which he was a member), 'Manners and Household Expenses of England in the Thirteenth and Fifteenth Centuries' (1841; this edition has also been attributed to T. H. Turner); for the Maitland Club, John Row's 'History of the Kirk of Scotland, 1558-1637' (1842); for the Abbotsford Club, Gilbert Hay's translation of 'The Buke of Order of Knyghthood' (1847); and, for the Bannatyne Club, 'Original Letters on Ecclesiastical Affairs of Scotland' (1851). He also contributed various articles to 'Archaeologia', the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and the 'Philobiblon Miscellany'. He set up a private printing press at Norton Hall and printed some of his own writings there in limited editions, including his account of the genealogy of the family of Boteville or Botfield, 'Stemmata Botevilliana' (1843) and excerpts from the catalogue of the library of Thomas Hearne, 'Bibliotheca Hearneiana' (1848). 
Botfield was also a notable book collector, one sufficiently distinguished to be elected a member of the Roxburghe Club. He died at his London home in Grosvenor Square on 7 August 1863, and his collection, primarily of early printed and colour plate books, often in sumptuous bindings, passed on his death to the Thynne family of Bath, with whom he claimed relationship on no very compelling grounds. His widow, Isabella, married Alfred Seymour on 18 August 1866. Most of Botfield's books, which included a number of Caxtons and other incunabula, remained at Longleat, the Thynne family home, although some were sold at sales at Sothebys (11 June 1979) and Christies (30 March 1994). His collection of paintings, mainly Dutch landscapes, also remained at Longleat, largely intact. Botfield produced a catalogue of his picture collection in 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 2961


Bothwell, Adam (1529?-1593), bishop of Orkney, was the son of Francis Bothwell (died 1535) and his second wife, Katherine Bellenden. He came of an important Edinburgh family with many links to the king's government. His paternal grandfather, William, was a town burgess and dean of guild. His father was provost of Edinburgh in 1523-4, a lord of council and session from 1532, and often a lord of the articles. His uncle Richard Bothwell (died 1549) became provost of St Mary-of-the-Fields, Edinburgh, in 1524, and in the same year was appointed director of the royal chancery. His maternal grandfather, Thomas Bellenden of Auchinoull, was made director of chancery in 1538 and justice-clerk a year later. His mother later married Oliver Sinclair, a favourite of James V and the likely commander of the Scottish army defeated at Solway Moss in 1542. His half-sister Janet, the daughter of his father's first marriage to Janet Richardson, married Sir Archibald Napier of Merchiston, who became general of the mint; the mathematician John Napier was their son. 
Nothing is recorded of Adam Bothwell's early life, but he was certainly a university graduate. His father had studied at the University of Orleans and Bothwell may have done the same. It is probably significant that in 1560 he urged his brother-in-law to send the young John Napier 'to the schuyllis: over to France or to Flanderis, for he can leyr na guid at home' (Keller, 115). Nor is it known when he took orders. In 1552 his half-brother William Napier died as parson of Ashkirk, a prebend of Glasgow Cathedral, and shortly afterwards Bothwell succeeded him in this valuable benefice. He also inherited property in the outskirts of Edinburgh at Corstorphine (where he became vicar), Briglands, and Henderstoun, and at Dunsyre, Lanarkshire. In 1555 he went on government business to Orkney, an appointment he could have owed either to his brother-in-law Gilbert Balfour of Westray, the husband of his second sister, Margaret, or to his stepfather, Oliver Sinclair, a near relation of the earls of Caithness. Bothwell's links with the northern isles became much closer four years later, following the death of Robert Reid, bishop of Orkney, on 6 September 1558. After the temporality of the see had been granted to his cousin Sir John Bellenden, Bothwell was himself nominated bishop on 24 July 1559 and provided on 2 August following, the necessary bulls having been secured at Rome and brought home by Balfour. He had most likely been consecrated by 14 October, when he was admitted to the temporality. He was probably then thirty years old. 
Bothwell set out for his diocese in February 1560, but was captured by an English ship and held prisoner for several weeks. He arrived in Orkney only in April, to face problems of all kinds: his health was often poor; a large proportion of his revenues had been disposed of in pensions by his predecessor; and his appearance in his diocese was far from welcome to some important members of his flock, notably Henry and Robert Sinclair, who took possession of the episcopal residence at Birsay and, according to Bothwell himself, set upon him as he returned from a visitation, intending 'to haiff alder slaine me, or taiken me' (Donaldson, 27). But Bothwell was not discouraged. From the first he showed himself a committed proponent of the reformed religion and its establishment in his diocese. Later he described how, 'when idolatry and superstitione was suppressed', he curbed 'the same also in his bounds, preached the word, administered the sacraments, planted ministers in Orknay and Shetland, disponed benefices and gave out stipends out of his rents to ministers, exhorters and readers' (Kirk, 'Patterns of Reform', 215). 
During 1560 and 1561 Bothwell established the foundations for reform primarily through his cathedral's dignitaries, whom he appointed to the parishes from which their revenues derived. He also imported men sympathetic to the cause of reform. Prominent among them were Gilbert Foulsie, a former monk who had become Bothwell's secretary before being made archdeacon of Orkney; the bishop's cousin Francis Bothwell, who had been a friar and now became treasurer of Kirkwall Cathedral; and William Lauder, a Glasgow notary who succeeded Foulsie as the bishop's secretary. In Shetland Bothwell appointed Archdeacon Jerome Cheyne, who had served Bishop Reid, to act as 'minister in these parts' (Kirk, 'Patterns of Reform', 29), and by 1562 two other priests were acting as readers there. An appeal to the assembly in 1563 shows that elders and deacons had by then been installed in Orkney. The impetus was maintained and the parishes were quickly staffed by reformed clergy, so that by 1567 there were more than thirty ministers or readers in Orkney and Shetland, with almost every parish being served. 
Bothwell helped the reformed church to achieve stability in Orkney by quickly making arrangements for paying ministers' stipends. However, while this proved acceptable to the general assembly, his own finances were a continual cause of trouble. At odds with a series of chamberlains, by the time of his death Bothwell claimed to be owed 10,000 merks by the heir of one of them. Nevertheless, he seems to have been resident in his diocese for at least a part of every year in the early 1560s, and between June 1563 and December 1566 he also attended most of the general assemblies. In December 1563 he became a member of the committee set up to revise the 'Book of Discipline', and he was appointed to committees in 1565 and 1566. In keeping with the approved practice of the reformed church he married; he and his wife, Margaret (died 1608), daughter of John Murray of Touchadam, had six sons and two daughters. 
From 1564 Bothwell was increasingly involved in secular affairs, in ways which eventually brought him into conflict with the kirk. On 14 January he was admitted an extraordinary lord of the court of session and on 13 November 1565 an ordinary lord, and he also became a member of the privy council. It was not these promotions as such which first brought trouble upon him, but his marrying Queen Mary to the fourth earl of Bothwell, on 15 May 1567. At first, indeed, the bishop seems to have escaped censure -- the order of the reformed kirk had been used, and he was still able to take part in the coronation of James VI on 29 July following, when he anointed the infant king on the head, shoulder blades, and hands. Earlier that day he had been one of those who received Queen Mary's demission of the crown, and shortly afterwards he took part in the expedition, led by his cousin William Kirkcaldy of Grange, which set off for the northern isles in pursuit of the queen's husband, recently created duke of Orkney. The ship ran upon a rock in Bressay Sound in East Shetland, and the bishop saved his life only by a desperate leap, in full armour, from the wreck into a crowded lifeboat. 
Adam Bothwell was not rewarded as he might have expected for his apparent willingness to risk his life in the young king's cause. Instead he seems to have fallen victim to the insecurities of Regent Moray's government, exacerbated by the ambitions of Lord Robert Stewart for control of Orkney (of which he later became earl, in 1581), and perhaps also by the kirk's growing misgivings concerning bishops. In December 1567 several accusations were made against him in the general assembly: he had been lax in visitation; his employment as a lord of session had distracted him from his ecclesiastical ministry; he had associated with Francis Bothwell, allegedly a papist; and he had solemnized the queen's marriage to the earl of Bothwell, contrary to an act of assembly prohibiting the marriage of a divorced adulterer. The bishop admitted that he could not reside continuously in his diocese, 'by reason of the evil air and the weakness of his body' (Kirk, 'Patterns of Reform', 40), but though he made a spirited defence against the other charges he was none the less suspended from all function in the ministry. In July 1568 he was reinstated on condition that he publicly confessed his fault concerning the queen's marriage, but the episode had weakened his position, and, late in September, under heavy pressure from Lord Robert Stewart, Bothwell conveyed to the latter all the lands, rights, and revenues of his see in exchange for the commendatorship of Holyrood Abbey. He remained bishop but was never again appointed by the assembly to oversee his diocese, and he was superseded in his functions by local ministers acting as commissioners. 
His bargain with Stewart and his failure thereafter to act as bishop led to further charges being brought against Bothwell in the assembly of March 1570. His exchange of episcopal office for monastic lands was denounced as simoniacal, and he was also criticized for neglecting his diocese, for acting as a lord of session, for failing to preach, and for retaining the title of bishop, especially as he took 'Roman titles as Reverend Father in God which pertaineth to no Ministers of Christ Jesus, nor is given them in Scriptures'. On this last point Bothwell abased himself, admitting that he was just 'a worm of the earth not worthy any reverence' (Kirk, 'Second Book of Discipline', 78). But he defended himself against the other charges, in terms which suggest that he felt he was unjustly used, especially concerning his acting as a lord of session, a position he had accepted: 'with the advice of godly and learned men, compting it not repugnant or contrariouse to any good order as yet established in the Kirke, and alledged that diverse others having benefices, have done the like, and are not condemned for so doing. (Mullan, 31)' The immediate outcome of the assembly's censures is unknown, but thereafter Bothwell had no contact with his diocese besides receiving a few presentations to churches. Nevertheless, he retained his episcopal title and in 1580 was one of the bishops whom the general assembly demanded should submit to its authority. 
Instead Bothwell lived in Edinburgh and acted as a government servant, as, indeed, he had long done. A member of the commission which in 1568-9 had brought accusations against Queen Mary in England, in January 1572 he was one of the government's representatives which negotiated the concordat of Leith, regularizing the organization and finances of the kirk. Later that year he represented the king's party in its attempts to make peace with the queen's followers. In 1578 he appears to have supported the earls of Atholl and Argyll against the former regent, Morton. He was a regular attender of privy council meetings from the early 1570s onwards, and was also active as a lord of session. He was present at almost every parliament until his death. When King James returned from Scandinavia in 1590, Bothwell was consulted about the arrangements for Anne of Denmark's coronation, on the basis of his involvement in James's in 1567. He had two residences in Edinburgh, the 'commendator's house' on the north side of Holyrood Palace, and a house in Byres' Close, very near the tolbooth, where the court of session sat. 
It is not known where Bothwell kept his library, which its surviving inventory shows to have been impressively large and wide-ranging. He clearly started buying books in his student days, and acquired works by many classical and patristic authors. He added to his collection at least into the 1580s, for instance in the field of theology, when the writings of Beza joined those of earlier Reformation luminaries such as Calvin, Melancthon, and Bullinger. His purchases indicate that he could read Latin, Hebrew, Greek, French, Italian, and Spanish. His judicial employment, as well as his work as a bishop, probably accounts for his owning large numbers of books on canon and civil law, while his continued ill health (in 1582 he excused himself from obeying the kirk's order to take on a congregational ministry on the grounds of sickness) may explain his many books on medicine and surgery. A typical representative of the Scottish Renaissance, if an unusually widely read one, he was interested in political theory, owning books by Buchanan and Bodin, possessed several works of history, and also concerned himself with such subjects as mathematics, geography, philosophy, astronomy, witchcraft, and cookery. Perhaps it was because he lived so close to the royal court that he had a copy of Castiglione's 'The Courtier'. 
Although financial aspects of his episcopate periodically resurfaced to trouble his peace, as did his deal with Robert Stewart, Bothwell is not known to have visited Orkney again after 1567. He died in Edinburgh on 23 August 1593 and was buried in Holyrood Abbey church. He had resigned as a lord of session a few weeks earlier, on 2 July, when he was succeeded by his eldest son, John, who in 1595 returned to the king 'ane great rubie set in golde' which James had pawned to the bishop for $500 Scots ('Scots peerage', 4.432). A courtier and a privy councillor, John Bothwell was created Lord Holyroodhouse on 20 December 1607, and died on 26 November 1609. 


@@@@@


doc= 2962


Botley, Samuel (1640/41-1677), stenographer, was a son of Robert Botley, citizen of London and cordwainer. The year of his birth has been calculated from the engraved portrait by William Dolle in the first edition of the shorthand manual for which Botley is chiefly remembered, 'Maximum in minimo' (first published in late 1674 or more probably early 1675), which gives his age as thirty-three in 1674. Samuel, who was made free of the Cordwainers' Company by patrimony on 12 April 1662, does not appear to have followed his father's profession, and from at least 1668 and probably until 1672 was employed as a messenger in the chamber in the lord chamberlain's department. According to both Botley's 'Maximum in minimo' (1675?), sig. K2, and the burial record for their daughter Mary in the register of St Thomas the Apostle, London, on 4 November 1677, his wife's name was Hannah, but nothing else is known of her. 
By no later than 1673 Botley was teaching the shorthand system invented by Jeremiah Rich (1630?-1667?), with whom he appears to have had some particular connection, at his house in Thames Street, London, adjacent to Vintners Hall, and subsequently at Colonel Mason's coffee house in Cornhill, London. Botley was among those who subscribed to the publication of later editions of Rich's shorthand edition of the 'New Testament' (1673, 1675) and was supplying both this and Rich's shorthand version of the metrical psalms of Sterngold and Hopkins, 'The Whole Book of Psalms in Meter' (1673), from his house in Thames Street. Although in his introduction to 'Maximum in minimo' (1675?) Botley addresses scholars in 'London, Bristol and Exeter', it is not known that he himself ever visited the west country, and his treatise may have been designed, at least in part, to foster an early form of distance learning. 'Maximum in minimo' was simply a reissue of Jeremiah Rich's 'The Penns Dexterity' to which Botley had added his own contribution of 'the whole Terms of the Law in Mr Rich's Character Compleated'; there were at least five subsequent reprints or editions, several of which feature re-engraved versions of William Dolle's original portrait. 
On 15 October 1677, according to the register of St James Garlickhythe, Botley died of a gastrointestinal obstruction and was buried in the neighbouring parish of St Thomas the Apostle, Thames Street, London, on 18 October 1677. 


@@@@@


doc= 2963


Botwulf (fl. 654-c.670), abbot of Iken, began to build his minster of 'Icanho' (now conclusively identified as Iken, Suffolk) in 654 according to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. Ceolfrith, the future abbot of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow, is said by his anonymous biographer to have visited East Anglia 'to see the monastic practices of Abbot Botwulf, whom report had proclaimed on all sides to be a man of unparalleled life and learning and full of the grace of the Holy Spirit' (Plummer, 1.389), a visit which would have occurred 'c'.670. This suggests that the rule observed at Iken, unfortunately unknown, was a formative one which influenced the practices of other major late seventh-century houses. 
Iken Minster, where excavations in 1977 found remains of the early church and monastic settlement, controlled at least one daughter house on the opposite side of England. A charter of 674-90 preserved in the 'Testament of St Mildburg' records the foundation of Much Wenlock Minster, Mercia, on land given by AEthelheah, abbot of Botwulf's monastery of Iken, 'on condition that the said place shall by God's will remain, not on compulsion but willingly, under the tutelage of the church of the venerable Abbot Botwulf' ('AS chart.', S 1798). A twelfth-century charter records a tradition that Hadstock, Essex, was another minster founded by Botwulf. 
These fragments of evidence identify Botwulf as a religious leader of high status in the first years of East Anglian Christianity, almost certainly acting under royal patronage, who extended his monastic federation through cross-kingdom family networks. The much fuller account of his life written by Folcard after 'c'.1070, which amplifies the context of royal patronage, states that Botwulf and his brother Adulf were trained in Germany, and gives the year of his death as 680, seems to be largely imaginary. In the tenth and eleventh centuries his relics were divided up and are recorded variously at Peterborough, Thorney, Bury, Ely, and Hadstock, a multiplicity of sites which raises a suspicion that two or more saints called Botwulf may have been conflated in the hagiographical tradition. Botwulf's cult had some success in post-conquest England, especially in East Anglia and London, and sixty-four medieval dedications to him are recorded; there was also a significant cult in Scandinavia. His feast was celebrated on 17 June, that of his translation on 1 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 2964


Bott, Thomas (1688-1754), Church of England clergyman, was born at Derby in 1688, the youngest of the six children of a mercer; his grandfather had been a parliamentary major. He was probably the son of Thomas Bott, whose son Thomas was baptized at All Saints', Derby, in June 1688. He was educated for the dissenting ministry, but, after some experience of preaching, he went to London to study medicine, and then took orders in the Church of England, obtaining the rectory of Whinburgh, in Norfolk, through Lord Macclesfield's interest. In 1724 he published a discourse entitled 'The Peace and Happiness in this World, the Immediate Design of Christianity'. A defence of this, 'The Nature and Design of Christianity Further Considered', followed in 1727. In 1725 he attacked William Wollaston's peculiar mode of deducing morality from truth, and in 1730 published a sermon on the question entitled 'Morality Founded in the Reason of Things'. In 1734 Mr Longe gave him the rectory of Spixworth, which he held, with the neighbouring parish of Croftwick, until his death. On 30 January 1738 he preached a sermon concerning the duty of doing as we would be done by, observing only, by way of application, that if both parties had fulfilled this duty Charles I would not have lost his head. In the same year he attacked Joseph Butler's 'Analogy of Religion' (1736). He married Rebecca, daughter of Edmund Britiffe of Hunworth, in 1739. In his chief work, 'An Answer to the Rev. Mr Warburton's Divine Legation of Moses' (1743), he censured Warburton for making morality dependent upon the command of a superior being. He also accused Warburton of confusion in his citation of the non-Christian ancients, thereby rendering much of the latter's work unacceptable. In 1747 he was presented to the living of Edgefield, Norfolk. His whole ecclesiastical income was $200 a year. His health broke in 1750, and he died on 19 September 1754 at Norwich. He was a follower of Bishop Benjamin Hoadly, a friend of Samuel Clarke, and a thorough whig. A son, Edmund, was a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 2965


Bott, Thomas (bap. 1828?, d. 1870), porcelain painter and designer, was born near Kidderminster, Worcestershire, and was probably the Thomas Bott who was baptized on 25 January 1828 at Bromsgrove, Worcester, the son of Thomas Bott and his wife, Mary. He was brought up to his father's business of making spade handles. He was trained from 1846 at Richardson's glassworks at Wordsley near Stourbridge where he painted glass, examples of which were shown at the Great Exhibition of 1851. On 28 December 1851 he married at St Martin's, Birmingham, Eliza Bourne, with whom he had a son, Thomas John Bott, baptized on 30 November 1854 at St Martin's, Worcester. He worked as a portrait painter in Birmingham and went in 1853 to Worcester, where he became principal artist of the Royal Porcelain works owned by Kerr and Binns. According to the 'Worcester Journal', 'In that year Mr Binns introduced what is known as the Worcester enamel. Mr. Bott made the first trials, and ultimately succeeded in giving the enamel the very important character it has since assumed' (17 Dec 1870). For his work in Worcester enamel Bott obtained distinction at the Paris Exhibition in 1855, and in London in 1862. Enamels by Bott were also shown at the Royal Academy in 1857 and 1860. His enamels are characteristically in the Limoges style, using tinted white enamel designs on dark grounds which are reminiscent of sixteenth-century Limoges enamels. Among his last works were vases in the Limoges style, which formed part of Worcester's 'Norman conquest' exhibit, and which won first prize at Vienna in 1873. A plate featuring a turquoise ground from a dinner service designed by Thomas Reeve for Queen Victoria and painted by Bott can be seen at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
Thomas Bott died at his home, 4 Park Hill, in the parish of St Martin, Worcester, on 12 December 1870. His son, Thomas John Bott, continued to work in the Limoges style for the Royal Worcester porcelain works. 


@@@@@


doc= 2966


Botetourt, John, first Lord Botetourt (d. 1324), admiral, emerged from obscurity in the 1280s and became a politically influential baron, an active soldier, and a prominent naval commander. For such a well-connected man Botetourt's origins and parentage are astonishingly obscure. An unsubstantiated reference in the Hailes Abbey chronicle suggests that he was an illegitimate son of Edward I, but it has been argued plausibly that he was the eldest son of Guy Botetourt (died 'c'.1316) of Little Ellingham, Norfolk, and his wife, Ada; if so he had at least five brothers, Roger, Robert, Guy, Ralph, and Thomas, and possibly a sixth, William. In either case Botetourt's later prominence was unquestionably the result of his long attachment to the royal household rather than of any inherited wealth, and he rose through the ranks to become a knight by Christmas 1284, and a banneret in 1298. Household service brought varied responsibilities, and Sir John's earliest domestic exploits were concentrated in the Welsh marches, including an appointment as keeper of St Briavels Castle, Gloucestershire, in January 1291, and a number of judicial commissions in following years. Botetourt's most important contribution, though, was in the military sphere: his royal connections left him well placed, if not obliged, to participate in a long series of campaigns, including expeditions to Gascony in 1286, 1288, and 1295. Botetourt's estates -- so far as they can be identified -- may explain this early career focus, for by the turn of the fourteenth century he owned enough property in Gloucestershire and Northamptonshire to qualify for personal military service. He also acquired a one-third stake in the barony of Bedford inherited in 1285 by his wife, Maud ('c'.1269-1328), who was the daughter of Thomas fitz Otho and Beatrice de Beauchamp and whom he had married possibly as early as 1282 and certainly by 1292. She also inherited estates in Suffolk, Essex, and Worcestershire. This inheritance probably helps explain why Botetourt's career came to concentrate almost exclusively on East Anglia, and Essex in particular. In March 1294, for example, Sir John was appointed to try alleged maritime crimes against the men of Holland in a period of heightened diplomatic sensitivity. Soon afterwards, in November of the same year, he received his first recorded naval commission as 'sub-captain' of a force sent out from Great Yarmouth; and in March 1297 an existing brief to defend the port's adjacent maritime lands was expanded to include the entire eastern coastline, a sign of Botetourt's growing reputation. Yet any long-term naval responsibilities were interrupted by a period of intense campaigning in Scotland. Botetourt fought alongside his brother Guy at Falkirk in 1298, was present at the siege of Caerlaverock in 1300, and afterwards led, with mixed success, a number of 'chevauchees' against the Scots until Edward I's death in July 1307 brought a change of regime, a change of fortunes, and a change of emphasis. 
Under Edward II, Botetourt's influence was severely curtailed -- his loyalty had evidently been to Edward I rather than the crown, and he was consistently associated with the baronial coalition against the king and his courtiers. He was a signatory of the so-called 'Boulogne declaration' of January 1308 which was a veiled attack upon Piers Gaveston, Edward II's notorious favourite, whose capture and execution he endorsed in June 1312. Ultimately Botetourt took up arms against the king at Boroughbridge in March 1322, and in the ensuing confusion temporarily fled the country while his eldest son, Thomas, arranged an expensive formal pardon on his behalf. Botetourt also worked as a mediator for the baronial party in the period 1311-13, however, and, ironically, the brief periods of reconciliation between the factions saw his renewed appointment to military and civil office. Personal summonses to parliament from 1305 onwards were combined with an appointment as admiral of the eastern fleet in March 1315, and several judicial commissions in East Anglia. He died on 25 November 1324 leaving property in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and Huntingdonshire. With his wife, Maud, Botetourt had four sons, Thomas, John, Otes, and Robert, and three daughters, Joan, Ada, and Elizabeth. Thomas Botetourt predeceased his father in July 1322 and the family estates therefore passed to Thomas's son, John ('c'.1317-1339). 


@@@@@


doc= 2967


Bottlesham, William (d. 1400), bishop of Rochester, may have come from the Cambridgeshire village of Bottisham; he was certainly from East Anglia. His origins are otherwise unknown. He became a Dominican friar, and later left bequests (if possible) of $50 and $100 to the houses of that order in Bishop's Lynn, Norfolk, and Cambridge, 'because I owe as much and more' to them (Reg. Arundel, 1, fol. 166'v'): debts of gratitude, not of cash. Cambridge was certainly where he studied, graduating DTh by 17 May 1382, when he was summoned to help Archbishop William Courtenay investigate Wycliffite opinion at the celebrated Earthquake council in London. He had been appointed titular bishop Navatensis by 13 March 1380, when Bishop William Wykeham had appointed him to be his suffragan in the remoter parts of the Winchester diocese, pleading the endless rain, his own ill health, and royal business. In 1383 Bottlesham appears with the grand title of bishop of Bethlehem, but this was purely titular. He was with the Roman pope, Urban VI, albeit only (according to Walsingham) on a mission from England, when the pope was under siege at Nocera by the king of Naples in January 1385. It was probably in appreciation that the pope provided him to the see of Llandaff on 16 October 1385, to which the crown had no objection once personal fealty was given on 21 August 1386. Bottlesham at last had a 'real' bishopric, if a very poor one. 
Bottlesham returned to England by the beginning of August 1386, possibly with the papal envoy, Richard Northalis. In the time of the Merciless Parliament, probably in February 1388, certain suspected heretics were summoned before a panel including the bishop. They refused to appear before this 'apostate' and denounced the rest of the panel as inadequate. These are, in effect, the only clues as to Bottlesham's rise to modest eminence; his standing in theology is already known, and whether 'apostate' referred to some particular controversy in his career, or to especial opposition to Wycliffism (a possibility raised by his will), or was just a generic slur on him as a friar, is unknown. It is thin gruel. 
On 4 May 1389 the eminent preacher Bishop Thomas Brinton of Rochester died. The monks elected the archbishop's official, John Barnet. Richard II signalled his assent in public, but privately requested the pope's tax collector to secure the see for his own candidate, Richard Wichened. The monks of Christ Church, Canterbury, wanted the see for their own Thomas Chillenden. On 27 August the pope translated Bottlesham; he knew of the current political divisions in England, resented recent attempts to curb his income and patronage, saw the chance to show his muscle over something not too important, and probably did want to reward Bottlesham, his only real appointee on the bench, a little more. The archbishop gave the bishop his temporalities on 15 December, and the king followed suit on 12 February 1390. Both wanted to come to terms with the pope (now Boniface IX) over major difficulties regarding taxation of the clergy and papal patronage, and so probably did not want to make trouble over so relatively small a matter as the see of Rochester. 
In any case, Bottlesham was an apposite successor to Brinton in a see too modest to attract the interest of ambitious (and usually heavily pluralist) ecclesiastics. He proved indeed a fully resident and active bishop, although 'aged' by January 1396, a claim supported by his unusual use of a vicar-general and suffragan even while resident, from September 1394. None the less, he preached in the convocation of Canterbury at St Paul's on 7 October 1399, a reportedly nervous assembly, in the immediate circumstances of Richard II's overthrow; perhaps his appearance on such an occasion is a final hint that his career was based on wide respect for his public and personal integrity, not on partisanship. 
On 16 February 1400 he made a very sensitive will at his favourite manor of Trottiscliffe, Kent, aware of his parlous financial state, asking for an undemonstrative burial in the church of the Blackfriars in London, requiring that his servants be paid to the end of the quarter, thinking of the poor on his three most familiar properties, having no goods or luxuries at all to direct, recalling very fondly his upbringing in the convents of Lynn and Cambridge, invoking saints Andrew and Dominic, and naming no kin. His chief executor, interestingly, was his fellow Dominican Dr Roger Dymoke, the forceful anti-Wycliffite polemicist. 
Bottlesham was dead by 26 February. Archbishop Arundel revoked the will, 'because he was obliged to other diverse creditors in great sums of money and goods' (Reg. Arundel, 1, fol. 167). On 24 May 1402, however, the administrators were able to report that at last they had paid off all the debts and could still hand over a residue of $54 17's'. 8died This was small comfort to his intended beneficiaries, no doubt, but perhaps they could remember a good, ungreedy master or friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 2968


Bottomley, Joseph (1786-1858), organist, the son of Enoch and Grace Bottomley, was born in Halifax, where he was baptized on 7 May 1786, and where he played a violin concerto in public at the age of seven. In 1798 he moved to Manchester and studied with Grimshaw, the organist of St John's Church. Three years later he was apprenticed to Lawton, organist of St Peter's, Leeds, and then studied the piano in London with Joseph Woelfl. In 1807 he became organist of Bradford parish church, but lived and taught in Halifax. He was organist of Sheffield parish church from 1820. Bottomley's publications included 'Six Exercises for Pianoforte', twelve waltzes, and 'A Dictionary of Music' (1816). He died in 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 2969


Bouch, Sir Thomas (1822-1880), civil engineer, was born on 22 February 1822 at Thursby, Cumberland, the third son of William Bouch, a captain in the mercantile marine and his wife, Elizabeth Sanderson. At the age of seventeen he was employed for four years on the construction of the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway, for which the engineers were Locke and Errington. He subsequently served four years as resident engineer on the Wear Valley Railway during its construction, and worked on other railways in the north of England. 
In 1849 Bouch became engineer and manager of the Edinburgh and Northern Railway (later known as the Edinburgh, Perth, and Dundee Railway). In this capacity he became interested in the problems of railway crossings of the Forth and Tay estuaries, and developed a train ferry or 'floating railway' (partly financed by Sir John Gladstone) for taking goods wagons over the Forth between Granton and Burntisland. The wagons ran on rails directly onto rails on the ferry and were taken off in the same way. This system worked well over a number of years. In 1853 Bouch married Margaret Ada Nelson; they had a son and two daughters. 
Shortly after completing the work on the Forth, Bouch left the Edinburgh railway company and set up as a consulting engineer, mainly on the development of railways in the north of England and in Scotland, and for tramways in London, Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Dundee. In total he was the engineer for the construction of about 270 miles of railways, chief of which was the South Durham and Lancashire Union, 50 miles long. His largest railway in Scotland was the Edinburgh to Peebles line, 21 miles in length and for a long time the pattern for cheap construction. His railways demanded many bridges, including the Beelah Viaduct, with sixteen spans of 60 ft each and 196 ft high, and Deepdale, which had eleven spans of 60 ft with a maximum height of 160 ft. These bridges were very economically designed, comprising lattice girders on iron piers composed of groups of braced columns, and carried railway traffic for over a hundred years before being dismantled. Bouch also constructed a remarkable road bridge in 1871 at Newcastle, the Redheugh Viaduct, which consisted of two spans of 260 ft and two of 240 ft. These spans were of lattice girders supported by raking ties and bore a striking resemblance to the cable-stayed bridges of today. 
Bouch was thus well equipped to realize the dream of his life, which was to bridge the Forth and the Tay estuaries. His opportunity to bridge the Tay came first, an act being passed in 1870 for the purpose. The scheme proposed by Bouch crossed the river between Wormit and Dundee and was a few yards short of 2 miles long, by far the longest bridge in the world at the time. It consisted of eighty-five spans, of which thirteen, at the deepest part of the channel, formed the navigation spans, longer and higher than the others. They were of lattice girders carried on piers formed of groups of cast-iron columns. The original design had the lattice girders carried on tall brick piers, but owing to misleading information on ground conditions the brick piers had to be replaced by lighter iron construction over most of the bridge length after construction had begun. This change had a significant effect on the strength and stability of the bridge. 
The bridge was passed by the Board of Trade and opened in May 1878. Queen Victoria journeyed over during the following year and knighted Bouch on 26 June 1879. He was meantime engaged on his design for a bridge at Queensferry to cross the Forth. Construction of this bridge with two main spans of 1600 ft was begun in 1878, again a gigantic leap forward in bridge design, as the longest railway spans hitherto constructed in Britain were of 460 ft, over the Menai Strait. 
However, on 28 December 1879 a violent storm caused the collapse of the navigation spans of the Tay Bridge while a train was crossing, and seventy-five lives were lost. The subsequent inquiry found the cause of the collapse to be inadequate bracing of the ironwork of the tall piers. It seems likely that defects in the casting of the columns also contributed to the collapse. The inquiry did not apportion blame for the disaster, but one of the panel members (a Mr Rothery), in a separate report, placed the blame on Bouch. Work on his Forth Bridge was stopped, and he was relieved of his post as engineer. These events affected Bouch's health, and he died from heart disease the following year, on 30 October 1880, after premature retirement to Moffat. He was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife. It may be said of him that he perhaps designed his bridges with a lower margin of safety than other engineers, but displayed boldness and originality in many of them, and had a distinguished career until the collapse of the Tay Bridge. It could also be said that he pointed the way to the eventual successful bridging of the Forth and Tay at locations which were first chosen by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2970


Boucher, John (1777-1818), Church of England clergyman, was the son of James Boucher, of Tynemouth. He matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 31 October 1795 and graduated BA on 23 May 1799. He was elected fellow of Magdalen College in 1800, took holy orders in 1801, and proceeded MA on 29 April 1802. He was an evangelical and, having been curate in Doddington, from 1803 was vicar of Kirknewton, near Wooler, Northumberland. He married, probably in 1808 or 1809, Salome Letitia, 'nee' Molesworth; they had six children. He died on 12 November 1818 in Kirknewton and was buried on the 15th in the church there, next to his youngest daughter, Wilhelmina (1816-1817). A posthumous volume of sermons was dedicated to Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham (2nd edn, 1821). 


@@@@@


doc= 2971


Boucher, John (1819-1878), Unitarian minister, was born in Moneyreagh, co. Down, the son of David Boucher, a tenant farmer. His educational history is obscure, owing in part to the complex and unfortunately only spottily documented history of the Belfast Academical Institution, from which he was accorded the general certificate from the college department in 1837. He may then have pursued further theological instruction from Henry Montgomery (1788-1865) and John Scott Porter, both of whom had since 1832 lectured to students intended for the non-subscribing ministry and who in 1838 were appointed unpaid professors of divinity to, respectively, the Remonstrant Synod and the presbytery of Antrim, bodies representing the latitudinarian wing of a badly fractured Irish presbyterianism. The Arianism of the latitudinarians -- their view, that is, of a limited divinity of Christ as against the full-blooded Trinitarianism of their conservative opponents -- easily progressed into belief in the simple humanitarianism of Jesus, and a number of younger remonstrants took up Unitarian pulpits in England. 
In 1842 Boucher moved to England and in 1844 he became minister at Union Street, Glasgow, where he healed the serious congregational rift resulting from the extreme theological radicalism of his predecessor, John Taylor (1812-1853), increased attendance, and undertook an only partially successful fund-raising tour in England and Ireland. Boucher's success in Glasgow brought an invitation in September 1846 from the New Gravel Pit Chapel in Hackney, which had been in decline (and some confusion) since the death in 1845 of its pastor of nearly forty years, Robert Aspland. Here, too, Boucher overcame congregational divisions (he had been invited on a split vote of 82-79) and increased both numbers and morale. Rationalistic in outlook at the start, Boucher began to move towards more orthodox positions. A sermon preached in 1852 called into question the central nonconformist principle of private judgement in religious matters. While he retained the votes of a majority of the congregation, he had lost support among the subscribers to the chapel's funds, and his resignation came as a matter of course. 
On 9 January 1850 Boucher married Louise (1822/3-1879), daughter of Ebenezer Johnston (died 1850) of Stamford Hill, London; a son and a daughter survived him. His pastorate ended, they moved to Chesterton, Cambridgeshire, and in Easter term 1853 Boucher matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge. He took a first in the moral sciences tripos in 1856 and proceeded BA the next year. His health broke, however, and he had to abandon his intention of taking Anglican orders. He lived on in Chesterton, an invalid, until his death on 12 March 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 2972


Boucher, Jonathan (1738-1804), schoolmaster and Church of England clergyman, was born on 12 March 1738 in Cumberland to James Boucher, schoolmaster and manager of an alehouse, and Anne Barnes, both descendants of Norman aristocracy whose family had fallen on hard times. Although a poor businessman, Boucher's publican father taught him to read at the age of three. His unlettered mother was an efficient household manager who kept Boucher and his siblings just out of poverty and enabled Jonathan to study in the Revd Joseph Blaine's school in Wigdon. In 1756 he secured a teaching post in a school in St Bees run by John and Anne James, who became his mentors and surrogate older siblings. 
The Jameses encouraged Boucher to accept a teaching position in Maryland in 1759 as a tutor for the sons of a Virginia merchant, John Younger. In 1761 he returned to London to secure ordination, which he received on 17 January 1762. In July 1762 he became rector of the Hanover parish, Virginia, and in November 1763 accepted a more attractive position in St Mary's parish, Caroline county, Virginia, where he realized his ambition to be a planter as well as a teacher and cleric. 
After lengthy manoeuvring Boucher secured appointment to the fashionable parish of St Anne in Maryland in May 1770. In 1771 he married Eleanor (Nelly) Addison (died 1784), the niece of his patron in Maryland, Henry Addison. Addison's patronage made Boucher an intimate of Governor William Eden and chaplain to the Maryland assembly. In 1773 he took the administration's side in a dispute between the governor and anti-proprietary leaders Samuel Chase and William Paca over clerical salaries. Boucher demolished the anti-proprietary case by demonstrating the historic ecclesiastical supremacy of the Maryland proprietors. 'Uncharitable priest,' Paca and Chase blurted in angry frustration, 'what passion dictated your resentment against us? Was it laudable zeal for the public welfare or was it revenge?' (Calhoon, 223). 
It was the central question about Boucher's politics and churchmanship. His transformation from a marginal emigrant in 1759 into an incisive polemicist in 1773 revealed the dependence of the Maryland proprietary regime on maintenance of a cosmopolitan veneer and political operatives willing to expose anti-proprietary republicanism. As tutor to George Washington's hapless stepson Jackie Custis from 1768 to 1773 Boucher took the measure of both the Virginia planter and Chesapeake society. He told Washington that Jackie was 'teeming with all the softer virtues' -- 'the harmlessness of a dove' without 'the wisdom of the serpent'. 'How will you forgive me', he asked Washington, 'should I suffer him to lose in gentleness, simplicity, and inoffensiveness as much as he gains in address, prudence, and resolution?... a dilemma by no means easily avoided' (Calhoon, 226). 
Acting on similar cultural assumptions Boucher laid down his challenge to the American War of Independence. On 20 July 1775, the day set apart by the continental congress for prayer and fasting in support of the American cause, Boucher faced a congregation of 200 armed men in the St Anne's parish church when he attempted to preach on obedience to the magistrate as a religious duty. Armed patriots in the church attempted to force Boucher to leave. Thinking to himself that 'once to flinch was forever to invite danger', Boucher drew his own loaded pistol and, pointing it directly at the head of the leader of the protesters, led a subdued procession out of the church. The next day he returned and without incident preached on 'Galatians' 5: 1 ('Stand fast then in the liberty wherein Christ has made us free'). That passage, Boucher declared, could not, 'without infinite perversion and torture', be 'made to refer to any other kind of liberty' (Calhoon, 230; Bailyn, 315). The very idea of associating Christianity with political radicalism, he suggested, had originated in Judas's politically inspired betrayal of Jesus. The 1797 published text of Boucher's sermon invoked Robert Filmer's doctrine of the divine right of kings to exercise patriarchal authority over their subjects. If Boucher did inject Filmer into the pre-revolutionary controversy, he would have been the only American loyalist to do so. The stronger likelihood is that Boucher added Filmerian patriarchalism to his conservatism during the 1790s in response to the extremism of the French Revolution, and accordingly revised his 1775 sermon just before its publication. 
On 14 August 1775 Boucher fled from Maryland, and sailed for England on 22 September. He and Nelly settled in Paddington where he resumed teaching and took into the household John and Anne James's sons, Thomas and John, for whom the Bouchers became surrogate parents, repaying an old emotional debt. He was rector of Paddington from 1776 to 1785, and was appointed the assistant secretary to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in 1779. Nelly died in March 1784. In January 1785 he became vicar of Epsom parish in Surrey. Boucher was married twice more -- first on 15 February 1787 to Mary Elizabeth Foreman (died 1788), and on 29 October 1789 to Elizabeth Hodgson, who survived him. Among his children was the religious writer Barton Bouchier (1795-1865). Yearning to become a bishop, Boucher sought unsuccessfully in 1793-4 to effect a merger of the Scottish Episcopal church with Anglican splinter churches in Scotland. During the last years of his life he devoted himself to producing a lexicographical history of the English language. He died on 27 April 1804 in Cumberland and was buried in Epsom churchyard on 4 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 2973


Bouchery, Weyman (bap. 1684, d. 1712), Latin poet, was born at Canterbury and baptized on 2 November 1684, at the Walloon or Strangers' Church there, the son of Arnold Bouchery, minister of the church, and his wife, Sara. He was educated at King's School, Canterbury, and Oundle, and was admitted pensioner of Jesus College, Cambridge, aged fourteen, on 3 July 1699. He became scholar in 1700, graduated BA in 1702/3, and MA in 1706; on 23 October 1705 he had migrated as fellow-commoner to Emmanuel College. 
Bouchery's sole publication, 'Hymnus sacer' (1706), is an accomplished paraphrase, in eighty-eight alcaic stanzas, of the song of Deborah from 'Judges' 5. He dedicates these first-fruits ('primitiae'), to the alma mater and her literary alumni, particularly 'sacrae poeseos amantibus' ('the lovers of sacred poetry'). Biblical paraphrase was a popular neo-Latin genre, in which a young writer could show his skills to good effect; Deborah's dramatic tale was to inspire several other early eighteenth-century versions, most notably by Anthony Alsop and John Burton, against which Bouchery may profitably be compared. In general, Bouchery follows his text closely, though with significant expansion (thirty-one biblical verses produce thirty pages of Latin) so 'they took no gain of money' (v. 19) becomes a whole stanza. Rhetorical flourishes abound; he also makes some material additions (Euphrates and Nile give way to Kishon, p. 21). Jael nails her victim with admirable gusto, though Bouchery's longer version perhaps lacks the full firmness and vigour of Alsop. Nevertheless, Bouchery's 'Hymnus sacer' is an elegant production, demonstrating his skill at handling an extended lyric poem: it might (had he continued to write) have led on to greater achievements. Bouchery was ordained deacon in June 1707, and priest in September 1709. He was rector of Little Blakenham, Suffolk, from 1709 until his death at Ipswich on 24 March 1712. His son Gilbert erected a memorial tablet in St George's, Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 2974


Bouchier, Barton (1795-1865), religious writer, born in Epsom, Surrey on 19 November 1795, was a younger son of the vicar of Epsom, the Revd Jonathan Boucher (1738-1804), and his third wife, Elizabeth Hodgson, widow of the Revd James of Arthuret. Barton changed his name from Boucher to Bouchier after 1822. He was educated at Balliol College, Oxford, proceeding BA in 1822 and MA in 1827. In 1816 he married Mary, daughter of the Revd Nathaniel Thornbury of Avening, Gloucestershire. Bouchier had read for the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1813, but was ordained in 1819 by the bishop of Hereford and became curate at Monmouth. A sermon preached by him at Usk in 1822 for the Christian Knowledge Society was published by request. Bouchier held curacies later at Old, Northamptonshire, and (before 1834) at Cheam, Surrey; while resident there he published an edition of Lancelot Andrewes's 'Prayers and Offices of Private Devotion' (1834). In 1839 he became rector of Fonthill Bishop, diocese of Salisbury, but remained in Cheam until 1856. 
Bouchier was the author of biblical commentaries and devotional works, including 'Prophecy and its Fulfilment' (1836) and 'Manna in the House' (1852-8). In 1853 he wrote a 'Letter' to the prime minister, Lord Aberdeen, against opening the Crystal Palace on Sundays, following up this appeal in 1854 by 'The Poor Man's Palace and the Poor Man's Duty', a pamphlet addressed to the Crystal Palace directors. He also published his 'Farewell Sermon' to his Cheam flock, having preached it on 28 September 1856. Bouchier died at the rectory at Fonthill Bishop on 28 December 1865. The editorship of 'The Vision', a humorous illustrated poem on Jonathan Boucher's philological studies, written by Sir Frederick Morton Eden, bt, and published in 1820, has been wrongly attributed to Bouchier. 


@@@@@


doc= 2975


Boucher, George (d. 1643), royalist conspirator, was probably related -- perhaps as a son -- to Nathaniel Boucher, a Bristol merchant who was warden (1621) and treasurer (1625) of the Bristol Society of Merchant Venturers, and sheriff of the city in 1624. Little is known of Boucher's family except that he left a wife, who died early in the Restoration, and seven children, of whom the eldest was a son, John; a younger son was named George. Boucher was probably the George Butcher listed as a member of the Merchant Venturers in 1618, who in 1626 was a collector for the company's project to send a ship in search of the north-west passage. He does not appear as a high official of the company. In 1640 or 1641 he was the first of several men sent to Westminster to complain that the actions resulting from the award of the customs farm to the London Vintners' Company had ruined large numbers of Bristol vintners. He was clearly a man of wealth and influence, who allegedly lost $2000 in the plot which cost him his life. 
The civic leaders of Bristol were unwilling to take sides in the civil war, but this was at first expressed chiefly in efforts to deflect and delay the admission of parliamentarian forces, who lay closer to the city than their opponents. During the subsequent occupation the behaviour of the parliamentarian commander, Colonel Essex, gave much ground for complaint and, despite his removal and the installation as governor of Nathaniel Fiennes, there was considerable sentiment in Bristol for an approach to the king's forces. The first steps in organizing the attempt were apparently taken before the end of 1642. The chief actors were Richard Yeamans or Yeomans and George Boucher, 'men of good esteem, plentiful estates, known integrity, and true children of the church of England' (Towgood, 21). Boucher's chief role, as he later affirmed, was initially in the political selection and recruitment of the foot-soldiers of the conspiracy in Bristol itself. First he framed an oath which expressed loyalty to the king 'in these words: I do voluntarily protest before Almighty God that I will to the utmost of my power and with my life and fortunes defend and maintain the rights and privileges of my dread sovereign Lord King Charles' (Walker, 6). He himself took this oath on 3 March 1643 and set about administering it to others, providing them also with arms and ammunition. But Boucher's organizational role on the night of 7 March was equally crucial. His house in Christmas Street lay next to St John's Bridge, and backed onto the River Froome. It was selected as one of four rallying points for the plotters, not least because all depended on the first step in their plan, the opening of the Froome gate to admit Prince Rupert and his troops. Boucher's men were to seize the guards stationed at the gate and imprison them in a crypt underneath the adjoining church of St John's. He had also arranged 'to give Prince Rupert a signal when he should make his approaches to the city, by ringing Saint John's and Saint Michael's bells' and had organized locks and chains to bar the movement of any parliamentarian horse, should these appear (Towgood, 15). 
The conspiracy, however, was betrayed at the last moment. Alerted to the danger, and expecting the arrival of Rupert under cover of darkness, Captain Thomas Goodier commanded that lanterns be lit by those living close to the Froome gate. His soldiers, proceeding along Christmas Street enforcing the order, found Boucher's residence 'without light' and silent, 'as if there were no person at all in the house', so they set about breaking down the door. Sixty men were crammed inside. Of these, most 'ran out at a water gate on the backside of the house, and went away through the water, it being a low tide, and made an escape' (Walker, 12). The soldiers arrested the twenty-three remaining, and impounded muskets and ammunition. 
Four conspirators were singled out as chief organizers. George Boucher was examined at least three times, signing statements on 10 March, 27 April, and 3 May. These amounted to a frank admission of guilt, and the accusers had ample supporting evidence against Boucher and others. Two principals, Edward Dacres and Robert Yeamans's brother William, were pardoned, and parliamentarian officers of the garrison who had been privy to the conspiracy were not prosecuted, but on 8 and 22 May respectively Richard Yeamans and George Boucher were condemned to death by hanging. 
In Oxford there was outrage at the death sentences. Patrick Ruthven, earl of Forth, lord general of the king's forces, threatened to execute parliamentarian prisoners taken at Cirencester, but Fiennes responded on 18 May that the four Bristolians had been taken not as soldiers in open warfare but in a conspiracy, and warned of retaliation against royalist prisoners in London if Ruthven did as he had promised. In the circumstances, Fiennes was careful to secure approval at the highest level before carrying out the sentences. On 22 May 1643 the Commons ordered that the earl of Essex, commander-in-chief of the army, should instruct the governor of Bristol to proceed. On 29 May the king himself ordered the mayor and aldermen to prevent the executions by all means. Even had this appeal arrived in time, the civic authorities would have had no means of obeying -- and it did not. On the following day Yeamans and Boucher were taken to the scaffold, which had been set up close to Yeamans's house in Wine Street. Fiennes arranged that the city gates be closed and deployed troops to prevent possible disturbances. Yeamans and Boucher had requested that two city divines, Richard Towgood of St Nicholas and Richard Standfast of Christ Church, should preach at the service which would precede their execution. These men were both outspoken supporters of the royalist cause and the request was refused; the three replacements included Walter Cradock, a prominent Independent recently arrived in Bristol. 
Yeomans was executed first without incident but Boucher, a devout man even on the testimony of his enemies, was enraged at the choice of preachers. When the time came for his last words, he launched into a bitter speech against 'those beggarly and schismatical rudiments which crafty and malicious men had invented and introduced into the church of God in these last and worst times of the world... Proud (says he) they are, boasters, heady, unstable', continuing in this vein at some length. This appears not to have been well received by one of the ministers, at least, for: 'Rosewell, a levite of their own, and a cract brained separatist, interrupts him in the midst of his devotions, reviles him, and calls him a hypocrite and apostate, that after so strict a conversation, so much time spent in the profession of religion, he should render all suspected for hypocrisie. (Towgood, 25)' George Boucher met his death bravely. The same evening his body was conveyed first to his own house, 'a sad spectacle to his poor widow and seven orphans', and then to be buried at the church of St Werburgh (Towgood, 26-7). His eldest son, John, was banished the kingdom. Charles I granted George's widow a pension of $100 per annum, but she did not receive it until the Restoration, when 'she lived but one year to enjoy it', as her younger son George reported when seeking financial relief from the crown in May 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 2976


Boucicault, Dion (1820-1890), playwright and actor, was born on 27 December 1820 at 28 Middle Gardiner Street, Dublin. He was the fifth and final child of Samuel Boursiquot (1769-1853) and his wife, Anne Maria (1795-1879), the daughter of Arthur Darley and sister of the poet George Darley. Boucicault's natural father was probably the encyclopaedist Dionysius Lardner, who was lodging with the Boursiquots at the time of Dion's birth and whose relationship with Anne had alienated his own wife. Lardner certainly took charge of the boy's education after 1827, when Samuel's business failed, and evidently encouraged him to adapt his surname to Bourcicault (Boucicault dropped the 'r' in 1845, when he found an authentic French spelling). When Lardner moved to London in 1827, prior to taking up his appointment as professor of natural philosophy and astronomy at the newly established University College, Anne Boursiquot followed him with her four youngest children. Boucicault attended a number of the small, semi-private boarding-schools that flourished during and after the Regency, but his interest was only selectively engaged. Sharing his nominal father's fanciful belief in a noble line of Boursiquots, he was a diligent student of French, and he read plentifully, but his unsystematic approach to learning survived periods at University College School (1834-5), Brentford collegiate school (1836), and a final year, after the ending of Anne's liaison with Lardner, at Dr Geoghegan's academy in Dublin (1837). He was already set on a career in the theatre. 
In April 1838, unknown to his family, Boucicault made his acting debut at the Theatre Royal, Cheltenham, under the protective pseudonym of Lee Moreton. His meagre income, augmented until March 1840 by a quarterly allowance from Lardner, did not prevent him from dressing like a dandy, posturing like a star, and spending beyond his means. He was small and agile, with a high forehead that would become domed as his hair thinned to early baldness. Had he been less pushily self-assured, he would have made fewer enemies through his life, but he would have achieved less. Before he was twenty, Lee Moreton had cajoled provincial managers in Brighton, Bristol, and Hull into staging his apprentice work, and it was persistence that led to his first major triumph. Initially thwarted, he eventually persuaded the harassed managers of the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, Madame Vestris and Charles Mathews, to buy his five-act comedy 'London Assurance'. Finely staged, in something approaching an innovatory box-set, it opened to popular acclaim on 4 March 1841. The play is a necessarily bowdlerized imitation of a Restoration comedy, with flirtation replacing seduction, and, though dressed in contemporary clothes, it was, even in 1841, an adroitly crafted period piece. Boucicault now abandoned his pen-name, was elected to the Dramatic Authors' Society, and was welcomed in moderately fashionable society. Immediately, he displayed his lifelong habit of spending more than he had. Sued for debt in September 1841 and February 1842, he escaped only because he was under age when the debts were incurred. 
Success had made Boucicault unproductive. Almost a year elapsed between 'London Assurance' and the opening, on 7 February 1842, again at Covent Garden, of his next play, 'The Irish Heiress'. Such inactivity was rare in a writing life of fifty years and more than 150 dramatic pieces. His long association with the actor-manager Benjamin Webster, which began in April 1842, was a matter of business rather than art, a necessary reining in of poetic aspiration endorsed much later in a comment recorded by the actor J. H. Barnes: 'Ah! when young men get tired of writing clever plays they may write successful ones!' (Barnes, 47). Most of the pieces with which Boucicault fed Webster and himself were avowedly potboilers, though they included the skilfully turned two-act curtain-raiser 'Used up' (Haymarket, 6 February 1844), which was a custom-made vehicle for the gentlemanly acting of Charles Mathews as Sir Charles Coldstream, and a competent five-act comedy, 'Old Heads and Young Hearts' (Haymarket, 18 November 1844). When Boucicault bemoaned the small remuneration for playwrights, Webster pointed out that it was cheaper for him to pay people to steal plots from the Parisian stage. Needing the money, and drawn by the romance of his own purported French connections, Boucicault sailed for France in December 1844. 
There is confusion and some deliberate obfuscation over the events of the next years. It was certainly in Paris that Boucicault met P. T. Barnum, whose eye for publicity, good or bad, he admired and would emulate. He certainly visited theatres, stole plots for shipping back to Webster, and tried to convince himself of his aristocratic descent (he briefly styled himself the Vicomte de Boucicault). It was possibly in Paris that he met the widowed Anne Guiot, whom he married in Lambeth on 9 July 1845. The daughter of Etienne St Pierre, with connections in the lesser nobility, she was older than Boucicault. Since she owned property in France, it was, unsurprisingly, rumoured that he married for her money, and, more far-fetchedly, that he soon pushed her off a glacial peak in the Alps. It is only known that she was dead by the late summer of 1848. Whatever benefits accrued to Boucicault from the marriage were soon squandered. In November 1848 he petitioned for bankruptcy. He had written nothing of note since 'Old Heads and Young Hearts'. His career had to be refashioned. 
The intervention of Charles Kean, eminent as manager of the Princess's Theatre, was decisive. Kean was conscious of the need to spice his classical repertory with modern work, and Boucicault had an appropriate pedigree. The association began in late 1850 and produced, most significantly, a five-act comedy called 'Love in a Maze' (6 March 1851), a clever adaptation of 'The Corsican Brothers' (24 February 1852), and a sensational rehandling of 'The Vampire' (14 June 1852). The first was approved by Queen Victoria; the second established Kean's credentials in 'gentlemanly melodrama'; the third marked Boucicault's return to acting in the sinister role of the Phantom. The title role in his last play for the Princess's, 'The Prima Donna' (18 September 1852), was taken by Agnes Kelly Robertson (1833-1916), who was already his lover and became his wife in New York in September 1853. The relationship caused a rupture between Boucicault and Kean, who had assumed wardship over Agnes, and the young couple resolved to try their luck in America. Boucicault divided the rest of his theatrical life between the New World and the old. Agnes's popularity in America, where she was billed as 'The Pocket Venus', was the foundation of their success there, but Boucicault fashioned the plays that featured her. The first of their six children, baptized Dion, was born on 10 May 1855. Agnes was acting again within a month. Boucicault had made his American debut in November 1854, unsuitably as Coldstream in 'Used up'. He was at his best only in eccentric character roles, supremely as the roguish Irishman who would be his finest creation both as actor and writer. That was a rich vein he had yet to strike when, after a failed venture into theatre management in New Orleans in 1855-6, he and Agnes became members of the company at Wallack's Theatre, New York. 
It was his part in the collaborative composition of 'The Poor of New York', which opened at Wallack's to ecstatic notices on 8 December 1857, that alerted Boucicault, not only to the capital to be made out of vividly staged sensation scenes in melodrama, but also to the marketability of contemporary events. A few months after the relief of Lucknow, 'Jessie Brown' opened at Wallack's (22 February 1858), with Boucicault as the evil Nana Sahib and Agnes as Jessie. 'Brigham Young' followed on 25 May 1858 and, four days after the execution of John Brown, the famous 'slavery' play 'The Octoroon' (6 December 1859). 'The Octoroon' marked the end of Boucicault's third American venture into management. After quarrelling with their joint managers over salaries, the Boucicaults stormed out of the Winter Garden, where they had opened in September 1859, to join a rival New York company at Laura Keene's Theatre. It was there, on 29 March 1860, that they opened in 'The Colleen Bawn', with Boucicault outstanding as the lovable wastrel Myles-na-Coppaleen. The play is a model of melodramatic plotting; its splicing of humour and tension captivated audiences. The Boucicaults decided to test it in London, where they opened a run of 230 performances at the Adelphi on 10 September 1860. They remained in England for twelve years. 
Boucicault's contract with Webster paved the way for the future prosperity of English playwrights, a cause to which he had been wedded since 1848. The Boucicaults jointly earned $23,000 during their first London year. As always, it was spent. Boucicault bought Hereford House in the Brompton Road, hired whole companies to tour Britain with copycat productions of 'The Colleen Bawn', and, in late 1862, completed the conversion of Astley's Amphitheatre into the New Theatre Royal, Westminster. This ill-starred venture, damaged by the sudden notoriety of his liaison with the actress Emily Jordan, brought Boucicault back to bankruptcy in July 1863. A provincial tour of 'The Poor of New York', adapted and retitled for each city visited, recouped the family finances, and, in July 1864, they settled at 326 Regent Street. 'Arrah-na-Pogue', the second of Boucicault's major Irish melodramas, was warmly received in Dublin in November 1864 and again at the Princess's, where it opened on 22 March 1865. By then, all too characteristically, Boucicault had quarrelled with Webster over money, but his name was a guarantee of audience interest throughout the decade. There were London successes in 1866 ('The Long Strike' and 'The Flying Scud'), 1868 ('After Dark'), and 1869 ('Presumptive Evidence'). Rumours of scandal, fanned by Boucicault, attracted audiences to 'Formosa' at Drury Lane on 5 August 1869. Was its heroine based on the courtesan Mabel Gray? The secret scandal of the production was Boucicault's affair with its leading lady, Katherine Rogers. She accompanied the Boucicaults on their return to the New York stage in September 1872. The marriage survived only in name. In March 1873 Agnes returned to England, while Boucicault toured his new plays with Katherine. During the prolonged divorce proceedings, concluded in 1889, Agnes named him as the father of Katherine's child. 
With one notable exception, Boucicault's later plays are undistinguished. 'The Shaughraun', his masterpiece, began its triumphant history at Wallack's on 14 November 1874. He bought a steam yacht on the American profits, and even persuaded Agnes to play in its London opening at Drury Lane on 4 September 1875. This last attempt at a reconciliation foundered when their eldest son, Dion, was killed in a train crash in January 1876, and there were quarrels over custody of the remaining children. In the event, four of them worked in the theatre, two, Darley George (1859-1929) and Nina (1867-1950), with distinction. Familiarly known as Dot, Darley adopted his father's and dead brother's name on stage ['see 'Boucicault, Dion, the younger]. Separated from Agnes, Boucicault continued his American tours, on which his appearance as Conn the shaughraun was almost obligatory. He was still playing the part in 1885-6, when he took a small company to New Zealand and Australia. One of the group was the 21-year-old Louise Thorndyke, whom Boucicault married in Sydney on 9 September 1885. He countered charges of bigamy by denying the legality of his marriage to Agnes, thus burdening his children with the stigma of rumoured illegitimacy. Not until May 1888 did Boucicault discontinue his acting tours with Louise. Out of patience with audiences who found his new work old-fashioned, he accepted an invitation to direct an acting academy at the Madison Square Theatre, New York. But he was determined to write another successful play. During rehearsals for 'A Tale of a Coat' in July 1890 he suffered a heart attack. Depressed by the play's failure in New York, he contracted pneumonia, from which, on 18 September 1890, he died. After making and losing several fortunes, the man who had once written of playwriting, 'It's a degrading occupation, but more money has been made out of guano than out of poetry', died poor. He was buried in Woodlawn cemetery, New York, but, on 19 November 1890, Louise had the body moved to the Mount Hope cemetery in Hastings-on-Hudson. When she died in 1956 she was buried under the same stone. 


@@@@@


doc= 2977


Bough, Samuel (1822-1878), landscape and marine painter, was born on 8 January 1822 at Abbey Street, Carlisle, the third of five children of James Bough (1794-1845), shoemaker, and Lucy Walker (1785-1836), a cook. He was baptized at St Mary's Church on 10 February. Bough grew up in a household that lacked material comforts but encouraged a love of literature and the arts, his parents being friends with many local artists. At an early age he began to draw and stage his own theatrical performances for friends, paying off small debts from the proceeds. Although Bough received no formal art education, he assimilated knowledge from an older generation of artists in Carlisle, particularly John Dobson, George Sheffield, and Robert Harrington, and from such visiting artists as Thomas Miles Richardson senior and John Wilson Carmichael. His rambles through Cumberland gave him access to the art collections of the local gentry, which added to his appreciation of the old masters. A few visits to London, including a brief period apprenticed to the engraver Thomas Allom, completed his early schooling in art. Of the many other artists admired by Bough, J. M. W. Turner had the most apparent impact on his subsequent work. For the most part, however, he turned to nature and direct observation for his inspiration. This was to be Bough's approach for the rest of his life. 
After an abortive start as a solicitor's clerk, Bough became a professional artist in Carlisle, struggling to make a living there until 1845, when he went to Manchester as an assistant scene painter. There he attended life classes at the Manchester Academy and formed close ties with the artists William Percy and Charles Allen Duval. Despite winning the Heywood silver medal for the best watercolour at the Manchester Exhibition of 1847 Bough had little financial success and took up another scene painting job in Glasgow in 1849. On 30 April of that year he married Isabella Taylor (1824-1900), a young opera singer and harpist. His first major work, 'The Baggage Waggons' (1849; Tullie House Museum and Art Gallery, Carlisle), was also painted in 1849. A scene of soldiers approaching his home town with a rainstorm in the distance, it contains most of the elements that marked his work across the rest of his lifetime: humanity set in the context of the elemental forces of nature. 
Glasgow failed to offer the breakthrough in art that Bough needed, so he moved on, first to Hamilton and Cadzow Forest in 1851, where his friendship with the landscape painter Alexander Fraser (1827-1899) produced some remarkable pictures of woodland scenes, in both oils and watercolour. Although he was not deemed a great colourist by his contemporaries, Bough's ability to capture the dappled effect of sunlight through trees in works from this period challenges such a judgement. 
In 1854 Bough moved to Port Glasgow in order to improve his technique in drawing ships and boats. For a man remembered for his lack of formal art education and with a reputation for being slipshod in his approach, Bough was paradoxically meticulous when he chose to be, as exemplified by his 'Gabbarts and Iron Shipyard' of 1855 (NMM), his most important work from this period. Tonally and compositionally a triumph, it depicts the whole spectrum of shipping activity on the Clyde, from the small boy sailing his model boat in the shallows to the construction of an ocean-going ship in the middle distance. From this date marine painting was to be one of Bough's most powerful forms of expression. 
To augment his income from painting Bough continued his work as a scene painter and also developed a reputation as a book illustrator, notably of the works of Robert Burns and Sir Walter Scott. He continued both activities throughout his life. 
In 1855 Bough moved to Edinburgh. He met with early success at the Royal Scottish Academy exhibitions and was elected an associate in 1856. Thereafter his relationship with the academy was a stormy one and it was not until 1875 that he was elected a full academician, despite being a prolific exhibitor. 
Bough's reputation with the art-buying public and the critics continued to rise throughout the 1850s and 1860s and, ultimately, he displaced Horatio McCulloch as the most popular of contemporary Scottish landscape painters. Major works from this period include 'The Mail Coach' (1855; Glasgow Museums and Art Gallery), 'Cadzow Burn' (1856; Tullie House Museum and Art Gallery, Carlisle), 'The Weald of Kent' (1857; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne), 'Royal Volunteer Review' (1860; National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), and 'Edinburgh Castle from the Canal' (1862). 
Bough travelled and painted widely throughout England and Scotland, being mostly identified with his native Cumberland and the Fife coast. He also made occasional forays into Europe, including Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, and Germany. At times, disenchanted by his lack of official recognition in Scotland, he considered resettling in Cumberland or moving to London, but continued to live in Edinburgh for the rest of his life. 
Throughout the 1870s Bough's style displayed more impressionistic elements that were later taken further by his younger friend William McTaggart. 'St Monance, Fife' (1876; Glasgow Museums and Art Gallery) and 'Summer Evening, Cadzow' (1877; priv. coll.) are fine examples of this phase of Bough's work. He continued to produce major works in his more 'commercial' style, including 'A Sunny Day in Iona' (1871), 'London from Shooters Hill' (1872), 'Peel Harbour, Isle of Man' (1875), and 'Burns Cottage, Alloway' (1876; Glasgow Museums and Art Gallery). 
Renowned for a bohemian lifestyle, Bough made friends at all levels of society. He was widely read, a great storyteller, and an accomplished musician. A kind and generous friend, he could also be sarcastic and boorish towards those he thought pretentious. This latter trait made him significant enemies within the Scottish art establishment. 
Bough recommended a palette with a limited range of colours to his students but ignored his own advice when it suited him. He did much of his preliminary sketching outdoors, but returned to the studio to finish the work. His approach was described succinctly by Robert Louis Stevenson: 'Artistic sight is judicious blindness. Sam Bough must have been a jolly blind old boy.... He saw, not the scene, but the watercolour sketch. Where does he learn that? In the studio, I swear.... He learns it in the crystallisation of daydreams; in changing, not in copying, fact. ('Letters of Robert Louis Stevenson', 2.147)' Always a controversial character, Bough established watercolour as a significant medium in Scottish art. His great facility in both oils and watercolour, and his speed of production, led some to criticize his work for lack of finish. In reality, he overproduced to meet the cost of his way of life. This led to his returning to earlier successful styles and subjects throughout his life and has left posterity with a confusing picture of his development as an artist. The best of his paintings have an energy and freedom of composition and style that mark his capacity for capturing the moment. He was best at portraying nature in its extremes -- wonderful skies with fleeting sunsets or storms and raging seas threatening the lives of those who sailed on them. Sentimentality had no part in his art. 
In 1877 Bough's health began to fail and he suffered a stroke in January 1878. He appeared to make a good recovery, but fell ill again later that year and died, at Jordan Bank Villa, his home in Morningside, Edinburgh, on 19 November 1878 of cancer of the prostate. He was buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, on 23 November. 
Historically, Bough's place in Scottish art is as an artist of transition, marking the change from the traditional themes and style of McCulloch to the impressionistic effects of McTaggart and those who came after. 


@@@@@


doc= 2978


Boughen, Edward (1587-1653), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in Buckinghamshire and educated at Westminster School. Elected as a Westminster scholar at Christ Church, Oxford, he matriculated, aged eighteen, on 13 December 1605, graduating BA on 22 June 1609 and proceeding MA on 14 May 1612. In 1619 he became chaplain to the bishop of Oxford, John Howson, who rapidly appointed him rector of Warpsgrave in 1620, and vicar of Bray in 1621 and of Stoke Talmage in 1628. 
Boughen was a well-educated conformist and his writings principally offered a staunch defence of the Church of England. He preached on 27 September 1619, at Howson's primary visitation, of the pastoral importance and episcopal function exercised in confirmation. Richard Hooker had long before noted the scandalous neglect into which the practice of confirmation had fallen, repeating criticisms and claims of laxity made to Burghley as early as the 1580s. Although Hooker's contention was championed by George Hakewill in the pamphlet he wrote in 1613 to celebrate the confirmation at Whitehall of Prince Charles, 'The Auncient Ecclesiasticall Practise of Confirmation', it does not seem to have prompted many of the episcopal bench into action any more than had 1604 Canon LX, which required that the bishop confirm triennially at his visitations. Visitation articles tended only to enquire after catechizing, a necessary part of confirmation preparation; those of Howson in 1619, repeated in 1628, on the other hand, expressly enjoined due diligence in preparing candidates for confirmation. 
Boughen's agenda at the 1619 visitation was to explain confirmation to the clergy: 'that you... may be the better encouraged, to performe that dutie of seasoning the younger sort of your parishioners with the principles of the Religio, that they may be more fit for that holy 'imposition of hands' by the Bishop, and worthily partake the fruits thereof. (Boughen, 'A Sermon of Confirmation', 2)' If this sermon is taken as evidence of an attempt to propagandize the rite -- other attempts were made in Scotland in the articles of Aberdeen of 1616 which became the five articles of Perth of 1618 -- Boughen's success was partial. Little uniformity of practice was achieved until after 1662. In the very next year (1620), in the Oxford schools, Richard Hall roundly answered in the negative the proposition whether confirmation was absolutely necessary as a sacrament instituted by the church. 
On 13 April 1633, in succession to Bishop John Bancroft, Boughen was collated to the rectory of Woodchurch, Kent; in 1638 he was appointed to the prebend of Marden in the diocese of Chichester. Removed from Bray in 1640, he was deprived of Woodchurch as a 'delinquent' in February 1641. In 1646 he joined the king in Oxford and on 1 July was made by him DD in the university. Thereafter he lived in Chartham, Kent, where he may have had family links: although nothing is known of his wife, his son Edward, who went to Merton College, Oxford, in 1644, was born there. 
Boughen's later writings on the necessity of unity of doctrine and uniformity in discipline are consistent with early opinions. A 1645 treatise 'Observations upon the ordinance of the Lords and Commons', showing the nullity and invalidity of Presbyterian ordinations was, according to Bishop Barlow, part of an intended larger work begun in 1643 that was overtaken by Jeremy Taylor's writings, while he returned to the need for confirmation and value of catechizing in a short exposition of the catechism, 'Principles of Religion' (1646). Here he lamented 'that two such useful and excellent means of saving knowledge, as sermons and catechizing be, should the one be advanced to the depressing of the other', noting that 'the inordinate Zeal of people' often demanded two sermons on Sundays at the cost of the catechism. Catechizing 'is a means indispensably necessary to attain the more excellent and only necessary end' ('Principles of Religion', 1646) of building up the faithful. Shortly before the regicide he discussed the treaty of Newcastle and whether the king could with a safe conscience consent to the abrogation of episcopacy in his 'Mr Geere's Case of Conscience Sifted' (1648). His last conformist work was 'An Account of the Church Catholick' (1653), a disputation with a New College man, Thomas Read. 
Boughen died during the interregnum, on 9 November 1653, and was buried at Southease church, near Lewes. News of his death was not widely known at the time and he was mistakenly entered at the Restoration as vicar of Bray; a successor was appointed later in the year. 


@@@@@


doc= 2979


Boughton, Joan (c.1414-1494), Wycliffite heretic, is known only from accounts of her death. The fullest of these, in the great chronicle of London, records that she was a widow and mother, and describes her as 'an old cankyrd heretyke that dotid For age', being at least eighty years old. The chronicle's bitterly hostile account reports that she was a disciple of Wyclif, whom she revered as a saint, and an ardent subscriber to his doctrines. Brought to trial for heresy, she could not be moved from her (unspecified) opinions, in spite of the efforts of 'alle the doctors of london', and was condemned to be burnt at Smithfield. Conducted to the stake on 28 April 1494, 'she spak offtyn of God & ouir lady', but could not be prevailed upon to utter the name of Jesus. She clearly had associates in heresy, since after her death they removed her ashes 'for a precious Relyk' ('Great Chronicle of London', 252-3). One of them was believed to be her own daughter, Joan, the widow of Sir John Yonge, mayor of London (1466-7). Joan may have followed her mother to the stake, since about 1510 a Kentishwoman declared that Lady Yonge 'died well... a martyr before God' (Brigden, 97), having refused to honour images. But there is no evidence to corroborate this. Sir John appears to have been a man of impeccable orthodoxy, who founded a chantry at Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire. His widow had remarried by 1486; her new husband was Sir Thomas Leukenor. In spite of her great age, there is no evidence that Joan Boughton was a heretic of long standing, and she could have been converted in the 1490s, when there was something of a revival of Lollardy in London ['see 'Lollard women (act. c.1390-c.1520)]. 


@@@@@


doc= 2980


Boult, Swinton (1808-1876), insurance company manager, was born on 3 December 1808 in Liverpool, one of several children of Francis Boult, a Unitarian shipowner, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Swanwick. While his father was fairly prominent in Liverpool, and a founder of the town's American chamber of commerce in 1801, nothing is known of Boult's early years. In 1831, aged twenty-two, he began in insurance with the local agency of George Booth, who represented two London offices, Albion Life and Protector Fire. In 1833 he married Maria Ann Grundy, eldest child of the Revd John Grundy; they had three sons. In 1834 Boult became Liverpool agent for London Assurance. This was a difficult time for fire insurance agents in Liverpool as London offices sought to maintain high premium rates in the face of consistently poor results, especially on warehouse insurances. Boult believed he saw a market opening for a local office. In 1836 he came together with George Holt, banker, cotton broker, and fellow Unitarian, to found Liverpool Fire and Life Insurance Company, with a paid-up capital of $66,000 and a board selected from local whig nonconformist merchants. Boult became company secretary, a title he held for the next thirty years. 
Initially the company's existence remained precarious. Boult was attacked in the press for inviting subscriptions to an enterprise which looked likely to fail. Shareholders became unhappy about slow growth, and the larger London offices were eagerly seeking provincial insurers to swallow up. Sun Fire Office, which targeted Boult's company in 1838, reported that Boult was a 'very young man... [who] has no warm friend or advocate and is thought very inefficient for the situation and has no influence whatever' (J. Toplis to C. Ford, 16 Oct 1838, London, Guildhall Library, MS 15032/7). This opinion, however, soon proved baseless. Boult was determined that Liverpool Fire and Life should survive, and he fought off all attacks, even during the disastrous losses of 1842-3. He launched himself into a campaign to improve Liverpool's water supply and firefighting facilities, and eventually succeeded in rallying the other fire offices to the cause. In 1845 the 'Liverpool Fire Prevention Act' was passed, with its provisions based upon an inquiry carried out by Boult into the causes of local fires. In 1846 he organized the Liverpool Fire Salvage Association, which aimed to improve warehouse construction and fire prevention methods. During the 1840s he played a central role in negotiating tariff premium rate agreements among the major fire offices for warehouse and cotton mill risks in Liverpool and Manchester. He also devised a uniform policy form for the tariff offices, which had been another point of competition. His role was further recognized when he was elected chairman of the northern committee of the Fire Tariff Association in 1858, and ten years later he helped to found its successor, the national Fire Offices' Committee. 
The early vulnerability of Liverpool Fire and Life was, in part, due to its concentration of risks. As a solution Boult began a series of take-overs which subsumed at least ten offices in Britain and abroad during his career. After the take-over of the London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Insurance Company in 1847, the company's name was changed by act of parliament to Liverpool and London. The culmination of this strategy came in 1864 when the company merged with Globe Insurance (established 1803), in one of the biggest corporate fusions Britain had seen. Boult, who negotiated the merger, was appointed managing director of the renamed Liverpool, London, and Globe (LL&G). At the time some of his compeers thought him a little obsessed with amalgamations, but the strategy had its effect. By 1867 the office was the largest fire insurer in the world, with a premium income of $837,000. 
Boult also pursued expansion overseas, particularly following the lines of Liverpool's trading links. From 1848 the first agents were appointed in New York, Newfoundland, and Hamburg, and in 1851 a board of directors was established at New York for the United States. In 1853 Boult made a long journey to Australia, travelling across the USA via San Francisco, where, with a new agency, Liverpool and London opened the first European office on the Pacific coast. New boards were also established by Boult in Melbourne and Sydney. Total premiums more than quadrupled to $222,000 between 1851 and 1856 as Liverpool and London extended its agencies across Europe, Latin America, Africa, India, and the Far East. Increasing use was made by the company of reinsurance, despite Boult's dislike of the business and his opinion that no office should underwrite any one risk or combination of risks, unless it meant to retain it (and had the resources to do so). In 1859 a director resigned in protest at the too rapid expansion, but an inquiry found that, over the long term, foreign underwriting had proved more profitable than home business. 
By 1871 the United States generated $423,000 out of a global premium income of $931,000. That year, in which Boult was described by a writer as the 'very Napoleon of fire insurance' (Walford, 354), proved to be disastrous, with losses of over $600,000 in the great Chicago fire, followed by $280,000 paid out in the Boston fire of 1872. All claims were met, and in the long term the company's reputation in the USA was enhanced, but the immediate dividends suffered, and Boult was called to account. Early in 1873 LL&G's board decided not to renew his appointment, ending his career after thirty-seven years. He lobbied the shareholders, but was unable to find a way back, and his attempt to establish a new insurance office failed. 
Writing before Boult's departure from LL&G, a journalist referred to 'the cheery voice, the frank manner, the dignified courtesy, the unfailing tact, the power of assimilation and clarification, which carried his board of directors with him' (Walford, 355). Boult was respected by the insurance community on both sides of the Atlantic, and the Americans viewed him as 'an open-hearted and courteous gentleman' ('New York Spectator', 431), but it seems he was not particularly sociable. Despite his frequent agency tours, it is said he behaved more like a banker than a merchant, sitting in his office to receive callers. He published on a number of topics, including taxation, joint-stock companies, and political economy. He was a firm believer in 'laissez-faire', and criticized, as another example of excessive state interference, the act of 1870 which made the registration of life assurance companies compulsory. He was no orator. In 1867 he gave evidence to the select committee on fire protection, it is said, in 'a sledge-hammer style of delivery, occasionally toned down by a characteristic sarcasm' (Walford, 355). 
Boult suffered from acute rheumatic gout, and on 8 July 1876, aged sixty-seven, he collapsed and died in Aigburth Road, Garston, near Liverpool, while hailing the Liverpool omnibus. The county coroner's verdict was death from natural causes. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2981


Boultbee, Thomas Pownall (1818-1884), Church of England clergyman, was born in Hope Street, Liverpool, on 7 August 1818. He was the eldest son of a family of four boys and three girls of the Revd Thomas Boultbee (1793-1883), vicar of Bidford-on-Avon and Salford Priors, Warwickshire, and his wife, Eliza Pownall (1790-1858). 
Boultbee was educated privately and then at Uppingham School (1833-7), before proceeding to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a sizar in 1837. He graduated BA in 1841 (fifth wrangler), MA in 1844, and LLD in 1871. He was elected to a fellowship of his college in 1841, and was ordained deacon in 1844 and priest in 1845, assisting in the parishes of Wolverton and Bearley in the same area as his father. Between 1846 and 1849 he served a curacy at Oldberrow and Morton Bagot, near Henley in Arden, and tutored private pupils. On 22 December 1846 he married Caroline Frances (1825-1906), daughter of Robert Lawrance (died 1871), rector of Bleadon, Somerset. They had a family of four daughters and three sons (two of whom were ordained). 
In 1849 Boultbee became curate to the Revd Francis Close at Cheltenham parish church. They became firm friends and Boultbee was the most able of Close's numerous curates. Between 1853 and 1863 Boultbee was one of the theological tutors (and later housemaster and chaplain) of Cheltenham College. The evangelical outlook of the school was maintained with Close as the chairman of the directors, and by the presence and influence of the theological tutors. 
In 1863 Boultbee became the first principal of the London College of Divinity, founded by the Revd Alfred Peache and his sister Kezia, which opened in a former school in Kilburn, London. In 1866 the college was relocated to a former college in Highbury (where it remained until 1940). During Boultbee's principalship 300 men were trained for ordained ministry at home and overseas, and the college buildings were considerably enlarged by the architect Ewan Christian. There were two notable staff appointments, Revd C. H. Waller (who succeeded Boultbee as principal) and Revd H. Gee (who later became master of University College, Durham, and dean of Gloucester). 
Islington was the leading evangelical parish in London, and the London College of Divinity became an important centre of learning there, alongside the Church Missionary College (opened in 1825). Boultbee was an evangelical by conviction, and gave strong leadership to the college and within the evangelical party. Committed to the principles of the Reformation, he was judicious, 'soundly and calmly wise', with little 'polemical bitterness' about him (Calthrop, 27-8). His 'Commentary on the Thirty-Nine Articles' (1871), based on his theological lectures, was widely approved and used as a textbook in other evangelical theological colleges. He published a number of sermons, gave papers on theological education at church congresses and to lay and clerical associations, and regularly spoke at the Islington clerical meeting. 
Boultbee was an examining chaplain to J. C. Ryle, bishop of Liverpool, and in October 1883 was made a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral by John Jackson, bishop of London. He suffered from gout, and died while convalescing at Bournemouth on 30 January 1884. He was buried at Chesham, Buckinghamshire, where his youngest son was the vicar. Ryle spoke at his memorial service in Christ Church, Highbury, in February 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 2982


Boulter, Hugh (1672-1742), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born in London on 4 January 1672, the son of John Boulter of the parish of St Katharine Cree, London. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 11 September 1685, matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in February 1687, but transferred in 1688 to Magdalen College, where he was made fellow in 1696; he graduated BA (1690), MA (1693), and DD (1708). He left Oxford for London in 1700 and was chaplain first to Sir Charles Hedges and then to Archbishop Tenison of Canterbury. 
In 1708 Boulter was appointed rector of St Olave's, Tooley Street, Southwark, and in 1715-16 was archdeacon of Surrey. In 1719 he served as chaplain to George I in Hanover; he was also appointed bishop of Bristol and dean of Christ Church, Oxford, being consecrated bishop on 15 November 1719. Three days previously, on 12 November 1719, he had married Elizabeth Savage (died 1754) at the church of St Peter-le-Poer, London; they had no children. In July 1724 Boulter was offered the primacy of the Church of Ireland, which he accepted apparently with great reluctance. Resentment that the archbishop of Dublin, William King, had been passed over for the primacy ensured that a section of Irish opinion was hostile to Boulter from the start. Lord Perceval, whom Boulter met when he went to Richmond to accept the primacy, recorded that Boulter regarded his principal duty in his new post as being to serve the king. Boulter arrived in Dublin on 3 November 1724 in the middle of the 'Wood's Halfpence' dispute, the most serious crisis in Anglo-Irish relations during the first half of the eighteenth century. He immediately warned the ministry of the strength of opposition in Ireland to Wood's patent, and in August 1725 he joined with Lord Lieutenant Carteret and Lord Chancellor West in advising the ministry to withdraw it, a recommendation which was reluctantly followed. 
From the start Boulter viewed the Irish political situation in terms of an Irish-English conflict and throughout his primacy argued for a systematic policy of strengthening the 'English interest' through the appointment of English-born bishops, judges, and privy councillors. Although Boulter's appointment did not, as was once thought, represent a radical change in government policy, his arrival was a turning point in the Irish-English conflict which had been afflicting the Church of Ireland since 1716. With Boulter as primate the leadership of the church was removed from Archbishop King, leader of the Irish interest, and Boulter's influence over the crown's ecclesiastical patronage enabled him to strengthen the English interest thereafter. Relations between King and Boulter began uneasily and deteriorated rapidly. Boulter's status among the Irish clergy was damaged by his scheme to augment the church's fund of first-fruits for the purchase of glebes. This well-intentioned plan failed, owing to the opposition of the Ulster and Munster clergy, and Bishop Nicolson of Derry suspected that Archbishop King had suggested the scheme to Boulter in the sure knowledge that it would arouse such opposition. More serious harm to Boulter's reputation quickly followed, as related by Percival: 'The ArchBp. of Dublin and our Primate are now at open enmity, never to be reconciled which among many other things is principally occasioned by the Primate's ordaining and giveing a living to one Power, who was one of the Waltham Blacks, the man came hither recommended by my Lord Townsend and Ld. Fane knowing him, gave the account of his being one of those fellows, and if he had not turned informer and evidence against them, he had bin hanged himself, this story the ArchBp. heard, and spoke of it with great bitterness to the Primate, which you may judge did occasion such resentments as are not to be made up. (BL, Add. MS 21122, fols. 27-8)' Boulter's declared objective was to break up what he called the 'Dublin faction' on the Irish episcopal bench, although this was only finally realized with Archbishop King's death in 1729 ('Letters', 1.12). Boulter did, however, quickly assert his authority within the church and the House of Lords. While the English-born bishop of Kilmore, Timothy Godwin, wrote that Boulter made 'a very good figure in our House' (Wake MS 14, fol. 297), a less friendly witness, Philip Perceval, reported that the primate was 'looked upon as a dull headed man, who in the house of Lords engrosses all the talk to himself which they say was one reason he was sent over they being tired out with him in England' (BL, Add. MS 47031, fols. 92-4). 
Boulter's strongest asset was the firm backing which he received from the British ministry, which normally enabled him to outmanoeuvre his political opponents, one of whom was Lord Carteret, the lord lieutenant. In order to conciliate leading factions in the Irish House of Commons, Carteret often recommended Irishmen for ecclesiastical and judicial positions on the Irish privy council. Boulter regarded such appointments as likely to weaken the English interest and, because he enjoyed better relations with Robert Walpole and the duke of Newcastle than did Carteret, his views normally prevailed. In 1727 Carteret recommended Theophilus Bolton, the Irish-born bishop of Elphin, for the archbishopric of Cashel, despite Boulter's opinion that Bolton was 'as dangerous an Irishman as any on the bench [who]... would set himself, if he had that station, at the head of the Irish interest here' ('Letters', 1.134, 115-6). This time Boulter blocked Bolton's appointment to Cashel but had to accept it in 1729, in order, as he put it, 'to keep things quiet in this country' (ibid., 1.272). The deaths in the mid-to late-1720s of William King, Timothy Godwin, and William Nicolson -- most of the leading actors who had dominated the Irish-English conflict -- facilitated the lessening of national tensions within the church. An indication of this changed atmosphere can be seen in Boulter's recommendation, in 1734, of two Irish-born bishops for promotion, describing both as being 'in the English interest' (ibid., 2.80). 
Despite his reputation as a staunch defender of the English interest in Ireland, Boulter devoted considerable attention to the problems of the Irish economy. His particular interest was in currency reform, specifically lowering the value of gold relative to silver in Ireland, a scheme which he first proposed in 1726; he finally overcame the opposition of Irish banking interests and various patriot figures, such as Jonathan Swift, in 1738. Over this issue, as with others, Boulter's pro-English reputation was exploited by his opponents to arouse suspicion about his motives. As he complained in 1729, opponents of his scheme were representing it as 'an 'English' project, formed in 'England', and carried on by my Lord Chancellor, myself, and other 'English' here, with a design to drain this Kingdom of their gold, as they are already drained of their silver' ('Letters', 1.245). When a riot bill was rejected by the Irish parliament in 1730, one commentator believed that many had opposed it because it was framed by the primate and the lord chancellor, Thomas Wyndham, and that: '[their] warmth about it was one great means of rejecting it, for some people have a mind to show them, that they shall govern but by the people of Ireland, with whom at present they have little correspondence or confidence, nor endeavour to have any, and yet seem desirous to carry everything as they have a mind. (BL, Add. MS 21123)' In spite of his reputation Boulter does have a claim to some 'patriot' credentials. Following a harvest failure in Ulster in 1728-9, he helped to organize the purchase and transportation of food to prevent famine. He was even prepared to defend the right of Irish protestants to regulate their own affairs without interference from England. In 1735 he asked the duke of Newcastle to oppose a bill in the Westminster parliament 'for securing the title of Protestants'. The primate argued: 'it must be dangerous to give way to passing bills originally in England wholly relating to affairs in Ireland and especially to our private property here, without the least pretence that his Majesty's service or the interest of England are anyways concerned in the affair. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/398, fols. 9-10)' Boulter was also actively engaged in a range of philanthropic enterprises. He was vice-president and treasurer of the Incorporated Society in Dublin for Promoting English Protestant Schools in Ireland, a scheme designed to promote protestantism, the English language, and industry among poor Catholic children. Boulter established his own school for forty boys at Santry, co. Dublin. The Charter Schools scheme, however, 'was soon to fall short of the high hopes with which it had been launched' and the schools subsequently achieved notoriety as centres of neglect and abuse (Milne, 34). 
Boulter had uneasy relations with successive speakers of the House of Commons with whom he and the lord chancellor served as lords justices. He clashed with William Conolly and Sir Ralph Gore over a range of patronage and policy issues, and in 1733, while supporting Henry Boyle's candidature as speaker, asked that Boyle should not be appointed a lord justice. Like his requests to diminish the Irish presence on the privy council, Boulter's plea went unheeded. 
Boulter's correspondence gives the impression of an intelligent, diligent, and determined man. There is no question that he understood his role in Ireland as being the loyal servant of the British government, and this perception was bound to bring him into conflict with anyone who put Irish interests above those of the ministry. As a result his reputation in Ireland has suffered among both contemporaries and later generations; he is generally regarded as the personification of the English interest in Ireland in the early Hanoverian era. 
Boulter was a contributor to the 'Free Thinker', a periodical founded in 1718, and published two sermons; a selection of his correspondence (1724-38) was published in 1769-70 under the supervision of his secretary, Ambrose Philips. Boulter died at St James's Palace, London, on 27 September 1742, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. He was survived by his wife, who died on 3 March 1754. 


