@@@@@


doc= 29390


Wilcox, Thomas (c.1549-1608), Church of England clergyman, is first recorded in 1564, when he matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, suggesting that he was born about 1549; much later in his career he was listed in a formal ecclesiastical document as a non-graduate. He became one of the preachers entertained in the peculiar London parish (in both the formal and informal senses) of Holy Trinity Minories, and he served the cure of All Hallows, Honey Lane. Towards 1570 he became part of a militant tendency of younger London preachers, led by John Field, curate of St Giles Cripplegate. In an attack published in 1581 against a certain I.B., a 'libertine', or freewiller, he would own the designation of 'Puritan' even while repudiating it, 'a worde of a doubtfull signification', attributing its invention to the Catholic exile Nicholas Sander (Wilcox, 'The Unfouldyng of Sundry Untruthes', 80-83). 
In 1571 Wilcox had joined with another radical spirit, William White, in replying to attacks on the nonconformists made in Paul's Cross sermons by bishops John Jewel and Robert Horne. Jewel was told that they would pray that God would put it into the queen's heart to remove Jewel from his 'over quiet estate, pompous livings and lordly titles' (Peel, 1.79-80). In June 1572 Field and Wilcox wrote and published, anonymously, the outspoken presbyterian manifesto 'An Admonition to the Parliament'. The 'Admonition' proper, relatively measured and carefully structured in its argument, was the work of Wilcox, the more heated and satirically inventive 'View of Popishe Abuses' which accompanied it Field's handiwork. So much is clear from exchanges with Archbishop Parker's chaplain, when Wilcox disowned responsibility for 'the bitternes of the stile', which Field freely acknowledged (Peel, 1.89-90). Both were imprisoned on the authority of the archbishop. The admonitioners became famous overnight and were visited by many of the leading nonconformist clergy, which is not to say that their extreme views were universally approved. After three months Field and Wilcox were sentenced by the lord mayor and aldermen to a further year's imprisonment in Newgate, which, in spite of petitions to the privy council, Lord Burghley, and the earl of Leicester from themselves and their impoverished wives, they appear to have served. At an appearance before the privy council in the summer of 1573 they were threatened with banishment. Bishop Edwin Sandys of London, who suffered much opprobium on their account, complained that London would never be quiet until 'these authors of sedition who are now esteemed as gods' were removed far from the city. 'The people resort unto them as in Popery they were wont to run on pilgrimage' (BL, Lansdowne MS 17, no. 43, fols. 96-7). Eventually the pair were released into the care of Archdeacon John Mullins. In the autumn of 1573 Wilcox went off on a tour of puritan centres in the midlands, but by February 1574 he was back in London, replacing Field, who was now perhaps overseas, as the regular correspondent of 'Father' Anthony Gilby at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, reporting from his house in Coleman Street the latest oppressions of the bishops. 
John Field always took the upper hand in his dealings with Wilcox. In December 1572 both men had composed 'a breife confession of Faythe', which, if wisdom had not prevailed, they would have attempted to promulgate as a formal affirmation by the entire presbyterian movement, an intrinsically schismatic gesture. 'Brother Wilcox' seems to have acted on Field's instructions, which ended: 'Studie to be breife' (Peel, 1.83-4). But in 1583 the relationship turned sour. This is revealed by some correspondence that fell into the hands of Richard Bancroft, and which he exploited in 1593 in his book 'Daungerous Positions'. The letters in Bancroft's hands may have mentioned the particulars of the offence, but the future archbishop, with his unfailing tabloid instincts, thought it not fit to rehearse 'any mans private behaviour or infirmities', leaving the prurient reader to suspect the worst. But it does sound as if the transgression was moral rather than theological or professional. For his part, Wilcox told Field that he had been dealt with 'disorderly', and hinted that 'hee had perhaps concealed as great infirmities of Fields', specifying six. Field retorted: 'If God hath made you an instrument, to seeke for the advancement of Christs scepter: kisse it your selfe and bee subject unto it.' It was the private opinion of Tomson and Thomas Cartwright that Wilcox should be 'for ever' suspended from his ministry (Bancroft, 117-19). It is perhaps significant that Wilcox in many of his writings was somewhat over-zealous in declaring himself a sinner, making much of 'the grievousnes of mine offences' (Wilcox, 'Summarie and Short Meditations', epistle). No less than six of his dedicatory prefaces and many of his letters were subscribed: 'Thomas Wilcocks [or 'T.W.'] the Lordes unworthie [or 'most unworthie'] servant [or 'minister']', in effect his trademark. 
In 1577 a new bishop of London, John Aylmer, had recommended that Wilcox and others be sent off to Lancashire, to wear out their zeal on the papists. However, Wilcox had already moved, but only as far as Hertfordshire, where he became curate of Bovingdon, a chapelry of Hemel Hempstead. In 1584 he was one of five clergy in the archdeaconry of Huntingdon, 'recusants', who evaded subscription to Archbishop Whitgift's three articles. He neither appeared nor subscribed, but was presumably protected by some of the many powerful friends whom he had by now acquired. Soon after this Wilcox was reported as attending a presbyterian conference in Oxford, which included some of the Scottish ministers then in exile in England. In March 1596 'T.W.', who may have been Wilcox, preached in a combination lecture or prophesying at Southwell in Nottinghamshire, but his presence so far from his usual haunts is not otherwise accounted for. Aylmer and his successors were not entirely rid of Wilcox's presence. He signed prefaces to published works from London in 1581, 1587, 1591, 1595, 1599, 1600 (giving his address as Lothbury), and 1604. 
In spite of his own alleged 'infirmity', or even because of it, Wilcox became one of the most sought after of puritan casuists, a pioneer in the art of 'practical' or 'comfortable' divinity. Long after his death he would receive the tribute of a volume of collected 'Works' (1624), something which never happened to Field. In 1589 he published 'Large Letters, Three in Number', dedicated to eight named London citizens 'and all the rest of his Christian acquaintance in London'. Many more of his pastoral letters survived in manuscript in a large folio volume until the late seventeenth century, when they were listed by the dissenting divine Roger Morrice: 'most of them containing little but godly, plain and necessary exhortations and directions for the exercise of godlynesse' (Morrice MSS, 'Letters of eminent persons', 2.617(2)), although a letter written to the countess of Sussex on 24 February 1577 asked her to use her influence at court on behalf of the silenced puritan ministers, himself included. 
Wilcox was one of the most committed, active, and socially and politically well connected of Elizabethan puritan ministers, and the tally of his correspondents reads like an Elizabethan 'Who's Who'. It includes Sir Francis Walsingham and his wife, Fulke Greville ('several' letters), the MP Peter Wentworth, Lady Anne Bacon, the wife of the clerk of the council, Robert Beale, Lord and Lady Zouche, and Sir Richard Knightley's sister and Sir John Harington's mother-in-law, Lady Rogers. Most of these letters were written in 1577-8. Wilcox's dedicatory epistles are distinctive for their emphasis on Christian friendship. His particular patrons, besides many wealthy Londoners, were Martin Harlackinden of Woodchurch, Kent, the recipient of scores of letters, who at his death in 1585 left Wilcox and his wife, Annah, an annuity for life of $13 6's'. 8died, plus $6 13's'. 4died for their son, Elijah; the third earl of Bedford and his wife, Lucy, the great patroness of poets, described as his 'very Christian friends' (Amandus Polanus, preface, 'Substance of Christian Religion', trans. T. Wilcox, 1600); and Lady Anne Bacon. He dedicated his 'Discourse Touching the Doctrine of Doubting' (1598) to the Bedfords and the countess's brother Sir John Harington (later Lord Harington of Exton) and his wife from Woburn, and in 1595 published a moralized account of 'a fearefull fire' at Woburn (Wilcox, 'A Short yet a True and Faithfull Narration'). Other books, written or translated by Wilcox, were dedicated to Sir Francis and Lady Walsingham, Sir John Popham, Sir William Pelham, Sir John Brocket, Sir John Cutts, and Sir Charles Morison. 
In 1604 Wilcox presented the ten-year-old Prince Henry with Philippe de Mornay's 'A Woorke Concerning the Trewnesse of the Christian Religion', his revision of a translation begun by Sir Philip Sidney and completed by Arthur Golding. The dedication included a fulsome declaration of loyalty to 'your most loving father, and my only dear and dred Soveraigne and gracious Lord and Master, here upon earth'. There is evidence that Wilcox had acted as some kind of intermediary between the English puritan interest and James at about the time of his accession. Later he was one of the ministers who met behind the scenes at the Hampton Court conference in 1604, in order to brief the four principal puritan spokesmen. 
Wilcox seems to have spent much time at Gorhambury as a chaplain and pensioner of Lady Anne Bacon. A servant of Anthony Bacon reported on one occasion that 'Mr Willockes had a paper with a grete delle of gould in it' (LPL, MS 650, no. 169). There is strong internal evidence that the puritan archives published in 1593 as 'A Parte of a Register' and the larger manuscript collections known as 'The seconde parte of a register', an enterprise begun by John Field, were assembled by Wilcox, and perhaps at Gorhambury. An item in 'The seconde parte', the account of the interrogation in 1572 of Field and Wilcox by Andrew Pearson, Archbishop Parker's chaplain, was written up by Wilcox after Field's death in 1588. 
Wilcox wrote or translated some twenty-five books (if various publications attributed to 'T.W.' are all his). Some of his 'Works' were posthumously published in 1624 by the staunchly puritan divine and physician Dr John Burges, who had married Wilcox's eldest daughter, Sara, in 1621. It was a daughter of Burges's first marriage who married the celebrated puritan divine William Ames. 


@@@@@


doc= 29391


Wild, Charles (1781-1835), watercolour painter, was born in London. He was apprenticed to the draughtsman Thomas Malton the younger and, like his master, he specialized in architectural subjects. It was from Malton's house that Wild exhibited his first works, at the Royal Academy in 1803, two views of Christ Church, Oxford. In total he showed nine works at the academy but it was at the Society of Painters in Water Colours that he was to make his mark, exhibiting 165 architectural subjects between 1809 and 1833. These comprised internal and external views of the great English cathedrals and, after 1821, the churches, first of northern France and subsequently of Belgium and of Germany. Works such as 'View in the East Transept of Worcester Cathedral' (exh. Society of Painters in Water Colours, 1823; V&A) combine a close attention to architectural detail with an attractive picturesque treatment. Wild's work was generally well received by the critics, who appreciated his ambition to raise the status of the architectural subject. 'A View in Canterbury Cathedral', exhibited in 1810, included pilgrims and was accompanied by a quotation from Chaucer; 'The Penance of Jane Shore, in the Old Cathedral of St Paul's' (exh. Society of Painters in Water Colours, 1827), a reconstruction from archaeological evidence, was accompanied in the exhibition catalogue by lines from Sir Thomas More. In addition to supporting the society's exhibitions Wild was its treasurer from 1823 to 1826, and its secretary from 1827 to 1831. 
Wild's work as an engraver and publisher of architectural views earned him a place in the history of the Gothic revival. Beginning with 'Twelve Perspective Views of the Exterior and Interior Parts of Canterbury', in 1807, he produced a series of aquatints -- sometimes coloured -- of English cathedrals, which were praised for their accuracy. The Canterbury series was followed by York in 1809, Chester in 1813, Lichfield in 1813, Lincoln in 1819, and Worcester in 1823. Wild's travels on the continent also resulted in a number of publications, including 'Twelve select examples of the ecclesiastical architecture of the middle ages, chiefly in France' (1826) and a series of etched outlines from 'Architectural Sketches Made in Belgium, Germany and France' (1833). Wild was particularly adept at publicizing his publications and many of the original watercolours appeared at the society's exhibitions. Wild is perhaps best remembered, however, for his contribution to one of the most sumptuous publications in hand-coloured aquatint, William Henry Pyne's 'History of the Royal Residences' (3 vols., 1819). He produced watercolours for fifty-eight of the hundred views, including large groups of Windsor Castle and Carlton House, some of which provide a unique record of lost interiors (Royal Collection). He also painted four highly detailed watercolours, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, for Whittaker and Nayler's 'Coronation of George IV' (1821-41). 
Wild's career was seriously affected by failing eyesight after 1827, and he became blind in 1832. He died, on 4 August 1835, at 35 Albemarle Street, Piccadilly, where he had lived since 1820. Among his children with his wife, Margaret, was the architect James William Wild; his daughter Isabella Lucy married the architect, printer, and designer Owen Jones (1809-1874). 


@@@@@


doc= 29392


Wild, George (1610-1665), Church of Ireland bishop of Derry, was born on 9 January 1610 in Middlesex, the son of Henry Wild, a citizen of London. He entered the Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1619, and was elected scholar of St John's College, Oxford, in 1629. He matriculated on 13 November 1629, was elected fellow of his college in 1631, graduated BCL on 7 February 1635, and was incorporated at Cambridge in the same year. While at Oxford he wrote plays, unpublished in his lifetime, including 'Euphormus', a Latin comedy, 'The Converted Robber', and 'Love's Comedy', the latter acted before Charles I at St John's on 30 August 1636 to celebrate the opening of Archbishop Laud's new quadrangle there, the expensive production being paid for by the archbishop. Wild became chaplain to Laud, and was presented by him to the vicarage of St Giles, Reading, and in 1640 to the rectory of Biddenden, Kent. With the outbreak of civil war he became chaplain and preacher to the king at Oxford, the degree of DCL being conferred upon him on 23 November 1647. In March 1643 he preached in St Mary's before those MPs who had joined Charles I at Oxford, subsequently publishing the sermon. 
Wild was turned out of his fellowship by the parliamentary visitors in 1648, having been sequestered from his living at Biddenden before 20 May 1645. During the interregnum he continued to officiate as a clergyman where he could, John Evelyn being present for his Easter sermon at St Gregory's, London, on 15 April 1655. Evelyn was present again on 30 December following, when Wild 'preached the funeral Sermon of preaching' in advance of the planned implementation of Cromwell's proclamation against the ministrations of Anglican clergy or the use of the prayer book; 'so pathetic was his discourse, as drew many tears from his auditory' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 2.107). Thereafter he conducted prayer book services and administered communion in a house in Fleet Street, London, and at some point appears to have suffered imprisonment. 
After the Restoration, Wild was appointed bishop of Derry, and was one of twelve bishops consecrated by Primate Bramhall in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 27 January 1661. He and Jeremy Taylor, who preached at the consecration, were the only appointees without previous ecclesiastical careers in Ireland. Both men appear to have been considered unsuitable for English bishoprics, where the composition of the bench was determined, in large measure, by the need to placate 'moderate' presbyterian opinion and to win as broad support as possible for the restored hierarchy. Wild and Taylor were, however, appointed to Irish dioceses with large numbers of protestant nonconformists, and Wild proved himself energetic in moving to enforce laws on conformity. In 1665 he boasted that he had 'brought very many [dissenters] of late to a peaceable conformity' ('Hastings MSS', 4.125). Considered to have been 'of great piety, and charity and to have stinted himself and spent most of the revenues of his see on acts of benevolence and hospitality' (Leslie, 9), he was somewhat of an ascetic in his later years. Visiting Dublin to attend parliament, he died of heart disease on 29 December 1665, and was buried in the choir of Christ Church, Dublin. He was unmarried, and left modest bequests to the Merchant Taylors' School, St John's College, and to the poor of Derry, London, and Kent. His funeral sermon was preached by Robert Mossom, who succeeded him at Derry. 


@@@@@


doc= 29393


Wild, James William (1814-1892), architect, son of Charles Wild (1781-1835), watercolour painter, and his wife, Margaret, was born on 9 March 1814 in Lincoln, and baptized there in St Peter's, Eastgate. In 1830 he was articled to George Basevi. Already familiar with the Gothic style through his father's work he made rapid progress and at the conclusion of his pupillage was entrusted with the design and erection of a small country church. Independent practice rapidly followed, and Wild was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects on 29 May 1837, proposed by George Basevi, C. Fowler, and J. B. Papworth; he gave his address as 35 Albemarle Street, London (his parental home). Before 1840 Wild had built six churches, including Holy Trinity, Blackheath Hill (1839; a design was exhibited at the Royal Academy, 1838); Holy Trinity, Coates, Cambridgeshire (1839); St Lawrence, Southampton (1839-42; design exhibited at the Royal Academy, 1839); and a church at Barton, Yorkshire (1840). 
In Christ Church, Streatham (1841), Wild designed a church of remarkable originality, often described as being in a Byzantine manner but in fact richly eclectic, combining Early Christian, Italian Romanesque, Islamic, and moorish elements. He relied on simple decoration, with innovatory brick and terracotta polychromy for the exterior details, to secure a distinctive building at the low cost to which his employers restricted him. He was assisted in the internal decoration of the church by Owen Jones, who later became his brother-in-law (by marrying Wild's sister Isabella in 1842). 
It was perhaps through his friendship with Jones that Wild became interested in Near Eastern studies and was motivated to join Dr Karl Lepsius's great expedition to Egypt and Nubia, under the patronage of the king of Prussia, from 1842 to 1845. Wild was hired as an architectural draughtsman and a promising orientalist. Lepsius described him as 'a young architect, full of genius, [who] seeks with enthusiasm in the East a new field for the exercise of the rich and various gifts with which he is endowed' (C. R. Lepsius, 'Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia and the Peninsula of Sinai', 1853, 35). Among the other members of the expedition was Joseph Bonomi, the second curator of Sir John Soane's Museum. Lepsius and his team drew monuments and inscriptions as far south as Meroe in the Sudan and conducted excavations at Hawara. Wild worked hard on Egyptology during the course of the expedition and contributed a number of letters to 'The Athenaeum', in one of which he explained for the first time the method by which the Great Pyramid was constructed. On reaching Cairo in October 1842 he was captivated by Cairene domestic building and threw himself into the study of medieval Islamic architecture. He also joined the circle of orientalists around Edward William Lane and thereby gained access to many Islamic residences occupied by Europeans which he studied painstakingly, one of the first Western architects to devote himself to this subject. 
After a short hiatus Wild left Lepsius's expedition and returned in April 1844 to Cairo, where he remained for most of the next three years, until the spring of 1847, continuing to explore mosques and Arab houses, living among the people, and making meticulous sketches and drawings. He was also given a number of commissions in Cairo, including a design for a gateway to the British cemetery (1844) for which a design survives in the Public Record Office, Kew. His most important work in Egypt was the Anglican church of St Mark in Alexandria. Wild was appointed as its architect in 1845 but the church was only completed, after changes to the design during construction and long periods of inactivity, in 1855. In its final form the church is eclectic in style, combining an Early Christian plan and English inscriptions with Islamic detailing (decoration derived from architectonic forms, geometrical and flattened foliage ornament) and symbols of faith (the cross and the six-pointed star). By using Islamic detailing Wild not only utilized his studies of Islamic forms but also tried to ensure that the building would be unlikely to give offence in a Muslim city. Mark Crinson has described the building of St Mark's as 'an unprecedented event: the first public statement of Anglican presence in the Near East that was also recognised... as a statement of religious toleration' (Crinson, 'Leading into captivity'). 
An obituary of Wild ('Art Journal', 97, 1893, 120-21, signed T. P.) describes how, as a result of his work on St Mark's, Wild was brought into contact with Turkish officials and succeeded in obtaining a firman from the Porte granting an inspection of the great mosque at Damascus in Syria. The obituary recounts that when, after leaving Cairo in 1847, Wild arrived in Damascus and requested the help of the British consul in using this permission 'the official was horrified at the proposal [as] such a desecration of the sacred building by an infidel would mean death... if discovered... Mr. Wild was not to be deterred from making the attempt, and next morning the Consul accompanied him to the door of the mosque leaving him, with much anxiety, to his fate. The Arabic language, native dress and a certain ascetic appearance were... an ample disguise and he had the gratification of seeing the entire Holy Place without exciting the slightest suspicion, no European ever before having been successful in doing so. ('Art Journal', 120)' The same obituary also explained other techniques Wild resorted to in the course of his travels, explaining that 'drawing in the East involves no inconsiderable amount of inconvenience, not to say danger, from the great suspicion of the natives of the use which may be made of their treasures: here again he had to resort to stratagem, and what could not be done in the daytime had to be accomplished in the night. From time to time in his wanderings he 'marked in' the objects he desired to copy, prepared his damped paper for squeezes and in the darkness set forth and obtained impressions with such perfect exactness of details as could not be obtained by drawing under an umbrella without intrusion. (ibid., 120-21)' Many of the meticulous drawings made by Wild during his travels are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum (presented by his daughter Elizabeth Wild in 1938). Although Wild's Cairo notebooks were never published, they did become a source for later writers. Owen Jones's celebrated 'Grammar of Ornament' (1856-7) used Wild's drawings of Cairo for the illustrations of Arabian details. 
Wild returned to Britain permanently in 1848, visiting Constantinople, Italy, and Spain 'en route'. He resumed practice and in 1849 won a competition for the design of the St Martin's northern schools in Castle Street, Long Acre, London (dem.), which, after Christ Church, Streatham, were his most important work and an influential example of the secular use of the Gothic. A plain frontage onto a narrow side street allowed Wild to demonstrate how he could achieve a facade of great beauty using only the simplest of elements, creating a fine rhythmic composition by means of arcuated treatment of the lower storeys. 
In 1851 Wild was appointed decorative architect to the Great Exhibition, working with Owen Jones, who had been appointed one of the superintendents of works, on the interior decoration of the Crystal Palace. Wild's brother Charles Heard Wild was also employed there, checking calculations and testing the structural elements. In the same year, 1851, Wild's health broke down and this eventually compelled him to retire from active practice in 1857. In 1852 he designed the great water tower at Grimsby docks, a red brick structure 230 feet high, inspired by Italian and oriental towers. An obituary of Wild by Reginald Stuart Poole (unsourced copy, Sir John Soane's Museum archive) noted that exactly 1 million bricks had been used in its construction and described it as 'the most original and simplest structure of its kind in the United Kingdom'. 
From 1853 Wild was retained by the South Kensington Museum as an expert on Arabian art. During this period he designed a Cairene window (now removed) for the oriental courts at the museum, designed by Owen Jones in 1863-5, and also assisted Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Scott in the design of the architectural cast courts (1868-73) and the Huxley Building in Exhibition Road (1867-71). When the iron and glass buildings which had formed the first home of the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum) were dismantled and re-erected in east London to form the Bethnal Green Museum (1872), Wild was responsible for the new masonry facade, although the forecourt and campanile that he intended were never built. He also designed the British legation buildings at Tehran in Persia (1869) and produced a design for the British consulate at Alexandria (exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1870), which was accepted but never built owing to lack of funds. 
In 1878 Wild was appointed curator of Sir John Soane's Museum at 13 Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he carried out many alterations to Soane's interiors. In 1889-90 he constructed the ground-floor Ante-Room and the domed New Picture Room. The intended painted ceiling decoration for the latter remained on paper at the time of Soane's death and was executed, based on the original drawings, only in 1992. Below the Ante-Room and New Picture Room Wild also modified the Catacombs and the West Chamber. Between 1890 and 1892 he inserted glass pavement lights on the ground floor of the museum and widened the small Study, the Dressing Room, and the stairs down to the basement storey. In the same period he made major alterations to Soane's crypt, removing the flat, low stone ceiling and much of the south wall, altering a series of arches, and inserting a large glass window onto the Monument Court, with a deep sill on which he arranged a large group of John Flaxman's models to form the Flaxman Recess. Wild also made proposals to remove Soane's famous dome area skylight and demolish the architectural drawing office to form one large top-lit modern gallery across the rear of the museum: this was a proposal too far for the trustees of the museum. At the time of his death Wild was busy with proposals to put an extra storey onto the main house. 
Wild died at the museum on 7 November 1892 and was buried on 11 November at Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Ellen, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 29394


Wild, Jonathan (bap. 1683, d. 1725), thief-taker, was born in Wolverhampton, Staffordshire, and baptized on 6 May 1683. He was the eldest of five children of 'mean but honest Parents': his father, possibly John Wyld, was a carpenter who probably died about 1699; his mother (died 'c'.1721), a fruit seller ('Authentick Narrative', 3). After learning to read, write, and cast accounts at the Wolverhampton charity school Wild, at about the age of fifteen, was bound apprentice to a Birmingham buckle-maker. Most accounts agree that the man who would become the greatest criminal mastermind of the eighteenth century served out his time 'honestly enough' ('Life of Jonathan Wild', 2), returning about 1705 to Wolverhampton, where he married, and 'work[ed] very diligently for some time' as a buckle-maker ('True and Genuine Account', 230). However, less than two years later Wild abandoned his wife and infant son and set out for London. 
Only a few months after his arrival Wild was arrested for debt and thrown in the Wood Street compter where, according to his own account, he was to spend 'above... four Years' (Wild, ii). Wild languished for a time in the common side of the prison; however, such was his 'Address' that he soon earned the confidence of the keepers, and was not only granted the 'Liberty of the Gate', but was appointed 'Underkeeper' to those 'disorderly Persons' kept in the compter until they could be brought before a magistrate ('Lives of the most Remarkable Criminals', 17). Here Wild cultivated the acquaintance of prostitutes and petty criminals -- not least of whom was one Mary Milliner, a 'common Street-Walker' who was to become both Jonathan's 'first instructor' in the ways 'of the sharping and thieving world' ('History of the Lives', 7; 'Select Trials', 1735, 2.54; 'True and Genuine Account', 232), and the first of his many mistresses (he was reported to have had six 'wives' altogether -- the last of whom, Mary Dean, he formally married in 1719, although his first wife was then still living). 
Wild was discharged from the compter in December 1712, apparently taking advantage of a recent parliamentary act for the relief of debtors, and promptly set up house (or, according to some accounts, a brothel) with Mary Milliner in Lewkenor's Lane; several months later they moved to Cock Alley, Cripplegate. Their relationship came to an end about 1714. A liaison with Judith Nun about 1714/15 produced a daughter, born at this time. Both were said to have survived Wild. Another short-term relationship 'c'.1714/15 was with Sarah Perrin, alias Gregstone or Grigson, who also survived him. There were no children of this relationship and several accounts suggest that Wild had become sterile as a result of mercury treatment for syphilis. His relationship with Elizabeth Man, or Mann, was deeper and more lasting. Wild had not lived with Nun or Perrin, but treated Man as his common law wife and lived publicly with her for perhaps four years. She died in late 1718 or early 1719 and was buried in St Pancras churchyard. Wild lost no time in mourning but went through a marriage ceremony on 13 February 1719 at St Pancras Church with Mary Dean, 'nee' Brown, widow of John 'Skull' Dean, executed for burglary in 1717; she may have died in or before 1732. The 'wedding' was well attended, but Howson could find no record of it, presumably because Wild had it omitted or destroyed to avoid a bigamy charge. 
Wild's London career began while he was living with Mary Milliner. Initially he seems to have cobbled together a living from the proceeds of prostitution and from sporadic work as a bailiff's assistant; however, he soon graduated to racketeering and dealing in stolen goods. It seems he was initiated into this line of work by none other than Charles Hitchen, who had recently been suspended from the office of under city marshall after being accused of receiving and various other shady practices. Some time in the spring or summer of 1713 Hitchen, who was still empowered to act as a constable, approached Wild, asking him to accompany him as an assistant in his nightly 'Rambles' -- ostensibly to reform disorderly houses, but in reality to extort protection money and to traffic in stolen goods (Wild, 13). After Hitchen was reinstated to his office in April 1714 he and Wild 'fell to Loggerheads' and 'parted... each of them separately pursuing the Business of Thief-taking' ('Select Trials', 1735, 2.57). 
It was then that Wild began his career as a thief-taker and receiver in earnest. By the end of 1714 he had moved his quarters to the Little Old Bailey, where 'at length his House became an Office of Intelligence for lost Goods' ('History of the Lives', 37). Skilfully evading a 1706 act which made receiving stolen property a felony Wild acted as a kind of middleman who helped the victims of theft recover their goods, but without ever keeping them in his possession. The newspapers were 'daily cramm'd' with advertisements 'calling loudly out for all Sorts of strayed Valuables to be brought in to Mr. Wild's in the Old Baily, upon Promise of great Rewards and no 'Questions'' ('Authentick Narrative', 18). In the eyes of many contemporaries Wild performed a vital public service, especially by arranging the return of various paper notes and bills which were of little use to thieves but of great value to their owners. Initially, at least, Wild was cautious enough to refuse any fees (although he took a large cut from the thieves); and often, to cement his 'reputation for a mightily honest man', he would take measures to have the thieves -- or at least those whom he could not 'bring to comply' with him -- apprehended and prosecuted ('True and Genuine Account', 237, 235). Thus Wild played a wily double game in which he acted both the part of a receiver and a thief-taker who earned not only 'public applause' for bringing 'offenders to justice', but the rewards offered by parliament for the successful conviction of burglars and highwaymen (ibid., 238). 
Wild's credit soared in the spring of 1716, when he apprehended several street robbers who had murdered a gentlewoman in the course of an assault. In May 1716 he inserted an advertisement in the government newspaper, the 'London Gazette'; other notices placed around the same time describing him as a man who '[made] it his Business to apprehend [thieves], and bring them to Justice' ('Daily Courant', 22 June 1716), furthered the impression that Wild was acting in a semi-official capacity. 'Mr. Jonathan Wild' began to 'make a considerable Figure in the World': he began to 'stile himself Esquire', wore a sword, kept a carriage and footmen, and became so successful in his 'Business', that 'a vast Resort of People of all Ranks and Conditions', now flocked to his 'Office' ('Weekly Journal, or, Saturday's Post', 19 Jan 1718; 'History of the Lives', 14). By January 1717 Wild was openly proclaiming himself to be the 'Head Theif Catcher', or 'Thief-catcher General of Great Britain' ('Weekly Journal, or, British Gazetteer', 19 Jan 1717; 'Weekly Journal, or, Saturday's Post', 28 Feb 1719, 5). 
In early 1718 Hitchen, evidently piqued at his old rival's success, published several pamphlets denouncing Wild as 'the Regulator' of a vast network of thieves and fences (Hitchen, 'Regulator', 5). Moreover, the 'Thief-Taker' was a 'Thief-Maker', who 'pervert[ed] the good Intention... of Parliament' (in granting immunity to robbers who turned evidence against two or more accomplices) by manipulating and stifling the testimony of witnesses to protect his 'Pensioners' on the one hand, or to hang those criminals who had outlived their usefulness or defied his authority on the other (ibid., 16). Wild promptly responded with a pamphlet of his own accusing his old 'Grand Master in Iniquity' of being 'guilty of more flagrant Crimes' than his former 'servant' (Wild, ii). Wild enumerated all 'of the dealings, and good Correspondence between the M[arsha]l and the Thieves' (ibid., 23), with a particular emphasis on Hitchen's attachment to 'his beloved Subjects, the Pickpockets' (ibid., 7-8), and his intimate acquaintance with the 'Sodomitish Academy' (ibid., 41). (Hitchen was indeed convicted of attempted sodomy in 1727.) Wild emerged on all fronts the clear victor of this paper war: a series of exchanges printed in the weekly newspapers ended with one editor refusing to be further bullied by 'Tom Teltruth' (Hitchen), whose 'Truth' was now called into question ('Authentick Narrative', 7; 'Weekly Journal, or, Saturday's Post', 12 April 1718). 
The timing, if not the wisdom, of Hitchen's attack on Wild may be explained by the fact that a clause in the 1718 'Transportation Act' would make it a felony to accept a reward for recovering stolen goods without attempting to prosecute the thief. Many have seen this legislation as directly aimed at Wild: indeed, the City recorder, Sir William Thomson, the principal architect of this act, had begun to look askance at Wild. Several accounts claimed that in 1718 Thomson had taken Wild aside to warn him 'against going any longer at his old Rate' now that it had 'become a capital crime' ('Lives of the most Remarkable Criminals', 46). However, all the evidence suggests that Wild, far from heeding this caution, 'went on in his wicked trade... with more impudence and shameless boldness than ever' ('True and Genuine Account', 251). 
This raises the question of why, for nearly seven years after the passage of the so-called 'Jonathan Wild Act', Wild not only continued but flourished in his trade of receiver-thief-taker. This has often been explained in terms of the corruption of early eighteenth-century society in general and the system of private prosecution in particular: contemporaries and later commentators alike saw Wild as 'in league with several trading justices' as venal as himself (Place MSS, fol. 13), while Gerald Howson, Wild's modern biographer, has suggested that even such high-ranking City officials as Thomson long turned a blind eye to the thief-taker's double-dealing. It is possible that after Wild's and Hitchen's paper war the authorities were unwilling to further expose the degree to which they themselves were implicated in questionable activities, although it is more likely that, as 'Philanthropos' (Bernard Mandeville) implied, magistrates 'made use of [Wild] for an Evidence', and were 'beholden to him in the Administration of Justice', simply because in a period of mounting anxiety about violent crime and gang activity he was viewed as a necessary evil ('British Journal', 27 Feb 1725). 
Perhaps, after 1718, to 'support his Credit with the Magistrates' and to divert attention away from his effective role as a receiver, perhaps simply because he had become hardened by his success, Wild focused more and more on the very public business of gang breaking and thief-taking ('Lives of the most Remarkable Criminals', 2.46; 'True and Genuine Account', 237). This was, moreover, a business which became more lucrative after a 1720 royal proclamation offered rewards of $100 (over and above those granted by parliament) for the successful conviction of robbers in the vicinity of London. Wild became a fixture at the Old Bailey and other criminal courts where 'scarce an Assize or Sessions past but Jonathan slew his Man' -- appeared as an evidence for the prosecution ('Authentick Narrative', 7). Wild's divide and conquer tactics began to elicit complaints from defendants -- one of whom in 1723 loudly descried Wild as a villain who 'gets his Livelihood by... swear[ing] away honest Men's Lives' ('Select Trials', 1742, 1.345). 
Public opinion turned sharply against Wild in the autumn of 1724 with his involvement in the arrest and prosecution of two of the most famous criminals of the day -- Jack Sheppard and his accomplice Joseph 'Blueskin' Blake. The press championed Sheppard's cause, casting him as a kind of underdog hero who had resisted having any dealings with Wild and employing him as a mouthpiece to denounce 'the Scandalous Practice of Theif-catching' ('Narrative of the Robberies', 164). Conversely, Blueskin served as an example of one of the many 'foster children' whom Wild 'had [bred]... up to be thieves' and later brought to the gallows ('True and Genuine Account', 252). On 14 October, while Blueskin was awaiting trial, Wild casually informed him that he could do nothing for him short of paying for his coffin; enraged, Blake fell on the thief-taker and slit his throat with a clasp-knife. While Wild survived the wound his reputation was not so easily salvaged: the 'Newgate's Garland' ballad, prematurely celebrating Jonathan's demise, broadcasted the 'Good News' that 'Honester poor Rogues' could, like their betters, now rob with impunity. 
The Blueskin incident 'made People a little more inquisitive into [Wild's] Honesty'; indeed, it would seem that Jonathan had now become so notorious that the authorities found 'themselves obliged... to take Notice of Him' (H. D., iv; 'Lives of the most Remarkable Criminals', 2.50). On 15 February 1725 Wild was arrested for assisting one of his henchmen, Roger Johnson, 'to make his Escape from a Constable' ('Select Trials', 1735, 2.44). Wild was held on a warrant of detainer, consisting of eleven articles accusing him of, among other things, being both a receiver and a confederate of thieves; of having 'form'd a kind of Corporation of Thieves'; and of having 'often sold human blood, by procuring false Evidence' (ibid., 2.44-5). There was as yet no precise charge against Wild, and it seems that the authorities were still casting about for prosecution witnesses when on 10 March Wild 'saved them that Trouble by committing a Felony while... in Newgate' ('Select Trials', 1742, 2.206): he had accepted 10 guineas for returning some stolen lace to one Mrs Statham without attempting to prosecute the thieves (who had, in any case, committed the robbery on his instructions). On 15 May 1725 Wild was tried at the Old Bailey for 'privately stealing' the lace, and for 'helping' Statham 'to the said Lace' for a reward ('Select Trials', 1735, 2.46). In a vain attempt to influence the jurors Wild 'dispers'd' a list of names of seventy-five 'Persons' he had 'discover'd, apprehended and convicted' to the courtroom (a modest estimate; some contemporaries put the figure as high as 120; ibid., 2.46). Neither this, nor all the art employed by Wild's counsel in the course of his four-hour trial, could save him; although acquitted of the theft he was convicted of the second indictment -- a charge made capital by the clause of the 1718 act supposedly drafted with him in mind -- and sentenced to hang. 
After conviction 'Jonathan's Cunning and Courage forsook him'; he refused even to attend chapel for fear of being 'insult[ed]', or worse, by enemies ('Select Trials', 1735, 2.108, 111). Wild appeared 'disorder'd' and almost stupefied, complaining that 'he thought he deserved well' for having 'regain'd Things of great Value for Dukes, Earls and Lords' and for his strenuous efforts to apprehend 'the greatest and most pernicious Robbers', which had left his body covered with 'Wounds and Scars' (ibid., 110-11). The night before his execution Wild attempted to commit suicide by taking a large dose of laudanum -- so large, in fact, that he 'vomited it up in a great measure, and liv'd to be hang'd' ('Evening Post', 25 May 1725). 
On 24 May 1725 Wild, still 'almost insensible' from the effects of the drug, embarked on what would prove to be an arduous journey to Tyburn. A 'numerous Crowd' of hostile spectators greeted him with triumphant jeers -- some, according to one account, 'calling out 'Blewskin', &c' -- and pelted him so violently with stones that 'Blood flew from him plentifully' ('Mist's Weekly Journal', 29 May 1725; 'Parker's Penny Post', 26 May 1725). At the place of execution Wild was hastily turned off after it became clear that the mob would brook no delays. Such was Wild's unpopularity that 'the Noisy Multitude' only 'acquiesc'd' in allowing his body to be carried off in a coach after it was 'given out that it was design'd for the Surgeons' ('London Journal', 29 May 1725; 'Evening Post', 25 May 1725). Wild had desired to be buried next to Elizabeth Man and was quietly interred late the following night at St Pancras churchyard, but early in the next month his body was 'dug up from the grave and carried off' by persons unknown ('Original Weekly Journal', 5 June 1725). Many years later a skeleton believed to be Wild's resurfaced and was eventually donated to the Royal College of Surgeons in 1847. 
If Wild's remains belonged to posterity, his name had long been the property of satirists and pamphleteers. As Peachum in John Gay's 'Beggar's Opera' (1728), or Henry Fielding's 'Jonathan Wild the Great' (1743), Wild -- and by analogy, his counterpart in high life, Robert Walpole -- had become a byword for hypocrisy and corruption in high places, an illustration of the old dictum that great rogues prosper while little rogues hang. In Harrison Ainsworth's 'Jack Sheppard' (1839), Wild was resurrected as Sheppard's evil nemesis and the embodiment of the corruption and brutality of a bygone age. The real Jonathan Wild, however, rivals any of his fictional incarnations: there were thief-takers before and after Wild, but none of them, as Mandeville pointed out, reigned 'with such an absolute Sway, or so long and successfully as himself', or 'was ever more universally known in his Occupation' ('British Journal', 17 April 1725). Those who wish to learn more about this Jonathan Wild are referred to Gerald Howson's excellent biography, 'Thief-Taker General: the Rise and Fall of Jonathan Wild' (1970). 


@@@@@


doc= 29395


Wild, Robert (1615/16-1679), nonconformist minister and satirical poet, was born at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, the son of Robert Wild, shoemaker. After attending a private school at St Ives he was admitted as a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, on 26 January 1632, aged sixteen, and named a scholar on 6 November 1634. He graduated BA in 1636 and proceeded MA in 1639. He was ordained a deacon at Peterborough on 18 February 1638 and a priest on 22 December 1639. For a time he apparently could find employment only as an usher in a free school. In spite of having proceeded BD at Oxford in November 1642, by order of the House of Commons Wild was appointed rector of Aynho, Northamptonshire, on 22 July 1646, and James Long, the previous incumbent, was sequestered on 10 December 1646. By 1644 Wild had married; he and his wife, Joyce (died 1687), had at least three children -- Robert (1644/5-1691), John (died 1682?), and James. 
A definitive canon of Wild's works has not been established. Indeed, the author of 'A Scourge for the Libeller' (1672) complained, with exaggeration, that every anonymous 'sheet' was attributed to Wild. One of his earliest works appears to have been 'The combat of the cocks', which appeared without attribution in Thomas Randall's 'The High and Mighty Commendation' (1642), and then anonymously as 'A Horrible, Terrible, Troublesome, Historical Narration of a Duel' (1660); it was identified as Wild's work in the second edition of his 'Iter boreale' (1661) and in Charles Cotton's 'The Complete Gamester' (1674). Another early work, although not published until 1689, may have been 'The Benefice: a Comedy'; in the tradition of the Elizabethan Marprelate tracts, it recounts the bitterness of the Book-worm, a young divine, toward the patron Marchurch who is interested only in selling a clerical living, not in the learning of a prospective incumbent. 'The Incomparable Poem Gondibert, Vindicated' (1655), which praises Sir William Davenant, has been attributed to Wild. His erudition is manifest in 'The Arraignment of a Sinner at the Bar of Divine Justice' (1656), a sermon preached at the assizes in Oxford and dedicated to his patron, John Cartwright of Aynho, sheriff of Oxfordshire. 
A friend of Richard Baxter, Wild shared his dislike of sectaries though not his interest in theological debate. The execution of the presbyterian minister Christopher Love in 1651 inspired Wild to write 'The Tragedy of Christopher Love' (1660), in which he denounced 'cruell 'Cromwell', whelp of that mad Star' Sirius, likening him to Herod. Wild later again vented his dislike of the former lord protector in 'Oliver Cromwells Ghost' [1678?]. He welcomed George Monck's restoration of monarchy, on which he wrote ''Exit Tyrannus' over 'Lambert''s dore'. His praise for Monck as the saviour of the nation from tyranny and the sectaries was effusive: '

'Monck'! the great 'Monck'! That syllable out-shines 


'Plantagenet''s bright name, or 'Constantine''s.... 

He took Rebellion rampant, by the Throat, 

And made the Canting 'Quaker' change his Note. 

' The poem from which these lines are taken, 'Iter boreale' (p. 5), was published on St George's day, 23 April 1660, and achieved wide popularity, with eight editions appearing by 1674, including two in 1668. Its success inspired others to write sequels: 'Iter boreale, the Second Part' (1660), by T. H., and 'An Essay to a Continuation of Iter boreale' (1660). 
At the Restoration Long regained his cure at Aynho, but Charles II, undoubtedly wanting to reward Wild for his support, presented him with the rectory of Tatenhill, Staffordshire, where he was inducted on 1 September 1660. He was created DD by Oxford on 9 November 1660 and by Cambridge the following year. The publication of a second edition of 'Iter boreale' in 1661 enabled Wild to append a number of shorter poems, most of which were elegies to the earl of Essex and puritan ministers such as Richard Vines, 'our English 'Luther'' (p. 35), Jeremiah Whitaker, Stephen Marshall, and Jeremiah Burroughs. The works of Edward Reynolds, who conformed and became bishop of Norwich, received special praise. Refusing to conform himself, Wild was ejected from his living at Tatenhill in 1662 and moved to Oundle, Northamptonshire. A corpulent man, he suffered so severely from gout that he was incapacitated from preaching for months at a time, yet he retained a sense of humour, comparing his confinement at the hands of Bishop Gout to Edward Calamy's incarceration for preaching illegally following his ejection. This became the subject of Wild's 'A Poem upon the Imprisonment of Mr. Calamy' [1663], in which he castigated the bishops: '
... see them Steeple upon Steeple set, 

As if they meant that way to Heaven to get. 

' In 'Anti-boreale' [1663] Bishop Laurence Womock retorted by calling Wild ''one' of Geneva- 'Basan Bulls fat breed'' and assigning him partial responsibility for the regicide (fol. a3'r'- 'v'). No less acerbic was 'On Calamy's Imprisonment, and Wild's Poetry' [1663], which prematurely wrote Wild's epitaph: '
This 'Presbyterian Brat' was 'born' and 'cry'd', 


'Spit in his Mothers Face', and so he 'dy'd'. 

' This work has been unconvincingly attributed to George Sacheverell, presumably because he copied it into his commonplace book (BL, Add. MS 28758), and to Samuel Butler, who denied authorship in 'On the Answer to Dr Wilds Poem' (1663) and condemned the anonymous writer for having vilified Wild and Calamy. The other replies to Wild's poem on Calamy's imprisonment were 'To R. W., D.D.' (1662 [1663]), 'Dr. Wild's Echo' [1663], 'An Answer for Mr Calamie' (1663), 'To the Ark in Newgate' (1663), and 'An Answer to Wild' [1663], the last of which portrayed him as 'a poor 'Erratick''. His defenders lashed back at 'Hudibras', the reputed author of 'On Calamy's Imprisonment', in 'Hudibras Answered by True de Case' [1663] and 'Your Servant Sir' [1663]. 
In the meantime, in 'The Recantation of a Penitent Proteus' [1663] Wild wrote a biting satire about Nathaniel Lee, effectively making him a representative of puritans who had conformed to the established church: '
If the 'great Turk' to 'England' come, I can 

Make 'Gospel' truckle to the 'Alcoran'. 

' Wild took aim as well at Roger L'Estrange, surveyor of the press, whom he linked to the turncoat Lee: '
Our Names ty'd taile to taile make a sweet Change 

Mine onely is 'St[r]ange' 'Lee', and his 'Le-Strange'. 

' He was not finished with L'Estrange, whom he ridiculed in 'The Grateful Non-Conformist' (1665) for his readiness to 'smell a Plot, a 'Presbyterian' Plot' (p. 67). Nevertheless, L'Estrange licensed 'An Essay upon the Late Victory Obtained by... the Duke of York' (1665), in which Wild effused patriotic fervour for James's naval triumph over the Dutch. The poem was reprinted in Edinburgh the same year as 'A Gratulatory Verse'. 
Although Wild has been described as a royalist, his principles harmonized with those of most protestant dissenters. In 'The Loyal Nonconformist' (1666) he professed loyalty to monarchical government and his readiness to take an oath not to alter it, but he repudiated the oath abjuring the solemn league and covenant, the enforced usage of the 'Book of Common Prayer' and the surplice, and episcopal polity. A defender of Anglicanism responded in 'Swearing and Lying' (1666), averring that Wild's professions of loyalty notwithstanding, he 'yield[ed] all things but obedience'. When Calamy died the following year, Wild saluted him as a prophet and martyr in 'On the Death of Mr Calamy' (1667). Wild again came under attack in 'A Sovereign Remedy for the Presbyterian's Maladie' [1667], and in an exchange of verse with Nathaniel Wanley, vicar of Trinity Church, Coventry, published as 'The Fair Quarrel' (1666; repr. 1668). Here, too, Wild defended nonconformists, in part by satirizing the 'Five Mile Act': '
Nor is there any Statute of our Nation 

That sayes, 'in five miles' of a 'Corporation'


If any 'Outed-man' a Fart should vent, 

That you should apprehend the 'Innocent'. 

' He apparently preached when he could, for in July 1669 he was indicted for holding a conventicle at Nuneaton, Warwickshire. Despite his differences with the government, he favourably contrasted Charles II with the popes in 'Upon the Rebuilding the City' (1670). 
When the king issued a declaration of indulgence in 1672, Wild expressed his gratitude but pointedly noted that dissenting clergy, unlike the ''Jack-dawes'' who held livings in the established church, were interested in preaching rather than material gain: ''Peter' shall preach, 'Judas' shall bear the purse.' Published as 'Dr Wild's Humble Thanks for his Majesties Gracious Declaration' (1672), it elicited hostile responses in 'An Answer to the Author of Humble Thanks' (1672), 'Dr. Wild's Squibs Return'd' (1672), and 'Poor Robin's Parley with Dr. Wilde' (1672). In 'A Letter from Dr. Wild to his Friend Mr. J. J.' (1672) he enthusiastically referred to the declaration as 'a second 'Magna Charta'' and expressed hope that parliament would approve it (p. 6), not least because he thought it was economically beneficial. Anglican apologists promptly responded in 'An Answer to Old Doctor Wild's New Poem' [1672?], 'Moonshine, or, The Restauration of Jews-Trumps and Bagpipes' (1672), and 'Flagellum poeticum' (1672), which chided Wild for having denigrated Anglicans. Other satirists were directing barbs at him, as in 'A Wipe for Iter-boreale Wilde' (1670) and 'The Wild Goose Chas'd' [1672?]. Taking advantage of the indulgence, he obtained a licence as a presbyterian in August 1672 to preach in his house at Oundle. Optimistic about England's prospects in the Third Anglo-Dutch War, he suffused 'A Panegyrique Humbly Addrest to the Kings most Excellent Majesty' (1673) with patriotism: '
Heav'n, that hath plac'd this 'Island', to give Law, 

To Ballance 'Europe', and for 'States' to Aw. 
(p. 2)' Advancing years slowed Wild's pen. In 'The Poring Doctor' (1674) he denounced a doctor of the church as a ''doting Fool'' who could neither pray nor preach, and who confused the names of Jesus and Judas. Responding to reports of the Popish Plot, he threw down the gauntlet to the papacy in 'An Exclamation Against Popery' (1678): '
Plot on Proud 'Rome'! And lay thy damn'd Design 

As low as Hell, we'll find a Countermine. 

' He also attacked Rome in 'Dr. Wild's Poem: In nova fert animus' [1679], composed as the First Exclusion Parliament met. 'Dr. R. W.'s Last Legacie' [1679] is usually regarded as his last poem, but 'A Copy of the Last Verses Made by Dr. Wild' (1679) may also be his work. In it the author denounced 'Papists' as traitors and repudiated the efforts of the court's supporters to draw parallels between 1679 and 1641. 
Following his death in July 1679, apparently from apoplexy, Wild was buried at Oundle on the 30th. In the works that marked the occasion, 'A Dialogue between Death and Doctor Robert Wyld' (1679) observed that 'Great 'Wyld' is slain!' and 'A Pillar Set upon the Grave of the Reverend Dr. Robert Wilde' [1679] praised him as a prophet and a poet, but noted that his verse was sometimes too light and his sermons 'too home, Phanatick-like'. His will, dated 10 August 1678 and proved on 17 February 1680, provided bequests of $1050, part of which was used to purchase six bibles each year for winners of a lottery in which six women and six men participated. He was survived by his wife, his sisters Elizabeth Acton, widow, and Esther Wild, and his sons, Robert, John, and James, a London linen draper. Robert (BA, Brasenose College, Oxford, 1665; MA, King's College, Cambridge, 1668) served as vicar of Chiddingly, Sussex (1661-1672?), rector of Blyborough, Lincolnshire (1672-1674?), and rector of Toppesfield, Essex (1674-91). John (BA, St Catharine's College, Cambridge, 1667; MA, Pembroke College, Oxford, 1670) was vicar of Weekley, Northamptonshire (1678-82), and chaplain to Lord Montagu of Boughton. According to Richard Winwood, an old friend of Wild's, the latter was pleased by John's position in Montagu's family. 
One of the most popular satirists of the Restoration era, Wild was described by Eugenius in John Dryden's 'Of Dramatick Poesie' (1668) as 'the very [George] 'Withers' of the City: they have bought more Editions of his Works then would serve to lay under all their Pies at the Lord Mayor's 'Christmass'' (p. 5). When Samuel Pepys read 'Iter boreale' in August 1663, he 'like[d] it pretty well but not so as it was cried up' (Pepys, 4.285), and he spent part of Christmas day 1667 listening to a friend read Wild's poems. In 1679 John Oldham also associated Wild with Wither: '
Should Parts, and Nature fail, yet very spite 

Would make the arrant'st 'Wild', or 'Withers' write. 
(Oldham, 3)' Several of Wild's poems were included with those of John Wilmot, earl of Rochester, in 'Rome Rhym'd to Death' (1683), and an incomplete edition of his 'Poems', edited by John Hunt, was published in 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 29396


Wilde, Sir Alfred Thomas (1819-1878), army officer, of Kirby Cane Hall, Bungay, third son of Edward Archer Wilde (died 1871), solicitor, of College Hill, Queen Street, London, and his wife, Marianne, daughter of William Norris, physician, was born on 1 November 1819. He was a brother of James Plaisted Wilde, Lord Penzance, and nephew of Thomas Wilde, Lord Truro. Educated as a commoner at Winchester School from 1834 to 1837, he obtained a commission as ensign in the East India Company's army on 12 December 1838, and joined the 15th Madras native infantry in April 1839. He was transferred to the 19th Madras native infantry in June, was promoted to lieutenant on 9 July 1842, qualified as interpreter in Hindustani in March 1843, and served with his regiment through the 1843 disturbances on the Malabar coast. 
In January 1847 Wilde was appointed adjutant, and in February became quartermaster and interpreter to his regiment. In March 1850 he was transferred to the adjutancy of the 3rd Punjab native infantry, and qualified as interpreter in the Telugu dialect. In April 1851 he was appointed second in command of the 4th Punjab native infantry, and was in field command of the regiment and other troops at the occupation of the Bahadur Khel valley, Kohat district, in November, receiving the thanks of government for defeating a night attack of a body of Wazirs upon the fort of Bahadur Khel. He was promoted to brevet captain on 12 December, took part in the capture of the village of Allah-dad-Khan in 1854, was promoted to captain on 23 November 1856, and was thanked by the government of India for valuable service in the great inundation of the Indus in that year. 
In March 1857 Wilde commanded the 4th Punjab native infantry in the successful expedition under Brigadier Neville Chamberlain against the Bozdar Baluchis. His regiment remained loyal, and Wilde was engaged throughout the Indian mutiny. He was at the siege of Delhi, and in the storming parties which captured the Delhi magazine and palace on 16 and 20 September, when he was wounded. He took part in the actions of Gangari, Patial, and Mainpuri in December, and in that of Shamsabad on 27 January 1858. He was promoted to brevet major for his services at Delhi on 19 January, and was thanked by government. 
Wilde commanded the 4th Punjabis in the first victorious assault on the entrenchments in front of Lucknow at the siege of that city in March 1858, led a storming party at the capture of the begum's palace on 14 March, and was wounded on 21 March at the attack on Goal Masjid, in the heart of the city. This secured the capture of Lucknow, and in May he went on leave to England to regain his health. He was mentioned in dispatches, promoted to brevet lieutenant-colonel on 20 July, and made CB, military division, on 16 November 1858. 
Wilde returned to India in 1859. In March 1860 he commanded his regiment in the expedition against the Mahsud Wazirs, and was thanked for his services. He was promoted regimental major on 18 February 1861, and on 3 March 1862 he was appointed commandant of the corps of guides, and commanded them in the expedition to Ambala against the Sitana and Mandi fanatics in 1863. On 20 July he was promoted colonel in the army, made an aide-de-camp to the queen, and was given command of the 2nd brigade of the Usafzai field force, which harried the villages of Sitana and Mandi. He was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel on 12 December 1864, and on 8 February 1865 succeeded to the command of the Punjab irregular force with the rank of brigadier-general. 
Wilde married, in 1866, Ellen Margaret, third daughter of Colonel Godfrey T. Greene CB, Royal (late Bengal) Engineers; they had at least one daughter and three sons. On 12 June 1866 he was made CSI. In 1868 he commanded the field force in the Hazara Black Mountain expedition, and received the thanks of government for his services. He was made a KCB, military division, on 2 June 1869, and was promoted major-general on 18 July. On his final return from India in 1871 he was awarded a good-service pension. In 1877 he was appointed a member of the Council of India, and promoted lieutenant-general on 1 October 1877. He died at his residence, Donoon House, Clapham Common, London, on 7 February 1878; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 29397


Wilde, James Plaisted, Baron Penzance (1816-1899), judge, was born in London on 12 July 1816, the second son of Edward Archer Wilde (1788-1871), solicitor, and his wife, Marianne Norris. Sir Alfred Thomas Wilde was his brother. He was educated at Winchester College and later at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in Michaelmas term 1834 and took his BA in 1838 and his MA in 1842. On 15 April 1836 he was admitted as a student at the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar on 22 November 1839, and elected bencher on 15 January 1856. 
A pupil of Barnes (afterwards Sir Barnes Peacock), and 'devil' to his uncle Sir Thomas Wilde (later Lord Truro), Wilde was rapidly launched into practice. In 1840 he was made counsel to the commissioners of customs, and thereafter made a successful career both on the northern circuit and at Westminster. He took silk on 6 July 1855, was made counsel to the duchy of Lancaster in 1859, and in 1860 became a baron of the exchequer and was also invested with the coif and knighted (on 13 and 24 April respectively). On 20 February 1860 Wilde married Mary Pleydell Bouverie, the youngest daughter of William Pleydell-Bouverie, third earl of Radnor; they had no children. 
After the death of Sir Cresswell Cresswell in 1863 Wilde was transferred to the court of probate and divorce (28 August), and on 26 April 1864 was sworn of the privy council. He soon showed himself worthy of his new office and did much to shape both the substantive law and the procedure of the court, being very much involved in the proceedings under the 'Legitimacy Declaration Act' (21 & 22 Vict., c. 93). He was created Baron Penzance on 6 April 1869 and on 23 April took his seat in the House of Lords. 
Wilde was an active peer, concerned with issues of social change. In his maiden speech he justified the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland on the broad ground of equity (15 June 1869). He also helped the government to push through legislation enabling the evidence of the parties to be taken in actions for breach of promise of marriage and adultery proceedings. In the following session he supported the measures in amendment of the laws relating to absconding debtors, married women's property, and the naturalization of aliens, and moved on 27 March 1871 the second reading of the bill for the controversial legalization of marriage with a deceased wife's sister. He also took an active part in the discussions on the judicature bills of 1872 and 1874. 
Wilde retired from judicial office in November 1872 because of ill health and took a pension of $3500. In 1874, however, he accepted the position of judge under the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' (37 & 38 Vict., c. 85). He was invested with the statutory jurisdiction by sign manual on 14 November 1874, without anything more than a formal nomination by the archbishops of Canterbury and York. By virtue of the statute he succeeded to the offices of dean of the arches court of Canterbury, master of the faculties, and official principal of the chancery court of York on the retirement in October the following year of Sir Robert Phillimore and Granville Harcourt Vernon. However, a mere declaration of churchmanship was substituted for the oath and subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' required by the 127th canon of 1603-4. This meant that his jurisdiction lacked moral authority, his monitions could be and were often disregarded, and his Erastianism was treated with contempt. Nor was his position in the judicial hierarchy clearly defined: the statute did not expressly constitute his court a superior court of law or invest him with power to commit for contempt, and the court of queen's bench asserted the right to review his decisions and restrain their enforcement by prohibition. Eventually these questions were determined in Penzance's favour by the House of Lords in 1881 and 1882, but by that time his position as ecclesiastical judge was emasculated. The bishops discouraged recourse to his court, while the laity generally doubted the morality or practical sense of prosecuting ritualists and so converting them into martyrs. For these reasons Penzance's court came eventually to be all but deserted for that of the archbishop of Canterbury. 
Penzance retired from the bench in March 1899, and died at his seat, Eashing Park, Godalming, Surrey, on 9 December 1899. He was buried on 15 December at Shackleford, near Godalming. His wife died less than a year later on 24 October 1900. 
Penzance also served on various royal commissions, including those on the marriage laws (1865), the courts of law (1867 and 1869), claims to compensation consequent on the abolition of purchase in the army (1873), the retirement and promotion of military officers (1874), the customs of the stock exchange (1877), and the condition of Wellington College (1878). He seldom took part in judicial deliberations in the House of Lords. His favourite pastime was gardening, and his favourite flower the rose, which he hybridized with remarkable success. 


@@@@@


doc= 29398


Wilde, Jane Francesca Agnes, Lady Wilde (1821-1896), writer and Irish nationalist, was born on 27 December 1821 in Dublin, the last of the four children of Charles Elgee (1783-1824), attorney, and his wife, Sarah (died 1851), daughter of Thomas Kingsbury, commissioner of bankruptcy. Her parents were both Irish. Her early years are unrecorded. She dismissed enquiries into her date of birth and birthplace as impertinence, saying 'There is no register of my birth in existence. It was not the fashion then, nor compulsory in Ireland as it is now' (letter, priv. coll.). She juggled with her birth date (as her son Oscar was to do) and wove romantic mysteries about her background. Asserting, for example, that Elgee was a corruption of the Italian name Algiati, she went on to claim relationship with the poet Dante Alighieri. Jane's father died in India (his reason for going there is unknown) and where and how Sarah Elgee and her children lived after his death is uncertain. Jane was well educated, becoming fluent in French, German, and Italian, and well-grounded in Greek and the classics. 
Despite her respectable, protestant background, Jane allied herself in her twenties with the revolutionary Young Ireland movement. In 1846 she began contributing rousing nationalistic poetry and prose to its weekly journal, 'The Nation'. She did so under the pseudonym of Speranza, to avoid family wrath. An inflammatory leader she wrote for the 29 July 1848 edition, 'Jacta alea est' ('The die is cast'), while the editor, Charles Duffy, was in prison, called for armed insurrection ('Oh, for a hundred thousand muskets'), and caused an uproar. The journal was shut down for sedition. Jane's verse expressed anger at the causes and effects of the great famine. Emotional poems such as 'The Stricken Land', in which she attacked the English for taking Irish corn ('Weary men, what reap ye? -- Golden corn for the stranger'), 'Courage' ('Lift up your pale faces, ye children of sorrow'), and the compassionate, 'The Voice of the Poor' ('Before us die our brothers of starvation; around are cries of famine and despair') fired audiences throughout Ireland. When her son Oscar toured America in 1882, he was welcomed by the Irish there not as the famous aesthete, but as 'Speranza's boy'. 
Jane's appearance was striking: nearly 6 feet tall, she had a Junoesque figure, good features, long blue-black hair, and expressive brown eyes. An admirer, Sir William Rowan Hamilton, astronomer royal for Ireland and world-renowned mathematician, found her 'almost amusingly fearless and original' who 'likes to make a sensation' (Hamilton letters, NL Ire., 905). Although she claimed that 'a Joan of Arc was never meant for marriage' (MS letter, November 1852, U. Reading L.), Jane married Dr William Robert Wills Wilde (1815-1876) on 12 November 1851. They had three children: William Charles Kingsbury ('b'. 1852), Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wilde (1854-1900), and Isola Francesca Emily (1857-1867). Despite a self-mocking cry of 'Behold Speranza making gruel' (MS letter, November 1854, U. Reading L.), she adored her children, and gave her family absolute support and loyalty all her life. 
Jane's Saturday salon or 'Conversazione' was famous. The Wildes' house in Dublin's Merrion Square, according to the 'Irish Times', 'was known as the house where a guest met all the Dublin celebrities in literature, art and the drama' (11 March 1878). Jane disliked 'the fatal miasma of the commonplace' (Lady Wilde, 'Notes on Men, Women and Books', 1891). A friend, Henriette Corkran, remembered her as hostess looking like a tragedy queen in a long crimson silk gown with flounces of Limerick lace, a vast crinoline, floating scarves, a gilt crown of laurels, and so many portrait-brooches she resembled a 'walking family mausoleum' (Corkran, 137-8). Emulating writer Charles Maturin, her uncle by marriage, she entertained in rooms darkened by closed shutters and lit only by dim, red-shaded lamps. 
Jane was an early, fervent, and constant advocate of women's rights: campaigning for better education for women; inviting the suffragist Millicent Fawcett to her home to speak on female liberty; and criticizing the different moral codes for men and women. She praised the passing of the 'Married Women's Property Act', 1883, preventing women from having to enter marriage 'as a bond slave, disenfranchised of all rights over her fortune' (Lady Wilde, 'A new era in English and Irish social life', 'Gentlewoman', January 1883). 
Jane, with her linguistic ability, became a translator of importance: her first publication was 'Sidonia the Sorceress' (a German terror-tale by J. W. Meinhold, 1849) which was Oscar's favourite childhood reading. Two translations from Alphonse de Lamartine followed: 'Pictures of the First French Revolution' (1850) and 'The Wanderer and his Home' (1851). Then there was 'The Glacier Land' (from Alexandre Dumas pere, 1852); 'The Future Life' (from Emanuel Swedenborg, 1853); and finally 'The First Temptation' (from Wilhelmine Canz, 1863). 
Dr Wilde was knighted in January 1864. But the celebrations this provoked, together with Jane's first published collection, 'Poems', were followed by a series of disasters. That year Sir William and Lady Wilde were the principals in a sensational Dublin court case regarding a young woman called Mary Travers with whom Sir William had become involved. Then, in 1867, Isola died of fever at the age of nine. In 1871 the two illegitimate daughters of Sir William were burnt to death and in 1876 Sir William himself died. The family, shocked, found he was virtually bankrupt. 
Jane left Dublin for London in 1879, to join her two sons. Oscar was establishing an artistic circle; her elder son, Willie, was a journalist. To earn money she began writing for publications such as the 'Pall Mall Gazette', 'The Queen', the 'Burlington Magazine', and the 'Lady's Pictorial'. She recalled her travels with her husband in 'Driftwood from Scandinavia' (1884), and drew on material left by Sir William, a notable folklorist, for her next two books: 'Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms and Superstitions of Ireland' (1887), which W. B. Yeats called a 'most imaginative collection' ('Letters of W. B. Yeats'), and 'Ancient Cures, Charms and Usages of Ireland' (1890). Her last publications were collections of her articles: 'Notes on Men, Women and Books' (1891) and 'Social Studies' (1893). 
For most of her life in London, Lady Wilde lived with her eldest son in rented houses in Mayfair and Chelsea. She revived her weekly salon and guests included the Irish novelist George Moore; Bernard Shaw, who admitted 'Lady Wilde was nice to me in London'; and W. B. Yeats -- who said of her that 'London has few better talkers' (W. B. Yeats, 'Letters to the New Island', 1970, 76-7). Oscar attended her salons and the links between the two remained strong: she wrote constantly to him, treating him as her close confidant and signing her letters when depressed La Madre Dolorosa. 
Lady Wilde successfully applied for a $100 grant from the Royal Literary Fund in 1888 and received a civil-list pension of $70 a year in 1890 in recognition of her husband's services to statistical science and literature. She lived in poverty, sometimes having to ask Oscar for money. He paid her most pressing bills but his involvement with Lord Alfred Douglas severely strained his income. 
Lady Wilde never forgot Speranza's place in Ireland. After Oscar's overwhelming success she wrote to him only half-jokingly to say 'I suppose I shall now be known as the Mother of Oscar' (Lady Wilde to Oscar Wilde, William Andrews Clark Memorial Library). His arrest in 1895, his vilification in the papers and subsequent imprisonment, devastated her. She was to write, 'I only feel the agony and loss of all that made life endurable and my singing robes are trailed in London clay' (MS letter, New York Public Library, Berg Collection). Yet when friends urged Oscar to leave England, she told him: 'If you stay, even if you go to prison, you will always be my son, it will make no difference to my affection, but if you go, I will never speak to you again' (Yeats, 'Autobiographies', 289). Her Irish pride was strong. Her son must show moral courage. 
The events took their toll. Lady Wilde contracted bronchitis in January 1896 and, failing, asked to see Oscar. Her request was refused. She died at her home, 146 Oakley Street, Chelsea, on 3 February 1896. Her elder son was penniless and Oscar paid for her funeral on 5 February at Kensal Green cemetery in London. A headstone proved too expensive and she was buried anonymously in common ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 29399


Wilde, John (1590-1669), barrister and politician, was the son and heir of George Wilde of Kempsey, Worcestershire, serjeant-at-law, JP, and MP for Droitwich, and Frances, daughter of Sir Edmund Huddleston of Sawston, Cambridgeshire. Wilde matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 18 January 1605. He graduated BA on 20 October 1607 (being incorporated at Cambridge, 1608) and MA on 4 July 1610. Admitted as a student of the Inner Temple about November 1602, he was called to the bar in 1612, elected a bencher in 1628, created a serjeant-at-law in 1636, and appointed under-steward of Kidderminster on 4 August of that year. From 1627 he was a legal counsel to the city of Worcester, and in March 1640 he became its recorder. 
Wilde served Droitwich as an MP in every parliament from that of 1621 to the Short Parliament of 1640. He was an active member from the beginning, with particular interests in law reform, commerce, and foreign policy. In 1621 and again in 1624 he brought in a long list of grievances against novel and exorbitant fees, particularly in the court of exchequer, where he practised, and against the abuse of licences and writs. On 27 November 1621, during the debate on Lord Digby's unsuccessful mission to secure the return of the Palatinate, he launched a passionate attack against Spain, describing it as 'Hanniball 'ad portas'', and concluding, 'Let this Carthage be destroyed'. Wilde went so far as to declare King James I 'deluded' in his belief that Spain could be trusted as a diplomatic interlocutor, and the house shouted him down, perhaps less in dissent than to shield him from the consequences of his rash words. 
By the parliament of 1626 Wilde had emerged as a leading figure in the House of Commons, speaking in critical debates and chairing committees. On 28 February he delivered a major speech on the mismanagement of the Spanish war, citing the refusal of 'the cordial counsel of Parliament' and warning of policy made 'by single counsel or private respects' (Bidwell and Jansson, 2.149). The latter was a clear allusion to the duke of Buckingham, whose impeachment on 'common fame' he supported later in the session. After a sombre address on 12 May calling for a remonstrance against the imprisonment of Sir John Eliot and Sir Dudley Digges in the Tower, it was the speaker who was cried down for breaking the long silence that followed. Wilde spoke less frequently in the parliament of 1628, but he stoutly defended habeas corpus and supported the bill to confirm the subject's ancient liberties. 
Wilde finally secured the county seat for Worcestershire in the Long Parliament on 21 October 1640 when he defeated a royalist opponent, Sir Thomas Littleton. His parliamentary experience and legal expertise pushed him rapidly to the fore. He was appointed chairman of the impeachment committee against the thirteen bishops involved in promulgating the canons of 1640, and on 3 August 1641 he made its report to the House of Lords. In April he staunchly supported the bill of attainder against the earl of Strafford. In December he was appointed to chair the committee investigating the alleged army plot, and on 6 January 1642 he was named to head the committee appointed to consider measures for the security of the kingdom and the City of London in the wake of the attempted arrest of the five members. Later in the month he conducted the impeachment hearings against the attorney-general, Sir Edward Herbert. Along with Bulstrode Whitelocke, Wilde frequently during this time chaired the house when it went into committee. He shepherded the bill to raise $400,000 for the defence of Ireland and the kingdom through to passage on 11 March 1642. On 18 March the house recommended him for appointment as a deputy lieutenant in Worcestershire, and in June, after being granted permission to buy arms formerly belonging to the recusant Lord Windsor for his own use and that of his county, he subscribed two horses and $1000 for the parliamentary cause. 
Throughout the months that preceded the outbreak of the civil war, Wilde was among the most active figures in the house. In addition to the impeachment of Herbert, he undertook those of Sir Thomas Gardiner, recorder of London, and the lord mayor, Sir Richard Gurney, as well as prosecuting George Benion and John Weld, high sheriff of Hampshire. In June he was prominently involved in securing ordinance for parliament and mustering the livery companies, as well as in preparing the charges to the deputy lieutenants of Lancashire and Warwickshire. Always one of the more godly members of the house, he chaired the committee to establish the Westminster assembly, in which he was to serve as a lay member, and was appointed to draw up bills to confine and disarm recusants, to employ fines collected from them for the Irish war, and to provide for raising their children in the protestant faith. (Yet neighbourliness was important to him as well; he stoutly defended a Catholic gentry family in Warwickshire in December 1640.) 
A majority of the Worcestershire gentry declared for the king as the summer began, leading to a hasty intervention by Wilde and his fellow knight for the shire, Humphrey Salway. They headed off a muster that had been fixed for the quarter sessions on 13 July, and instigated a petition to the justices to execute the militia ordinance, as well as one by the freeholders in support of parliament. Their efforts were unavailing, however, and on 12 August the county mustered 'for the king's safety and honour' outside Worcester. 
In February 1643 parliament nominated Wilde as chief baron of the exchequer as part of its proposals to the king for an accommodation. On 5 April a bill was introduced to recompense him, along with Sir William Strickland, for losses to his estate. Presumably his recovery was aided by his appointment as a sequestration commissioner for Worcestershire. As a member of the Westminster assembly he prosecuted Archbishop Laud with zeal, employing against him the same argument of constructive treason that he had supported in Strafford's attainder. On 19 June 1646 he was appointed an assize judge, in July he became recorder of Worcester, and on 12 October he became chief baron of the court of the exchequer. He left the house on 14 November to take up this post, receiving much acclaim for his services. On the bench Wilde remained a committed partisan. Clarendon called him an 'infamous judge' for presiding at the condemnation of Captain John Burley, who had tried to free Charles I from captivity in Newport, and for securing the exoneration of Charles's would-be assassin, Captain Edmund Rolfe. Toward Charles himself he remained implacable. He promoted petitions against further treaty with him in Somerset in March and September 1648, and on 10 October he joined Cornelius Holland and Thomas Hoyle in demanding justice against all delinquents 'without exception' in the House of Commons. 
Like his fellow justices Wilde declined to serve on the high court of justice to try the king. He embraced the Commonwealth with alacrity, however, and served on its first two councils of state while continuing to preside over the court of the exchequer. On 17 March 1649 he delivered a 'gallant speech' on behalf of the new government at Exeter, though only seven of forty JPs attended it. When the mayor of Exeter threw the proclamation of the Commonwealth into the gutter, Wilde fined him $200. Wilde prospered during these years, allegedly trafficking in forged debentures for fee-farm rents. After leaving the council of state, he was appointed a militia commissioner for Worcestershire on 25 September 1651. 
Wilde inherited a number of houses and other properties in Droitwich, and some thirty other buildings in Worcester and the surrounding shire. He profited perhaps even more handsomely from his legal practice, and was accused of peculation during the civil war and after. He married a coheir, Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Harries, bt and serjeant-at-law, of Tong Castle, Shropshire; they had one daughter, also named Anne. Through Harries he was also related to William Pierrepont, who served with him in the Long Parliament. 
Cromwell removed Wilde from the bench in October 1653 in favour of William Steele, who had served as Captain Burley's prosecutor. This dismissal in favour of a junior colleague was particularly galling, and he vainly enlisted the services of his old friend and colleague Whitelocke in seeking to win the protector's favour. Wilde retired to Worcestershire for the next several years, where he served as a JP and as a commissioner for raising the county assessment in 1656. In January 1659 he was returned for his old seat of Droitwich in Richard Cromwell's parliament, where he petitioned for the restoration of his former position and the payment of $1300 arrears in salary. He was granted his recompense, but was restored to the judicial circuit only with the return of the Long Parliament, in which he took his former place. On 17 January 1660 he was at last reinstated as chief baron, but was again replaced in May by Charles II, who appointed Sir Orlando Bridgeman in his place. Wilde's last service was to advise the Convention Parliament in smoothing the transition to the Restoration. He was absolved by the 'Act of Indemnity' and retired to his house in Hampstead, Middlesex, where he died in 1669. Wilde was buried on the estate of his son-in-law, Charles West, Lord De La Warr, at Wherewell, Hampshire. 
Wilde's greatest eminence was as chief baron of the exchequer, and the gain, loss, recovery, and final surrender of this position preoccupied him for the last seventeen years of his career. His larger historical importance may lie in the role he played in the events of the civil war. Wilde was in the vanguard of those who affirmed parliament's assumption of sovereign powers in an emergency, for example its right to raise military forces and to execute the great seal on its own authority. In the aftermath of the attempt on the five members, he spoke of the king as having laid hands on 'the horn of the altar', a phrase which, as Conrad Russell notes, had been previously used to describe the royal sovereignty. Although he cannot be described as a parliamentary legitimist in the manner of William Prynne, his unwavering support of parliament's claims to authority in 1642-3, and the legal prestige he brought to them, made him a central figure at the beginning of the civil war. 


@@@@@


doc= 29400


Wilde, Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills (1854-1900), writer, was born on 16 October 1854 at 21 Westland Row, Dublin, the second of the three children of William Robert Wills Wilde (1815-1876), surgeon, and his wife, Jane Francesca Agnes Wilde, nee Elgee (1821-1896), writer and Irish nationalist, daughter of Charles Elgee (1783-1824), solicitor, and his wife, Sarah Kingsbury (died 1851), whose sister Henrietta married the Revd Charles Robert Maturin (1780-1824), author of 'Melmoth the Wanderer' (1820). Wilde, his father, and his elder brother, William Charles Kingsbury (1852-1899), afterwards added the name Wills as a forename, asserting kinship to William Gorman Wills, a playwright famous after Henry Irving's title-role performance of his 'Charles I' (1872). Wills was the son of the Revd James Wills (1790-1868), poet and man of letters, whose 'The Universe' (1821) was wrongly attributed to his friend Maturin, thus symbolizing linkage between the Wilde and Elgee families. 
Wilde's immediate family was more clerical than any of his fellow writers' of the Irish Renaissance: in addition to Maturin, two paternal uncles proper and one by marriage, a maternal uncle, and maternal grandfather were ordained in the (established) Church of Ireland. These and some of their lay relatives and friends participated in the Romantic flowering of Irish evangelicalism (1815-45) which sought to convert the Irish Catholic masses where predecessor protestant episcopalians were content to subordinate them. All the major Irish Renaissance writers of protestant origin showed some evangelical inheritance, substituting cultural for spiritual leadership: Wilde, Shaw, Yeats, Synge, O'Casey. All retained the self-confidence and authoritarianism of Irish protestant evangels. Wilde's Iokanaan in 'Salome' (1893) and Canon Chasuble in 'The Importance of being Earnest' (1895) reflect that family clerical background, as do Wilde's 'Poems in Prose'. 
Wilde was baptized by his father's brother Ralph in St Mark's Church, Dublin, on 26 April 1855. Five or six years later he was baptized into the Roman Catholic church, at his mother's instance, by the Revd L. C. Prideaux Fox (1820-1905), chaplain to the juvenile reformatory at Glencree, co. Wicklow, where the family were on holiday. Wilde violated no Irish protestant taboo as great as that broken by his mother for him in thus perverting him (as her relatives would have termed it). During the great Irish famine (1845-52) William Wilde had directed the census from local medical reports giving him unique mastery of famine mortality and his folklore researches showed its cultural toll, while Jane Elgee as poet and polemicist on the Dublin 'Nation' declared that the million-odd victims owed their fate to her fellow protestant landlords. Wilde's dialogue between Death and Avarice in 'The Young King' ('Lady's Pictorial', Christmas 1888) echoes her indictment while his 'Ballad of Reading Gaol' (1898) has recollections of her poem 'The Famine Year'. He would have understood the symbolism of her consecration of her sons to the church whose children had died in such horror and such numbers. He reaffirmed her defence of the Irish revolutionaries of 1848 when lecturing in San Francisco in 1882. Filial devotion made him a rebel, with some uncertainty as to his cause. 
Wilde's Irish-speaking father took his family on vacations to Galway in quest of folklore, later written up by his widow: Wilde himself retained enough Irish to sing abstruse Gaelic lullabies to his children. Wilde would also draw on his parents' mastery of ghost, curse, and fairy lore to inspire his first prose fiction, 'The Canterville Ghost' and 'Lord Arthur Savile's Crime' ('Court and Society Review', Feb-March and May 1887), and 'The Happy Prince and other Tales' (1888). The wish of human vanity whose fulfilment brings ultimate damnation, characteristic in Gaelic story-telling, dominates Wilde's 'The Picture of Dorian Gray' (1890, 1891). Wilde would duly win his greatest social success as oral narrator. His parents' choice of Gaelic heroic names for him (including what may have been a claim of descent from the 'wild' O'Flaherties, memorable threats to English settlers) heightened his alienation. Fenian legend supposedly survived in the bard Ossian, son of the Odysseus-like contriver Fingal, and father of the Achilles-like hero Oscar: Wilde fulfilled all three roles in his life. But Fenian names sounded ominous in Irish protestant ears after 1858, and Wilde may have suffered from it as a boarder at Portora Royal School, Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh, a bastion of English imperial culture where Ireland was virtually obliterated from formal educational allusion. Wilde seems to have detested his time there (1864-71), although winning scripture prizes in 1869 and 1870. But it taught him how to conceal the Irish identity he had inherited. 
On 23 February 1867 Wilde was told that his little sister Isola Francesca ('b'. 1857) had just died. He mourned her unconsolably, memorialized her ten years later in the poem 'Requiescat' (later anthologized by Yeats), carried a lock of her hair as best he could until his death, and haunted his literary work with images of girls unknowing of their incipient womanhood, for example in 'Vera' (1880, 1882), 'The Canterville Ghost', 'The Birthday of the Infanta' ('Paris Illustre', 30 March 1889), 'The Picture of Dorian Gray', each of his four great comedies, and 'Salome', the keynote always innocence expressed in extreme terms, whether of courage, kindness, or cruelty. His earliest surviving letter (to his mother, 5 September 1868) shows his hunger at Portora for home and its culture, asking for the current number of James Godkin's 'National Review', then an outlet for her patriotic verse, and seeking news of her poems' possible republication (subsequently realized) by the Glasgow Irish nationalist firm Cameron and Ferguson. From Portora he won a scholarship to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1871. 
Wilde's mother by now held a literary salon at 1 Merrion Square, Dublin, the Wilde family home from 1855, with visitors such as the poets Aubrey de Vere and Samuel Ferguson, the great peasant story-teller William Carleton, and the Dublin historian John Gilbert. At Trinity, Wilde's chief mentors were the classicists John Pentland Mahaffy and Robert Yelverton Tyrrell. Mahaffy proved a stimulating challenge in his witty contempt for Roman Catholicism, Irish nationalism, democracy, liberalism, socialism, and Gaelicism, on none of which he influenced Wilde: but both men helped make him a great Greek scholar. He won a foundation scholarship in 1873 and the Berkeley gold medal for Greek in 1874. Mahaffy germinated Wilde's first great dramatic character, Prince Paul Maraloffski, the tsar's premier in 'Vera', cruel, treacherous, and endlessly amusing. Wilde's juvenile cult of Shelley weathered the editorial austerity exuded by Edward Dowden from Trinity's chair of English literature. Wilde was then too shy for much student friendship but activity in college societies threw him together with Edward Carson. 
In June 1874 Wilde won a demyship in classics to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he studied until 1879, having graduated BA in November 1878 with a double first in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores' or Greats (classics). Dublin probably educated him better than Oxford, but Oxford gave him a new world of expression and audience. In place of the Dublin wits and scholars vying to outsmart one another, he found intellectuals whose oratorical articulacy was declining as his own developed: Walter Horatio Pater and John Ruskin. In Wilde's last Dublin year Pater published his 'Studies in the History of the Renaissance'. Its conclusion induced academic malice and was withdrawn by him in the second edition (1877), but Wilde was fascinated by its agenda: 'not the fruit of experience, but experience itself... success in life... [is] to burn always with this hard gemlike flame' (W. Pater, 'Studies in the History of the Renaissance', 1873, 210). Ruskin recruited Wilde into a group of social activists trying to build a road, and his anger at social cruelty found fallow soil in the boy from the famine-writers' house. Pater and Ruskin shaped Wilde's thought and its expression: they did not originate it. Initially he brought their ideas and his glosses into the market place in lectures on aesthetics in the UK and the USA. Thereafter he embedded them, begirt in his own wit and charm, in fictions such as 'The Happy Prince and other Tales' and 'The Picture of Dorian Gray'. To Wilde ideas had to assert themselves dramatically: Yeats saw him as 'a man of action' (O'Sullivan), Chesterton as 'an Irish swashbuckler -- a fighter' ('The Victorian Age in Literature', 1913), and even Whistler's sneer 'Oscar has the courage of the opinions -- of others' ('Truth', 2 Jan 1890) realized it. 
Wilde's first literary stage was Irish, finding outlets for his Oxonian perceptions in poetry and prose in the 'Dublin University Magazine' (protestant evangelical), 'Kottabos' (edited by Tyrrell), the 'Irish Monthly' (Jesuit), and the Boston 'Pilot' (Catholic and Irish nationalist). He celebrated the new temple of aesthetic rebellion, the Grosvenor Gallery ('Dublin University Magazine', June 1877), and made a lengthy appeal for a starving Irish artist Henry O'Neill (1800-1880) in 'Saunders's News-Letter' (29 December 1877), reprinted in his mother's old Dublin journal, 'The Nation'. David (later the Rt Revd Abbot Sir David) Hunter-Blair (1853-1939), a close friend at Magdalen, was converted to Roman Catholicism in 1875, graduated in 1876, and entered the Benedictine order in 1878. Wilde's Catholic self was most notably expressed to him, although Wilde deferred a full Catholic identity until his deathbed (D. H. Blair, 'In Victorian Days', 1939). Wilde's Catholic consciousness permeates his stories, his prison and post-prison writings pursue its realization, and his poem 'The Sphinx' (1894), begun at Oxford, shows warring attractions for him of paganism and Catholicism. 
Wilde was happy at Oxford, apart from financial pressures and disciplinary measures following his protracted vacation in Greece in April 1877 with Mahaffy. Sir William Wilde's death on 19 April 1876 was a severe psychological blow, and left the family much poorer than they had expected. Wilde won Oxford's Newdigate prize for his poem 'Ravenna' in 1878 and declaimed it in the Sheldonian Theatre on 26 June. It was published as his first book. Its laments for the sufferings of Dante and Byron proclaimed admiration and anticipation. His graduation was delayed by the requisite divinity test to satisfy requirements as to his Anglican status, which he deliberately failed until it was a laughing-stock. He then worked on 'Historical criticism among the Ancients', for the chancellor's English essay prize. No award was made. Posthumously published as 'The Rise of Historical Criticism' (1909) it shows a remarkable grasp of historiography, a subject then in its infancy. It shows history as the foundation of his thought, with a judicious scepticism. It also stands on the cusp of Victorian confidence and its collapse. It sees history's motive as 'the discovery of the laws of the evolution of progress' (O. Wilde, 'Complete Works', introduced by M. Holland and others, [1994], 1207). Its author's doubts about whether history was progress grew to illuminate works as different as his 'The Importance of being Earnest' and 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol'. 
Wilde settled in London early in 1879; his mother and brother also moved there. The land war developing in Ireland made their few remaining properties uneconomic, but Oscar and his mother were none the less firm supporters of home rule and Charles Stewart Parnell. They still cut a wide swathe in society, assisted by her new salon. He won friendships with three great rivals in beauty and celebrity in and out of the theatre, Emily Charlotte Le Breton (Lillie) Langtry, Ellen Terry, and Sarah Bernhardt, writing poems to all three. He frequented the theatre and dressed in the aesthetic role, the better to evangelize beauty in modern life. The knee-breeches, the great bow-ties, and the ornate hats became famous; they were guyed and caricatured in 'Punch' and bad plays and ultimately in the new Gilbert and Sullivan opera 'Patience', for whose opening on 23 April 1881 Wilde bought a 3 guinea box. He knew their work, and he intended not to protest against its satire on aestheticism, but to latch on to it. His physique, mannerisms, opportunism, salesmanship, female admirers, and even background of Irish landholding inspired George Grossmith as Bunthorne to put more and more of Wilde into the part. Wilde, tall, growing plumper, drawling, almost affecting affectation, developed his own performance on Bunthorne lines. Unlike Bunthorne, Wilde was not a fraud: he was fascinated by beauty from classicism to Keats, he correlated reform in dress and house decoration with beauty and respect in human relations, and he saw philistinism as tyranny in taste and politics. But he enjoyed self-mockery -- from his difficulty at Oxford in living up to his blue china to his deathbed insistence that the wallpaper was killing him. His 'Poems' were published by David Bogue at his own expense a few weeks after 'Patience' opened, and like Bunthorne's they were often derivative (for which the Oxford Union, despicably, rejected his presentation copy). The book sold out four editions of 250 copies at half a guinea within the year. Amid much that had been tried, there was a little that rang true -- 'Requiescat', 'Magdalen Walks', 'Helas!', 'Humanitad', respectively saluting Isola, Oxford, Christianity, paganism. Many of the poems have a value as social documents -- giving us incisive glimpses of the theatre, politics, cosmopolitanism, and parochialism of their time. Gladstone, Matthew Arnold, Swinburne, and Oscar Browning complimented him on all or some of the poems, but reviewers were rude. Individual verses acquired new meanings in the light of his later life, such as 'Roses and Rue -- to L[illie] L[angtry]': '
But strange that I was not told 

That the brain can hold 

In a tiny ivory cell, 

God's heaven and hell. 

' Yet Wilde's tragic forebodings were constantly balanced by the growth of his comic genius. His tragedy 'Vera' found its early drafts undermined by the hilarity induced by the evil Prince Paul's epigrams. Wilde had studied Polish and Russian literature under his mother's influence, but 'Vera''s hidden Irish resonance, however smothered by the tsar's court and its pursuing nihilists, gave the hardbitten worldly wisdom on which the play turns. The play argued, wisely from either Irish or Russian contexts, that political intransigence ensures worse repression and worse revolution, and that political extremes induce one another's success at the expense of rational solutions. 'Vera' was scheduled for a London production in December 1881 with Mrs Bernard Beere, 'nee' Fanny Mary Whitehead (1856-1915), a lifelong friend of Wilde, in the title role but it was cancelled since its nihilist assassination of the tsar might seem to reflect on its real-life counterpart the previous March, the murder of Tsar Alexander II. 
Wilde contracted with the producer of 'Patience', Richard D'Oyly Carte, to lecture in the USA, whose people might otherwise fail to understand what the opera was satirizing. He sailed on the 'Arizona' on 24 December 1881, landing in New York on 2 January 1882, delivering nearly 150 lectures throughout the USA and Canada, and receiving $6000 over the next twelve months. His lectures were entitled 'The decorative arts', 'The house beautiful', 'The English Renaissance', and 'Irish poets and poetry in the nineteenth century'. He improved in both brevity and force as he travelled from the east to the west coast. He sailed home on the 'Bothnia' on 27 December 1882, docking in Liverpool on 6 January 1883. His was a theatre performance, and it furthered theatre links. His friendship with Dion Boucicault guided the early weeks of his tour and gave him contacts for 'Vera'. Boucicault proved in his case as in those of all his major fellow playwrights of the Irish Renaissance the vital precursor in technique, craftsmanship, and wit. 'Vera' was taken by Marie Prescott (1853-1923), who played the title role at the Union Square Theatre in New York from 20 August 1883 for a week (to hostile notices) with later touring in upper New York state. Wilde returned to the USA for the production (11 August to 11 September). Meanwhile Mary Anderson commissioned a play from him which he sent her from Paris in March 1883, a historical tragedy in Shakespearian verse, 'The Duchess of Padua'. She rejected it. Her brother Joseph (1863-1943?) later married Gertrude, daughter of the American actor-manager Lawrence Barrett (1838-1891), who staged it in New York from 21 January 1891 as 'Guido Ferranti', with considerable success cut short by Barrett's death in March. 
Wilde lived in Paris from January to May 1883, meeting Hugo, Verlaine, Mallarme, Edmond de Goncourt, Degas, Zola, Daudet, and his own first major biographer, Robert Harborough Sherard (Kennedy) (1861-1943), a Francophile revolutionary enthusiast whom he saw almost every day, and who brings him vividly to life in these days. Wilde then resumed his lectures, adding 'Impressions of America', and performing all over the British Isles. On 25 November 1883 he became engaged to Constance Mary Lloyd (1858-1898), a protestant Dublin girl, whom he had known since 1881. They married at St James's (Church of England) Church, Sussex Gardens, Paddington, London, on 29 May 1884. The honeymoon was spent in Paris, where Sherard had to cut short private confidences on the delights of the wedding night from an ecstatic Wilde. Wilde's sexual experiences to date seem to have been entirely heterosexual. The speed with which he took up homosexual activity after introduction to it some three years later by Robert Ross is evidence in itself against any previous acquaintance with it; he astounded his later lover Lord Alfred Douglas by stating that no such thing existed in Portora. Sherard later recalled Wilde's mention of syphilis at Oxford after experience with a female prostitute. Wilde thought himself cured of this (if it ever happened) although it is possible, as Ellmann speculates, that he later feared it lingered (the enchanted portrait of Dorian Gray seems to reveal syphilis among other physical evidence for the foul life lived by its perfectly preserved original). His marriage was sexually vigorous, with his son Cyril born on 5 June 1885, at the Wildes' new home in London, 16 Tite Street, Chelsea, while his son Vivian (later altered by its owner to Vyvyan) Oscar Beresford ['see 'Holland, Vyvyan Beresford] was born on 3 November 1886. The resultant strain on the Wildes' finances led them to abstain from sexual intercourse. Constance inherited $900 a year from her grandfather John Horatio Lloyd QC, but Wilde's earnings were entirely freelance and involved contributions to his mother's upkeep. Remembering his father's sexual infidelities (resulting in at least three bastards), Wilde recoiled from the thought of sexual solace with other women, and Ross seems to have exploited his sexual hunger and refusal to betray his heterosexual bed. Wilde never seems to have engaged in anal penetration either actively or passively. 
From early in 1885 Wilde was a regular book critic for the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. Under the pressure of rapid book reviewing Wilde began to make his comic genius serve his aesthetic evangelism in print, as he had been doing on the lecture platform and at the dinner table. Constance Wilde took up her husband's beliefs in dress reform, displayed rational dress to advantage, and spoke fluently on the subject. Wilde's own maturity in prose dates from his marriage. Significantly, his first timeless successes as a writer came in fields also cultivated by his wife: costume, and fairy-stories. His first major essay, 'Shakespeare and stage costume' ('Nineteenth Century', May 1885) brought his prose comedy into its own. Later revised as 'The truth of masks' for inclusion in his essay collection 'Intentions' (1891), it was Wilde's first presentation of his masque of masks whose reader can never be sure how seriously to take the author -- and neither, apparently, can the author. It coincided with his best verses before the 'Ballad': 'To my Wife with a Copy of my Poems', a miniature of egocentric tenderness, and 'The Harlot's House', which launched the decadence of the 1890s five years early. 
'The Canterville Ghost' and 'Lord Arthur Savile's Crime' (spring 1887) used society comedy as skilfully as Irish folklore, foreshadowing Wilde's return to playwriting. Edmund Wilson in 'Classics and Commercials' (1950) diagnosed 'a sense of damnation, a foreboding of tragic failure' (p. 336) even in Wilde's earlier work. Lord Arthur confronts horrors of possible social disgrace and criminal trial when a fortune-teller predicts he will commit a murder; the ghost enjoys haunting American purchasers of his family home by Irvingesque theatrical performances but suffers for his life's crimes in the purgatory from where the Isola-like Virginia finally rescues him. The two stories make excellent use of modern forms, the former originating in the first of Wilde's delicate and deadly dissections of English aristocratic social gatherings, while the latter arises hilariously from Wilde's shrewd witness to British-American social confrontations. 
To raise an income Wilde became editor of Cassell's monthly magazine the 'Lady's World', which he promptly renamed the 'Woman's World', serving for its issues from November 1887 to October 1889. 'The Happy Prince and other Tales' was published by Alfred Nutt in May 1888: its origin in Irish oral narrative is affirmed by his subsequently reciting the stories to his sons, weeping for 'The Selfish Giant' when the child befriended by the giant becomes the crucified Christ who takes his protector to paradise. Their permanent place in child affections refutes the vulgarism that Wilde's literary reputation arose from his legal notoriety. In all cases they are on the child's side, celebrating the courage and generosity of the poor and vulnerable, while their satire mocks the kind of pomposity and hypocrisy children can recognize. January 1889 saw publication of his 'Pen, pencil, and poison' ('Fortnightly Review'), an aesthetic 'study in green' of the forger, artist, and poisoner Thomas Griffiths Wainewright and of 'The decay of lying' ('Nineteenth Century'), an elegantly Platonic dialogue supposedly denouncing the renunciation of invention by modern story-tellers while actually dissecting them in a succession of hilarious but profound epigrams. The Wainewright essay startlingly reveals Wilde's criminologist credentials long before his acquisition of practical experience of prison. Forgery also dominated 'The portrait of Mr W. H.', whose first draft in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (July 1889) Wilde expanded to book length. It was not returned by its intended publisher, John Lane, when Wilde's trials put paid to its publication (realized in a limited New York edition in 1921 and a London commercial publication in 1958). A painting is forged to provide evidence for the existence of a boy actor as recipient of Shakespeare's sonnets and creator of his heroines: does the forgery impair the thesis or provide proof of its perpetrator's conviction, all the more when its discovery induces suicide? 'No man dies for what he knows to be true. Men die for what they want to be true, for what some terror in their hearts tells them is not true' (O. Wilde, 'Complete Works', 349). The story is gratifyingly post-modern in its doubts about scholarly certainties: the zealot loses faith having converted his target. It also points out that the place to look for a male lover for Shakespeare must initially be in his own profession, and the sonnets might be expected to have some relevance to the plays. 
Wilde relinquished the 'Woman's World', much enlivened by his literary notes, and left book reviewing after a review-essay ('The Speaker', 8 February 1890) on the fourth-century BC Chinese sage Chuang Tzu. He extolled the philosopher who saw perfection in ignoring oneself, divinity in ignoring action, and sagacity in ignoring reputation, silently marking the contrast from himself by thoughts on how disturbing Chuang Tzu would be at dinner parties (at which Wilde himself was now London's leading lion). His valedictory to criticism ('Nineteenth Century', July and September 1890) was reprinted in 'Intentions' as 'The critic as artist', where he transformed remunerative hackwork into a creative creed. The critic's response to the work of art under review should be to make another. This was set out in a gorgeous profusion of epigram and paradox, ostentation and learning, frivolity and wisdom, but few critics reached deeper into the heart of their business than Wilde's evangel. 
In July 1890 'Lippincott's Magazine' published Wilde's first version of 'The Picture of Dorian Gray'. His critic's interest in Stevenson's 'Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' ('reads dangerously like an experiment out of the 'Lancet'': 'Decay of lying') induced the idea of age and its spiritual effects expressing themselves in the portrait whose model walks free of either. 'The decay of lying' had nature imitating art: in 'Dorian Gray' nature imitates art with -- literally -- a vengeance, when in knifing the portrait Dorian kills himself and becomes the final horror to which its successive changes have evolved. Dorian Gray himself became a name as immortal as those of Jekyll and Hyde, his picture in the attic baring his self-obsessed soul as vital a symbol as the 'madwoman in the attic', the discarded first wife established in Charlotte Bronte's 'Jane Eyre' (1847). The story itself, so far from vindicating art for art's sake, asks what it profiteth a man to gain the whole world, and suffer the loss of his own soul. His sexual sins, so far as we know them, are firmly heterosexual. He attracts two men, the artist Basil Hallward who has fallen in love with his appearance, and Lord Henry Wotton, whose scruples might be philosophically less nice than Hallward's but who never seems to go beyond repainting Dorian in epigrams. The fervent expression of Hallward's love (arguably the finest sentiment in the story) unleashed the venom of Wilde's Oxford classicist contemporary Samuel Henry Jeyes (1857-1911), who in the 'St James's Gazette' (20 June 1890) demanded that the book be burnt and hinted that its author or publisher were liable to prosecution in terms which suggested more familiarity with homosexuality than his vehemence warranted; comparably, Charles Whibley in the 'Scots Observer' accused Wilde of writing for 'none but outlawed noblemen and perverted telegraph boys'. Wilde revised it, toning down a few passages for book publication, adding six new chapters to the book and about nineteen years to the action. His preface disposed of his critics in an epigram sequence. Technically the amendments are improvements. Wilde, contrary to what he liked to say, was a very hard worker when it came to revising his writings, and from 'Vera' onwards could be ruthless in what he removed. Despite, or possibly because, W. H. Smith refused to stock it ('filthy' was his description), it was the most famous novel of its time. On its appearance in April 1891, the critics were quieter, but still confused, apart from Pater, who reviewed it enthusiastically for 'The Bookman' (November 1891). 
Wilde moved more fully into social criticism with his 'The soul of man under socialism' ('Fortnightly Review', February 1891), perhaps the most memorable and certainly the most aesthetic statement of anarchist theory in the English language. In 1891 Wilde was hard at work on a play, and also published 'Intentions' and 'Lord Arthur Savile's Crime and other Stories'. In November came 'A House of Pomegranates' -- more ornate fairy-stories than the 'Happy Prince' collection and more directly socialist: the happy prince wanted to use his adornments to relieve suffering but the young king discovers his to be the cause of it. The general effect is more tragic, the infanta's dwarf dying of grief when he realizes she likes him only as an object of ridicule for his ugliness, the fisherman and his soul corrupted in their separation, the star-child's expiation for his snobbery and cruelty ending in his life as ruler cut short and his successor ruling evilly. The elegiac, doom-laden note accords with the new spirit of 'fin de siecle' which a character in 'Dorian Gray' had equated with 'fin du globe'. 

'Lady Windermere's Fan' opened under George Alexander's direction and lead male performance at the St James's Theatre, London, on 20 February 1892. It anticipates Ibsen's 'A Doll's House' twenty years after. Ibsen was the crucial influence that turned Wilde from a melodramatist into a dramatist: Wilde was as much his pupil as was Shaw, with whom he linked himself as playwright. Mrs Erlynne, like Ibsen's Nora, has left her husband and offspring and returns to blackmail Lord Windermere, her son-in-law, on the threat of self-disclosure to her daughter who believes her to have died a loving wife. Lady Windermere, led by suspicion that her husband's payments to Mrs Erlynne are recompense to his mistress, leaves her home to elope with Lord Darlington, from which decision Mrs Erlynne rescues her at further cost to her own reputation. Mrs Erlynne is a figure of potential tragedy, but she is also much the wittiest person in the play and ultimately deals herself a happy ending with an infectious cynicism. She endangers her own future to save her daughter from the brittle, loveless life into which her bid for freedom had enmeshed her. The play was revolutionary in its mingling of the vocabulary of comedy, the potential of tragedy, and the insistence on realism. 
Herbert Beerbohm Tree was actor-manager for Wilde's next play, 'A Woman of No Importance', after 'Lady Windermere's Fan' had run to delighted audiences and enraged critics (save for the Ibsenite William Archer) in London and on tour through almost all of 1892. The title role for Tree's production described an unmarried mother doing exactly what Mrs Erlynne denied modern life would permit: to become a dowdy, having been victimized by a dandy. Mrs Bernard Beere played Mrs Arbuthnot while Tree played Lord Illingworth, the treacherous dandy, who encounters his former mistress and their son twenty years after, while he is conducting a flirtation with Mrs Allonby (played by Mrs Tree), who recalls Mrs Erlynne's conversation without her complication. Tree had more in common with Wilde than any other actor and thus may have been more alive to the dangers of his more liberated epigrams, some of which were deleted, notably when Tree sidetracked a seventeen-year-old blackmailer named Alfred Wood, for which Wilde gratefully gave Mrs Allonby the entrance line 'The trees are wonderful, Lady Hunstanton. But I think that is rather the drawback of the country. In the country there are so many trees one can't see the temptations', that is, one could not see the Wood for the Trees. Only the first four words remained in the text, which may be all Wilde intended to happen: uttered by Mrs Tree, they must have raised a fine laugh from the regular customers at the Haymarket Theatre, where the play opened on 19 April 1893, running until 16 August. For all of Wilde's cult of the dandy, Illingworth is defeated and discredited at the play's end, at the hands of the somewhat absurd American puritan girl who makes a man of Illingworth's bastard. Wilde assigned his savage indictments of modern society to her, answered by the elegant English society ladies in the finest feline form; but at the play's end they are hollow and she is victrix. William Archer was once again its sole defender. 
In late 1891 Wilde wrote 'Salome', partly in Paris. Sarah Bernhardt had begun rehearsals of it at the Palace Theatre in London by June 1892 but the play was banned from performance by the lord chamberlain for infringing protestant Reformation legislation against medieval miracle or otherwise religious plays. The play's censor, Edward Frederick Smyth Pigott (1824-1895), was in no doubt that however pagan Wilde might currently be feeling, he was too Catholic to be staged. That the play was in French no doubt made matters worse: that was half-way to Latin. It is apparently untranslatable into English: various attempts were made by Lord Alfred Douglas, Aubrey Beardsley, Wilde himself revising Douglas, Wilde's son Vyvyan Holland, Jon Pope, Steven Berkoff, and others, but it demands reading and performance in French to make its impact. Beardsley illustrated the French text in a series of drawings proclaiming the decadence of the day. Both Wilde and Beardsley privately belittled one another's work for the published play (February 1893) but their impact was mutually inspirational. They seem in accord as to Herodias and Herod: her no longer irresistible voluptuosity, his predatory, questing eyes. Beardsley's sophisticated Salome in 'toilette' and dance is far removed from Wilde's idea of terrifying innocence enraged, and even befouled, by the prophet obsessed by the omnipresence of guilt (as Emile Vernadakis has established). Yet Beardsley's hungry devourer of Iokanaan and vampirical ascendant with his head seems the vital stimulus for Richard Strauss in creating his opera in 1905, and Beardsley's experienced Salome rather than Wilde's virgin child dominated most subsequent performances of the play. It was Beardsley more than Wilde who followed the tradition of Flaubert and Maeterlinck on the theme. Wilde's Salome is a human being, as opposed to a sex object in (or out of) seven veils. Bernhardt toyed with the idea of a Paris production, but dropped it when Wilde's scandal overtook him. 'Salome' was first produced on 11 February 1896 by Aurelien Marie Lugne-Poe (1869-1940), who played Herod to Lina Munte's Salome, for the Theatre de l'OEuvre in Paris. News of it rescued the imprisoned Wilde from utter despair. 
From October 1893 Wilde worked on 'An Ideal Husband', whose highly political plot he elaborated from an anecdote told by Frank Harris. Sir Robert Chiltern, saved by his friend Lord Goring from blackmail over his sale of a cabinet secret in the remote past, leaps at the first chance of forbidding Goring's marriage to his sister because Goring had entertained the lady from whom he obtained the document. Although now known to Goring as thief and traitor, Chiltern once secure becomes the House of Commons moralist, reclaiming moral superiority regardless -- or perhaps mindful -- of what Goring must think of him. Shaw, now the 'Saturday Review' theatre critic, hailed Wilde as 'our only thorough playwright. He plays with everything: with wit, with philosophy, with drama, with actors and audience, with the whole theatre' (12 Jan 1895). Lewis Waller played Chiltern in his production at the Haymarket, with Julia Neilson as his wife: they opened on 3 January 1895. Charles Brookfield (playing Goring's valet, Phipps), helped gather evidence that might implicate Wilde in recently criminalized homosexual relations. Wilde had found the theatre a haven where homosexuality found acknowledgement if not acceptance. It also meant that enemies could discover more, quicker. 
Wilde's last play, 'The Importance of being Earnest', opened at the St James's on 14 February 1895 with George Alexander as John Worthing and Allan Aynesworth 
(E. Abbot-Anderson; 1865-1959)
as Algernon Moncreiff. Although hurriedly reduced from four acts to three because of Alexander's insistence on a curtain-raiser, it won critical unanimity of applause (save for Shaw) and the twentieth century in general, when permitted to view it, hailed it as the greatest English comedy of all time. Wilde's first two comedies had been published in November 1893 and October 1894 respectively, but their successors had to await his release, and 'The Importance of being Earnest' was published by Leonard Smithers in February 1899, by which time Wilde's sufferings had caused him to lose all his regard for the play, to which he gave little annotation and no hint of the original four-act text, which did not appear until 1956. Wilde's notes for 'An Ideal Husband', published by Smithers in July 1899, included likening of its characters to models for appropriate painters, to culminate in the blackmailer Mrs Cheveley: 'A work of art, on the whole, but showing the influence of rather too many schools'. These notes were the last creative work Wilde ever wrote. 
On 28 February 1895 Wilde received a card at his club, the Albemarle, ten days after it had been left by John Sholto Douglas, ninth marquess of Queensberry, accusing Wilde of being 'ponce and somdomite' or of 'posing as somdomite'. Wilde took out a warrant against him for criminal libel. Queensberry entered a plea of justification on 30 March. Having belatedly assembled evidence found for Queensberry by very recent recruits, it declared Wilde to have committed a number of sexual acts with male persons at dates and places named. None was evidence of sodomy, nor was Wilde ever charged with it. Queensberry's trial at the central criminal court, Old Bailey, on 3-5 April before Mr Justice Richard Henn Collins ended in Wilde's attempt to withdraw the prosecution after Queensberry's counsel, Edward Carson QC MP, sustained brilliant repartee from Wilde in the witness-box on questions about immorality in his works and then crushed Wilde with questions on his relations to male youths whose lower-class background was much stressed. Collins demanded that Queensberry be found not guilty and Queensberry's solicitors sent the plea of justification and its supporting evidence to the public prosecutor, on which Wilde was arrested at 6.10 p.m. and lodged in Holloway prison. Next day, 6 April, Wilde was charged with offences under the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' (1885), section XI together with Alfred Taylor, owner of a male brothel Wilde had used, and who went to penal servitude rather than inform against Wilde. Bail was refused. Of ten alleged sexual partners Queensberry's plea had named, five were omitted from the indictment at Wilde's first trial (26 April - 1 May) before Mr Justice Arthur Charles (1839-1921), where a sixth was dismissed for perjury, a seventh denied any impropriety, and an eighth required a verdict of not guilty during Wilde's second trial. The trial under Charles ended in jury disagreement after four hours. Wilde was granted bail, for $5000; his case was separated from Taylor's on 20 May. Taylor was found guilty on 21 May; Wilde was tried on 22-25 May, and found guilty on 25 May. Both prisoners were sentenced by Mr Justice Alfred Wills to two years' penal servitude with hard labour. The two known persons with whom Wilde was found guilty of gross indecency were male prostitutes, one of them the blackmailer Wood. Wilde was also found guilty on two counts charging gross indecency with a person unknown on two separate occasions in the Savoy Hotel. These may in fact have related to acts committed by Queensberry's son, Lord Alfred Douglas, who had also been Wood's lover. But Wilde had had sexual relations in 1893-4 with the remaining prostitute, Charles Parker (now a soldier), on which he was found guilty on four counts. 
Far more severe than any court verdict was the utter social destruction of Wilde. His blameless, and somewhat neglected, family were utterly innocent sufferers. His entertainment of homosexual friends in hotels and abroad had sometimes coincided with economic privation and credit embarrassment for his wife and children. The house at 16 Tite Street was given over to the bailiffs at Queensberry's demand (non-payment of costs awarded him after his trial), and Wilde's family possessions, library, art collection, autographed gifts, and even children's toys including a rabbit hutch were put up for auction with a view to selling as much as possible for as little as possible. Constance Wilde took the children, Cyril and Vivian, to her brother Otho Holland Lloyd (1856-1943) in Switzerland. She decided against divorcing Wilde, whom she visited in prison in September 1895 and February 1896, but changed her children's and her own surname to Holland. She was dying from spinal injury caused by a fall in Tite Street. 
Wilde's first prison month was in Pentonville, where R. B. Haldane (on a Home Office committee under Herbert Gladstone investigating prison conditions) saw him on 12 June 1895. Haldane managed to get books for Wilde (to be read through the prison library). Wilde was transferred to Wandsworth (from 4 July to 20 November) before being sent to the much smaller Reading gaol (administered by the Berkshire authorities). Robert Sherard visited Wilde first in Wandsworth where he supported Constance Wilde's anxiety that he repudiate his homosexual friends. But when Wilde was taken to the bankruptcy court in Carey Street for his first hearing at Queensberry's suit on 24 September 1895, Robert Ross (now returned after a self-protecting flight to the continent during the Wilde trials) waited in a corridor to raise his hat, which moved the friendless convict to the heart. Arthur Clifton (1862-1932), a solicitor friend of both, saw Wilde during these hearings (resumed on 12 November when Wilde was declared bankrupt), and Ross's friend William More Adey (1858-1942) became a consultant, visiting Wilde on 30 November ten days after Wilde's horrific experience in being transferred to Reading when he was subjected to half an hour of mobbing, including being spat upon, although handcuffed and guarded, while waiting for a change of trains. Ross now became Wilde's most constant prison visitor, turning Wilde's desire to repudiate his former lifestyle into a rejection of the lover who had supplanted Ross and who for fear of indictment was still on the continent, Lord Alfred Douglas, to whom the letter posthumously named 'De Profundis', was written between December 1896 and March 1897. 
Wilde's prison experience was physically and psychologically destructive, particularly between November and July when the Reading governor was Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Bevan Isaacson (1842-1915): not a Jew, as commentators assumed. He had a kindlier successor, Major James Osmond Nelson (1859-1914), but Reading was dominated by its doctor, Oliver Calley Maurice JP (1838-1907). Governors came and went: Maurice was a permanent power-broker. Wilde's medical condition had become dangerous from a fall in Wandsworth which exacerbated middle-ear disease, from which he died five years later. Maurice dismissed any anxieties, and Wilde's petitions to the home secretary asking for release on medical grounds were ignored on Maurice's advice. As the son of one of the world's greatest aurists, Wilde knew his ear condition was serious, and that Maurice's diagnosis was faulty. But when on release Wilde denounced existing prison conditions in the 'Daily Chronicle' (28 May 1897) he highlighted other prisoners in mortal danger from Maurice ('It is a horrible duel between himself and the doctor. The doctor is fighting for a theory. The man is fighting for his life. I am anxious that the man should win') as well as children and other tragic victims of the system. 
This transition was made possible by Wilde's spiritual regeneration, which worked its way out in 'De Profundis'. It did not deny his own culpability for the wreck of his and his family's lives, but it made his obsession with Douglas the leading count in his own self-indictment. It attacked Douglas for hatred of his father, acknowledged his love for Wilde, but saw that love, like Wilde himself, enslaved in the work of hate. Ross was held up as a model of friendship and stimulus. Yet the power and profundity of 'De Profundis' itself asserted Douglas's far more cataclysmic inspirational effect. Nor was the contrast accurate in all respects. Both Ross and Douglas were demanding, self-centred, and indiscreet, and Wilde's relationship to both of them was more that of an indulgent but exploited uncle than of the physical lover he seems to have been for a relatively brief time in each case. Both Ross and Douglas were homosexual liberationists, Ross more constructively, Douglas more flamboyantly: 'De Profundis' justly denounced the egotism of Douglas in using Wilde's imprisonment to publicize the launch of his own book of verse, but Douglas also tried to show the utter injustice of Wilde's fate in particular and the punitive legislation in general. But 'De Profundis' is also an extraordinary record of a man hurled from the pinnacle of literary success to the uttermost public degradation, and of the spiritual means by which he turned away from despair. Wilde fixed his mind on Christ, first as a person, then (in 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol') as a redeeming god. The sublime elimination of himself in the thought of the suffering of his fellow prisoners, in his time and in all time, permeates the letters to the 'Daily Chronicle' and the 'Ballad', all written after his release. 'De Profundis' is less reflective of this than the proof of how it was happening. Its universal quality is more evident if it is read as a man addressing himself, the Douglas of the letter being Wilde as well as Douglas. 
The elimination of self had its apogee in 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol' which Wilde began to write at the end of May, the month in which he was released, completing it in October, and seeing it published by Smithers in February 1898, initially signed C. 3. 3. Its theme was the man hanged in Reading while Wilde was there, Charles Thomas Wooldridge (1866-1897), trooper of the Royal Horse Guards, who had murdered his wife in what today seems a clear attack of mental illness. With high dramatic sense Wilde turned the sufferings of all the other convicts into a subordinate but supportive chorus. The poem made no denial of guilt, although its hanged prisoner ultimately suffered more than the rest, and embodied their agonies more intensely. The 'Ballad' followed the advice of 'De Profundis' to Douglas, and sustained itself by love, ultimately the redeeming love of Christ, rather than hatred of custodians such as Maurice (though he figured prominently enough to worry the printers about a possible libel action). Hatred of the prison system and of the human oppression that created it animated the 'Ballad': but the poem confronted that cruelty with the love of Christ against which it offended. Chesterton would see the 'Ballad' as 'a cry for common justice and brotherhood very much deeper, more democratic' than the most radical protest of the age (G. K. Chesterton, 'Victorian Age in Literature' [1913], 227). 
Wilde was released from Reading on 18 May, being handed 'De Profundis' by Nelson, and was transferred for a night to Pentonville, where he was met by Adey. He travelled to Dieppe, where he was met on 20 May by Ross. For some months Wilde called himself Sebastian Melmoth (died 288?), after the Christian martyr under Diocletian -- transfixed by arrows, whence a cult figure in homoerotic art -- and the doomed hero of 'Melmoth the Wanderer' (1820) by his mother's maternal uncle-in-law Charles Maturin, which had influenced 'The Picture of Dorian Gray' and which Ross had re-edited in 1892. Wilde settled for a time in Berneval, near Dieppe, but left for Naples in September, having been reconciled with Douglas, who advised on final revisions and additions to the 'Ballad' -- Douglas was a poet, after all. They did not, apparently, discuss 'De Profundis', which Wilde evidently thought Douglas had read (Ross was to have sent it to him after having had it typed: if Douglas ever got it, or any part of it, he destroyed that text without reading much of it). The withdrawal of their incomes by Wilde's wife and Douglas's mother ended their Naples Indian summer. Wilde returned to Paris in February and on 23 March 1898 the 'Daily Chronicle' published his last public prose work, a second prison letter (signed as the 'Ballad''s author) intervening in the current debate on the 'Prisons Bill'. 
Apart from passing his plays for the press, Wilde's writing life was over. Constance had been very moved by the 'Ballad' and by both prison letters, but she died on 7 April 1898. Wilde's life became a helpless drift from place to place, centring on Paris. From London, with limited resources and occasionally guilt-ridden impatience, Ross struggled to manage his survival. Wilde went to Rome and received the blessing of Leo XIII in April 1900. His medical condition became worse and he was rescued from dying in a Paris street by a former landlord, Jean Dupoirier, proprietor of the Hotel d'Alsace, rue des Beaux-Arts, where he died on 30 November 1900. An Irish priest, Cuthbert Dunne, obtained by Robert Ross, had conditionally baptized him, and given him extreme unction and absolution, being satisfied that Wilde, although now speechless, understood and approved. Wilde was buried at Bagneux on 2 December 1900 by Ross, Douglas, Dunne, Dupoirier, and a few other friends. In 1909 his uncorrupted body was moved to Pere Lachaise cemetery, Paris, with a monument by Jacob Epstein over the grave. Ross's ashes were placed in the grave at his request after his death in 1918. 
Although still unmentionable in most circles at the time of his death, Wilde had an obituary in 'The Times' and a notice in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Sherard published a touching memoir, 'Oscar Wilde: the Story of an Unhappy Friendship' (1902), followed by 'The Life of Oscar Wilde' (1906) and 'The Real Oscar Wilde' (1915). Ross issued less than half of 'De Profundis' in 1905, shorn of any allusion to Douglas although occasionally addressing an unspecified friend identifiable with Ross. Douglas reviewed it favourably, and others proclaimed it a classic. Wilde's reputation soared from the depths, and Ross planned and brought out a comprehensive fourteen-volume edition of Wilde's known published writings with the aid of Christopher Sclater Millard in 1908, emended in 1909, followed by many republications in cheap editions by the publisher, Methuen. Millard under the name Stuart Mason produced an invaluable, if somewhat ragbag, 'Bibliography of Oscar Wilde' (1914), abounding in instructive tangents; several other Mason volumes covered the 'Dorian Gray' controversy ('Art and Morality', 1907, 1912, reproducing the major reviews from Jeyes to Pater and the ensuing correspondence), and further bibliographical problems. Anonymously Millard issued an edition of the trial transcripts, 'Oscar Wilde Three Times Tried' (1912). Ross, as Wilde's named literary executor, cleared the estate of bankruptcy in July 1906 and administered it for the sons of Wilde, both of whom served in the First World War, in which Cyril was killed (1915). Vyvyan Holland took over the estate after Ross's death in 1918. Wilde's vast sales were unaccompanied by critical assessment of much value: academic respectability, masquerading as integrity, dominated intellectual opinion to insist that Wilde would have been forgotten had it not been for the scandal. The First World War was made an excuse to argue that Wilde fostered a cult of national degeneracy which the Germans would exploit for blackmailing, morale, and other purposes, climaxing in the sensational and ludicrous trial 'R. v. Billing' (1918). The British Isles alone pursued this thesis: Wilde was by now a major literary figure in Europe, North America, and ultimately Asia. His reputation in Latin American countries would follow, with significant influence on writers such as Jorge Luis Borges. Biographies of varying degrees of unreliability kept his story before the public, though significantly the two most substantial up to the Second World War were by a Frenchman, Leon Lemonnier (1931), and a Russian, Boris Brasol (1938). In 1946 Hesketh Pearson produced the best 'Life of Oscar Wilde' to date, a collage of memoirs and memories by a former actor drawing on many personal recollections given him over thirty years. More impressionistic than scholarly, it remains a sparkling narrative, a fine introduction to the theatre world of Wilde, and a stimulating, sympathetic critique from the polarity of an English, agnostic, heterosexual tory. 
Wilde's critical reputation in the British Isles came into its own when Rupert Hart-Davis published his authoritative edition of 'The Letters of Oscar Wilde' (1962). It included the first reliable text of 'De Profundis', whose status as a letter to Douglas had become known when a Ross-inspired work, 'Oscar Wilde: a Critical Study' (1912) by Arthur Ransome, led Douglas to sue for libel against implications of having betrayed Wilde. Douglas was then forced to listen in the witness-box to Wilde's laceration of him. This was read from the manuscript which Ross had given to the British Museum (now the British Library) in 1909 on condition of its remaining closed for fifty years; there, after being called in evidence in 1913, it remained. Douglas pursued a vendetta against Ross thereafter, denouncing Wilde in 'R. v. Billing' but renewing affection in his 'Oscar Wilde: a Summing-Up' (1941). Portions of 'De Profundis' had been republished in the USA and as appended matter to Frank Harris's 'Oscar Wilde: his Life and Confessions' (1916, 1918, 1938) whose vivid pages and largely invented conversations (Wilde's supposed reiteration of 'Frank' is one obvious inauthenticity) added their plenty to the inventions in circulation, complicated by some endorsement from Harris's one-time drama critic on the 'Saturday Review', Shaw, which allowed the book's publication in Britain for the first time in 1938. After Douglas's death Vyvyan Holland published the full text of 'De Profundis' (1949) from a transcript copy, and it replaced the fragment of 1905 in most editions of Wilde's works. Only when Hart-Davis and his future wife, Ruth Simon, scrutinized the British Museum manuscript did it become clear that Ross had not had a true copy made, nor had he employed an accurate typist. Hart-Davis at last established the true text, and Wilde's life swam into full focus in his own narration from his Oxford days when the letters began. 
Wilde still awaited a satisfactory biographer, and it seemed that in Richard Ellmann he had found him. Ellmann was a brilliant critic of Wilde's and his mother's protege William Butler Yeats, and a definitive biographer of Wilde's posthumous scrutinizer, James Joyce. Ellmann pursued Wilde's life for several decades, but the onset of fatal illness obliged him to publish his (posthumous) biography in unrevised form. Ellmann had been anxious to let the multitude of divergent voices be heard on Wilde, and sought what now seems a post-modernist approach, in harmony with Wilde's exuberant denunciation of the tyranny of fact in 'The decay of lying' but without the distillation of possibility from probability in all cases which he would have wished. Nor was Ellmann able to incorporate his own final researches or those most recently communicated to him. He became preoccupied by what is now known to be a baseless thesis of Wilde suffering from continued syphilis. The result is a work of towering artistic insight, elegant prose, critical genius, but not the authoritative biography in all respects. Since Ellmann, his pupil Declan Kiberd has greatly advanced awareness of Wilde's Irish heritage in his books 'Inventing Ireland' and 'Irish Classics' and his student Jarlath Killeen has greatly advanced understanding of Wilde as a Catholic author in his doctoral dissertation (2001). Among many other academic studies may be singled out Emile Vernadakis 'Les pretextes de Salome' (3 vols., Paris, 1987), showing the origins of Wilde's French play in his English writing as well as in his French studies. 
Visually Wilde has been before the public since 1936 when Robert Morley starred in the play 'Oscar Wilde' by Leslie Stokes and Sewell Stokes (1936) in a version of which he starred in the eponymous film (1960). He was perhaps a little too remote, but he captured Wilde's dignity and, more unusually, his slightly pedagogic manner. Peter Finch in 'The Trials of Oscar Wilde' gave a more orthodox version, stressing Wilde's self-possession and coolness under threat, if rather less of the artist. The classic realization will always be that in Micheal Mac Liammoir's 'The Importance of being Oscar' (1961), a work of genius, bringing together man, work, reputation, and above all performance, sometimes being Wilde, sometimes his creations from Herod to Lady Bracknell. The film starring Stephen Fry (1997) made for a more English Wilde but met with interest and appreciation, especially because the relaxation of censorship enabled more unrestrained depiction of aspects of Wilde's private life. A fine bust of Wilde by the sculptor Patrick O'Connor (1955) survives in the best private collection of Wildeana, that of Donald Hyde and Mary Hyde at Princeton. The best collection in the world is that at the William Andrews Clark Library of the University of California at Los Angeles. 
The popular and critical successes of Wilde in the twentieth century interplayed significantly with the struggle for decriminalization and social acceptance of homosexuality. Homosexual or bisexual actors found their self-respect reaffirmed by direction or performance of Wilde's plays, obvious instances being John Gielgud's John Worthing in 'The Importance of being Earnest' (1922, 1930, 1939, 1942, 1947), Michael Redgrave's in Anthony Asquith's film of that play (1952) -- whose conquest of mass audiences owed more, however, to Edith Evans as Lady Bracknell and Margaret Rutherford as Miss Prism -- and Mac Liammoir in Dublin Gate Theatre productions of Wilde including his dramatized 'Dorian Gray' (1956) when he played Lord Henry Wotton. Mac Liammoir designed the bilingual marble plaque affixed to Wilde's birthplace at his birth centenary, and supported the London centenary commemoration, led by Sir Compton Mackenzie. Growing police persecution of homosexual offences met increasingly angry protest after 1954, as did the failure to implement the Wolfenden report's demand for decriminalization. Wilde, as the most conspicuous UK victim at the cost of many more possible works of genius, was a clear rallying point, and the widespread popular dissemination of his writings by Collins (1948), Penguin (1954), and others undoubtedly made converts otherwise unready to bestir themselves for such legal reform. The 'Letters' and consequent critical re-evaluation in the UK strengthened such sentiment, and facilitated the achievement of substantial though not total removal of legal penalties for homosexual intimacies (by the Wilson government). Gay liberation in 1971 in the USA obtained rapid UK discipleship and the growth in academic study of sexuality necessarily made much of Wilde as a well-known and now well-recorded case whose literary achievement continued to pose its mysteries as well as its revelations. Gay bookshops in various cities in USA and UK frequently made use of his name; amateur plays about him and productions of his works became more and more numerous in theatre festivals led by Edinburgh Festival Fringe (annually in August); Ellmann's biography led the literary fare for general consumption, winning a mass audience for academic criticism on the highest level. Various Wilde societies and symposia continued to flourish, and to encourage both greater liberalism in public attitudes and greater promiscuity among devotees. As cultural hero and literary icon, Wilde beguiles scholars and fascinates the public at large; this ability shows no signs of abating in the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29401


Wilde, Thomas, first Baron Truro (1782-1855), lord chancellor, was born in Warwick Square, Newgate Street, London, on 7 July 1782, the second son of Thomas Wilde, attorney, of London and Saffron Walden, Essex, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Knight. He was uncle of Lord Penzance and younger brother of Sir John Wilde (died 1859), chief justice from 1827 of the Cape of Good Hope. 
Wilde was educated at St Paul's School in London from 1785 until 1796, when he left to be articled to his father. Although he once ran away to try his hand at commerce, he was admitted attorney in 1805, and for some years practised as such on his own account. In March 1811, however, he entered himself at the Inner Temple and was called to the bar on 7 February 1817. By then he had already practised as a certificated special pleader for two years, and on 18 April 1813 married Mary, daughter of William Wileman and widow of William Devaynes, a banker; they had a daughter and three sons, one of whom died in infancy. 
Wilde had none of the personal advantages which heighten the effect of oratory. He was small and thick-set with irregular features, his voice was unmusical and his delivery monotonous. He had a speech impediment, which he evaded rather than overcame by the use of synonyms, but his mastery of the technicalities of pleading, his connections, and experience, joined to great talent and industry, all assisted his success. Retained in 1820 for the defence of Queen Caroline during the progress through parliament of the bill of pains and penalties, he readily surmounted the prejudice with which he was at first received by Brougham and Denman, and distinguished himself in cross-examination. The celebrity thus early gained opened the way to an extensive common-law practice, and Queen Caroline expressed her gratitude by making him, with Stephen Lushington, one of her executors. Wilde was made serjeant-at-law (13 May 1824), and in Trinity term 1827 he was advanced to the rank of king's serjeant. 
On 31 May 1831 Wilde was elected for Newark-on-Trent as a whig. He won the seat only at the fourth attempt, lost it at the general election of December 1832, but recovered it on 5 January 1835 and retained it until the dissolution of 23 June 1841. Having unsuccessfully sought a puisne judgeship on account of his poor health, from 1841 to 1846 he represented Worcester. Like most great lawyers, Wilde was unfitted to carry the House of Commons by storm, and at first he confined himself to the discussion of points of detail in the measures for the reform of the representative system and the law of bankruptcy. On 2 April 1835 he made a rambling speech displaying more rancour than vigour in support of Lord John Russell's motion for a committee on Irish church temporalities. On his party's return to power on 8 April he devoted himself at first chiefly to election petition business, and on 16 February 1836 was appointed to serve on the Carlow election petition committee as legal nominee to examine witnesses without power of voting. On the question of privilege (the reporting of debates in the Commons) raised by the great case of 'Stockdale v. 'Hansard'' ('Hansard 3', 38, 1837, 1299; 48, 1839, 356) he maintained from the first the highest possible view of the dignity and authority of the House of Commons. During this controversy he succeeded Sir Robert Monsey Rolfe (afterwards Baron Cranworth) as solicitor-general (2 December 1839), and was knighted (19 February 1840). The tension between the House of Commons and the court of queen's bench was then extreme. Wilde was prepared for the most violent measures, and, though his excessive zeal was curbed on the whole by the attorney-general, John (later Lord) Campbell, he nevertheless opposed the legislative settlement of the question on the ground that it involved a tacit waiver of the privilege that it affirmed. He was no less jealous of the privileges of the serjeants-at-law. He opposed, and succeeded in obstructing Brougham's attempt, by means of the prerogative, to admit queen's counsel to equal rights of audience with serjeants in the court of common pleas, but reverence for the past did not blind him to the demerits of Westminster Hall as a setting for the law courts, and it was under his auspices that the first steps were taken towards their relocation in the Strand ('Hansard 3', 57, 1849, 1162). He succeeded Campbell as attorney-general on 3 July 1841, but went out of office on the fall of Lord Melbourne's administration in the following September. 
Wilde was one of the earliest converts to Rowland Hill's scheme of postal reform, which he introduced to the House of Commons on 27 June 1843. He also supported the measure of the same year for the more effectual suppression of the slave trade. His professional knowledge and skill showed to advantage in the discussions which arose on the report from the committee on the forged exchequer bills (4 April 1842), the reversal of the judgment against O'Connell (5 September 1844), and the question of privilege raised by the case of 'Howard v. Gossett' (30 May 1845; 'Hansard 3' 61, 1842, 1222; 70, 1844, 399; 76, 1844, 2007; 80, 1845, 1099). 
Wilde's first wife died on 13 June 1840, and on 13 August 1845 he married Augusta Emma D'Este (1801-1866), daughter of Augustus Frederick, duke of Sussex, and his wife, Lady Augusta Murray, daughter of the fourth earl of Dunmore. Wilde met his second wife on the journey accompanying the coffin of Queen Caroline to Brunswick in August 1821, as documented in Augusta's journal (TNA: PRO, PRO 39/93/20). He later acted for her brother in litigation which sought to establish his legitimacy. It was a romantic match, and her royal connections supplied a useful cachet in his subsequent career. There were no children of the marriage. 
On the formation of Lord John Russell's administration in July 1846 Wilde was reappointed attorney-general, but, in consequence of the sudden death (6 July) of Sir Nicholas Conyngham Tindal, he was at once appointed chief-justice of the court of common pleas. On 30 October he was sworn of the privy council. As a judge, he displayed the same strengths as at the bar -- an amazing attention to detail and acuteness in applying the law -- but was prone to losing the important amid the unimportant in the detail at his disposal. The chief-justiceship, for which the experience of a lifetime had eminently fitted him, he held for little more than four years, being induced in 1850 to become lord chancellor. He was sworn in on 15 July, was created Baron Truro of Bowes, Middlesex, and took his seat in the House of Lords. 
Notwithstanding his age and inexperience of equity business, Wilde proved a competent chancellor, mastering the rules of equity in the same manner as he had earlier those of the ecclesiastical courts. But his success was achieved at the cost of intense study -- his judgments were invariably written -- and his health suffered in consequence. His period as lord chancellor saw the creation of the lords justices of appeal in chancery, who could hear appeals from the master of the rolls or the vice-chancellors with or without the lord chancellor being present. Thus was achieved the dual triumph of freeing the chancellor for the legislative business of the House of Lords and his duties as a minister, without severing his link with the actual administration of justice. Wilde also supported the 'Common Law Procedure Act', 1852, which ended the need to cite a specific cause of action in the writ which commenced proceedings at common law. For the future, the cause would appear in the pleadings, which unlike the writ could be amended. Effectively, therefore, the old forms of action were abolished. 
Wilde was relieved of the burdens of office by the fall of the government in February 1852, and in 1853 ceased to attend the House of Lords. After two years of suffering he died at his residence, 13 Eaton Square, London, on 11 November 1855. His remains were interred on 17 November in the Dunmore vault in the churchyard of St Lawrence, near Ramsgate. His widow presented his law library to the House of Lords and his portrait to St Paul's School. 


@@@@@


doc= 29402


Wilde, Sir William, first baronet (c.1611-1679), judge and politician, was the son and heir of William Wilde (died 1650), a vintner of Bread Street, London. Admitted to the Inner Temple from Clifford's Inn on 13 February 1630, Wilde married, on 6 July that year, Hannah Terry, the daughter of another London vintner; their relationship was ended prematurely by Hannah's death two months later. Called to the bar on 21 May 1637, Wilde may have been practising in chancery and king's bench the following year, although his professional career was soon disrupted by political crisis and civil war. In summer 1643 William Wilde junior of the Temple was assessed at a mere $50 by the parliamentarian committee for advance of money. Two years later he claimed that his net worth was only $500, disregarding lands held by his father for life, and that over the previous eighteen months he had made less than $15 as exigenter of Yorkshire, an office connected with the court of common pleas which Wilde may have held since 1631. 
Despite the obscurity of the next few years of Wilde's life, his acquisition of an additional chamber in Figtree Court in 1649, election to the bench of the Inner Temple in November 1652, and second marriage that same year or earlier to Jane Wilson (died 1661) of Hanwell, Middlesex, who would bear his son and heir, Felix, all point to a steadily expanding practice. With the revival of royalist City presbyterianism following the military coup which overthrew Richard Cromwell's protectorate, Wilde was elected on 3 November 1659 to the politically sensitive post of recorder of London. His personal standing and influence were further enhanced early next year when he was returned unopposed as one of the members for London in the Convention Parliament, where he busied himself with committee work and delivered at least eight speeches. As a member of the committee appointed to prepare parliament's response to the royal declaration of Breda, Wilde also joined the MPs who waited on Charles II in the Netherlands, and was knighted there together with London's other representatives after presenting a loyal address which he had helped to draft. 
After his return to England, Wilde continued to play a linking role between parliament and the City. As recorder he served on the commission for the trial of the regicides, after moving successfully in the Commons that Sir Arthur Hesilrige not be indicted, and was raised to a baronetcy during the September adjournment. Created serjeant-at-law in October (when the patrons of his count were the earl of Northumberland and the lord mayor of London), Wilde was appointed king's serjeant on 10 November 1660. He also served in such local offices as justice of the peace and assessment commissioner, not only for London (where he became deputy lieutenant in 1662), but also for Middlesex and Kent. These reflected his extensive landed property, both leased and freehold, at Ash, Dunmow, and Lewisham, where he lived when not occupying his town houses at Great St Bartholomew's Close and Lincoln's Inn Fields, or his chambers at the Temple and Serjeants' Inn. However, Wilde did not stand for the Cavalier Parliament, perhaps because his failure to oppose the excise had damaged his political standing in London. 
Following the death of his second wife in August 1661, Wilde married for a third time in October 1662. His bride was a 32-year-old spinster, Frances Barcroft (died 1719), of St Michael Bassishaw, London. Their only son, William, was confusingly given the same baptismal name as both his father and his older half-brother, Wilde's second son by Dame Jane, the first Lady Wilde (BL, Add. MS 5520, fol. 251). In April 1668 Wilde was made a puisne justice of common pleas; his appointment 'during pleasure' signalled a major policy shift, since from 1641 onwards virtually all judges had been appointed 'during good behaviour'. The significance of this change became apparent six years after his transfer to the court of king's bench in 1673, when Charles II revoked the patents of Wilde and three other judges. According to Burnet the dismissal of this 'worthy and ancient judge' ('Burnet's History', 2.199) in April 1679 followed Wilde's judicial censure of perjured testimony by a key witness to the supposed Popish Plot. 
Wilde died on 23 November 1679 and was buried on 2 December in the Temple Church (despite an expressed wish for his 'fraile body' to lie in St Bartholomew's 'neere my deceased vertuous wife Dame Jane' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/361, fol. 333). His large estate of lands and leases, loans and mortgages, plate, fine furniture, jewellery, books, and musical instruments comprised the accumulated fruits of parental inheritance, marriage settlements, and a successful legal career. Wilde had been friendly with the learned physician Sir George Ent and was known to Sir John Evelyn. His only significant publication was as editor of Sir Henry Yelverton's king's bench reports (1661, and four subsequent editions). 


@@@@@


doc= 29403


Wilde, Sir William Robert Wills (1815-1876), surgeon, was born at Kilkeevin, near Castlereagh, co. Roscommon, the youngest of the three sons and two daughters of a prominent local medical practitioner, Thomas Wills Wilde, and his wife, Amelia (died 'c'.1844), daughter of John Fynn. From his family background and schooling in Roscommon -- the Royal School at Banagher and the Church of Ireland diocesan school at Elphin -- Wilde acquired an idealized if scholarly devotion to the folk traditions and topography of the west of Ireland. His introduction to surgery came from accompanying his father on his rural rounds. In 1832, however, Wilde was bound as an apprentice to Abraham Colles, the pre-eminent Irish surgeon of the day, at Dr Steevens' Hospital in Dublin. He was also taught by the surgeons James Cusack and Sir Philip Crampton and the physician Sir Henry Marsh. Wilde also studied at the private and highly respected school of anatomy, medicine, and surgery in Park Street (later Lincoln Place), Dublin. Wilde's close and significant friendships with the physicians Robert Graves and William Stokes came about as a result of his being taught by Graves at Park Street. He completed his Dublin training with a year's midwifery at the Rotunda Hospital under Evory Kennedy, where he won the annual prize examination with a treatise on spina bifida. 
A collapse in health preceded Wilde's appointment as a licentiate of the college of surgeons in March 1837. For either reasons of health or as a consequence of his having fathered a child out of wedlock, his mentors arranged for him to absent himself temporarily from Dublin in September of that year to travel as surgeon to a consumptive Glasgow merchant bound for Madeira and the Levant on the steam yacht 'Crusader'. The numerous cases of ophthalmic trachoma Wilde encountered on the streets of Alexandria and Cairo were decisive for his later orientation towards eye surgery. The notes on the climate, natural history, topography, and state of medicine in the places he visited were later published as the two-volume 'Narrative of a Voyage to Madeira, Teneriffe and Along the Shores of the Mediterranean' (1840). This work, which became known popularly as Wilde's 'Voyage', established him as a Dublin savant and led to him becoming a regular contributor to, and close associate of, the editorial coterie behind the 'Dublin University Magazine'. It also introduced Wilde to the 'gentlemen of science' who made up the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS). His attendance at its 1839 Birmingham meeting marked the start of a long and fruitful association with the natural history and anthropological sections of the BAAS. 
The $250 fee Wilde received for 'Voyage' allowed him to extend his medical education by a period of study abroad, first in London for three months in 1839 at the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital (Moorfields) and the Hunterian Museum, and then at the Allgemeines Krankenhaus in Vienna. At Moorfields his teachers were John Dalrymple, Frederick Tyrell, and George Guthrie. He also made the acquaintance of Richard Owen, the Hunterian professor of comparative anatomy at the Royal College of Surgeons. His London circle included Queen Victoria's physician Sir James Clark, his fellow Dublin expatriate, the surgeon and later founder of King's College Hospital, Robert Bentley Todd, and Sarah Lee, illustrator and author of 'Memoirs of Baron Cuvier' (1833) and numerous works of travel, African exploration, and natural history. Through the novelist Maria Edgeworth, Wilde was brought into London literary society. Although Wilde had gone to Vienna primarily to extend his knowledge of ophthalmic and aural surgery he quickly discovered that the latter was as neglected by the Allgemeines Krankenhaus as it was by Moorfields. With the treatment of eye disease, however, he followed a six-month course on practical surgery in the Viennese medical faculty, which in 1812 had established a chair and clinic of ophthalmology. Here Wilde observed the clinical and teaching practices of Anton Rosas (1791-1855), the second holder of the ophthalmology chair, and Friedrich Jaeger (1784-1871), professor of ophthalmology at the Joseph's academy, where surgeons were trained for service in the imperial army. Vienna also afforded him access to Josef Skoda (1805-1881), renowned for his diagnosis of diseases of the chest, and the pathological anatomist Karl Rokitansky (1804-1878). 
From Vienna, Wilde travelled to Munich, and from there to Prague, Dresden, and Heidelberg, where he attended the university for several months as an independent scholar before to going to Berlin to study at the clinic of Johann Friedrich Dieffenbach (1792-1847), founder of plastic surgery. The letters of introduction he carried from Maria Edgeworth were a passport to the political and intellectual elites, most notably to the Berlin Geographical Society, at which he read a paper on Irish ethnology and which brought him to the attention of Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859). 
Wilde returned to Dublin in 1841 to open a practice as an eye and ear specialist from his home at 15 Westland Row. As his practice grew he moved in 1848 to 21 Westland Row, and then in 1855 to 1 Merrion Square. On 12 November 1851, in St Peter's Church, Dublin, he married the poet and critic Jane Francesca, known as Speranza (1821-1896) ['see 'Wilde, Jane Francesca Agnes], the daughter of the Dublin attorney Charles Elgee (1783-1824) and Sarah (died 1851), daughter of the Revd Thomas Kingsbury LLD, of Lisle House, Dublin. They had two sons, the barrister and later journalist William Charles Kingsbury Wills (1852-1899) and the writer, critic, and journalist Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde, and a daughter, Isola Francesca (1857-1867). Wilde also fathered three illegitimate children, one of whom, a son whom he called Henry Wilson ('c'.1838-1877), a name thought to have been a play on 'Wil(de's) son', was trained by his father as an oculist. Wilson was the author of 'Lectures on the Theory and Practice of the Ophthalmoscope' (1868), and, after Wilde's death, succeeded him as senior surgeon to St Mark's Hospital for Diseases of the Eye and Ear. Wilde's two other natural children, Emily (1847-1871) and Mary (1849-1871), were adopted as wards by his eldest brother, the Revd Ralph Wilde. 
Wilde established in Dublin a specialist eye and ear hospital modelled on Moorfields but including aural practice. He acquired the lease of a disused stable on South Frederick Lane, off Molesworth Street, and converted it into a dispensary for treating the eye and ear complaints of the poor of Dublin. The reputation he quickly acquired from the popularity of his dispensary both enhanced his private practice and led to his being appointed lecturer in ophthalmology and otology at the Park Street school. Wilde's dispensary paid for itself through monthly subscriptions from each of his patients, but further expansion into the treatment of in-patients and the development of teaching required a larger building. In 1844 Wilde purchased the building on Mark Street that had formerly housed a general hospital. As St Mark's Hospital and Dispensary for Diseases of the Eye and Ear this became the first hospital in the British Isles to teach aural surgery, and the first in Ireland to combine treatment of the eye with that of the ear. Funded partly from a realization of the assets of the former general hospital, partly from a grant from the Dublin grand jury, and partly from private subscriptions, it appointed Robert Graves as consultant physician and Sir Philip Crampton as consultant surgeon. Its success was such that it soon outgrew the Mark Street building. The closing of the Park Street school in 1848 provided Wilde with a timely opportunity for further expansion. He bought the building for $1100 and put $200 into structural work, which enabled it to become a hospital for twenty public patients, with three private rooms, outpatient facilities, an operating theatre, a lecture room, and rooms for a resident surgeon. In 1862 Wilde formally delegated the management of St Mark's as a voluntary hospital to a board of trustees to safeguard its facilities for the poor of Ireland. It merged in 1897 with the National Eye and Ear Infirmary to form the Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital, on Adelaide Road. 
Under Wilde's direction St Mark's became a centre for research and teaching in ophthalmic and aural practice. Wilde followed the continental teaching techniques of clinical instruction at the patient's bedside in what was effectively a specialist teaching hospital. As a surgeon he followed the methodology of the schools of Paris and Vienna in seeking to apply to surgery the localized insights offered by pathological anatomy. He was a regular attender of the Saturday afternoon meetings of the Dublin Pathological Society. Wilde's 'Observations on Aural Surgery and the Nature and Treatment of Diseases of the Ear' (1853) drew on the wealth of detailed clinical case reports he had amassed at St Mark's. It was also the first textbook to provide practitioners with a reliable nosology and pathology for scientific diagnosis and treatment. The book, in which Wilde classified ear diseases by pathology rather than symptomatology, was bitterly attacked in 'The Lancet' by Wilhelm Kramer, who advocated the older symptomatological classification. The attack was supported by 'The Lancet''s editor, who said that the reviewer had 'consigned [Wilde's] book to the trunkmakers'. Nevertheless, in 1853 the appointment of surgeon oculist-in-ordinary to the queen in Ireland was conferred on him. 
Wilde's bedside investigations were crucial in establishing the role of the tympanic membrane and the middle ear in aural infections. Wilde introduced into Irish medical practice the unsplit ear speculum designed by the Viennese otologist Ignaz Gruber (1803-1872) for examination of the tympanic membrane. He also developed the first dressing forceps specifically for use with the ear, an aural snare, and a new incision to be used in the surgical treatment of mastoiditis. As 'Wilde's snare' and 'Wilde's incision', these became the first otological additions to the existing stock of Irish medical eponyms. 
In his other specialism, eye surgery, Wilde was a keen proponent of the use of atrophine in the treatment of corneal ulcer and cataracts. He followed Jaeger's technique for the removal of cataracts by upward incision, and performed numerous operations to relieve squint by tenotomy, cutting and then stitching to divide the internal rictus muscle of the eye. He regarded the granulations of ophthalmic trachoma as the most frequent cause of blindness in Ireland and believed it was the same condition he had seen in Egypt. He independently (with Thomas Wharton Jones, a London ophthalmologist, confirmed the cause of astigmatism as being the asymmetry of the cornea. Wilde shared with many of his contemporaries an ambiguity about anaesthetics, though he did support the use of chloroform for plastic operations on the face and the tear ducts. 
In 1843 Wilde initiated an extended series of clinical communications in the 'Dublin Journal of Medical Science', questioning received medical opinion on eye and ear surgery and issues of public health. Having added the word 'Quarterly' to its title when he became editor in 1845, he used the journal to campaign vigorously on behalf of his profession, publishing as an open letter the 1847 attack by Robert Graves on the central board of health for the inadequacy of the financial provision it had made for doctors involved in famine work. In 'Medico-legal observations upon infantile leucorrhea, arising out of the alleged cases of felonious assaults on young children, recently tried in Dublin' (1854), he argued that leucorrhea in minors was not necessarily associated with venereal infection and did not therefore provide conclusive proof of sexual assault; 'On the Physical, Moral, and Social Condition of the Deaf and Dumb' (1854) drew on the statistics he had compiled from the 1851 Irish census. These represented the first attempt anywhere in Europe to classify the total number of persons in a given geographical area suffering from disease, either permanent or temporary, on a given day. 
In the 1850s Wilde also enjoyed lucrative part-time employment in the emergent life-insurance industry, in his case as medical referee for the Victoria Assurance Company. He was an early member of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, and in 1844 he had instituted at St Mark's an annual series of hospital reports distinguished by their level of statistical detail. The statistical abilities he had demonstrated in his book 'Austria: its Literary, Scientific and Medical Institutions' (1843) drew him to the attention of the organizers of the material collected in the 1841 census of Ireland and led to his appointment as medical adviser and compiler of the table of deaths for the census report. He went on to become assistant commissioner for the censuses of 1851, 1861, and 1871, service which earned him a knighthood in 1864. 
Wilde viewed the Irish countryside as a national asset which was threatened by famine, emigration, and education. His early writing on this topic was to have been expanded into a 'History of Irish medicine and popular cures', but this remained uncompleted at the time of his death. Some of the material he had assembled was published in his 'Irish Popular Superstitions' (1852) and, posthumously, in Lady Wilde's 'Ancient Cures, Charms and Usages of Ireland' (1887). Through his wife and her contributions to 'The Nation', Wilde was linked to the nationalist politics of Young Ireland; he himself was a quasi-nationalist, and in his final years looked favourably on Isaac Butt's campaign for Irish home government. Wilde became part of the inner circles of the Royal Irish Academy, the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and the Celtic Society of Dublin. The first volume of his 'Descriptive Catalogue of the Antiquities... in the Museum of the Royal Irish Academy' (3 vols., 1857-62) was published to coincide with the association's meeting in Dublin in 1857. At its 1874 meeting in Belfast, Wilde gave an address entitled 'On the ancient races of Ireland'. Other publications reflected his interests in natural history and travel. In 1849 he also published 'The Closing Years of Dean Swift's Life', one of the earliest refutations of Swift's insanity. 
Wilde's reputation became tarnished by scandal. Mary Travers, a long-term patient of his and the daughter of a colleague, had for some time been engaged in an increasingly public campaign of harassment against Wilde, claiming that he had seduced her. This culminated in her writing, and then distributing outside the building where Wilde was about to give a public lecture, a pamphlet crudely parodying himself and Lady Wilde as Dr and Mrs Quilp, and portraying Dr Quilp as the rapist of a female patient anaesthetized under chloroform. Lady Wilde complained to Mary's father, Robert Travers, which resulted in Mary bringing a libel case against her. Mary Travers won her case but was awarded a mere farthing in damages by the jury. The case, however, was the talk of all Dublin. Wilde's refusal to enter the witness box during the trial was widely held against him as ungentlemanly behaviour and provided his fellow oculist and medical editor Arthur Jacob with a further opportunity publicly to campaign against the man he had earlier accused of rapacity as a gentlemanly entrepreneur of surgery. 
From this time onwards Wilde began to withdraw from Dublin to the west of Ireland, where he had started in 1864 to build what became Moytura, his house overlooking Lough Corrib in Connemara. His declining health and persistent and prolonged bouts of depression during much of that time were exacerbated by deaths of his daughter Isola from fever in 1867, and of his natural daughters Emily and Mary in a fire in 1871. Moreover, the trial cost Wilde dear, with costs of $2000 awarded against his wife, and this may have started the downward spiral which left his family in virtual penury after his death. Wilde returned to Dublin to die on 19 April 1876 at 1 Merrion Square surrounded by his family, and, Oscar Wilde later recalled, a former lover who sat with Lady Wilde's permission, shrouded in a veil at his bedside. He was buried three days later in the Church of Ireland cemetery of Mount Jerome in Harold's Cross, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 29404


Wilderspin, Samuel (1791-1866), educationist, was born on 23 March 1791 in Hornsey, London, the son of Alexander and Ann Wilderspin. His father, a follower of Swedenborg, was a member of the Church of the New Jerusalem, founded in London in 1787. Wilderspin was separated from his parents at the age of seven, sent to a school in central London, and later apprenticed as a calenderer in the textile trade. About 1819, while serving as a clerk to the minister of a New Jerusalem church in south London, he met James Buchanan, a fellow Swedenborgian, recently arrived from Robert Owen's famous school in New Lanark to open the first London infant school at Brewer's Green, Westminster. When Joseph Wilson, a London silk merchant, decided in 1820 to open a similar infant school in Spitalfields, Buchanan recommended Wilderspin and his wife, Sarah Anne (whom he married in 1811), as master and mistress. With some help from Buchanan and occasional visits from Owen, Wilderspin evolved innovative methods of teaching large groups of children from two to six years of age. These were described in his first book, 'On the Importance of Educating the Infant Children of the Poor', published in 1823, which also emphasized the need for education as a means of combating juvenile crime and raising the social level of the poor. 
Wilderspin's school in Spitalfields attracted many visitors and led to the formation of the Infant School Society, a middle-class philanthropic organization, in 1824. Wilderspin became the society's agent, travelling on horseback or by gig throughout Britain to found and popularize infant schools on his model. On the demise of the society in 1828, he settled in Cheltenham and began a career as a freelance educator. From early 1828 to late 1830 he spent most of his time in Scotland, perfecting his system and devising novel means of publicity, involving public lectures, examinations, and parades of children through the streets. Following the death of his first wife, he married in 1826 Jane Mary Peacock, who probably died in 1828. 
Wilderspin relinquished his active role in the New Jerusalem church in 1825, and later became a nominal Anglican, but he remained a Swedenborgian at heart. Swedenborg's educational theory rested on his conviction that infancy was a state of innocence, that the child was endowed with curiosity and a love of knowledge, and that education was a developmental process from a blank mind to wisdom. Although Wilderspin was inspired by the practice of Owen and Buchanan, and was familiar with the concepts of Pestalozzi and the phrenologists, he derived most of his principles from the Swedenborgian canon, combining them with his own practice to produce a new, if not entirely consistent, system of infant teaching. This was based on short classroom lessons in an inclined gallery, the stimulation of the senses of the child by the use of apparatus, pictures, and objects, and an emphasis on play, using the playground both as an arena for activity and a site for the formation of character. His ultimate aim was to inculcate moral principles based on Christian love and charity but without religious dogma or ceremony. Although sometimes burdened by an excess of inert knowledge and repetitive memory work, his system at its best was far in advance of the methods of his time and anticipated much of twentieth-century early childhood education. 
After twelve years of travel throughout England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales (during which time some 270 infant schools were established, mostly on his model), Wilderspin accepted a series of important educational engagements. In 1836-7 he organized the non-denominational school system of Liverpool town council, introducing progressive changes which aroused the fierce opposition of Anglican and conservative forces. Early in 1838, at the invitation of the commissioners of national education in Ireland, he took charge of the Dublin model infant school, and subsequently of all three of the model schools; but after an altercation with one of the Catholic commissioners his contract was not renewed and he left Dublin in August 1839. Between these two engagements, in the latter part of 1837, he had taken part in the Central Society of Education's campaign for a state-supported national system of education, incurring the wrath of influential evangelicals in his home town of Cheltenham. 
On his return to England from Dublin in August 1839, Wilderspin found that his difficulties in Ireland, and his three-year absence from his work as a travelling infant school missionary, had diminished his reputation. Both church and state refused to employ him, but many of his ideas and practices were adopted, without acknowledgement, by both the largely evangelical Home and Colonial School Society and the committee of council on education. His fame in Britain rested not only on his practical work as an educational innovator but also on his numerous books. In addition to 'On the Importance of Educating the Infant Children of the Poor', which went through seven further editions (with varying titles and added content) between 1823 and 1852, Wilderspin published 'Early Discipline', an account of his travels, in 1832 (second edition 1834); 'A System of Education for the Young' (1840); and, with his son-in-law T. J. Terrington, 'A Manual for the Religious and Moral Instruction of Young Children in the Nursery and Infant School' (1845). His reputation spread abroad, and infant schools on his model were opened in France, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Switzerland, Sweden, and the USA. 
In the early 1840s lack of employment forced Wilderspin to the edge of destitution. He was saved by the patronage of Daniel and Mary Gaskell of Lupset Hall, Wakefield, in Yorkshire, who supported him both morally and materially. After a short time as master of the infant school at Barton upon Humber, Lincolnshire, with his third wife, Mary Dowding (they had married in 1838), he retired to Wakefield in 1848. There he spent an active retirement as a prominent member of the local mechanics' institute. In 1846 he had been granted a civil-list pension of $100 per annum, and also received an annuity of $40 from the interest on $1818 collected as a 'national tribute' by the efforts of the Gaskells. Wilderspin died in Wakefield on 10 March 1866, and was buried in Thornes churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 29405


Wildman, Sir John (1622/3-1693), Leveller and conspirator, was possibly the son of Jeffrey Wildman, yeoman, of Wreningham, Norfolk. According to Clarendon, Wildman, whom he knew personally, studied at Cambridge, though surviving records do not mention him. He also reputedly pursued legal studies in London, and though he never became a barrister he provided legal assistance to various people and was knowledgeable in property law. Medicine also interested him. Pepys erred in labelling Wildman a Fifth Monarchist, and although Burnet regarded him as a deist in his later life, Wildman welcomed the Independent minister George Cokayne into his home to preach, suggesting that he had congregationalist sympathies. Before 1646 Wildman married Frances, daughter of Sir Francis Englefield, a Catholic baronet in Berkshire; they had one son, John (died 1710). By 1655, shortly after Frances's death, Wildman had married Lucy (died 1692), daughter of Lord Lovelace. 
By 1647 Wildman was serving in the army, and in July he professed to have inside knowledge about negotiations concerning 'The heads of proposals' -- the army's terms for a settlement with Charles I. On 4 September the general committee of officers recommended that he be appointed governor of Poole and Brownsea, but nothing came of this, perhaps prompting his decision to leave the army. In late September, Wildman and Maximilian Petty began helping agents who represented five regiments articulate their grievances. The result was 'The Case of the Armie Truly Stated', to which Wildman may have contributed. Presented to Sir Thomas Fairfax on 18 October, it accused the generals of not keeping faith with the soldiers by purging parliament and called for a radical extension of the franchise, biennial parliaments, the abolition of tithes and the excise, repeal of recusancy and conventicle statutes, and law reform. Wildman almost certainly helped compose the 'Agreement of the People', setting forth the Levellers' call for a unicameral legislature, biennial elections, expanded suffrage, and religious freedom. He was a principal spokesman for the agreement in the debates held at Putney in the general council of the army. On the eve of the debates he may have written the first of the 'Two Letters from the Agents of the Five Regiments', encouraging soldiers to demand reform; he also probably wrote 'A Cal to All the Souldiers of the Army', distributed on 29 October, accusing Cromwell and Henry Ireton of betraying the soldiers' trust. On the contentious issue of suffrage, he argued in the debates that 'every person in England hath as cleere a right to Elect his Representative as the greatest person in England' (Firth, 1.318). He also denied any power in the House of Lords or monarch to veto legislation approved by the Commons, insisting that all authority be vested in the Commons, and called for Charles's trial. Shortly thereafter the general council of the army appointed Wildman (the only citizen to be included) to a committee assigned to examine the extent to which 'The Case of the Armie' and the agreement were compatible with the army grandees' position. In the meantime Wildman and John Lilburne were organizing a campaign in London against the grandees and parliament. Writing under the anagrammatic pseudonym John Lawmind, in late December Wildman published 'Putney Projects', attacking the grandees as pretended patriots and accusing Cromwell of attempting to impose slavery on England. Early the following year Wildman, Lilburne, and others wrote to supporters in Kent urging them to stand firm. At a meeting in Smithfield, Wildman warned that civil war would resume if the government were not quickly settled, and he again assailed Cromwell. 
Arrested on charges of sedition, Wildman (alias Wenman) and Lilburne appeared at the bar of the Commons on 20 January 1648, where they denied the house's jurisdiction and demanded trial by common law. The house committed them to prison, where they remained without trial for six months. In 'Truths Triumph' (1648) he protested his arrest, called for national unity on behalf of freedom and justice, depicted the plight of textile workers in the west, and cited food riots in Wiltshire to exhort parliament to implement reforms. At Lilburne's request Wildman also composed 'The Laws Subversion' (1648), pleading the case of the presbyterian MP Sir John Maynard, who had also been imprisoned without trial. Following a petition from London supporters and Maynard's address to the Commons, parliament released Wildman and Lilburne on 2 August. At the Nag's Head tavern on 15 November, Wildman explained the 'just ends of the war' to Levellers and Independents, following which the group resolved to convene a committee to draft another agreement ('Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell', 1.688-9). In late November, Wildman and Lilburne conferred at Windsor with Colonel Thomas Harrison, and it was agreed to set up a committee comprising radicals from London and parliament as well as from the army and the Leveller leadership to prepare a new 'Agreement of the People'. In reaction, this helped to precipitate the vote in the House of Commons to accept the king's latest answer to the parliamentary peace proposals as the basis of a settlement, and this in turn precipitated Pride's Purge and the trial of the king. The committee did indeed meet throughout mid-December (the 'Whitehall debates') and drew up a new agreement, but to the disgust of Wildman and other Levellers, when the army presented this document to the Rump of the Long Parliament on 15 January 1649 it had significantly diluted it, above all in weakening the commitment to religious liberty as a natural right. Later allegations that Wildman was on the scaffold with Charles I are baseless, but claims that he differed significantly from other Leveller leaders in his refusal to denounce the king's trial as a sham and in his willingness to work with the new Commonwealth regime are correct. 
In May the government was preparing to send Wildman as a commissioner to Guernsey, but for unknown reasons this fell through. The same year he was commissioned as an officer in Sir John Reynolds's regiment of horse, though he did not accompany it to Ireland in August. 'The Clarke Papers' lists a Captain Wildman as commanding a troop of sixty men in Cheshire, and a Major Wildman in charge of a troop of Reynolds's horse in Hampshire. For Wildman's refusal to condemn the new regime, Lilburne and Richard Overton castigated him in July. 
Wildman's estrangement from his fellow Levellers was brief, for in 1650 he and Lilburne advised in the exchequer the fenmen who were protesting the draining of the marshes around the Isle of Axholme, in Lincolnshire. In the autumn Wildman and Lilburne went to Lincolnshire, but they apparently made no attempt to organize support for the 'Agreement of the People', nor did they participate in or encourage the riots and destruction of crops. In October 1651 Wildman and Lilburne entered into an agreement with the fenmen, promising to defend them from lawsuits and fines stemming from the riots in return for 1000 acres each. While Lilburne was responsible for surveying this land, Wildman defended the commoners' interests in London, but he and Lilburne failed to persuade parliament to hear the fenmen's case. There is no reliable evidence that the fenland involvement of the two men was intended as a precursor of a Leveller inspired insurrection. 
In the meantime Wildman and John Price represented London freemen in December 1650 as they endeavoured to make the London Common Hall representative of the citizens rather than the livery companies, but their efforts ultimately failed. Nor was Wildman successful in December 1651 when he sought to represent Gloucester in seeking reparations from parliament for damages sustained in the siege of August 1643; for his services he wanted a third of any reparations, which the mayor and aldermen deemed excessive. During the early 1650s he was active in the land market, purchasing property in twenty counties, mostly as an agent for others. The properties included Becket House, Shrivenham, Berkshire, which he acquired from Henry Marten. Of the fifty transactions in which he participated, most involved property in Lancashire and Yorkshire; through such dealings he obtained substantial wealth. 
In the elections to the first protectorate parliament Wildman stood for Westminster and Scarborough, losing the former but winning the latter. However, proprietors of reclaimed land in Lincolnshire successfully petitioned against his sitting on the grounds that he had lied about the contract awarding him 1000 acres for defending the fenmen. Wildman now turned against the government, drafting the petition of three republican colonels -- Thomas Saunders, John Okey, and Matthew Allured -- against rule by a single person and in favour of the fundamental rights outlined in the agreement. Wildman and other Levellers met with excluded parliamentary republicans, and he was also in contact with Major-General Robert Overton, who was implicated in a plot against Monck in Scotland. With Edward Sexby, Wildman not only sowed discontent among army units but plotted to assassinate Cromwell. He was arrested in the second week of February 1655 as he was dictating 'The declaration of the free and well-affected people... in arms against the tyrant Oliver Cromwell'. In it he called for a constitutional settlement with free and regular parliaments. He was confined in Chepstow Castle and then transferred to the Tower on 10 March. Through his friend Colonel Henry Bishop he made contact with royalists prior to Penruddock's insurrection the same month. Cromwell accused Wildman of being one of the uprising's managers. In fact Wildman was prepared to sell himself to either side, offering his services to John Thurloe as a spy while pursuing contacts with the royalist agents William Rumbold, an incarcerated Leveller, and Sir Robert Shirley. Apparently in return for agreeing to spy on royalists Wildman was released on 26 June 1656 on a bond of $10,000, and his estates were restored. 
Acting as a double agent, Wildman, William Howard, and eight other Baptists and Levellers signed a petition to the exiled future Charles II pledging to venture their lives for him if he promised to restore the Long Parliament, abolish tithes, grant amnesty, and provide religious freedom. For their services they unsuccessfully sought $2000 from Charles. In January 1657 Wildman again plotted with Sexby to assassinate Cromwell, to which end they commissioned Miles Sindercombe. Wildman approved a plan to burn Whitehall Palace, killing Cromwell and signalling an uprising. Following the arrest of Sexby in July 1657, perhaps owing to Wildman's betrayal, the latter assumed responsibility for negotiating with the Spaniards as part of the conspiracy; for this purpose he travelled to Flanders several times in the summer and early autumn. He professed to want an invasion of England, but Charles lacked money and men. Negotiations between Levellers and royalists ceased in December 1657 when Howard was arrested. 
After Richard Cromwell succeeded his father as protector in September 1658 Wildman sought to forge an alliance between Levellers, Baptists, royalists, and Spaniards; his principal co-conspirators were the duke of Buckingham and Peter Talbot, an Irish Jesuit. Wildman was possibly a co-author in February 1659 of 'The Leveller', which echoed James Harrington's call for a government of laws rather than men. When the army ousted Cromwell in May, Wildman gave up on his plot; by this point Hyde had lost confidence in him in any event. With Marten, Henry Nevile, John Lawson, Samuel Moyer, and John Jones, Wildman wrote two letters to the army leader Charles Fleetwood in early May calling for a bicameral legislature, with a senate to debate issues and a popular assembly to enact laws. Two months later he helped Nevile draft a humble petition to the restored Rump Parliament opposing a unicameral legislature. The petition, which had been written in Nonsuch House, represented Harrington's views. With other republicans, Wildman and Nevile founded the Rota Club in Michaelmas term. In recognition of Wildman's keen interest in polity Fleetwood invited him to sit on a committee to draft a new constitution in the wake of the army's recent expulsion of the Rump, and he did so with zeal, though the effort failed. When John Lambert went to Scotland to heal a rift with Monck over the army's actions Wildman threw his support to Lambert's parliamentarian foes, persuading Colonel Henry Ingoldsby and Major Robert Huntington to seize Windsor Castle. For this the Rump, restored once more, thanked Wildman on 28 December, and he was appointed colonel of the Berkshire militia and a commissioner for the assessment at Westminster in January 1660. The same month he received the council of state's thanks for his service in suppressing dangerous meetings in Berkshire. 
His republican principles notwithstanding, Wildman was initially regarded with favour by the Restoration regime, undoubtedly because of his royalist links in the 1650s. He must have helped himself as well by terminating the Rota Club in February 1660. Drawing on his substantial wealth, he may have assisted Bishop pay $21,000 for the postmaster-generalship, and for a time he exercised considerable influence over Bishop. In the undated 'Brief discourse concerning the business of intelligence' he provided the government with suggestions on how to use the Post Office to conduct espionage. Simultaneously, however, he participated in the republican club that gathered in his own Nonsuch House, which William Parker managed for him. For allegedly plotting with Harrington, John Ireton, and others, Wildman was imprisoned in the Tower on 26 November 1661. The government suspected them of conspiring to restore the Long Parliament or electing a new one, seizing London and other key towns, and opposing a standing army, but a parliamentary committee could not find substantial evidence of a conspiracy. Apparently to avoid a writ of habeas corpus he was moved to St Mary's in the Isles of Scilly in July 1662. Accusations that he helped to plot the northern rebellion in 1663 are baseless. Moved to Pendennis Castle in early 1666, he was finally released in October 1667, probably through Buckingham's intervention. The duke made Wildman his secretary and legal adviser. Samuel Pepys heard in December that Wildman had been nominated to the commission to investigate the public accounts, but nothing came of this, probably owing to substantial opposition from Sir William Coventry and Sir John Talbot. Citing ill health, Wildman took his family to the continent in July 1670. Upon his return in 1675 he resumed his close relationship with Buckingham, serving as his solicitor and a trustee of his will. He and Nevile accompanied the duke to Paris in August 1678 in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain money from Louis XIV to support their political activities. Although Wildman's endeavour to win a seat in parliament for Marlborough failed in the first election of 1679, he succeeded in the second election, only to be rejected by the election commission. As MP for Great Bedwin, Wiltshire, in the Oxford parliament he voted against exclusion, preferring to impose limitations on James. 
Frustrated by the king's treatment of parliament Wildman apparently engaged in reckless talk of assassinating Charles, or so the informer Charles Rea claimed in April 1681. Wildman was now working closely with Algernon Sidney and Silius Titus. When Sidney persuaded Monmouth, Essex, and Russell to tell Wildman about their proposed insurrection, the latter repudiated assassination. At their request he drafted a revolutionary manifesto; no copy survives. He played a key role in discussions with Scottish dissidents, especially Robert Baillie, but Robert Ferguson subsequently accused Wildman of failing to persuade the Scots to support a commonwealth. He was also in touch with Robert West's Rye House cabal through Richard Rumbold, but he refused to give Rumbold money to purchase weapons for an assassination party. Following disclosure of the plotting Wildman was incarcerated in the Tower, on 28 June 1683. Before his apprehension he had sent word to his wife to destroy any incriminating papers. In late July the government considered trying him, but it had insufficient evidence, notwithstanding Howard of Escrick's claim that Wildman knew about the proposed uprising. Two cannon and their carriage, which James thought were suitable for use in the streets, were found in the cellar of Wildman's London house, hidden under straw and wood; in October the state investigated their origin (Wildman had obtained them from Buckingham). Appearing in king's bench on a writ of habeas corpus on 28 November, Wildman was released on bail. At his home he celebrated the same day with John Hampden and Francis Charlton. He was formally discharged on 12 February 1684. 
By late February 1685, following the accession of James II, Wildman and his cousin William Disney were in contact with Monmouth, urging him to reach an agreement with Argyll regarding an invasion. With the whig Goodwin Wharton, Wildman, seeking funds for Monmouth, searched for treasure in Somerset House and a home in Holborn, purportedly with the aid of an executed felon's spirit. Monmouth asked Wildman to communicate with Macclesfield, Delamere, and Gerard of Brandon about co-ordinating a rebellion in Cheshire with the duke's invasion; at the least, he consulted with Delamere in London. When Monmouth was about to sail he sent Robert Cragg to inform Wildman and to ask that the latter send five or six good horses to the west for the duke's use. Monmouth relied on Wildman, Henry Danvers, and Matthew Meade to lead an uprising in London as soon as government troops left for the west, but this the three men failed to do. Wildman refused to consult with Danvers or make plans until the duke landed, thus betraying the confidence Monmouth had placed in him. By this point Wildman was a wanted man, a warrant for his arrest having been issued on 19 May. Proclamations for his apprehension were published on 4 June and 26 July, but he escaped to the continent. In October he was seen in Cleves, where John Locke joined him the following month. The general pardon issued by the king in March 1686 excluded Wildman, as did James's subsequent pardons. In exile Wildman associated with such fellow dissidents as Francis Goodenough, John Manley, John Matthews, and Sir Robert Peyton. Through Gilbert Burnet he established ties to William, becoming one of his chief propagandists. In the 'Memorial from the English Protestants' (1688), ostensibly from suffering protestants in England to Willem Bentinck, Wildman called on the prince to protect protestantism and the fundamental rights of Englishmen. To win the support of the English for William, he also wrote 'Ten Seasonable Queries' (1688). Dissatisfied with William's proposed declaration, he drafted an alternative (now lost), castigating Charles's and James's violations of English law. Although Macclesfield and Mordaunt shared his criticism, Shrewsbury, Burnet, and Henry Sidney did not. However, Wildman and Burnet jointly drafted forty or fifty articles condemning James that were to be distributed in the Netherlands if the invasion succeeded. 
Wildman's stature as a prominent Williamite led to his appointment in December to the assembly of past members of the Commons' committee of thirteen that invited William to exercise civil government. Before the Convention met Wildman articulated his views in 'A Letter to a Friend' (1689), arguing that the government had been dissolved and all power vested in the people, and calling for a figurehead monarch devoid of a veto. Elected to the Convention for Great Bedwin, he demanded James's permanent exclusion from the throne, argued that government by a Catholic was inconsistent with England's independence, and averred that making William and Mary sovereigns would prevent anarchy. A member of the rights committee, he proposed that the declaration be sent directly to William, bypassing the Lords. He chaired the committee that investigated Philip Burton and Richard Graham, the crown's solicitors in the Rye House trials. Altogether Wildman was named to sixty-four committees, including those to examine the public accounts, consider the oaths of supremacy and allegiance, prevent excessive expenses in electing MPs, and draft an address supporting William's foreign alliances. He made fifteen recorded speeches, in one of which (on 2 November 1689) he contended that the war against James was to defend England against popery and slavery; France, he thundered, was 'the Bottom of all Slavery' (Grey, 9.391). With the Commons' permission, he testified to the Lords' committee investigating the deaths of Sidney, Essex, and Russell. Perhaps because of his previous ties to the army's rank and file, in early 1689 he received numerous petitions from soldiers in Berkshire protesting their poor condition. He continued to defend his political views in print, publishing 'Good Advice before it be Too Late' and 'A Defence of the Proceedings of the Late Parliament' the same year. In addition to serving in the Convention, Wildman was appointed postmaster-general at a salary of $1500 p.a. (1689-91), justice of the peace for Middlesex (1689-93), and commissioner of assessment for Westminster (1689) and Berkshire and Wiltshire (1689-93). A member of the Skinners' Company beginning in 1689, he served as an alderman of London (1690-93), having been nominated by Sir Thomas Pilkington and Sir Patience Ward. 
In June 1690 Carmarthen accused Wildman of complicity in Sir James Montgomery's plot to restore James to the Scottish throne, but the evidence was inconclusive. The earl of Monmouth charged Wildman with fabricating letters to discredit the tories, an accusation endorsed by Mary. William finally dismissed him as postmaster-general in February 1691, provoking Hampden's ire. The king sought to mend political fences by appointing Wildman deputy lieutenant of Middlesex in March 1692 and knighting him in the Guildhall on 29 October of the same year. Following Wildman's death on 4 June 1693, aged seventy, he was buried in St Andrew's, Shrivenham, Berkshire. 
Interpretations of Wildman have ranged widely, from Buckingham's reputed claim that he was one of England's wisest statesmen to Sir William Coventry's damning indictment that he had been false to everyone. According to Cragg, Monmouth complained that Wildman had insisted on governing everyone and blamed him for the lack of sufficient support in England in 1685. Disraeli, on the other hand, absurdly praised Wildman as 'the soul of English politics in the most eventful period of this kingdom' and a man who 'seemed more than once to hold the balance which was to decide the permanent forms of our government' (B. Disraeli, 'Sybil, or, The Two Nations', 1881, 18). As a political thinker and a legal practitioner Wildman was second rate, though his vision of law reform, including codification of common law, limitations on the power of judges, simplification of property law, and a substantial reduction in the use of capital punishment, was bold. Nevertheless, claiming to champion the rights of Englishmen, he seized every opportunity to profit from the misfortunes of others. His irresistible attraction to political intrigue, which proved to be his defining characteristic, overrode both political convictions and friendships. 


@@@@@


doc= 29406


Wilford, Sir James (b. in or before 1517, d. 1550), soldier, was the only son of Thomas Wilford (died 1553), landowner, of Hartridge, Kent, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died in or before 1530), daughter of Walter Culpepper of Bedgebury, Kent, and his wife, Anne. His grandfather James Wilford (died 1526), merchant tailor, sheriff and alderman of London, established the family's fortunes in London and Kent. Thomas Wilford, the eldest son, inherited the Kent estates and, following the death of his first wife, married Rose, daughter of William Whetenhall, of Peckham, Kent. The couple had three sons: Sir Thomas Wilford (c.1530-1610), soldier, of Heding, Kent, governor of Ostend, deputy lord lieutenant of Kent, and MP for Winchelsea, Sussex; William; and Francis, of Nonington, Kent; and a daughter, Cicely (died 1611), later the wife of Edwin Sandys, archbishop of York. 
James Wilford should not be confused with his first cousin James Wilford, of Broad Street ward, London, and Surrey, eldest son of John Wilford (died 1551). The first public reference to Wilford is found for 1538, when he was considered for the post of daily waiter in the household of Sir Thomas Cromwell, Henry VIII's secretary. By 1542 Wilford was a servant of the king, when pardoned for an assault enacted with his lifelong friend Thomas Wyatt the younger. He was patronized by Sir John Baker, under-treasurer and chancellor of the exchequer, who was also from Kent. Wilford married Joyce (died 1580), daughter of John Barrett of Aveley, Essex, by 1543. The couple had a son and two daughters. Baker and Barrett enjoyed a close friendship, cemented by family marriages. Wilford's brother-in-law, Thomas Barrett DCL (died 1544), was canon of St Paul's Cathedral and a royal chaplain; his sister-in-law, Anne Barrett (died 1553), married Sir Martin Bowes, under-treasurer of the royal mint and lord mayor of London from 1545 to 1546. 
Wilford established his reputation in the wars of the late 1540s, beginning with service in the army royal at Boulogne in 1545. He declined to command at Basse Boulogne under Adrian Poynings in June 1546, but was none the less well respected. A note in the state papers for about 1547 listed him among gentlemen, 'whiche either for ther experyens wysdom lernyng or languages ar mete to serve in the most part of things' (TNA: PRO, SP 46/162, fol. 53'r'). In 1547 he was appointed provost-marshal of the army for the Scottish campaign of the lord protector, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset. On 10 September 1547 he distinguished himself at the battle of Pinkie, placing himself among the foremost of the vanguard. He was knighted on 28 September for this action. With his star on the rise, Wilford sat in the parliament that met on 4 November, representing Barnstaple, Devon, raised recruits for the army, and returned north, arriving at Newcastle upon Tyne on 12 March 1548. Placed briefly in command of Lauder, Berwickshire, in April he participated in the capture of Haddington. This town was to become the key to the English control of the lowlands, and on 28 April William Grey, thirteenth Lord Grey of Wilton, recommended Wilford for the command, informing Somerset, 'there is no man among us so apte for that charge' ('CSP Scot.', '1547-63', 111). The English occupiers worked feverishly to improve the fortifications, constructing a 'trace italienne' or low-lying artillery fort, but the garrison was overlooked by high ground, victuals were scarce, and the enemy too near. On 3 June Wilford and Thomas Wyndham successfully led a sortie to capture Dalkeith, Edinburghshire, but on 26 June the French army began to move into position for a siege. Wilford's subsequent defence of Haddington, against superior, better equipped forces and in the face of desertion, chronic supply problems, and epidemic disease, was the most celebrated action of the war. The commander was short of powder, shot, victuals, money, and men, and his condemnation of English relief efforts was unremitting. On 11 December Somerset gave free rein to his own frustrations: 'mary we cannot but marvell that ye shuld demaunde so much as ye doo' (TNA: PRO, SP 50/4/120, fol. 595). Nevertheless, Wilford's defence was masterly until, early in 1549, upon leading an attack on Dunbar Castle, Haddingtonshire, he was wounded and taken prisoner. Haddington held out until the garrison was evacuated on 1 October 1549, a critical event that led to the end of hostilities in early 1550. The young captain, released on exchange, arrived at York in November in a weak state. He never recovered. Wilford was awarded the keepership of Otford Park, Kent, made steward of the manor of Gravesend, Kent, and awarded an annuity of $133 6's'. 8died However, his will of 18 November 1550 revealed a broken constitution, 'very weake, feeble and sicke in bodye' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/33, sig. 28). Wilford's death was not long delayed; he died at the Crutched Friars, London, and was buried at St Bartholomew by the Exchange on 24 November. Miles Coverdale preached the funeral sermon. His widow soon after married Thomas Stanley, later an under-treasurer of the Elizabethan mint. Stanley acquired in 1553 the wardship of Sir James Wilford's only son, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 29407


Wilford, John (fl. 1706-1747), bookseller, was apparently the stationer apprenticed for seven years to the London bookseller George Sawbridge, on 4 February 1706; this might locate his birth date about 1689. Wilfords are well represented in the seventeenth-century book trade, but John's precise family connections remain obscure. He opened a shop at the Three Flower de Luces in Little Britain about 1715, the year in which he entered 'The Memorial of the Church of England' in the Stationers' Company's register, but his earliest surviving imprint dates only from 1719. It seems that he began as a retail bookseller and only later turned to publishing. All three titles in an advertisement of 'Books sold by John Wilford' at the end of Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion... in Ireland' (1720) were printed for others, including two for George Sawbridge. 
Wilford's most original production was the 'Monthly catalogue, or, General register of books... printed or reprinted either at London or the two universities' (March 1723-December 1729). Previous registers of new titles had been chiefly devoted to promoting the properties of the advertisers (like the 'Term Catalogues', 1668-1711) or the publisher (like Bernard Lintot's 'Monthly Catalogue', 1714-17), whereas Wilford's compilation is truly general, indiscriminate, and disinterested -- if not, inevitably, exhaustive. In 1730 the 'Gentleman's Magazine' imitated the scheme in a regular monthly department and, to meet this competition, Wilford continued his catalogue as a department of the newly founded rival 'London Magazine' (1731-80). Wilford's 'Monthly Catalogue' remains an indispensable bibliographical guide to the books of its period. 
Beside the 'London Magazine', Wilford published or co-published other important periodicals: the 'Daily Post Boy' (1728-35), the 'Grub Street Journal' (1730-37), and 'Fog's Weekly Journal' (1728-37). These occasionally brought him into conflict with government authority -- particularly 'Fog's Journal' and the foreign news reports featured in the 'Daily Post Boy'. Other libels for which he was arrested were Swift's reflections on 'Sir 'R[ober]t Brass'' (that is, Walpole) and 'the Hirelings of St 'S[tephen]s'' in his 'Epistle to a Lady who Desired the Author to Make Verses on her in the Heroic Style' (1734), and an advertisement of Pope's 'Letters' (May 1735), naming the poet's titled correspondents (considered a breach of privilege). 
A list of Wilford's publications may be found in the 'Daily Courant' (7 January 1734). From 1731 to 1741 he published a number of titles in parts by subscription, of which the most interesting are two duodecimo volumes of 'Select Trials... at the Sessions-House in the Old Bailey' (1734), covering some 'hair-raising varieties of crime' (Wiles, 207). This is the first 'Newgate Calendar' and reprints or condenses not only the usual sessions paper and ordinary's account, but also some scarce ephemera. The emphasis is on the sensational and bizarre, but the facts are reliably reported; a reprint with two more volumes (not by Wilford) of a continuation appeared in 1742. 
Wilford's last serial publication was 'Memorials and characters, together with the lives of divers eminent and worthy persons (1600-1740)', published in twenty-six irregular monthly folio numbers from 1739 to 1741. It contains about 240 lives, one-third of them women's, compiled by the clergyman John Jones ('c'.1700-1770) and others, chiefly from funeral sermons. The title-page announces that the compilers drew on 'above 150 different Authors, several scarce Pieces, and some original Manuscripts'; there is an appendix of monumental inscriptions. 
Wilford declared bankruptcy in 1735 and, though he continued business in Little Britain, published relatively little thereafter. His last imprint is dated 1747, and possibly he died soon afterwards. He is probably not the John Wilford of Southampton Street who died on 2 January 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 29408


Wilford, Sir Thomas (c.1530-1610), soldier, was the third son of Thomas Wilford (died 1553) of Hartridge, Kent, merchant and landowner, and his second wife, Rose, daughter of William Whetenhall of Peckham. His elder half-brother, Sir James Wilford (b. in or before 1517, d. 1550), had a distinguished military career. Like him, Wilford was brought up as a soldier, but nothing is known of his education. He was a beneficiary of his brother's will. 
Wilford was a committed protestant and went into exile with his brother James Wilford during Mary I's reign. They both signed the 'new discipline' at Frankfurt am Main in 1557. Wilford was appointed captain of Camber Castle, Sussex, in 1566 and was much involved in politics and administration in Winchelsea, Sussex, between 1566 and 1572. He was MP for the borough in 1571 and 1572. In 1573, already an experienced soldier, he acted as the marshal for the expedition undertaken by Walter Devereaux, first earl of Essex, during the ill-fated attempt to establish a plantation in co. Antrim. The expedition was strongly opposed by the local Irish chief, Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, and it was largely due to the experience and courage of Wilford that it survived the winter. His outstanding service to the force was acknowledged by Essex. 
Wilford was a strong advocate of English intervention in the Low Countries, and wrote to his protestant patrons, Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, on the subject. He was captain of a cavalry company at Ostend in 1585, one of many English officers and men serving in the Low Countries before Leicester's 'official' expedition was sanctioned by the treaty of Nonsuch in August 1585. Leicester reorganized the structure of the English troops, removed Wilford from the official payroll, and transferred him to the payroll of the states general. This caused him acute financial hardship, from which he had not recovered five years later. He was garrison sergeant-major of Ostend in 1586. On Leicester's departure, he served his successor, Peregrine Bertie, Lord Willoughby de Eresby, was made sergeant-major of the entire English force in the Netherlands in 1587, and was appointed a member of the council of war in December 1587 and sergeant-major of the field in February 1588. Willoughby frequently followed his advice. He played a prominent part in the successful defence of Bergen op Zoom, which was attacked in September 1588. Willoughby knighted Wilford for his distinguished service during the siege. 
Early in 1589 Wilford was sent to England to report to the privy council on the problems that Willoughby was facing. Sir John Norris bemoaned his absence because he felt that Wilford would be more able to persuade Willoughby to release soldiers for the Portuguese expedition. In September 1589 Wilford was appointed high marshal of the expedition to support Henri of Navarre in Normandy, with Willoughby as commander. He was also colonel of the Kent regiment. The force landed at Dieppe and marched to support Henri at Paris. It supported Henri throughout November and December and played a key part in the capture of Vendome, Le Mans, and Alencon. During the siege of Alencon on 5 December 1589, Wilford devised an engine that utilized an iron hook to pull down the drawbridge of one of the defensive ravelins defending the town. He then led the assault force into the work and slaughtered the garrison of thirty-four men. The town surrendered the next day, claiming they feared the English behind them more than the French in front of them. 
Wilford joined the debate about the correct strategy for opposing a Spanish invasion force, and rejected the notion proposed by Thomas Digges that every landing site should be held and defended with fieldworks and troops. He favoured concentrating forces for an effective counter-attack, and rebutted Digges's work line by line in 'A military discourse whether it be better for England to give an invader present battle or to temporise and defer the same'. 
After Wilford's return from Normandy his finances appear to have been gradually restored and he became heavily involved in the military administration of Kent. He was appointed the deputy lieutenant of the county in October 1589 and, in addition to taking responsibility for the county musters, he superintended the admiralty works at Dover harbour in 1590-91. He was JP for Kent from about 1592. He became the governor of Camber Castle in 1593. In July 1595 he was commissioned to exercise martial law in the county, with the draconian power to arrest and summarily execute vagrants and others. In 1597 Wilford was commissioned to survey the castles of the downs, which guarded the sheltered anchorage behind the Goodwin Sands, Kent, following an invasion scare, and in August 1599 was appointed one of the sergeant-majors of the force planned to meet a further invasion threat. 
On 17 March 1595 Wilford was admitted as a member of Lincoln's Inn. He died intestate at his manor of Hedding, Kent, on 10 November 1610 and was probably buried there. He had married Mary, the only daughter of Edward Poynings, who had been killed during the defence of Boulogne in January 1546. They had three sons, including Sir Thomas Wilford (who succeeded him and married Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Sir Edwin Sandys), and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 29409


Wilfrid (c.634-709/10), bishop of Hexham, played a central role in the political and ecclesiastical life of later seventh-century England. 
Born the son of a minor Northumbrian nobleman, Wilfrid was sent at the age of fourteen to the court of the Northumbrian king Oswiu (died 670). There he first demonstrated his ability to elicit the patronage of the great, a quality he retained throughout his life, by attracting the attention of Queen Eanflaed, who placed him at Lindisfarne under the monk Cudda, a former companion of her husband. Within a few years he was sent by Eanflaed to her kinsman, King Eorcenberht of Kent, at whose court he lived for a year or so before taking up with another of the queen's associates, the Northumbrian Biscop Baducing (later Benedict Biscop), in order to make the pilgrimage to Rome. When, about 653, he and Biscop arrived at Lyons, they parted company, not perhaps entirely amicably, Biscop continuing to Rome and Wilfrid remaining under the patronage of the bishop, Aunemund (known to Wilfrid's biographer, Stephen of Ripon (Eddius Stephanus), as Dalfinus). According to Stephen, who is not entirely to be trusted on this matter, the bishop offered to marry Wilfrid to his niece and make him governor of a Frankish province. Wilfrid, however, rejected his offer and proceeded to Rome. The buildings, ceremonies, and above all the relics of the Holy See had an enormous impact upon the impressionable young pilgrim. He made daily visits to the shrines of the martyrs and conceived (or at least consolidated) there what was to prove a lifelong devotion to the apostolic brothers Peter and Andrew, vowing, before St Andrew's altar in the rotunda attached to St Peter's, to become, like them, an evangelist. Almost as formative was his education in the most recent teaching about the calculation of Easter and other matters of ecclesiastical observance by the archdeacon Boniface with whom he evidently struck up a close friendship. In due course, having been presented to the pope and in possession of a collection of relics, he returned to Lyons. There, according to Stephen of Ripon, he remained for three years, during which he received the tonsure and was further instructed in orthodox practice. More fantastically, Stephen also alleges that he was present at Aunemund's murder, a chronological impossibility since Wilfrid had returned to England by the end of 658 and the murder did not take place until 660. Nevertheless, whatever the precise course of events at Lyons, there can be little doubt that Wilfrid's early visits there left an impression almost as profound as Rome itself, and had a lasting impact upon his notions of episcopal authority and status. 
On his return to England, Wilfrid was recommended by the West Saxon king, Cenwalh, to Oswiu's son, the 'regulus' (under-king) Alchfrith, by whom he was granted the monastery of Ripon and estates assessed at 40 hides. The monks recently installed there, who included the young Cuthbert and his abbot Eata, were expelled, to be replaced at Wilfrid's invitation by Abbot Tondbehrt and his kinsman Ceolfrith, both from the important royal foundation at Gilling in Northumbria. 
In 663 Wilfrid reaffirmed his continental connections by seeking ordination at the hands of the Frankish Agilbert, former bishop of the West Saxons. The young abbot's rising reputation was boosted in 664 when, in conjunction with Agilbert, he proved a skilful spokesman for the victorious Roman party at the Synod of Whitby. By then, however, Wilfrid was making enemies as well as friends. His intrusion into Ripon was almost certainly controversial and the departure of Bishop Colman of Lindisfarne and a substantial portion of his household in the aftermath of Whitby also aroused hostility in powerful quarters within the Northumbrian establishment. Nevertheless, when shortly afterwards the see of Northumbria again became vacant, Alchfrith was able to secure Wilfrid's appointment, with a view to removing the see centre from the now discredited Lindisfarne to Paulinus's church at York. Characteristically, Wilfrid sought unimpeachably orthodox credentials before entering into his inheritance; deeming there to be insufficient bishops in England to perform a valid consecration, he obtained the consent of Oswiu and Alchfrith to go to Francia, where, during a splendid ceremony at the Merovingian royal palace of Compiegne, presided over by his friend Agilbert and eleven other bishops, he was publicly enthroned and carried shoulder-high in a golden chair. The episode is a clear illustration of the continuing impact of the ideals and aesthetic of episcopal grandeur which Wilfrid had imbibed during his earlier sojourn at Lyons. 
According to Bede, Wilfrid 'lingered' abroad seeking consecration. Certainly he seems not to have returned until 666 and then was further delayed when his ship was beached on the pagan shore of Sussex, a potential catastrophe from which he and his followers emerged with honours, having slain the high priest and fought off the South Saxon host before escaping with the returning tide. When the new bishop eventually reached Northumbria, he found his position much changed: his patron Alchfrith had been eclipsed and he himself had been superseded at York by Ceadda (Chad), a figure strongly linked with Lindisfarne. Wilfrid was forced to withdraw to his monastery of Ripon, his base for the next three years from which, resourceful as ever, he exercised his episcopal authority in Mercia and Kent by permission of their friendly kings. In Mercia in particular he seems to have acquired considerable estates from Wulfhere, on which he established religious communities, including perhaps Oundle, where he dedicated a church to St Andrew. The situation was resolved only in 669 after the arrival at Canterbury of a new archbishop, Theodore. Wilfrid was restored to his see and Ceadda, who was consecrated afresh, was made bishop of the Mercians. According to Stephen of Ripon, Ceadda's appointment was largely due to Wilfrid's good offices, his see being based upon the great estate of Lichfield, initially granted to Wilfrid himself. Doubtless, Wilfrid wished to remove a potential rival from the Northumbrian scene; but even so the episode points to a certain large-mindedness, apparent elsewhere in his career. 
The years which followed his restoration, 669-678, were Wilfrid's most successful and illustrate his aims and ideals most clearly. In accordance with what he had seen in Francia, he replaced the remote island monastery of Lindisfarne with a genuine see city; Paulinus's cathedral at York was splendidly brought back from ruin, adorned with glass windows, whitewashed walls, and new fittings. At Ripon, Wilfrid invested yet more heavily in building, constructing there a new church of stone, dedicated to St Peter at an elaborate ceremony conducted according to Gallic rites and attended by King Ecgfrith and his brother AElfwine. In addition, by 672 his ecclesiastical patrimony was enriched with the grant by Ecgfrith's queen, AEthelthryth, of a large estate at Hexham, where Wilfrid founded his second great monastery and built another stone church, remarkable for its grandeur and complexity and dedicated to his especial patron, St Andrew. The new buildings reflected Wilfrid's travels. Although vague and confusing, Stephen of Ripon's descriptions suggest that they were aisled basilicas, no doubt influenced by the great churches Wilfrid had seen in Rome and elsewhere; indeed in the twelfth century returning pilgrims expressly declared that the church at Hexham re-created the splendours of the Holy See. 
Wilfrid intended the contents of these churches also to evoke what he had seen abroad. Above all, they were to house relics of the Roman martyrs in an appropriate environment; the strange surviving crypts are perhaps best explained as an attempt to re-create the catacombs in which Wilfrid had seen the corporeal remains of the saints whose relics he had brought back to England. Other objects, equally redolent of Frankish or Roman magnificence, included the gospel book commissioned for Ripon, with its purple-stained pages and letters of gold, the jewelled shrine in which it was stored, and the gold, silver, and purple hangings and altar vestments which adorned his two great churches. 
The liturgy within these churches looked to the same cultural milieux. Like Benedict Biscop, Wilfrid was particularly concerned to enhance their ceremonial with appropriate music, bringing to Ripon in the late 660s a Kentish singing master trained in the Roman tradition, the first to practise there since the early seventh century. The importance which the bishop attached to his liturgical achievements is apparent from the fact that, when defending himself at a hostile council some thirty-five years later, he expressly claimed to have introduced into Northumbria the double choir to sing liturgical antiphons and responsions 'according to the rite of the primitive church' (Eddius Stephanus, 'Life of Bishop Wilfrid', c.47). Equally significant was his claim to have been the first Northumbrian to patronize the rule of St Benedict, which he promoted in his two great houses and in the numerous other communities which placed themselves under his direction. His own monastic observance, however, was almost certainly coloured by customs imbibed in the Frankish milieux whose eclectic rules provided his earliest introduction to Benedict's work. 
Wilfrid was also one of the first English churchmen to appreciate the importance of the written charter as a means of guaranteeing monastic possessions. He caused a list of the gifts made to Ripon to be written down, witnessed, and publicly read at the dedication ceremony and from the 670s he seems to have been associated with a number of innovative charters which adopt a new incarnational dating linked with the 'Dionysiac Easter tables'. He thereby championed two important practices which he encountered abroad: written authentication of land grants and the 'Easter tables' so recently introduced into Rome. 
During these successful years Wilfrid enlarged his monastic connection. His possessions increased as Ecgfrith expanded the boundaries of his kingdom; besides his two great houses of Ripon and Hexham, he acquired lands in and to the west of the Pennines, formerly held by the Britons, and in the conquered territories of the Picts and Scots to the north. Moreover, his monastic connection continued to transcend political boundaries; indeed, in the 670s he probably added to his holdings outside Northumbria, in particular in the kingdom of the Hwicce. Wilfrid's pretensions at that period are indicated by his claim at the Roman synod, convened by Pope Agatho to condemn Monotheletism in 680, to represent the whole of northern Britannia and Hibernia, and the islands settled by the English, British, Scots, and Picts. That he could indeed mobilize wide-ranging contacts is indicated by his response in 676 to a request from the Franks of Austrasia to secure the return from Ireland of the exiled Merovingian prince, Dagobert. Wilfrid more than fulfilled his task, sending Dagobert on his way with a suitable entourage drawn from his own followers. He was then, it seems, in especially close contact with Irish communities which observed the Roman Easter, for only shortly afterwards his monk Willibrord left Ripon to settle among them for a prolonged period of study. 
Although Stephen of Ripon dilates upon Wilfrid's temporal glories -- his innumerable followers arrayed in royal vestments and arms, his many monasteries, his personal wealth -- he also stresses his hero's personal asceticism and pastoral assiduity. Wilfrid is depicted as modelling himself on biblical prophets and apostles, travelling around his diocese, baptizing and confirming in accordance with current models of episcopal sanctity. Though he apparently ordained numerous priests and deacons to help him in the administration of the sacraments, significantly, he consecrated no episcopal coadjutors. Probably he felt that his vast see was best left undivided if he was to maintain the outward show he believed appropriate to his office. As a result he never, as might have been expected, sought the revival of Gregory the Great's scheme for a northern metropolitan with twelve subordinate bishops, nor, apparently, did he openly challenge Theodore's growing pretensions, which culminated in his assumption of the title of archbishop of the island of Britain in 679 or 680. On the other hand Wilfrid certainly aspired to an independence greater than the bishops south of the Humber: in 672, for example, he merely sent legates to the synod which Theodore convened at Hertford. Above all, his claim to represent northern Britain at the synod of 680 looks like a covert assertion of metropolitan, even archiepiscopal, authority. It may be that Wilfrid's fall frustrated (or indeed was precipitated by) such grandiose plans and that he was never thereafter in a position to revive them. That, however, they were not forgotten is perhaps suggested by Stephen's twice referring to York's metropolitan status. 
It is significant that Wilfrid never sought to buttress the case for a northern ecclesiastical province by appealing to the authority of Pope Gregory the Great. Interestingly, the cult of the apostle of the English was most vigorously promoted by Wilfrid's opponents; like his Roman mentors, Wilfrid himself appears to have been comparatively uninterested in Gregory, whose teachings on episcopal rule, based as they were upon small dioceses and an avoidance of show, conflicted with his Frankish-derived notions of episcopal power and splendour. 
In 678 Wilfrid's fortunes underwent a dramatic reversal: Ecgfrith turned against him and he was driven from Northumbria. The reasons for the king's change of attitude are unclear. Possibly they were connected with Wilfrid's friendly relations with the kings of Mercia with whom Northumbria was generally at variance in the later 670s. A powerful interest within the Northumbrian establishment focused on the great royal foundation of Strensall-Whitby was also hostile to Wilfrid; Strensall-Whitby's abbess, Hild, not only supported the Lindisfarne community at the synod of 664 and Archbishop Theodore in Rome in 680, but had connections with monasteries and aristocrats in western Francia, bitterly opposed to Wilfrid's Austrasian (eastern Frankish) friends. Above all, Ecgfrith himself had strong personal reasons for disliking his bishop, who had supported his first queen, AEthelthryth, in her determination to remain celibate. After she had received the veil from Wilfrid in 672 the king married again, and, according to Stephen of Ripon, his new consort sought to undermine Wilfrid by making the king envious of his outstanding riches. In a deliberate act of provocation, Archbishop Theodore was called in to divide the great Northumbrian diocese. New sees were established at Ripon and Hexham, under figures unsympathetic to Wilfrid and his followers, and York itself was given to a pupil of Hild of Strensall-Whitby, the bishop's old enemy. 
Wilfrid determined to appeal in person to the pope against his deprivation and set out for Rome on a leisurely and circuitous progress, apparently intended to avoid the lands of the hostile Ebroin, mayor of the palace and effective ruler of Neustria (western Francia). Having crossed to Frisia, where he paused to preach to the heathen inhabitants, the bishop made his way to the court of his friend Dagobert II, then king of Austrasia, where he was offered and refused the see of Strasbourg. By 679 he had arrived in Rome, where preparations for the synod which was to condemn the Monothelete heresy were in progress. There he claimed (with justification) to have been uncanonically deprived of his see and sought full restitution, or, if that was denied, that any new sees should be occupied by men drawn from the clergy of his churches. The pope and council found in Wilfrid's favour, but worded their judgment with considerable care. Wilfrid was to be restored to the diocese which he had lately held and with the aid of a church council was to choose fellow bishops who were to be consecrated by Theodore. The intruding bishops were to be expelled. Pope Agatho thus allowed Wilfrid a special position in the north but stopped short of awarding him metropolitan status. Wilfrid's position was, however, further strengthened by a privilege exempting his monasteries from the authority of the diocesan and ascribing them directly to the Holy See. 
Armed with this verdict Wilfrid returned to Northumbria. Ecgfrith was, however, unmoved by the pope's judgments, and according to Stephen of Ripon cast his former bishop into prison, an episode ignored by Bede and difficult to accommodate with evidence that by 680 Wilfrid had departed to Mercia. The exile was given land for a small monastery by Berhtwald, nephew of King AEthelred and probably sub-king of a Mercian dependency in north Wessex. Those arrangements were, however, soon terminated by pressure from Ecgfrith and perhaps from the West Saxon king, Centwine, Ecgfrith's brother-in-law. Wilfrid, his fortunes at their lowest ebb, was forced to take refuge in Sussex. The Mercians' only concession to their former protege was to allow Oshere, king of the Hwicce, to grant land at Ripple (in modern Worcestershire), originally given to the monastery of Ripon, to one of his monks. 
When Wilfrid arrived in Sussex in 680 or 681, the king, AEthelwalh, and his people were, according to Stephen of Ripon, entirely pagan. Bede, however, relates that AEthelwalh himself had married a Christian princess and accepted the Christian faith at the instigation of Wulfhere of Mercia some five to ten years earlier; he also mentions, somewhat dismissively, a little community of Irish monks at Bosham, the later history of which suggests that it may have been more important than he allowed. Nevertheless, Wilfrid must be credited with a major role in converting the still largely pagan population of Sussex. He was able to capitalize on a severe drought, the end of which apparently coincided with his arrival in the kingdom. Characteristically making the most of his opportunities, he not only urged the new faith upon a people who felt deserted by their ancient gods with notable persuasiveness, but also taught practical remedies, in particular new methods of fishing, to counteract the famine which the drought had induced. When AEthelwalh gave Wilfrid a large estate at Selsey, upon which he established a monastery, he further insinuated the new religion by manumitting all the slaves. 
Some time in the early 680s Wilfrid seems to have transferred his allegiance to Caedwalla, an exiled and still pagan prince of the West Saxons who invaded Sussex and slew AEthelwalh. When Caedwalla became king of the West Saxons in 685, he summoned Wilfrid, making him bishop in his kingdom and giving him 300 hides in the newly conquered Isle of Wight. The South Saxons, who quickly regained their independence, were it seems abandoned or subjected to the West Saxon bishopric, while the still pagan inhabitants of the Isle of Wight were placed under the care of Wilfrid's nephew Beornwine, who was one of his clergy, and the priest Hiddila. This murky episode, which scarcely redounds to Wilfrid's credit, is treated with considerable circumspection by both Bede and Stephen of Ripon. 
Shortly after his removal to Wessex, Wilfrid's fortunes changed yet further for the better. With the death of Ecgfrith in 685, the elderly archbishop, Theodore, determined to make peace and in 686 he sent letters recommending a settlement to the new king of Northumbria, Aldfrith, to Abbess AElfflaed of Whitby (who appears to have inherited her predecessor's mantle as leader of the anti-Wilfridians), and to AEthelred of Mercia. According to Stephen of Ripon, Theodore also sought to nominate Wilfrid his successor at Canterbury, an offer which Wilfrid magnanimously suggested was best referred to a church council. 
Aldfrith fell in with the archbishop's proposals and Wilfrid was restored to his privileged monasteries of Hexham and Ripon and to the diocese of York, from which the intruder Bosa was expelled. His new diocese was, however, only a shadow of the great see which he had administered in the 670s. To the south Lindsey had been lost to Mercia and to the north Abercorn to the Picts. Moreover, in Bernicia the sees of Lindisfarne and Hexham, created since 678, remained in being. Although Wilfrid administered both temporarily for about a year, following the deaths of their bishops, Eata and Cuthbert, by 688 both sees had new incumbents. The partial nature of the settlement made further dissension inevitable and matters came to a head in 691, according to Stephen of Ripon because of the king's insistence on implementing the late archbishop's controversial decrees and more especially because of plans to despoil the monastery of Ripon of its lands and turn it into an episcopal see. By 692 Wilfrid had left for Mercia, and Bosa, it seems, had been restored to York. 
Wilfrid remained in Mercia under the protection of King AEthelred for some eleven years, serving as bishop at Leicester and assisting in the translation ceremonies at Ely of his friend and patron, the queen-abbess AEthelthryth. In 703 Berhtwald, Theodore's successor at Canterbury, presided over a church council which, with Aldfrith's consent, sought to resolve Wilfrid's anomalous position by depriving him of all his possessions except the monastery of Ripon, where he was to remain without exercising his episcopal office. 
In consultation with AEthelred, who continued to guarantee Ripon's Mercian endowments, Wilfrid determined on a further appeal to Rome, a move to which his enemies responded by excommunicating him and all his supporters. By 704 both Wilfrid and his party and the envoys of Archbishop Berhtwald were in Rome. Basing himself on earlier papal judgments in his favour, Wilfrid appealed to Pope John VI ('r'. 701-5) for a confirmation of Agatho's privilege for his two great monasteries. The pope found Wilfrid personally guiltless of the charges alleged against him and confirmed the judgments of his predecessors; anxious to avoid dissension in Britain, he ordered that the matter be resolved at a synod convoked by Berhtwald 'with Bishop Wilfrid', and attended by Bosa of York and John of Hexham. 
Wilfrid, as always tempted to linger abroad, remained in Rome for several months, visiting the shrines of saints and collecting relics, ecclesiastical vestments, and ornaments. As he returned he suffered a seizure at Meaux, from which he perhaps never fully recovered and during which he received a vision indicating that he had been saved by the intercession of the Virgin, whose cult he had hitherto neglected in favour of the apostles Peter and Andrew. He arrived in Kent in 705, was reconciled with Berhtwald, and, attended by his abbots, made his way to London and thence to the former king, AEthelred, by then abbot of Bardney, who greeted him with renewed friendship. Aldfrith, who refused to accept the judgment of the Holy See, died shortly afterwards, leaving a minor as his heir and apparently expressing regret for his obduracy. Wilfrid was much involved in the political upheaval which followed. Aldfrith's successor, Eadwulf, was of a different lineage, and evidently was regarded by Wilfrid (whose entourage at Ripon included Eadwulf's son) as a friend. Eadwulf, however, rejected Wilfrid's advances, ordering him to leave the kingdom. Shortly afterwards the king himself was expelled, after a reign lasting only two months, and Aldfrith's young son, Osred, succeeded. By then, in a sudden 'renversement', Osred had become Wilfrid's adopted son ('filius adoptivus'); the bishop, so long at variance with the house of Ecgfrith, had been transformed into the guardian of its heir. It is perhaps at this period that Hexham, under Wilfrid's episcopal control, espoused the cult of the saint-king Oswald, a leading member of Osred's lineage. The fruits of the realignment became apparent in 706 when, at a synod presided over by Archbishop Berhtwald and attended by Northumbria's leading nobles and clergy, Ripon and Hexham with all their possessions were restored to Wilfrid. Shortly afterwards Bosa of York died, and the opportunity arose to reinstate Wilfrid in his original see. The ageing and probably ailing bishop did not, however, press his claims, acquiescing instead in the translation of John of Hexham, a move which left Wilfrid with episcopal as well as abbatial authority at Hexham. Significantly, Stephen of Ripon never discusses the episode, which he perhaps regarded as a defeat. 
Wilfrid survived a further four years. Some eighteen months before he died he suffered a second stroke, after which he made a final disposition of his possessions, choosing suitable superiors to rule his monasteries and, it seems, deciding on the distribution of his lands. Not long afterwards he shared out his portable treasure, kept at Ripon. His mode of doing so casts an interesting light on the ideals and practice of Rome's great champion. According to Stephen of Ripon, he summoned two of his abbots and a number of monks, before whom he divided his treasure into four parts. The best portion was offered to two Roman churches, the Liberian basilica, Santa Maria Maggiore, and the shrine-church of the apostle Paul, San Paolo fuori le Mura; of the three remaining portions, one was to be devoted to the poor, a second to the abbots of Ripon and Hexham 'to purchase the friendship of kings and bishops' (Eddius Stephanus, 'Life of Bishop Wilfrid', c.63), and a third to rewarding those followers who had accompanied the bishop into exile but had not yet received treasure or estates. Although the exact sequence of events is unclear, it seems that Wilfrid went on to nominate his kinsman Tatberht as co-ruler and eventual successor at Ripon and Acca as his successor at Hexham. All this, it need hardly be said, is a world away from ideal Benedictine practice as recommended by the rule, which laid especial emphasis on the community's role in electing its superior regardless of the claims of the founder's kin. Indeed, Wilfrid's actions at this particularly crucial moment of his life look like those of a contemporary secular aristocrat. In particular, his sharing out of his treasure evokes the actions of a Germanic lord in the midst of his 'comitatus' (following), rather than the traditional death-bed scenes of a Christian bishop and abbot. Significantly, none of this appears in Bede, whose own ideals of episcopal behaviour as set forth, for example, in his letter to Ecgberht or his life of Cuthbert are markedly different and more austere. 
After making these dispositions, Wilfrid received a deputation asking him to confer with King Ceolred about the position of his monasteries in Mercia. He therefore left for that kingdom, where he again confirmed his will, distributing land and possessions among his monks. He then proceeded to his monastery at Oundle, where he was seized with a final sickness and shortly afterwards died. It was the forty-sixth year of his episcopate and the fourth year of Osred's reign: almost certainly, therefore, 709 or 710. After due preparation his body was placed in a cart and brought to Ripon for burial on the south side of the altar in the church of St Peter. Bede records the elaborate epitaph inscribed on his tomb. 
Undoubtedly ambitious, probably pugnacious and opinionated, Wilfrid was from an early age deeply and enthusiastically involved in controversy. His career divided contemporaries and has engendered debate among historians ever since the early eighth century, when Stephen of Ripon and Bede produced their divergent accounts. That Wilfrid could elicit fierce loyalty is sufficiently indicated by the admiring and committed tone of Stephen's biography. That, on the other hand, his was a somewhat ambiguous career, is suggested by Bede's account with its significant omissions and discreet distortions. Clearly Bede could not ignore a figure who played so large a part in establishing the church in his own kingdom and elsewhere, who had championed Roman orthodoxy so successfully, and who was, moreover, the patron of his friend and diocesan Acca. His account represents a carefully edited summary of those episodes in Stephen which were most relevant to his own purposes in writing his 'History'. It need not necessarily be read as disapproving, although it is perhaps worth remembering that it was before Wilfrid, who for some six years was his diocesan, that Bede was accused of heresy, a charge which stimulated a furious letter stigmatizing the bishop's entourage as drunken boors, and barely veiling an attack on the bishop himself. 
One aspect of Wilfrid's career which Bede unquestionably plays down is his involvement in earthly concerns. Undoubtedly, Wilfrid could in many ways be described as worldly; he was fond of display and a great builder and collector of fine objects; he clearly shared many of the values of the secular nobility, whose sons were to be found in his entourage, and treated his friends and followers with an open-handed generosity appropriate to a great lord; he was at home in royal courts and spent time and effort in winning the good opinions of kings and princes. Yet he was more than this. His support of AEthelthryth in her pursuit of virginity suggests a concern for ascetic values sufficient to put at risk his most significant royal friendship. The controversies in which he was embroiled were clearly not all of his making; and his apparent willingness in 680 to accept the division of his diocese, provided his colleagues were drawn from his own clergy, seems reasonable. Above all, his evangelizing activities at the low points in his career suggest a genuine and continuing concern to fulfil his early vow before St Andrew's altar. 
Wilfrid was one of the most cosmopolitan figures of his age: his monastic communities represent a network transcending English political boundaries; his diplomatic contacts extended from Ireland to Austrasian Francia, Lombard Italy, and Rome; his architectural, liturgical, and collecting interests mark him as among the foremost English patrons of the arts in the later seventh century, rivalled only by Benedict Biscop. Such wide-ranging activities left a lasting impact, especially apparent in his missionary work. Not only did he do much to speed up the final phases of the conversion of the English kingdoms in the 680s, but in Frisia his preaching, followed up by the work of his pupil Willibrord, and his consecration of Willibrord's companion Swithberht as bishop in the early 690s, initiated Anglo-Saxon intervention in the pagan areas on the Frankish periphery. 
All in all, Wilfrid was a remarkably complex figure. The defender of Roman orthodoxy was educated in an Irish-influenced milieu and built up a monastic confederation not unlike those of his Irish contemporaries. The earliest Northumbrian exponent of the Benedictine rule probably himself followed eclectic Gallic observance. Paradox and ambiguity also characterized his personal life. Clearly ambitious, he declined several offers of advancement, including, apparently, the English primacy. Worldly and rich, he seems to have practised private austerities. Such contradictions help to explain the ambivalent discretion of Bede's portrait. 
Among his followers Wilfrid became the object of a cult immediately after his death. At Oundle, in ceremonies which resemble those accorded to other early English saints, the body was brought into a marquee and laid out, washed, and clothed in appropriate ecclesiastical vestments. Water used in washing the body was ritually poured away at a carefully marked site which became the scene of miracles, and the robe on which Wilfrid's body had been laid out was also preserved and esteemed a holy relic capable of working wonders. At Ripon the whole community came out bearing relics to greet the funeral cortege in a ceremony again modelled on those for the reception of a saint. Tatberht, Wilfrid's heir, established the formal apparatus of a cult, celebrating a daily private mass in Wilfrid's honour and keeping Thursday, the day on which he died, as a feast day equivalent to Sunday. The anniversary of the saint's death became an even more solemn feast attended by a great gathering of his abbots and followers. There were vigils at the tomb and on at least one occasion the event was marked by a sign which was taken by Stephen of Ripon as proof that in death Wilfrid had joined the company of the apostles in heaven. 
In pre-conquest England, Wilfrid was commemorated by two feasts, 12 October and 24 April. In 709 neither date was a Thursday, the death-day which Stephen of Ripon expressly says was kept as Wilfrid's feast. Although the October date has traditionally been regarded as the main commemoration, marking Wilfrid's death or deposition, the April feast is in fact earlier -- it alone occurs in the eighth- and ninth-century calendars; 24 April was a Thursday in 710, and is therefore probably the date of Wilfrid's death. The emphasis on the October feast perhaps developed because that in April was likely to conflict with Lent and Easter. 
Although Wilfrid's cult started early, it did not spread particularly rapidly. Stephen of Ripon's life survives in only two manuscripts and probably never had a wide currency outside Wilfrid's foundations. One reason for its limited circulation is that the Wilfridian confederation soon broke up; almost certainly, it suffered a severe blow when Wilfrid's heir at Hexham was driven from his see in 731. Thereafter, the main cult centre seems to have been at Ripon, where, following its sack by Eadred in the mid-tenth century, the cult was revived and patronized by Oda, archbishop of Canterbury, and his nephew Oswald, archbishop of York. There were, allegedly, two 'inventiones' (discoveries), the accounts of which are mutually contradictory. Oda was believed to have brought Wilfrid's body from Ripon to Canterbury, whereas Oswald elevated the relics 'in situ' and re-established a community at Ripon to look after them. Those events issued in a verse reworking of Stephen's life, by Frithegod, a member of Oda's household, again a work which achieved only a very limited circulation. Thereafter relics were distributed to other great centres, including Peterborough. 
By the conquest Wilfrid's cult was relatively well-established; his feast is to be found in most of the early calendars, although curiously he was rarely invoked in the litanies. In England at least eleven religious communities claimed to possess a relic, and some forty-eight ancient churches were dedicated to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29410


Wilkes, John (1725-1797), politician, was born in St John's Square, Clerkenwell, London, on 17 October 1725, the second son of the six children of the malt distiller Israel Wilkes (1698-1761) of Clerkenwell and his wife, Sarah (1700-1781), the daughter of John Heaton, a tanner from Bermondsey. This plebeian though prosperous background was not a promising one for a man with social and political pretensions, but the Wilkes family evidently marked out the clever and charming John for such advancement, and there never seems to have been any suggestion that he should manage the distillery. That task fell to his younger brother Heaton after the eldest son, Israel, had declined it. Having been sent to a school in Hertford in 1734, Wilkes had mastered Latin and Greek by the age of fourteen, and remained a scholar throughout his life. His Presbyterian mother was the dominant figure in the household, but John took the opportunity to break free of moral restraint when he went to the University of Leiden in 1744; he later boasted to James Boswell of his incessant whoring and drinking there. This Dutch interlude ended when he was summoned back for an arranged marriage on 23 May 1747 to a bride some ten years older than himself, Mary Mead (died 1784), whose dowry from her wealthy widowed mother was the manor of Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire. While it was evidently intended by his parents to establish his fortune, this betrothal was a mismatch between a simple, devout woman and a sophisticated rake, one that not even the birth of a daughter, Mary (known as Polly), in 1750 could save. For some years Wilkes played a dual role of country squire -- he served as a local magistrate in Aylesbury -- and London man about town (he was elected to two prestigious clubs, the Royal Society in 1749 and the Beefsteak Club in 1754). Wit and generosity gave him the entry into society his parents had sought for him. 
In Buckinghamshire, Wilkes joined the Franciscans or 'monks of St Francis' at Medmenham, and doubtless regaled members with the 'Essay on woman', an unpublished obscene parody of Alexander Pope's 'Essay on Man' which he wrote in 1754. His evil genius was Thomas Potter, who not only strengthened Wilkes's addiction to vice but also introduced him into politics. Before the parliamentary general election of 1754 Potter deceptively flattered him with the idea of a joint candidature for the two seats at Aylesbury, where Wilkes had an important interest -- only for Wilkes to find himself being palmed off with the honorific sop of being county sheriff while Potter was elected with another candidate. The prime minister, the duke of Newcastle, noting his interest in politics, sent Wilkes to fight, at his own expense, the distant borough of Berwick upon Tweed, a hopeless and costly quest. Such political adventures incurred almost as much disapproval by his thrifty and puritanical wife as his fashionable lifestyle, and the marriage broke up. A trial separation in 1756 became permanent the next year, when Wilkes retained the Aylesbury estate and agreed to pay his wife $200 a year. Their daughter chose to live with her father, and their loving relationship was thought even by his severest critics to be a redeeming feature of Wilkes's life. 
Wilkes now decided to exploit his electoral influence at Aylesbury, and the opportunity came in 1757, when Potter moved to another seat on being given office by a new ministry headed by the elder William Pitt. Wilkes already knew Pitt as the brother-in-law of his Buckinghamshire neighbours Lord Temple and George Grenville, and enrolled under his banner after an unopposed by-election. Pitt in reply congratulated him 'on your being placed in a public situation of displaying more generally to the world those great and shining talents which your friends have the pleasure to be so well acquainted with' (John Wilkes MSS, BL, Add. MS 30877, fol. 5). But Wilkes, so sparkling a companion, was not a fluent public speaker and remained anonymous and silent in parliament. This failure to live up to expectations doomed his various patronage requests to be a lord of trade, ambassador to Constantinople, and governor of Quebec. At the next general election, in 1761, he avoided a contest for his Aylesbury seat by crude bribery, offering 300 of the 500 voters $5 each. Before the new parliament met Pitt resigned office over the cabinet's refusal to back his demand for a Spanish war. Wilkes took Pitt's side, and made his maiden speech supporting him on 13 November 1761, being deemed a follower of Lord Temple. He spoke several more times that session, but soon realized that he would not make his mark in debate. Horace Walpole was disparaging about his performance: 'His appearance as an orator had by no means conspired to make him more noticed. He spoke coldly and insipidly, though with impertinence; his manner was poor, and his countenance horrid' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.142). 
The political talent of Wilkes lay in his pen. After an anonymous pamphlet of 9 March 1762, 'Observations on the Spanish Papers', and some essays in 'The Monitor', he made his name by his political weekly the 'North Briton', founded on 5 June 1762 to attack the new ministry of George III's Scottish favourite, Lord Bute. The very name was chosen to adopt a satirical guise of Scottish approval of Bute's take-over of England. Wilkes was personally responsible for most of the text, though the poet Charles Churchill was also an important contributor. The paper, which soon achieved a circulation of nearly 2000, escaped prosecution by shrewd political calculation and legal advice: but individuals offended included Lord Talbot, lord steward of the royal household, who fought a pistol duel with Wilkes on 6 October 1762, and the cartoonist William Hogarth, who was to exact revenge in 1763 by his savage caricature 'John Wilkes Esquire'. This portrayal of an impudent demagogue with a hideous squint was to be the visual image of Wilkes conveyed both to contemporaries and to posterity. More conventional portraits show that he was not quite that ugly, but he himself was famously wont to say that it took him half an hour to talk his face away. 
During the Bute ministry (1762-3) the main focus of opposition attack was the treaty of Paris ending the Seven Years' War, condemned as far too generous to defeated France. The 'North Briton' commented on 1 January 1763 that the treaty had 'saved England from the certain ruin of success', and the paper constantly reminded readers of the old Scottish alliance with France against England. The journalistic talent of Wilkes soon came to appear the sole recourse of Bute's enemies as opposition in parliament faded early in 1763. Ministerial attempts to silence the paper were unavailing, for government lawyers could find no ground for prosecution. 
When Bute resigned on 8 April 1763 he was succeeded as prime minister by George Grenville, who had broken with Pitt and Temple in 1761. Wilkes momentarily held his fire, but when Grenville ended the parliamentary session by a king's speech commending the peace, 'North Briton' no. 45 on 23 April denounced the 'ministerial effrontery' of obliging George III 'to give the sanction of his sacred name' to such 'odious' measures and 'unjustifiable' declarations. Immediate prosecution of the paper for seditious libel ensued. But the Grenville ministry made a legal blunder by arresting Wilkes and his associates under a general warrant directed against 'the authors, printers and publishers' without naming any persons. The story initially became confused when Wilkes himself was released on the ground of parliamentary privilege. When the crowd in Westminster Hall, ignorant of legal niceties, saw their hero being freed on 6 May, the building echoed with shouts of 'Wilkes and liberty'. Wilkite mobs on London streets became a common phenomenon during the next dozen years. Wilkes now challenged the legality of the general warrant by actions for damages and false arrest. There already existed doubts on that point; but an expensive and sustained legal challenge was now made possible by the deep purse of Lord Temple, ironically the prime minister's eldest brother. 
The ministerial campaign against Wilkes preceded legal decisions on general warrants. Wilkes had unwisely given a hostage to fortune by privately printing off a few copies of the 'Essay on Woman'. The ministry obtained a copy, and further blackened his already unsavoury reputation by having it read out to a crowded House of Lords when parliament met on 15 November 1763. The House of Commons resolved on the same day that the 'North Briton' was a seditious libel, and on 24 November that parliamentary privilege did not cover seditious libel, thereby exposing Wilkes to punitive legal action. The Commons debate of 15 November, moreover, had resulted in a pistol duel the following day in Hyde Park between Wilkes and an MP, Samuel Martin, who had impugned his personal courage. Wilkes was so badly wounded in what many thought a plot against his life that he was unable to attend any further legal or parliamentary proceedings. Before the end of the year he had fled from justice: he crossed to France on 25 December and took up residence in Paris. Pleading ill health, he refused to attend either parliament or the law courts. 
The House of Commons on 19 January 1764 received evidence that Wilkes had published the 'North Briton', and so expelled him as unworthy to be a member, without a vote. Politicians concerned about the issues he had raised were not willing to defend the man himself. But the legality of general warrants was a matter of widespread concern, and after a run of acrimonious debates the ministry avoided a parliamentary defeat on 17 February by only fourteen votes, 232 to 218. The trial of Wilkes for libel followed four days later in the court of king's bench. He was convicted of publishing the 'North Briton' and the 'Essay on Woman', but no attempt was made to prove his authorship. After he had failed to answer five summonses to attend, he was outlawed on 1 November. The 'North Briton' case nevertheless produced a victory for 'liberty' in the total condemnation of general warrants. Already on 6 December 1763 Chief Justice Charles Pratt had ruled in the court of common pleas that general warrants could not be used as search warrants of unspecified buildings. This verdict was complemented by judgments of Chief Justice Lord Mansfield in the court of king's bench on 18 June 1764 and 8 November 1765 that ended the use of general warrants for the arrest of persons. 
Wilkes was to remain abroad for four years, since his return to Britain would have meant imprisonment. Later he recalled, admittedly to a Paris correspondent, that he was 'never so happy' as in his French exile (Wilkes MSS, U. Mich., Clements L., III, no. 26). He entered the dazzling intellectual society of Paris through the salon of Baron D'Holbach, a former fellow student at Leiden, and was lionized as a champion of liberty. He acquired a tempestuous Italian mistress in the nineteen-year-old dancer Gertrude Corradini, but on a journey to Italy in 1765 she decamped with all she could carry. Wilkes stayed for four months in Naples, and then made his way to Geneva, spending two months in the company of Voltaire. He returned to Paris in the hope of help from the first Rockingham ministry, former opponents of Grenville, for his affairs were now desperate. Afraid of the financial consequences of debt and outlawry, he had liquidated his assets in Britain: the manor of Aylesbury was sold for $4000, his library for $500. But the friend, Humphrey Cotes, to whom he had entrusted the management of his finances, proved neither competent nor honest. After Wilkes received $1000 in the first half of 1764, he obtained not a penny more from Cotes. Numerous requests to the Rockingham ministry for a pardon and patronage, backed by a mixture of flattery and threats, produced only a precarious income of $1000, voluntarily subscribed by friends in that administration. Wilkes unofficially visited Britain in May 1766 in a vain attempt to extort a pardon, and did so again in the autumn after the duke of Grafton took over the Treasury on behalf of Lord Chatham, the former Pitt. Grafton declined to help him, and a furious Wilkes returned to France to write a scathing pamphlet, 'Letter to the Duke of Grafton', an attack on 'flinty heart' Chatham, that served to bring Wilkes back to public attention and to pave the way for his return to Britain. News of the bankruptcy of Cotes in the summer of 1767 may have been the final spur, if credence may be attached to this apocryphal statement: 'What the devil have I to do with prudence? I owe money in France, am an outlaw in England... I must raise a dust or starve in a gaol' (Bleackley, 185). Wilkes intended to obtain a parliamentary seat at the general election due by March 1768, and to do so through popular election, not by purchase or gift from an admirer. He visited London briefly in December 1767, and returned in February 1768, living quietly under the name of Osborn until parliament was dissolved on 11 March. No answer was made to a request for pardon that he submitted to the king on 4 March, but neither was there any attempt to apprehend him. Wilkes, to resolve this anomalous situation, formally announced his intention to surrender himself to justice when the court of king's bench next met, on 20 April, and meanwhile busied himself with securing a parliamentary seat. 
Wilkes defied the advice of his friends and stood for the City of London in the election on 25 March 1768, but he came last of seven candidates for the four seats, with a mere 1247 votes, as against 2957 for the lowest successful candidate. He blamed his failure on the shortness of his campaign, and dropped a bombshell by promptly announcing that he would challenge the two sitting members for the county of Middlesex (in effect Greater London with a rural surround). A clockwork campaign organized both propaganda and transport to the county town of Brentford, 10 miles from the City. Superb organization was reinforced by popular enthusiasm, as crowds intimidated supporters of his two opponents, the Chathamite George Cooke and the independent Sir William Proctor. In a low poll on 28 March, Wilkes triumphed by 1292 votes to 827 for Cooke and 807 for the defeated Proctor. 
The cabinet, headed by the duke of Grafton, promptly decided to expel Wilkes from parliament on the assumption that he would be imprisoned after his court appearance on 20 April. But Lord Mansfield deemed his attendance in court voluntary, and the ministry feared a riot if he was arrested. Wilkes, anxious to resolve the legal situation, delivered himself into custody on 27 April, only to be freed by a mob. In a farcical sequel to this episode he stole into prison in disguise, giving rise to obvious jokes. On 8 June his outlawry was revoked on a technicality, but six days later he was sentenced for his 1764 convictions, a year each for publishing the 'North Briton' and the 'Essay on Woman'. The whole Middlesex election case was played out while he remained in king's bench prison. 
That famous saga was preceded by a by-election caused by Cooke's death. John Glynn, Wilkes's leading counsel, defeated Proctor in a poll in December 1768 by 1542 votes to 1278, a result that signified the Wilkite hold on Middlesex more obviously than the snap victory of Wilkes himself. A petition from Wilkes about his treatment in 1764, and a newspaper piece by him on 10 December, accusing the ministry of having deliberately planned a military attack on a Wilkite crowd outside his prison on 10 May that resulted in several fatalities, provoked the wavering Grafton cabinet into a renewed determination to expel him from parliament. This was achieved on 3 February 1769 by a composite resolution listing five libels, two as seditious and three as obscene, the former being the newspaper item of 10 December 1768 and the 'North Briton', and the latter drawn from the 'Essay on Woman'. Many deemed this mode of proceeding unfair, but the expulsion was carried by 219 votes to 137. Wilkes was not the man to accept such treatment, and he was returned unopposed at a by-election on 16 February 1769. Next day the House of Commons resolved Wilkes to be 'incapable' of election, since he had been expelled, and later again voided his return in a second by-election on 16 March. To end this monthly ritual, the ministry, for the third by-election on 13 April, produced a rival candidate, Colonel Henry Luttrell, who was well protected by soldiers. Although Wilkes defeated Luttrell by 1143 votes to 296, the latter was awarded the seat by the Commons two days later. The episode became a major political controversy, as the parliamentary opposition challenged the decision both at Westminster, where the ministerial majority fell to 54 over the seating of Luttrell, and in a summer petitioning campaign throughout England. The topic dominated the opening of the new parliamentary session in January 1770, and Grafton resigned as prime minister when his Commons majority fell to forty; however, Lord North stepped into the breach, to become prime minister for the next twelve years. Wilkes had felled one prime minister, but had not brought down the king's government. 
Wilkes had no intention of being the cat's-paw of the parliamentary opposition. Deprived of a Commons seat until the next general election, he intended to make London his power base, for the democratic structure of City government was open to exploitation by such a popular hero. The 7000 liverymen annually chose the City officials and the court of common council, and also, within each of the twenty-six wards, the aldermen for life as vacancies arose. But before the political career of Wilkes could be relaunched, his finances had to be put in order, if his release from the king's bench prison in April 1770 was not to be followed by immediate imprisonment for his debts, estimated at $14,000 in February 1769. That month the Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights was formed, and made the settlement of these debts its first task, a herculean one in the face of Wilkes's continued extravagance even in prison. Already Wilkes himself had secured election as alderman, for the ward of Farringdon Without in January 1769, and that year saw Wilkites procure City offices and become aldermen. But a split among Wilkites resulted from the intention of a group led by John Horne to make the Bill of Rights Society a truly radical organization and not merely a vehicle for the payment of Wilkes's debts. An escalating quarrel led on 9 April 1771 to secession by Horne and his supporters, who formed a new Constitutional Society. However, despite this quarrel, both factions co-operated in the simultaneous contest with the House of Commons over parliamentary reporting. 
Hitherto parliamentary reporting had been suppressed by direct action by both houses against newspapers and magazines. The successful challenge to this censorship in 1771 followed a tactical coup masterminded by Wilkes. The political excitement generated by the Middlesex election had led to a significant expansion of the London press, and by early 1771 this had resulted in extensive reporting of parliamentary debates. The attempt by the Commons to stop this practice was initiated by two ministerial supporters, and the North administration soon gave it official backing. On 7 February 1771 two printers were summoned to appear, and on 26 February their non-attendance led to orders for their arrest. Wilkes, realizing that the campaign would be extended to other newspapers, devised a plan to thwart this policy. He would pit against the power of parliament the privilege of the Wilkite-dominated City of London, which claimed an exclusive right of arrest within its own boundaries, and where printers would be encouraged to take refuge. The beauty of the scheme was that secrecy was not necessary. Once the House of Commons had embarked on its course of action, confrontation would be inevitable. And so it proved. Six more printers were added to the list on 12 March, and three days later an attempt to arrest one of them in the City, John Miller of the 'London Evening-Post', a Wilkite newspaper, was frustrated by City magistrates. It was in vain that the Commons imprisoned the Wilkite Lord Mayor Brass Crosby and another alderman. Wilkes himself, the third official directly concerned, refused to obey the summons before the house, and the Commons chose not to pursue the matter; Chatham was informed on 24 March that 'the ministers avow Wilkes too dangerous to meddle with. So his Majesty orders: he will have 'nothing more to do with that devil Wilkes'' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 4.122-3). In London even ministerial supporters deemed it prudent to support the City's privilege, and parliamentary reporting continued from within this safe haven. The North ministry tacitly conceded defeat, and thenceforth newspaper reporting of parliament was established. The administration had been outmanoeuvred by the astute Wilkes, even though the parliamentary opposition had shunned the project. Once the fatal step into the City had been taken the government was unable to extricate itself from the trap. There was a sequel to this episode in 1775 when Wilkes, then lord mayor, threw down the same gauntlet to the House of Lords, which declined a confrontation, for the consequences of committing him to the Tower were too horrendous to contemplate. This freedom of the press to report parliament was a significant long-term gain for 'liberty' in ensuring responsibility of MPs to their constituents. 
This so-called 'Printers' case' was the greatest triumph of Wilkes arising from his power within the City of London, but during the next few years he further exploited the political situation there to embarrass government. It was a three-sided contest, for the secession group led by John Horne competed with the Wilkites in radical zeal and for City posts, while the North ministry sought to exploit the split among its opponents. Wilkes did not himself draft the political programme put forward by the Bill of Rights Society on 23 July 1771, but he endorsed it and personally advocated annual parliamentary elections and the abolition of pocket boroughs. In the 1771 election of City sheriffs he and his acolyte Frederick Bull defeated two ministerial candidates. As sheriff, Wilkes adopted a high profile, out of a genuine concern for 'liberty' as well as to cultivate his public image. He sought to prevent government 'packing' of juries, and criticized the multiplicity of death sentences for trivial crimes. This role was a preliminary to the 1772 election of lord mayor. Wilkes duly headed the poll, but the court of aldermen exercised its right to choose the second candidate, the Hornite James Townsend. 'Wilkes was thunderstruck, and, for once, angry in earnest', noted Horace Walpole ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 1.158). A year later the ministry stood aside as Wilkites fought Hornites. Wilkes and Bull came first and second, only for an alliance of ministerialists and Hornites in the court of aldermen to choose Bull, a treatment of Wilkes that proved counter-productive, as Walpole commented: 'This proscription of Wilkes, though for two years together he was first in the poll, did but serve to revive his popularity from the injustice done him' (ibid., 1.250). 
For most of 1774 the inevitable candidature of Wilkes for lord mayor dominated London politics. The situation was complicated by the ministerial decision to call a general election in the autumn of 1774, but Wilkes gained by a bargain with John Sawbridge, hitherto a leading Hornite. Sawbridge was promised Wilkite support for a London parliamentary seat, and in return prevented radical opposition at the mayoral elections to Wilkes and Bull, who defeated two ministerial candidates. This time the court of aldermen accepted Wilkes, again top of the poll. Soon afterwards Wilkes re-entered the Commons, being returned unopposed with Glynn for Middlesex, to the vain fury of king and ministers. 
The mayoralty of Wilkes was one of the most splendid in London's history. His generosity, popularity, and flair for publicity combined to make it memorable; and affection for his daughter, Polly, an elegant lady mayoress, also explained why he put on such a show. He gave frequent and lavish entertainments -- his expenses of $8226 exceeding by $3337 his official allowances -- and he ended heavily in debt. Wilkes, as when sheriff, took his duties seriously. He concerned himself with the regulation of food prices and with charity for prisoners, and he initiated a campaign against prostitutes, thereby gaining respect and respectability; the archbishop of Canterbury attended one of his functions. Genial host and busy administrator, Wilkes hoped to take advantage of his popularity by securing election to the lucrative if onerous post of City chamberlain, manager of London's finances. But, after persuading the incumbent to resign, he was defeated in 1776 by a ministerial candidate, for by then his seemingly unpatriotic opposition to the American War of Independence was proving to be a solvent of Wilkite control of the City. 
Contrary to legend, Wilkes never championed the cause of American independence in principle. Nor was he even always sympathetic to colonial grievances. His reaction, when in France, to news of the 'Stamp Act' crisis in 1765 was to comment to his brother Heaton that 'there is a spirit little short of rebellion in several of the colonies' (Wilkes MSS, U. Mich., Clements L., I, no. 91). But during the next few years colonial adulation of Wilkes as a hero of liberty led him to adopt the idea of a common cause on both sides of the Atlantic. He offered words of encouragement to America, commending resistance to the 1767 import duties on tea and other items, and deploring the use of soldiers in Boston, by an analogy with events in London. After the Boston Tea Party of 1773 had reignited the American question, the colonial cause afforded new ground on which to attack government as the Middlesex election lost its appeal. Wilkes took little part in London agitation against ministerial policy in 1774, but once he was lord mayor he busied himself in organizing a series of City petitions. When he presented a remonstrance to George III on 10 April 1775 his conduct was such that it was said 'the King himself owned he had never seen so well-bred a Lord Mayor' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 1.456). But George III then foiled this propaganda tactic of Wilkes by vetoing any repetition of such ceremonies. As the colonial crisis escalated Wilkes shifted his ground from merely supporting American resistance to taxation, as in a Commons speech of 6 February 1775, to endorsement of the colonial denial of parliament's authority, as on 26 October; but the final demand for independence he did not accept. In parliament, urging conciliation rather than coercion, he therefore denounced the American war only as bloody, expensive, and, above all, futile, telling the Commons on 20 November 1777 that 'men are not converted, Sir, by the force of the bayonet at the breast' (Almon, 8.8). After news of Burgoyne's surrender at Saratoga, Wilkes on 10 December 1777 moved repeal of the 'Declaratory Act' of 1766 as a final attempt to save the colonial link, but secured only ten votes. The failure of the 1778 peace commission led him to urge recognition of American independence, in a speech of 26 November 1778: 'A series of four years disgraces and defeats are surely sufficient to convince us of the absolute impossibility of conquering America by force, and I fear the gentle means of persuasion have equally failed' (Almon, 11.21). That he believed American independence to be inevitable was misinterpreted then, and later, as support for the idea: the case was rather that his realism anticipated majority British opinion by several years. But the outbreak of the American war had proved the kiss of death to City radicalism. Deprived of that power base, Wilkes became more active in Westminster politics. 
The parliamentary behaviour of Wilkes on his return to the Commons in 1774 confounded all expectations. He did not create his own radical party, as he lacked the reputation and resources to do so -- and indeed sufficient supporters, once dubbing them his 'twelve apostles'. Nor did he enlist in either of the opposition parties led by lords Rockingham and Shelburne. But he was not the silent back-bencher many expected from his earlier spell in the house. He spoke regularly in debate, delivering prepared speeches, marked by detailed research and literary polish, that, though designed for the press rather than parliament, fully merited the attention his character and reputation secured for them. The diarist Nathaniel Wraxall recalled that 'he was an incomparable comedian in all he said or did; and he seemed to consider human life itself as a mere comedy... His speeches were full of wit, pleasantry, and point; Yet nervous, spirited, and not at all defective in argument. (Wraxall, 2.296-7)' Every session Wilkes moved to rescind the resolution of 17 February 1769 declaring him incapable of election after expulsion. On the first occasion, 22 February 1775, the North ministry was pushed harder than on America, winning only by sixty-eight votes, but thereafter the motion became one of form until the resignation of North in 1782. That Wilkes made the first ever motion for parliamentary reform, on 21 March 1776, established his radical credentials for posterity. He urged the transfer of seats from rotten boroughs to London, the more populous counties, and the new industrial towns. The motion was defeated without a vote, and afterwards, in the 1780s, Wilkes, while remaining a reformer, allowed others to take the lead. 
'Liberty' for Wilkes embraced wider objectives than political aims. Although brought up a dissenter, from the 1750s he was a professed Anglican, but he held extremely liberal views on religious toleration, expounding them when supporting a 'Dissenters Relief Bill' on 20 April 1779. After pointing out that a person's religion was due to accidents of time and place of birth, Wilkes declared: 'I wish to see rising in the neighbourhood of a Christian cathedral... The Turkish mosque, the Chinese pagoda, and the Jewish synagogue, with a temple of the Sun.... The sole business of the magistrates is to take care that they did not persecute one another. (Almon, 12.311)' Wilkes was a conspicuous absentee when fellow radicals organized City protests against the 'Quebec Act' of 1774 for establishing the Catholic church in Canada, and he had scant sympathy with the anti-Catholic Gordon riots in London during June 1780. He took an active role in their suppression, receiving accolades from supporters of government but incurring unpopularity in London. It signified his final transformation into respectability, one underpinned at last by financial security. The City chamberlain who had defeated him in 1776 died on 9 November 1779, and Wilkes routed a ministerial candidate by 2343 votes to 371, formally taking office on 1 December 1779. 
When Lord Rockingham succeeded North as prime minister in 1782 Wilkes was at last able, on 3 May, to carry his motion to erase the 1769 resolution on the Middlesex election, thereby belatedly establishing the right of voters to choose any eligible candidate. But soon there occurred a seismic change in his political career. After Rockingham's death on 1 July 1782, Charles James Fox led the bulk of his party back to opposition when George III chose Shelburne as the new prime minister. Wilkes disliked Fox's attempt to bully the king and chose to support Shelburne, demonstrating that his frequent professions of loyalty to the crown had not been mere formality. He therefore opposed the Fox-North coalition of 1783, denouncing their 'East India Bill' in a much-admired speech as confiscation paving the way for corruption, and became a follower of the younger Pitt, not least because he was a parliamentary reformer. At the general election of 1784 he fought Middlesex as a ministerial candidate and scraped home by sixty-six votes. Thenceforth he was an occasional and silent Pitt supporter, and made only one more recorded speech, seeking in 1787 to prevent the impeachment of his friend Warren Hastings. But unpopularity for both his support of government and his neglect of parliamentary duties cost him his seat without a contest at the 1790 general election. His political career ended in irony. He detested the violence and political extremism of the French Revolution; but on 11 June 1794 a loyalist mob, perhaps from folk memory, smashed the windows of his house. Wilkes refused to prosecute, saying, 'they are only some of my pupils, now set up for themselves' ('Morning Post', 24 June 1794). 
'Mr. Wilkes was the pleasantest companion, the politest gentleman, and the best scholar he knew' (John Wilkes MSS, BL, Add. MS 30874, fol. 92). This 1783 tribute from Wilkes's old adversary Lord Mansfield serves as a reminder that politics never filled his life. Pursuit of women engrossed much of his attention; he was a man of culture; and from 1779 he had duties as City chamberlain. All this activity took place against a background of financial difficulty, eased but not solved by his chamberlain's income, which fluctuated between $1500 and $3000, and at least ended his earlier dependence on private donations. He always spent freely, without heed for the morrow, was often pressed for money, and died virtually insolvent. 
The post of City chamberlain was no sinecure. Wilkes supervised a staff of seven, to administer official and charitable funds, and had various other duties, such as the admission of freemen. He worked hard, visiting the Guildhall several days a week to the end of his life, and contemporaries attested to his efficiency. His zeal as an administrator, already displayed as a Buckinghamshire magistrate, London alderman, City sheriff, and lord mayor, was a facet of his character often overshadowed by his political and social activities. 
So also was the cultural thread of his life. Wilkes amassed a personal library of altogether nearly 3000 books and pamphlets. He read and wrote in French, and knew both Latin and Greek. His correspondence and speeches alike were laced with classical and other literary allusions. In a debate of 28 April 1777 on the British Museum he made a far-sighted plea for the establishment of a copyright national library and national art gallery. During the last decade of his life he gave fuller vent to his literary turn of mind, publishing editions of Catullus in 1788 and Theophrastus in 1790, respectively in Latin and Greek. 
But the wider contemporary world knew Wilkes only as a profligate. That he loved all women except his wife was his famous boast. His overt sexual promiscuity, which was emphasized by bawdy language and lack of shame, began before his arranged marriage, from which there could be no escape of divorce and which he gave as an excuse for his conduct to his daughter when he assured her, 'I have since often sacrificed to beauty, but I never gave my heart except to you' (John Wilkes MSS, BL, Add. MS 30880B, fol. 71). He did not remain faithful even to his current mistresses, of whom the most enduring was Amelia Arnold ('b'. 1753). He set her up in a nearby house for the last two decades of his life, and she was mother of an acknowledged daughter, Harriet Wilkes, born in 1778. An earlier illegitimate child, born in 1760 to his housekeeper, was passed off as his nephew John Smith, a papal nephew joked Wilkes, who in 1782 obtained for him a post in India. 
Somehow Wilkes contrived to fit in a conventional social life among all these interests. He did not hunt or gamble, and indeed boasted that he had 'no small vices'. Instead he simply enjoyed company. His engagement diary records numerous occasions when he was either at private houses or at public dinners. Wraxall recalled how 'in private society, particularly at table, he was pre-eminently agreeable, abounding in anecdote, ever gay and convivial... He formed the charm of the assembly' (Wraxall, 2.297). Wilkes, a tall and thin man, enjoyed good health, and preferred to walk the 3 miles from his Westminster home to Guildhall rather than hire a carriage. Towards the end of his life he became emaciated, and the reputed cause of his death on 26 December 1797, at his house, 30 Grosvenor Square, Westminster, was marasmus, a disease of malnutrition. He was buried in Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley Street, Westminster, on 4 January 1798. 
Posterity has been reluctant to accept that Wilkes, a womanizer and blasphemer, and a man with a cynical sense of humour, could have possessed genuine political principles, a verdict seemingly confirmed by such stories as his comment to George III that he had never been a Wilkite, and his rebuke to an elderly woman who called out 'Wilkes and liberty' on seeing him in the street: 'Be quiet, you old fool. That's all over long ago' (Bleackley, 376). Nor did his overnight conversion in 1782 from radical to courtier do his reputation any good, even though he received no reward in honour or office. That last twist to his career is irrelevant to his earlier political record. For two decades Wilkes fought for 'liberty', whether freedom from arbitrary arrest, the rights of voters, or the freedom of the press to criticize government and report parliament. He suffered exile, financial ruin, and imprisonment for his principles, and by a combination of political courage and tactical skill won notable victories over government. He thereby earned respect from Lord North. In a debate of 27 November 1775 the prime minister declared that one Wilkes was enough, 'though, he said, to do him justice, it was not easy to find many such' (Almon, 3.214-30). After Wilkes British politics would never be the same again: his career permanently widened the political dimension beyond the closed world of Westminster, Whitehall, and Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 29411


Wilkes, Richard (1691-1760), physician and antiquary, the eldest of the three sons of Richard Wilkes (1666-1740/41), and Lucretia, 'nee' Astley ('c'.1670-1717), of Wood Eaton, Staffordshire, was born at Willenhall, Staffordshire, on 16 March 1691. The family, originally from Hertfordshire, had lived in Staffordshire for three centuries. Wilkes was educated at Trentham and at Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, and entered St John's College, Cambridge, on 13 March 1710, gaining a BA in January 1714 and an MA three years later. He was elected a fellow of St John's on 21 January 1717; he resigned on 23 March 1723. At Cambridge he attended the mathematics lectures of Nicholas Saunderson, to whose 'Algebra' he contributed a memoir in 1740. In 1718 Wilkes was chosen as Linacre lecturer at the college. Briefly in deacon's orders at Stow by Chartley, Staffordshire, he failed to secure a living and began practising medicine at Wolverhampton on 12 February 1720. There is no evidence of his having an MD degree. 
On 24 June 1725 Wilkes married an heiress, Rachel (1695-1756), the eldest daughter of Rowland Manlove of Abbots Bromley, and moved to the Wilkes family estate of some 450 acres at Willenhall. His father had built their house, the Old Hall, on the Walsall Road; it was demolished in 1934. Wilkes's younger brother John was already practising there as a surgeon; his sister Anne committed suicide in 1744. As a physician, Wilkes kept detailed patient case notes; he also wrote a diary, too personal to have been intended for publication, of which the first and second volumes have survived, although the county antiquarian, Stebbing Shaw, referred to a third volume, now apparently lost. Wilkes was actively involved in founding a chapel of ease at Willenhall in 1748, and was chapel warden there until his death; he was also a trustee of the town's workhouse. He owned the Wolverhampton waterworks, and in 1750 actively promoted the healing qualities of the springs at Willenhall, long reputed for eye and skin conditions, having already carried out his own experiments on the mineral waters. 
Rachel Wilkes died in May 1756 and on 9 October Wilkes remarried; his second bride was Frances (1711-1798), widow of Heigham Bendish (1680-1723), a former Essex physician, and sister of the Revd Sir Richard Wrottesley, head of the leading local family. Wilkes was said to live in considerable state after this second marriage. Apart from his diaries, Wilkes wrote 'A Treaty on Dropsy' (1730), 'A letter to the gentlemen... of Staffordshire on the treatment of the distemper now prevalent among horned cattle' (1743), and 'An Essay on the Smallpox' (1747). He is credited with creating an epitaph in Wolverhampton church for Claudius Phillips (died 1732), a musician. He had wide antiquarian interests and wrote part of a history of Staffordshire, which Shaw incorporated in his own 'History and Antiquities of Staffordshire' (1798-1802). Wilkes was also planning a new edition of Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras'. When seriously ill in 1747 he wrote his own epitaph in eighteen rhyming couplets: '
Here, reader, stand awhile, and know 

Whose carcase 'tis that rots below. 

A Man's, who walk'd by Reason's rule, 

Yet sometimes err'd and play'd the fool; 

A Man's, sincere in all his ways, 

And full of the Creator's praise; 

Who laugh'd at Priestcraft, pride, and strife, 

And all the little tricks of life. 

He lov'd his king, his country more, 

And dreadful party-rage forebore: 

He told nobility the truth, 

And wink'd at hasty slips of youth. 

The honest poor man's steady friend, 

The villain's scourge in hopes to mend. 

His father, mother, children, wife, 

His riches, honours, length of life, 

Concern not thee. Observe what's here. 

He rests in hope, and not in fear. 
(S. Shaw, 'History and Antiquities of Staffordshire', 2.148)' Wilkes's journals describe many of his experiments, as well as showing his considerable scientific and antiquarian interests. They are of particular value, however, as a record of his patients, therapies, and professional acquaintances across the midlands. His patients ranged from the local gentry (the Vernons of Sudbury, the Leveson-Gowers of Trentham) to the poorest, whom he treated for the medical interest of their symptoms, many described in great detail. One patient criticized him as 'little lamented but for his judgment in physick. He was without doubt a good physician but no charity' (Wyndham, 1.170), and he twice refused to attend William Shenstone's dying brother. 
Wilkes had been visiting patients in Wolverhampton on the day he died, 6 March 1760, in Willenhall, apparently from 'a Return of the Gout in his Stomach' ('Aris's Birmingham Gazette', 10 March 1760), and was buried on 20 March at St Giles, Willenhall, where a monument was erected in 1800. He died a very wealthy man. Both marriages were childless and by his will, made on 22 February 1759, the estate was to pass eventually after his wife's death to his cousin, the Revd Thomas Unett (1732-1785) of Stafford. Frances Wilkes made her will in 1784, having won a chancery lawsuit with Thomas Unett over the estate. She died at Froxfield, Hampshire, on 24 December 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 29412


Wilkes, Sir Thomas (c.1545-1598), diplomat, was already an adult when first recorded in 1572. It is not known whether he originated from Sussex, as stated by Anthony Wood, from Wiltshire, or from the west midlands. His parentage and family are obscure, but he had relatives both in London and the Wolverhampton area. Seventeenth-century genealogies are demonstrably wrong. That a new coat of arms was devised for him implies obscure origins. 
Wilkes stated that he spent eight years travelling in France, Germany, and Italy before settling in Oxford. Although nothing is known of his earlier education, he had surely been studying in Oxford for several years before he graduated BA in February 1573 and was appointed probationary fellow of All Souls College. He was immediately appointed secretary to Dr Valentine Dale, the newly appointed ambassador to Paris, doubtless on the strength of his continental experience and contacts. It may also be significant that he was already acquainted with and a correspondent of Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, who was to be his patron until he died in 1590. A letter from the privy council of 24 May 1573, perhaps originating with Dale, perhaps with Walsingham, secured Wilkes leave of absence from his fellowship. 
It was only briefly that Wilkes played second fiddle to Dale. Never a resident ambassador responsible for continuing relations, he was constantly employed on special missions that required initiative and intrigue, and involved risks, not least to himself. In 1584 he stated that he had served Elizabeth I without regard for his life, reputation, or the difficulty of the task. Like Walsingham, he was a committed protestant and supported an aggressive foreign policy as a result. He understood military matters and was not averse to involving himself in them, he had a good grasp of complex affairs, and his reports are both lucid and contain sound recommendations. Late in life he admitted to his 'boldness oftentime used in presuming to yield my rude and raw opinion' on matters of state to political superiors. He apologized while still pressing his case (BL, Stowe MS 296 fol. 7'r'). 
An early instance of the sort of mission at which Wilkes excelled occurred in 1574. In April he was commissioned directly to assure the Huguenot Henri Bourbon, king of Navarre, and Francois Valois, duke of Alencon, then incarcerated by the dowager queen, Catherine de' Medici, of Elizabeth's support. Having accomplished the mission Wilkes was placed in considerable danger when Alencon exposed him to Catherine: Navarre's intervention alone saved him from arrest. He was expelled from France and found himself disowned by Elizabeth, whose response to Catherine's complaint of 10 July was to blame Wilkes and instruct him to explain his actions to Catherine. Returning to France, he received a personal interview on 7 September at which he denied any plot and in doing so secured permission to remain in France. 
Wilkes was recalled to England in February 1575 to embark on a sustained period of pro-Huguenot diplomacy. Dispatched first to the Rhineland, ostensibly to meet Sir Philip Sidney, Wilkes's main objective was to consult the Calvinist Frederick III Simmern, elector palatine, about how best to help the French Huguenots. He returned in April bearing the elector's preference for military intervention in support of Henri (I) de Bourbon, prince de Conde, and a request for a subsidy of $150,000. This sum was whittled down and agreed to in further missions from August 1575. Wilkes himself remained with the elector and participated in the ensuing invasion with his own men at his own charge until peace was agreed in June 1576. He went on a further mission to Spain in December 1577 to negotiate a compromise in the Netherlands. He was instructed to inform Philip II that Elizabeth favoured his rule in the Netherlands providing that his approach was conciliatory rather than coercive. In particular, the queen demanded that Don John of Austria be recalled. If Philip agreed, Elizabeth would help him overcome the rebels; if not, she would be obliged to help them. Although Wilkes secured no answer to his unpalatable and unacceptable message, he was treated quite well: Wilkes was not to know that Philip wanted him to depart 'before he commits some indiscretion that will force us to burn him' (MacCaffrey, 313). Returning via France on 16 February 1578, he was dispatched on 4 April via William the Silent, prince of Orange, to Don John of Austria to offer mediation and advocate a cease-fire, both of which suggestions were firmly declined. 
Bar a further mission to the Netherlands in 1582, Wilkes spent the next seven years in England. During these years he established his fortunes and started a family. About 1578 he had married Margaret ('c'.1562-1596), daughter of Ambrose Smith, a London mercer, and his wife, Joan, of Coggeshall, Essex. Wilkes was rewarded in 1576 with the office of queen's printer, which he sold to Christopher Barker, and with one of the four clerkships of the privy council, which carried a salary of $50 a year. In January 1579 a rota was agreed for the clerks, as was standard practice, Wilkes being assigned for duty during the months of May to August and November to December. His office placed him at the heart of decision making but provided him with only limited opportunity to pursue his own interests. Thus in 1581, when he pressed his own suit to the privy council, he was furiously berated for his impropriety by William Cecil, Baron Burghley, lord treasurer. Further efforts to advance his own interests were similarly unsuccessful. He complained to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, on 12 July 1584, after a request for preferment was interpreted by the queen as a plea to leave her service. Exaggerating his poverty somewhat and claiming that he had been paid only $350 for twelve years' service, whereas $400 had been received from the clerkship alone and as much again from Downton parsonage, Wilkes lamented how much he had depended on the largess of his father-in-law and on his creditors. He claimed he had incurred debts of $500 that he could not repay and asked that he be permitted to reduce his costs by removing from Brentford, Middlesex, to Downton, Wiltshire. Since he was also unsuited to clerical work, he sought employment in some other capacity so that he could repair his credit or at least asked for the appointment of a third clerk to the privy council to enable him to retrench in other ways. He was still pursuing the balance of his wife's portion in 1587. 
In 1585, perhaps in response to his complaints, Wilkes was granted a twenty-one-year monopoly on the import of white salt through King's Lynn, Boston, and (from 1586) Hull: regrettably it was not trouble-free and placed him at odds with popular opposition to monopolies in 1587-8, when the Commons were induced to drop their attacks. In 1593 he had to discuss the matter with his parliamentary critics before a committee of the privy council. He could not afford to give the monopoly up. A further aspect of his domestic duties began in 1584 when Wilkes was elected MP for Downton. Wilkes's clerkship also entitled him to absences from government. Apparently he first settled at Brentford in Middlesex. It was as clerk of the privy council, not a resident, that he became a freeman of Southampton in 1581: he was three times elected Southampton's MP, in 1586 (when he declined), 1589, and 1593. Wilkes was fairly active in parliament. In 1582 the queen induced a reluctant Winchester College to lease him Downton rectory for forty years. Subsequently he presented his cousin Dr William Wilkes (died 1637), a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, to the vicarage. He was re-elected MP for Downton in 1586. He was JP for Wiltshire from about 1583 to 1593, when he moved to Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire, at which time he assigned his property at Downton to Carew Ralegh, elder brother of Sir Walter Ralegh. He was JP for Hertfordshire from about 1593, reflecting his establishment of himself in that county. He was employed on various important tasks, for example, in examining the Jesuit Edmund Campion on the rack in the Tower of London in 1581, seizing the books and papers of Thomas Norton, and inquiring into a minor conspiracy in the west midlands in 1583. 
Wilkes's diplomatic career reached its apogee in the Netherlands in 1586-7. Leicester, dispatched to the Netherlands in 1585, accepted the role of governor-general of the Netherlands, contrary to Elizabeth's specific instructions, but she was persuaded during the spring of 1586 to accept the 'fait accompli'. When she selected Wilkes in July 1586 to report on the state of the Netherlands, Leicester was at first highly enthusiastic. 'Wilkes hath exceedingly wisely and well behaved himself', he wrote. 'Her majesty does not know what a jewel she hath of him' (Bruce, 360, 383). His colleague Thomas Sackville, Baron Buckhurst, observed next year that Wilkes was 'so sufficiently practised in the estate of other countries and so well trained in your affairs at home, with such excellent gifts of utterance, memory, wit, courage and knowledge and with so faithful a heart to serve your majesty' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603'). It was not therefore surprising that Wilkes was chosen to fill the English vacancy on the council of state. His own preference, set out in a lengthy discourse, opposed any accommodation with Philip and favoured the independence of the recently declared United Provinces. He argued that Elizabeth should accept sovereignty. Such views were not easily reconciled with his complex brief from the government, not fully known to Leicester, to reduce English expenditure, and promote harmony between the earl and the states general. Bolstering Leicester's authority was difficult when Wilkes fundamentally disagreed with aspects of his policy, notably the earl's solicitation of popular support against the town regents on whom alone, Wilkes thought, stability depended. Wilkes's independence and frank reports exposing Leicester's intrigues and errors were resented by the earl, who counter-attacked with malicious rumours that Wilkes had maligned Burghley. Wilkes also found himself at odds with Jan van Oldenbarneveldt, advocate of the states general of the United Provinces. In the face of Leicester's growing hostility to all his leading subordinates and the English embarrassment at Sir William Stanley's betrayal of Deventer, Wilkes, troubled by poor health, decided, in company with the general Sir John Norris, to take the extreme step of abandoning their posts without royal licence or informing Leicester, and returned to England in June 1587. They were ill-received: Norris was banned from the court and Wilkes was imprisoned briefly in the Fleet, then placed under house arrest with a friend. 
Wilkes was felt to have at least partly justified his behaviour and his integrity was not long in doubt. Walsingham ordered 'he should be well-used for that he was not to be a close prisoner, but was only done for and upon a slightt displeasure conceived by her Majesty' (C. Read, 'Mr Secretary Walsingham and the Policy of Queen Elizabeth', 3 vols., 1925, 3.252). Such punishment, Leicester felt, was quite inadequate. 'Surely there was never a falser creature, a more seditious wretch, than Wilkes', he railed. 'He is a villain, a devil, without faith or religion' ('DNB'). Leicester, using his influence as the queen's favourite, was able to deny Wilkes his clerkship. Wilkes's petitions, even Walsingham admitted, could not avail against him -- and it was only on 4 August 1589, following Leicester's death, that he was returned to favour and was allowed to resume his clerkship. In September 1589 he took part in the renegotiation of England's treaties with the Netherlands. 
Yet Wilkes's misdemeanour may have been disastrously mistimed. His recent disgrace no doubt disadvantaged him when the secretaryship of state fell vacant in 1590 on the death of Walsingham. Though repeatedly mooted for the post in 1590-91, it was taken by Burghley himself and largely delegated to his son Sir Robert Cecil, who was duly appointed in 1596. Between 1596 and 1598 Wilkes wrote his 'Brief and summary tractate' on the duties of a councillor. He dedicated it to Cecil. It is extant in a manuscript in the British Library's Stowe collection and detailed the qualities of an able royal servant, including diligence and professionalism. 
Wilkes was dispatched to the Netherlands again in May 1590. One objective of this mission was to address England's ongoing military and financial commitment to her Dutch ally and to pressure the rebel leaders to make a greater contribution to the cost of England's war effort in the Netherlands. Wilkes was also instructed to ascertain the truth behind rumours that the Dutch had offered Henri IV sovereignty of the United Provinces in return for French support against Spain. Additionally he was to learn whether or not Philip had made peace overtures towards the rebel leaders. Apart from gaining the reassurance that neither report was true, the mission achieved little and Wilkes sailed for England in August. He was knighted in 1591. 
Wilkes was sent once again to France in March 1592 to secure possession of several towns guaranteed by Henri in return for Elizabeth's assistance. He returned the following year to persuade Henri not to convert to Catholicism and to ensure that he maintained his anti-Catholic stance alongside Elizabeth. In September 1594 Wilkes was chosen to lead an embassy to Archduke Ernest, Spanish governor-general of the Netherlands. However, due to French and Dutch opposition, the mission proved abortive. He married Frances ('b'. 'c'.1576, died in or after 1598), daughter of Sir John Savage of Rocksavage, Cheshire, and his wife, in or after 1596. They had a daughter, Margaret ('b'. 1596x8), who outlived her parents. In February 1598 he accompanied Cecil on his final mission to France, but he died 'en route' at Rouen on 2 March. Presumably he was buried there. 
Wilkes took some care over his will before his death. He was anxious to fulfil his relatively minor obligations to the children of the Italian Giacomo Manetti, of whom he himself had been executor. His will dealt only with the leasehold and copyhold estate in Rickmansworth, which he left with plate, jewels, stock, and chattels to his widow, whom he made responsible for the education and marriage of their daughter. He left only $13 6's'. 8died to his servant George Baynham and made no other legacies. That he doubted whether his moveables amounted to Margaret's $300 marriage portion without restricting Frances's share and that he owed $400 in short-term loans suggests that he died in far less affluent circumstances than might be expected of such a distinguished and prominent government servant. His will was proved on 12 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 29413


Wilkie, Sir David (1785-1841), painter of genre, historical subjects, and portraits, was born on 18 November 1785 in the manse at Cults, in the parish of Pitlessie, Fife, where he was baptized on 4 December 1785, the third of the five children of the Revd David Wilkie (1738-1812), and his third wife, Isabella ('c'.1762-1824), daughter of James Lister, farmer at Pitlessie Mill. 
Wilkie's schooling, locally at Kettle and Cupar, drew nothing out of him. His conspicuous gift, precociously apparent, lay in the observation of human behaviour. His way forward was to turn this to advantage, and so, helped by influential neighbours, he applied for admission to the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh -- so called for being administered by the Board of Trustees for Fisheries, Manufactures, and Improvements in Scotland. He was there from 1799 to 1804, under the mastership of John Graham, who had recently returned from London and established a curriculum which involved not only drawing but, unusually, painting. Among fellow pupils were John Burnet and William Allan. Graham instituted prizes for small history pictures, and in 1803, with John Clerk of Eldin as examiner, Wilkie took the first with 'Diana and Callisto' (Chrysler Museum, Norfolk, Virginia). In Fife he kept himself by painting portraits cheaply, adopting the fashionable style of Henry Raeburn in a number of them; the grandest and most original is 'William Bethune-Morison and Family' (1804; NG Scot.). His creative energy, on the other hand, went into furthering his ambition, already set, to tell stories of common life on the patterns offered by David Allan, and by the seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish genre painters; they were, chiefly, Adriaen van Ostade and David Teniers the younger, known to him then almost wholly through prints. The summit of his achievement in this direction, premonitory of much to come, was the panoramic 'Pitlessie Fair' (1804-5; NG Scot.), an uneasy aggregate of rustic incident, yet full of observant and inventive passages. By the time it was finished, Wilkie realized that Scotland offered no future, and had decided on going to London. 
Wilkie arrived in London on 20 May 1805, and by early July he had informally attached himself to the Royal Academy Schools, where he threw himself into study, and was formally enrolled on 28 November. He was now twenty-one. 
Wilkie had come with little money, and lived in penury such that after a few months he feared he would have to desert his one talent and return home. Again to support himself he resorted to what he called his old trade in portraiture, an art for which he always felt himself unfitted. Nevertheless, he had brought with him 'Pitlessie Fair', which he appears to have lent to the royal piano maker William Stodart, the first to order portraits from him. Through him the picture was seen by others, leading to a commission in January 1806 from the third earl of Mansfield for 'Village Politicians' (exh. RA, 1806; priv. coll.). In the exposition and control of its subject it marks a rapid advance. Its text was taken from 'Scotland's skaith', a versified plea for temperance by Hector McNeill, but it was not for any social topicality that the picture drew immediate attention among academicians. The hanging committee for that year's exhibition placed it in a prime position, and Henry Fuseli, lately the professor of painting, said, 'Young man, that is a dangerous work' (Cunningham, 1.116). He sensed, without doubt, that this fierce declaration of naturalism, shaped in the old manner of the Low Countries, questioned the Franco-Italian values of history painting, promulgated for a century; equally, it challenged the sweet ruralism of Francis Wheatley, W. R. Bigg, and George Morland. Some likened Wilkie's early pictures to the poems of George Crabbe. The present picture quickly attracted two substantial and later friendly patrons: Sir George Beaumont, who commissioned the 'Blind Fiddler' (exh. RA, 1808; Tate collection); and Lord Mulgrave, who commissioned 'Rent Day' (exh. RA, 1809; priv. coll.). In 1807 the president of the Royal Academy, Benjamin West, had considered Wilkie 'already a great artist', and 'Card Players' (exh. RA, 1808; priv. coll.) was commissioned for William Frederick, second duke of Gloucester. 
This group of pictures had its culmination in two works, larger and more complex, aimed at the top of the market. In 1809 Wilkie began the 'Village Festival' (exh. RA, 1812; Tate collection) as a speculation, having become wary of the exigencies that commissions could impose; J. J. Angerstein added it to his collection of old masters in 1811. In that year Wilkie began 'Blind-Man's-Buff' (exh. RA, 1813; Royal Collection), commissioned by the prince regent through West. This act of patronage, in keeping with the prince's taste for Dutch pictures, was to have an effect on Wilkie's later career. These works show progressive mastery, not only in Wilkie's management of the relationships, in mind and action, between the people in the scenes he created, but especially in the rendering of their individualities. This latter skill, widely appreciated at the time, owed much to the researches being made into the physiognomy of expression by Charles Bell. 
In 1809 Wilkie -- encouraged by Fuseli, Joseph Farington, and others -- put his name down for election as an associate of the Royal Academy, and was admitted on 6 November, although a year short of the statutory age of twenty-five; he did not cease to draw in the Academy Schools. Despite a hostile faction, using Edward Bird as its stalking-horse, he was elected Royal Academician on 11 February 1811. Also in 1811 he moved to the first of four successive addresses in the suburb of Kensington (none surviving), for the sake of better air than that north of Oxford Street, where he had lodged before. In 1812 Wilkie took public stock of himself by holding a one-man exhibition, an unusual procedure. Of the twenty-nine pictures, seven had been exhibited before. The more important he borrowed; the earliest was 'Pitlessie Fair' and the most recent the 'Village Festival'. Among the others was a deeply felt and loving portrait of his parents (priv. coll.), painted on a visit home in 1807. 
During the exhibition, subscriptions were taken for a forthcoming engraving by Abraham Raimbach after 'Village Politicians'. In 1809 Wilkie had begun to have engravings made from a number of his pictures. This fairly common practice was valuable in keeping an artist's work in the public eye. For Wilkie there must also have been the hope that the need to paint portraits would be reduced by the sale of prints; bread and butter was certainly to come from this source for the rest of his life. His first and best interpreters were Burnet and Raimbach, who worked in the line manner he preferred; early on they joined him as publishers, but later this and the business of distribution went into commercial hands. In his lifetime, prints went to France, the Low Countries, Germany, Spain, America, and India. At home especially they became the source of many copies and pastiches. 
Wilkie's first seven assertive years in London were followed by a decade or so as active, his work now conveying a sense of having been painted with the confidence of an established master. The texture of his paint became creamier, his colour more mellow -- tone was to become an absorption -- his line more beguiling, his penetration of character more searching. The period may be said to open with the 'Letter of Introduction' (exh. RA, 1814; NG Scot.), a composition of two figures in which a gulf of acute awkwardness is opened between a complacent youth and the suspicious recipient of the letter, a tetchy old man of taste. Their arrangement echoes examples from the Low Countries, but not now the peasantry of Ostade and Teniers; rather, and significantly, Dutch painters of comfortable interiors -- in this case, openly enough, Gerard ter Borch. Burnet wrote: 'It was a common practice with Wilkie to adopt a part of a celebrated work as a point to work from... The spectator, by this means, was drawn into a predisposition of its excellence' (J. Burnet, 'Rembrandt', 1849, 40). The allurement had warrant in the example of Sir Joshua Reynolds, of whom Wilkie was a constant admirer. 
Among Wilkie's finest achievements, for its large groupings and emotional range, is 'Distraining for Rent' (exh. RA, 1815; NG Scot.), a 'sadly real' subject, open to political interpretation, although not intentionally. Bought by the directors of the British Institution, who collected to encourage British artists and to provide examples for students, it was the first of Wilkie's pictures to enter a public collection; he was to have the then singular distinction of having pictures in the National Gallery during his lifetime, when Angerstein's and Beaumont's collections went there in 1824 and 1826. 
Wilkie returned to Scotland only intermittently, and never without purpose. In 1817, in search of subject matter, he made his only visit to the highlands, where the way of life was strange to him, a lowlander. He had asked advice on what to see from Walter Scott, whom he visited at Abbotsford on the way back. The major outcome of this ethnographic tour was to be 'Highland Whisky-Still at Lochgilphead' (exh. British Institution, 1820; priv. coll.), bespoken in 1819, on the strength of a sketch, by Major-General Sir Willoughby Gordon, a lasting patron. 
The prince regent had already asked for a second picture, and in 1817 Wilkie's consummately vivacious 'Penny Wedding' (exh. RA, 1819; Royal Collection) was begun. The subject, from the lowlands, looks back to the century before, fixing details of a disappearing way of life, as in novels by Scott and John Galt. Before work on this was finished, an order came from Maximilian I of Bavaria, likewise for a subject of Wilkie's own choosing, and in 1819 he began 'Reading a Will' (exh. RA, 1820; Neue Pinakothek, Munich). In the catalogue of the exhibition at the Royal Academy he tagged it with a reference to an episode in Scott's story of 'Guy Mannering' (1815), which it does not illustrate, but which he re-created in his own manner. Although the opening of a will had been proposed to Wilkie as a subject a decade earlier by the actors John Liston and John Bannister -- he had a taste for plays -- this does not account for a staginess in the picture. This almost certainly came from his use, for some years about this time, of a device in the formation of a composition, old but not much used in his day. Into a small box with an open side were placed clay models, as in a theatre; this allowed their arrangement and lighting to be considered before transfer to the canvas. It was noticed of this picture that the proportion of the figures to their setting was larger than before. The development became conspicuous in 'Parish Beadle' (exh. RA, 1823; Tate collection), also noticeable in which are a loosening in the handling of the paint and a forcefulness of light and shadow; Fuseli detected a look of Guercino, others of Rembrandt. The change of style thus adumbrated was not, however, apparent in his small, genially domestic portrait of the 'Duke of York' (exh. RA, 1823; NPG), also painted for Gordon. 
If Wilkie had misgivings about his competence to be a portrait painter, he had a less understandable lack of confidence in his ability to paint landscape. He felt his inexperience while painting the trees and sky in the 'Village Festival', and set out to improve himself. For ten years or so he exercised himself in the art, and made a number of accomplished studies, stimulated by an amateur landscapist, his friend Perry Nursey. He chose to exhibit only one landscape, the large 'Sheepwashing' (exh. British Institution, 1817; NG Scot.), having explained to Beaumont, another amateur: 'My ambition is not more than that of enabling myself to paint an out-door scene with facility' (Cunningham, 1.454). But only a handful of his subjects had landscape backgrounds, and after 1825 he gave up landscape painting altogether. 
In 1820 Wilkie began the work by which he is most widely known, 'Chelsea Pensioners' (exh. RA, 1822; Apsley House, London). The duke of Wellington, who was to become a friend, had come to him in 1816 for a picture, saying, 'the subject should be a parcel of old soldiers assembled... at the door of a public-house, chewing tobacco and talking over their old stories'. Agreeing that this would make a picture, Wilkie added that 'it only wanted some... principal incident to connect the figures together' ('Life of Benjamin Robert Haydon', 1.246). The outcome was a subject pretending to represent the reception of the news from Waterloo by pensioners and others outside the public houses near Chelsea Hospital. It is, in effect, a history picture with an invisible hero, the popular joy being in the victory of the nation rather than of a commander. Of great intricacy, 'composed rather than inspired', a contemporary remarked ('The Athenaeum', 1842, 585), it was admired for its 'expressions touchantes' by the French painter Theodore Gericault (C. Clement, 'Gericault', 1867, 202), and at the exhibition it had to be protected from the crowds by a rail; the entrance-money taken at the Royal Academy that year was the highest ever. The duke paid the exceptional sum of $1260 for the picture, in cash. 
Later in 1822 George IV went on a state visit to Edinburgh, to be presented there as the king of Scotland at home in his Scottish capital. Wilkie went also, hoping to find in the pageantry of the occasion, largely orchestrated by his friend Scott, a subject for a second modern history picture. At about the same time he was giving thought to a subject from Presbyterian history. Both were to come. In 1823 Wilkie was informed by the home secretary, Sir Robert Peel, who was to become a patron, that the king had chosen him to succeed Raeburn as limner for Scotland. A state portrait of the king was thus expected from him, although he had never painted a formal portrait, indeed any at full length and of life size. An opportunity for trying his hand came in 1824, when an invitation came from Fife to paint the earl of Kellie for the county hall. He went to Scotland again that year and got the portrait well under way, also gathering materials for his two pictures of Scottish history, present and past. 
Each of the years from 1824 to 1826 brought calamity. Since his father's death Wilkie's mother had become the centre of his London home. She died in 1824; the year in which his eldest brother, John, also died, in India. His other older brother, James, died in 1825. Both brothers left children to be taken care of, some of whom Wilkie had already been supporting. He had long been prone to nervous illness, brought on by anxiety; now he had fresh financial responsibilities. Professionally, he worried over his burden of work, not least that arising from his royal appointment. By the spring of 1825 he had become too tense to write, or to paint. Travel was advised as a relief. While he was abroad, his income from engravings was to be undermined by the failure of his print publisher in the crash of 1826. 
Wilkie had travelled before, to Paris in 1814 and to the Low Countries in 1816, essentially to see pictures. Although he was alert to work done recently by the French, his chief interest on both journeys had been in Dutch and Flemish painters of the seventeenth century; the grandeur of Rubens was a particular revelation. Now, in July 1825, he set off on a grand tour, centred on Rome, with an excursion into Germany in 1826. The high Renaissance painters who impressed him greatly were Raphael, Michelangelo, and Fra Bartolommeo, and of the later sixteenth century, Titian and Correggio. Returning, he made a diversion into Spain, then scarcely known to painters. He went there not least in the hope of finding old masters for Peel, as he had been doing in Italy. He spent six months over the winter of 1827 in Madrid, making a trip to Seville; new and exciting to a British painter, was the encounter with major works by Velazquez and Murillo. It may be judged that of all these painters, Raphael, Titian, Correggio, and Murillo had the most evident effect on his practice, although by other means he had already arrived at an understanding of the discipline of Raphael and the colouring of Titian. 
In Rome, Wilkie painted three modest scenes of pious observances seen during Holy Week, to which he added a fourth, painted at Geneva during a lengthy pause after leaving Italy, over the summer of 1827. At Madrid, where he enjoyed the company of Washington Irving, he finished a picture, and began three others, on the subject of Spanish resistance to the French occupation. These four clearly announce a new stylistic ambition. They are generous in scale, the figures large and forward in the picture space, the whole executed, as never before, with rapidity and freedom. Each of these characteristics was virtually imposed in consequence of his illness; his old ability to paint small and in detail had been taken from him. His achievement on the continent of a new style and a way forward was in accord with his previously apparent pursuit of old masterliness. Materially, he tried for richness and transparency by using bitumen. After two or three decades this treacherous tarry compound almost invariably degenerated, so disfiguring many of his larger late pictures, and making their original impact hard to judge nowadays. 
After an absence of three years Wilkie was home again in July 1828. The king received him generously, buying two of the Italian pictures, as well as all four of the Spanish ones, the largest and most vigorous of which is the 'Defence of Saragossa' (exh. RA, 1829; Royal Collection). The intermediary in this was Sir William Knighton, who himself became a patron and a confidant. 
Of the work Wilkie had left unfinished in 1825, the 'Earl of Kellie' (exh. RA, 1829; County Hall, Cupar, Fife) was soon completed. A portrait, 'George IV in Highland Dress' (exh. RA, 1830; Royal Collection), the fulfilment of his duty as limner, was not judged a very good likeness, but Wilkie thought the tartan outfit in which he had seen the king at Edinburgh so rich 'that one might fancy Velasquez, Rembrandt, and Titian ambitious of such a model' (letter to Prince D. Dolgoruky, 1839, Yale University Library, New Haven, Connecticut). The history picture commemorating the king's visit to the city, begun a year after the event, was the 'Entrance of George IV at Holyrood House' (exh. RA, 1830; Royal Collection), over 6 feet long. Although incorporating portraits, it has almost no documentary value, being a fancy kindred to Scott's when he invented the spectacle for the occasion; none the less the picture remains a serious construction, Rubensian in derivation. 
The fourth unfinished work was the other history picture begun in 1823, the large 'Preaching of Knox before the Lords of the Congregation' (exh. RA, 1832; Tate collection); it went to Peel. Wilkie was shortly to write: 'The question of Catholic and Protestant I have considered a theme for art' (Cunningham, 3.113); his interest in the theme had been deepened by his observations on the continent. The picture was critically received as an assured achievement in the historical branch of art. 
The king appointed Wilkie his painter in ordinary in 1830, in succession to Sir Thomas Lawrence; he was confirmed in the office later that year by William IV, and in 1837 by Queen Victoria. He found state portraits difficult; they, and repetitions from them, took much time. With Queen Victoria he failed, and lost favour. His office under the crown, as well as the need of money despite his economical way of life, made it difficult for him to avoid requests for full-length formal portraits of persons of eminence, among them 'Viscount Melville' (exh. RA, 1831; University of St Andrews); the 'Duke of Wellington as Constable of the Tower' (exh. RA, 1834; Merchant Taylors' Company, London); and a lord mayor of London, 'M. P. Lucas' (exh. RA, 1839; Guildhall Art Gallery, London). He continued to paint private portraits. 
Although Wilkie had returned from the continent with a new style, it would appear that for the next ten years or so he had an imperfect sense of direction. This is, in a manner, indicated by the increase in the variety and originality of his subject matter: 'Columbus in the Convent of La Rabida' (exh. RA, 1835; North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh) is one of six pictures on Spanish themes, one commissioned from New York; the 'First Earring' (exh. RA, 1835; Tate collection), painted for John, sixth duke of Bedford, was the first of five pictures treating upper-class female domestic life. Reversions to scenes of cottage domesticity are represented by the 'Cotter's Saturday Night' (exh. RA, 1837; Glasgow Art Gallery), a pious and moralizing subject found in the poem by Robert Burns and painted for the print publisher F. G. Moon. 'Napoleon and the Pope' (exh. RA, 1836; NG Ire.) -- an encounter of 1813 -- was painted for John Marshall, the Leeds linen manufacturer. Restricted to the two figures, 'my largest picture' attracted remarks on matters of detail and on the nature of history painting, but none arising from the politics of the event shown. As surely as the picture of Knox preaching, this was a statement on the conflict between temporal and spiritual power. Thematically akin, and of a more immediate political pertinence, was the 'Peep-o'-Day Boy's Cabin' (exh. RA, 1836; Tate collection), painted for Robert Vernon. Wilkie's Spanish subjects had been novel in British painting, and a success. In 1835, looking for more new material, he went to Ireland, until then visited only by a few English topographers. There, as in the highlands in 1817, his attraction was to the primitive in rural life. The picture described this; further, by centring the narrative on one of the old protestant bands, still at odds with the indigenous Catholic population, it opened the sensitive issue of political responsibilities in London. 
Since Wilkie's return in 1828 a large number of his critics -- and of his public too, no doubt -- had felt disappointed when they found that he had abandoned his old subject matter and manner of presentation, above all the strong characterization that outshone his seventeenth-century models. Many had seen in Wilkie an heir to Hogarth; few can have been aware of the nervosity that had lowered his manual capacity. The feeling was, and persists even now, that a source of enlightening entertainment went when Wilkie Europeanized his style. Yet in this he was to venture further. 
Wilkie had not been unwilling to enter into portraiture when he could blend it with history, so to invest it with anecdote; 'portraits in action' was his phrase. One such picture had been that of George IV at Holyrood; another was to be the 'First Council of Queen Victoria' (exh. RA, 1838; Royal Collection). Also of the sort, although the portrait in it was posthumous, is 'Sir David Baird Discovering the Body of Tippoo Saib' (exh. RA, 1839; NG Scot.). Over 11 feet high, and the result of four years' work, this heroic image was begun in 1835 at the request of Baird's widow. Wilkie regarded it as a commission 'of first rate consequence' (Wilkie, MS letter to Knighton, 20 Sept 1834, Mitchell Library, Glasgow). If his phrase was portentive it might be explained by his interest in what he had seen of the revival of fresco painting in Rome and in Germany, and which, since the burning of the houses of parliament in 1834, had become a prospect in England. 
In 1839 Wilkie began a still more forward-looking picture, 'John Knox Dispensing the Sacrament at Calder House' (NG Scot.), a commercial undertaking to give Moon a subject for engraving as a companion to the existing print after the picture of Knox preaching. In formal contrast to the latter, this carefully deliberated composition is overtly formed on high Renaissance precedent. For Wilkie the scene concerned 'the restoration of a holy ordinance to its primitive simplicity' (Cunningham, 3.232). The painting was not to be finished. 
As Wilkie was beginning the picture of Knox, he also began one of 'Samuel Ministering before Eli'. Always careful to lend truth to his historical works by working from evidences of their period, this subject provoked questions about what the world of the 'Old Testament' had looked like. On the continent he had already wondered at anachronisms in biblical paintings. Now he wrote to Gordon, who had commissioned the subject: 'The researches of travellers must assist greatly in the representation of Scripture subjects' (Wilkie, MS letter to Gordon, 21 Oct 1839, priv. coll.). David Roberts had shown him drawings he had recently made in Palestine, but Wilkie's allusion was rather to the rising number of illustrated accounts of the Levant published in the 1830s -- themselves part of a wider popular attraction to the region, raised by political, military, and missionary interests there. 
On 15 August 1840 Wilkie left London for the Holy Land. Like most travellers then, he used the 'Bible' as his guidebook. Intending only to gather authentic materials for further engagements in scriptural subjects, he limited his painting equipment to that necessary for making studies. He was to express his larger purpose in writing to Peel of 'the great work to be essayed of representing Scripture history' (Cunningham, 3.415); behind this was a democratic wish that, with government help, painting should be enjoyed at large in public places. 
The war in Syria delayed Wilkie at Constantinople from October to January, so that he did not reach Jerusalem until February 1841. There his attention was largely drawn to remains associated with the life of Christ and to the manners of the existing Jewish community. At Jerusalem he made small compositions in oil, two of which survive in private collections. In them he presents scenes from the life of Christ in which the physical types, costumes, and settings are those about him in the city. At the age of fifty-six Wilkie seemed on the verge of a significant new departure. 
Wilkie left Jerusalem for home in April. Waiting for a steamer at Alexandria he used the time to paint a small portrait, 'The Pacha of Egypt' (Tate collection), as he had painted 'The Sultan of Turkey' (Royal Collection) at Constantinople. Wilkie died of a sudden illness on 1 June 1841, aboard the SS 'Oriental'; he was buried at sea, off Malta. At the Royal Academy, in the following year, his loss was marked by two imaginary representations of burial at sea: the 'Funeral of Sir David Wilkie' (priv. coll.) by his friend George Jones, and 'Peace: Burial at Sea' (Tate collection) by his old sparring partner J. M. W. Turner. 
Wilkie was held in high esteem as a man and as an artist. Among artists, some particular friends were William Allan, Francis Chantrey, William Collins, John Constable, Andrew Geddes, B. R. Haydon, John Jackson, C. R. Leslie, and Thomas Phillips. When Lawrence died, Wilkie was near to succeeding him as president of the Royal Academy, but knew he was not constituted for so contentious an office. He was an honorary member of foreign academies; was made doctor of civil law at Oxford on 13 June 1834; was knighted on 15 June 1836; and in 1841 was nominated a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. On his death a public subscription was raised for a memorial, and in the end a marble statue by Samuel Joseph was presented to the National Gallery in 1844 (Tate collection). An extensive retrospective exhibition was mounted at the British Institution in 1842. 
Wilkie revealed almost nothing of his private life, which was essentially domestic. In congenial surroundings he could be amusing; in his earlier years at least he played the fiddle. He did not marry, although he had at least one hope. By inference, he lost his Presbyterianism to the Church of England; his patriotism was as a Briton pleased to be Scottish. In the 1830 he went, if not very attentively, to meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science; he does not appear to have been much given to reading, and he mastered no foreign language. 
Of a number of surviving portraits of Wilkie, the most valuable are by William Beechey (exh. RA, 1809; Scot. NPG), Andrew Geddes (exh. RA, 1816; Scot. NPG), and Thomas Phillips (exh. RA, 1829; Scot. NPG); each was engraved. There is also a life mask of uncertain date (Scot. NPG). Of the few self-portraits, notable are those from 1805-6 (Scot. NPG), 1813 (NPG), and 1840 (Musee des Beaux-Arts, Pau). 
Wilkie painted a total of some 500 works in oil, including some 170 portraits; many of these works were small studies and sketches, and about half the total can no longer be accounted for. Of the total, he exhibited in London eighty-seven subject pictures and thirty-seven portraits. He was a prolific and distinguished draughtsman, for figures perhaps the finest of his age; he exhibited six drawings at the Royal Academy. His will, made on 21 July 1825 and proved on 10 August 1841, provided that the contents of his studio, copyrights in prints, and personal effects -- his house was evidently leased -- should be sold, the proceeds to be held in trust for his sister Helen and brother Thomas, then portioned among nephews and nieces. The arrangement, complicated in its care for equity, resulted in sales by his trustees at Christies on 25-30 April and 3-4 May 1842, and on 20-21 June 1860; the catalogues of these are greatly informative. 
Latterly, Wilkie employed assistants, among them John Ballantyne, J. Z. Bell, Alexander Fraser, John Simpson, and W. S. Watson. He took an interest in the training of young painters, and gave them advice and letters of recommendation. Some painters, of genre in particular, developed from him. C. W. Cope, Daniel Maclise, and John Phillip are examples; others, such as Thomas Webster and Thomas Faed, simply followed in his footsteps. Wilkie's considerable influence on Victorian painting, which remains to be charted accurately -- so too his influence abroad -- was depressed variously by the aesthetic values of John Ruskin, J. A. M. Whistler, and Roger Fry. A reassessment was begun with the Wilkie exhibition at the National Gallery of Scotland and the Royal Academy in 1958. 
Much of Wilkie's writing -- letters (many survive), journals (lost), and his 'Remarks on painting' -- was published in 1843 by his first biographer, Allan Cunningham, whose account, although he made excisions and alterations on occasion, remains indispensable. The major collections of Wilkie's paintings are in the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh, and the Tate collection. There are substantial holdings of his drawings in Aberdeen Art Gallery, the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh, the British Museum, the Courtauld Institute, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 29414


Wilkie, William (1721-1772), Church of Scotland minister and poet, was born on 5 October 1721, the son of James Wilkie, a farmer at Echlin in the parish of Dalmeny, 10 miles north-west of Edinburgh. He was educated at the local school and then at the University of Edinburgh, where he studied arts and prepared for the ministry in association with the William Robertson circle of young clergymen of letters. His father's death during his student days obliged him to run the family farm, 2 miles west of Edinburgh, for the benefit of his three unmarried sisters, and farming would continue to be his primary occupation for eight years after obtaining his licence to preach from the presbytery of Linlithgow on 29 May 1745. In September 1745 he enlisted in the college company, formed to defend Edinburgh from the Jacobite army of Charles Edward Stuart, but he never saw action in that conflict. He was befriended by a neighbour, George Lind, the sheriff-substitute of Edinburghshire, who introduced him to the third duke of Argyll, Lord Milton, and the earl of Lauderdale, patron of the nearby parish of Ratho. Thanks to Lauderdale, Wilkie was called to Ratho on 15 February 1753 and was ordained as assistant; he became successor three months later, finally becoming the sole minister there after the death of the aged incumbent, John Guthrie, on 28 February 1756. At Ratho he used sophisticated enclosures and drainage systems to increase yields from the glebe allotted to the minister, and he founded the Husbandry Club for rural improvement. 
In late May 1757 Wilkie published anonymously in Edinburgh, with a dedication to Argyll, the 'Epigoniad', a long, ponderous epic that was harshly criticized in the London reviews as well as in a pamphlet, 'A Critical Essay on the 'Epigoniad''. Among his Scottish admirers, however, the epic earned him the epithet the Scottish Homer, just as his lifelong passion for agricultural improvement spawned such nicknames as Potato Wilkie and the Potato Minister. Blaming the failure of the 'Epigoniad' on the prejudice of English readers and a conspiracy of English booksellers, Wilkie's friend David Hume encouraged the publication of a second edition in London early in 1759, and he praised it in the April issue of the 'Critical Review'. The title-page of the second edition identifies Wilkie as the author and calls the work 'carefully corrected and improved', meaning the deletion of Scotticisms and some self-serving critical remarks about Pope in the preface, and the addition of 'A Dream, in the Manner of Spenser'. But the second edition also sold poorly, and the surplus stock was reissued ten years later with two different cancelled title-pages. 
Wilkie took an interest in geometry and history as well as poetry, and his scientific ability, along with the influence of Professor Robert Watson, helped him to win election to the chair of natural philosophy at the University of St Andrews in July 1759, after several unsuccessful attempts to obtain academic positions at Glasgow and Aberdeen. He was admitted to the university on 12 November and resigned his clerical charge at Ratho three days later. Although he never published in his academic field, he acquitted himself well in the classroom, focusing his attention on scientific principles of agriculture, which he practised on a few acres of farmland that he purchased in the vicinity of St Andrews. In late March 1768 he is believed to have interceded with Principal William Tullidelph to reinstate the future Scots poet Robert Fergusson after the principal had expelled him for a prank. Shortly after this event Wilkie published in London his second book of poetry, 'Fables', with a dedication to the earl of Lauderdale. Declaring himself a little 'disappointed' after reading this work, James Beattie wondered, in a letter of 1 July 1768, how 'a man of good sense' could demonstrate 'such a poverty in his language and versification' (Aberdeen University Library, MS 30/1/15). Similarly, Henry Mackenzie, who considered the 'Epigoniad' a work of 'great merit', judged 'Fables' harshly (Mackenzie, 'Account', 15-16). 'Fables' attracted little attention and never went to a second edition, but both of Wilkie's books were reprinted in 1795, along with an important biographical sketch, in volume 11 of Robert Anderson's 'Complete Edition of the Poets of Great Britain'. 
Wilkie, who was unmarried, was a man of extraordinary eccentricity. He dressed shabbily, went about dirty and unkempt, was absent-minded in the extreme, employed grotesque gestures, chewed tobacco excessively, and slept under a large pile of heavy blankets in an effort to stave off the feverish chills to which he was prone. Mackenzie states that his circle of Edinburgh literati considered him 'superior in original genius to any man of his time, but rough and unpolished in his manners, and still less accommodating to the decorum of society in the ordinary habits of his life' (Mackenzie, 'Account', 15). One member of that circle, Alexander Carlyle, recounted a remarkable evening of verbal jousting in 1759, after which the English visitor Charles Townshend said that 'he had never met with a man who approached so near the two extremes of a god and a brute as Wilkie did' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 413). Yet Sir Robert Liston, while admitting that Wilkie was slovenly in his dress and personal hygiene, asserted that he was gentle, kind, and good-humoured, and deserved Mackenzie's description as 'rough and unpolished' only in the sense that 'he abstained from every thing like flattery or compliment, and perhaps too frankly spoke the truth' (Mackenzie, 'Account', 183-4). Liston's insistence that Wilkie was an excellent companion is supported by his role as a participant in a philosophical dialogue by Adam Ferguson, set on a highland jaunt with David Hume and others. 
Wilkie was elected to the Select Society of Edinburgh on 4 December 1754, and was a member of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1758 and 1762; he received honorary DD degrees from St Andrews University in 1766 and from Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1767. Owing to his agricultural efforts, he accumulated an estate worth between $2000 and $3000, which he left to his two unmarried sisters. His manuscripts were bequeathed to his friend the Revd Robert Liston of Aberdour, but they do not seem to have survived. Shortly after his death on 10 October 1772, from an undisclosed 'lingering indisposition' (Anderson, xiii), he was eulogized by Robert Fergusson in 'An Eclogue to the Memory of Dr William Wilkie', which appeared in the 'Weekly Magazine' on 29 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 29415


Wilkin, Simon Wilkin (1790-1862), publisher and literary scholar, was born at Costessey (Cossey), Norfolk, on 27 July 1790, the second of the three children of William Wilkin Wilkin (1762-1799), a Norfolk flour miller, and his wife, Cecilia Lucy (died 1796), daughter of William Jacomb of London. On his father's death Wilkin moved to Norwich to live with his guardian, Joseph Kinghorn, who educated him at home. At twenty-one Wilkin was an expert entomologist, a fellow of the Linnean Society, and a member of the Wernerian Society of Edinburgh. His niece Cecilia Lucy Brightwell quotes her father's description of him as 'a good scholar... attractive in manner, and agreeable in personal appearance'. 
Two major crises affected Wilkin's life: having inherited substantially in 1811, he lost everything in 1816, when the paper mill in which he was a partner failed, and in 1832 his guardian's death was a severe blow. Bankruptcy compelled him to sell his outstanding entomological collection, which was purchased by the Zoological Society. Soon after, however, he established a well-respected printing and publishing business in Norwich, his authors including Harriet Martineau, Amelia Opie, George Borrow, and William Taylor. On 18 July 1825 he married Emma, daughter of John Culley of Costessey, and they had two daughters and a son. 
In 1834 Wilkin moved with his family to London, increasingly estranged from the Baptist church to which he had been a generous benefactor, through disagreement with its policy on communion. He had played a major role in the development of the Norfolk and Norwich Literary Institution and Norwich Museum, but once he left Norwich, much of his energy seems to have faded. 
Wilkin's greatest achievement was his four-volume edition of the works of the seventeenth-century physician and author Sir Thomas Browne (1836; reissued 1852). He collated manuscripts and early editions meticulously so as to produce the best possible text, exhaustively researching Browne's vast correspondence in the British Museum and Bodleian Library. Geoffrey Keynes saw his work as the foundation of all subsequent editions, praising him as 'the ideal editor for Browne' ('Works'). Wilkin also wrote a textbook on the use of the globes (1823-6), and contributed to his son Martin Hood Wilkin's biography of his guardian, 'Joseph Kinghorn of Norwich' (1855). 
Wilkin's London years, spent at Cossey Cottage, Pilgrim Lane, Hampstead, were saddened by doctrinal disputes with the Norwich Baptists. He died at home on 28 July 1862, and was buried in his native village of Costessey. 


@@@@@


doc= 29416


Wilkins, Sir Charles (bap. 1749, d. 1836), orientalist, born at Frome, Somerset, where he was baptized on 21 June 1749, was the son of Hugh Wilkins and Mary Wray. His mother was niece of the engraver Robert Bateman Wray and of Charles Wray, a partner in Hoare's Bank in London, who procured a writership in the East India Company's Bengal establishment for his great-nephew. In 1770 Wilkins proceeded to Bengal and became superintendent of the company's factories at Malda. Following the example of his friend Nathaniel Brassey Halhed, and with the encouragement of Warren Hastings, the governor-general, he took up the study of Sanskrit and became the first Englishman to master the language. Wilkins was one of the pioneer orientalists of British India who, under the leadership of Sir William Jones, made Calcutta the centre of a new type of orientalism, focusing on India and the Sanskrit language, which had a considerable vogue in Europe in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; the study of Sanskrit and Indian antiquities, according to an idea widely prevalent in Europe, would bring about an 'Oriental Renaissance' similar to the Renaissance that had been brought about by the revival of Greek letters. 
Wilkins's contributions to the new orientalism began with the leading role he played in establishing, in 1778, a printing press for oriental languages, for which he was (in the words of Halhed) 'metallurgist, engraver, founder, and printer' of types for Bengali and Persian. His Bengali types were used in Halhed's 'Grammar of the Bengali Language' (1778), the first English primer for that language, at a time when knowledge of Bengali among company servants was rare; his press had a profound effect upon the people of Bengal, ushering Bengali literature into the era of printing. The same year, he tells us, his curiosity excited by the example of Halhed (who had begun the study of Sanskrit, and who had published a few brief characterizations of that language, including comparisons with Greek), he took up the study of Sanskrit. Halhed did not get very far in his study of the language, and continued to rely on Persian translations for his knowledge of the content of Sanskrit literature. Wilkins, however, succeeded, and after the arrival in Calcutta of Sir William Jones, who was already famous for the brilliance of his accomplishments in Persian and Arabic, became fast friends with Jones and assisted him in learning Sanskrit. In 1784 Wilkins was one of a small band of company servants who founded the Asiatic Society in Calcutta, with Jones as president. His publications in the first volume (1788) of the society's journal, 'Asiatic Researches', comprised three articles translating ancient inscriptions of India, which launched the modern study of Indian epigraphy, and a brief description of the Sikh religion; the second volume (1790), published after his departure from India, contained translations of two more inscriptions. 
Besides his contributions to Indian typography and epigraphy, Wilkins undertook three projects which, though not fully realized, were to provide the foundations for the new orientalism: a Sanskrit grammar, a Sanskrit dictionary, and a translation of the great epic, the 'Mahabharata'. Each of these projects was a massive undertaking in its own way: the grammar because it would have to include an extensive vocabulary, because there was no published Sanskrit-English dictionary, and because a Devanagari typeface would have to be devised, the dictionary because of the vastness of the Sanskrit language and its literature, and the 'Mahabharata' because it is the longest epic poem in the world, conventionally reckoned to consist of 100,000 verses. Ultimately he published the grammar but not the dictionary (of which there are some manuscript remains), and translated as much as a third of the 'Mahabharata', publishing, however, only parts of it. 
The first of these projects to appear was his translation of a part of the 'Mahabharata', the 'Bhagavad gita', an important text of Hindu devotionalism, which was published in London (as 'The Bhagvat-Geeta') by the East India Company in 1785. He had sent it to Warren Hastings who, apparently without consulting him, forwarded it to the court of directors with a recommendation to publish, and who supplied a preface for it. It enjoyed a great response in Europe and in America (especially among the transcendentalist writers of New England), and was much translated, French and Russian versions appearing more or less immediately, in 1787. 
Wilkins left India and the company service in 1786, for reasons that are not wholly clear but which seem to include the departure of his friend and patron Hastings, the state of his own health, and private affairs; in 1787, soon after returning to England, he married Elizabeth Keble, in London. They resided at Bath for a time, and then returned to London, where they were living in 1788 when Wilkins was elected to the Royal Society in recognition of his pioneering Sanskrit studies and his typographical achievements. His first wife died about that time, and late in 1789 he married Lucy Shingler at Hawkhurst in Kent. During this period he published a translation of the 'Hitopadesha' (1787), a book of political wisdom presented through animal fables and popular tales which has ever since played a large role in the learning of Sanskrit in the West, and another part of his 'Mahabharata' translation, the story of Shakuntala (1794, 1795). (At about the same time Sir William Jones published a translation of Kalidasa's dramatic version of this story which was well received in Europe and translated into many European languages.) In 1800 Wilkins re-entered the service of the East India Company as librarian, an office then established mainly for the care of its collection of manuscripts, many of them taken in the victory over Tipu Sultan at Seringapatam. On the establishment in 1806 of East India College at Hertford Castle (later Haileybury College) he accepted the offices of examiner and visitor, and continued the duties up to his death in London on 13 May 1836; he was interred in the graveyard of St John's Wood Chapel. He left three daughters; the eldest, Elizabeth, was married to the philologist William Marsden (1754-1836), with whom Wilkins shared many scholarly interests. 
Wilkins's literary achievements were recognized by his election to the Royal Society and by the award in 1825 of the society's gold medal, inscribed 'Carolo Wilkins literaturae Sanskritae principi'; and by his creation of DCL of Oxford in 1805; he was also an associate of the Institut de France. He was knighted in 1833. 
European knowledge of ancient Indian literature and the Sanskrit language owes a great deal to the pioneering efforts of Charles Wilkins. He was greatly esteemed by Sir William Jones, who stated that he took up Sanskrit himself only because Wilkins's determination to return to Europe left him without a guide in Sanskrit literature; and after Wilkins's departure he more than once described him, only slightly inaccurately, as the only person in Europe who knew Sanskrit. In addition to highly regarded translations of Sanskrit works, Wilkins soon set about establishing Sanskrit learning in England. In 1795 he designed and cast a fount of type in the Devanagari script for the Sanskrit grammar he was writing, but it was destroyed when his house burnt down; it would have been the first of its kind. He abandoned the project, but resumed it after the formation of East India College, having been encouraged by Alexander Hamilton, Sanskrit professor of the college, publishing the grammar in 1808 for the use of its students. Two others had been published in Bengal nearly simultaneously, by William Carey (1804) and Henry Thomas Colebrooke (1805). Hitherto Sanskrit could only be learned in India, from pandits, and Calcutta had had a virtual monopoly of the new orientalism; now it could be learned from books, in Europe, at a time when Sanskrit instruction had been inaugurated by Hamilton's appointment to the first European professorship in Sanskrit. 
Although Wilkins never completed his dictionary of Sanskrit, he produced three lexicographical publications, the first of which seems to be a fragment of that project: it was a treatise on the roots of Sanskrit (1815). The second was a glossary of words in Indian languages having to do with land revenue, which was attached to the so-called fifth report on the East India Company (1812), a work that was later elaborated upon and superseded by H. H. Wilson's extensive dictionary of Indian revenue terminology. The third was his revision of John Richardson's 'A Dictionary: Persian, Arabic, and English' (1806); Persian was the lingua franca of Indian diplomacy, and the medium through which the new orientalism made its first approaches to knowledge of Sanskrit literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 29417


Wilkins, David (1685-1745), Coptic scholar, was born of Prussian parentage in Memel, Lithuania, on 11 June 1685. His original name was Wilke, which he Latinized as Wilkius and Anglicized into Wilkins. Little is known about his education in Germany (probably in Berlin) or how he acquired his knowledge of ancient and Semitic languages, which was extensive rather than profound. He referred to the antiquarian Ezechiel Spanheim, the elector of Brandenburg's ambassador in England from 1701 to 1710, as his former teacher (Wilkins, 92). By 1707 Wilkins was studying at the Bodleian Library in Oxford and had encountered a group of clerical protectors in London. In 1709, engaged in preparing a history of the patriarchs of Alexandria (which remained in manuscript) and the 'editio princeps' of the Coptic (Bohairic) 'New Testament', the 'Novum Testamentum Aegyptium' (1716), he left for the continent. He called on scholars, examined manuscripts in Vienna, Rome, and Paris, and stopped in Amsterdam in 1714 to see to the publication of his first works -- an edition of the Aramaic paraphrasis of the books of 'Chronicles' and an Armenian version of the apocryphal third epistle to the 'Corinthians' (1715) -- and of John Chamberlayne's polyglot edition of the Lord's prayer, to which he contributed. 
By then Wilkins was a well-known figure in the republic of letters, acquainted with the French orientalist in Berlin, Mathurin Veyssiere de Lacroze, and in correspondence with numerous European intellectuals who shared his interest in languages and the early church. In England his reception was mixed. Oxford refused him an MA (23 May 1712), but he was created DD at Cambridge in October 1717, and in 1724 was appointed lord almoner's reader of Arabic, a post he resigned in 1729. He was elected FSA on 13 January 1720. 
Like one of his first patrons, John Ernest Grabe, another Prussian immigrant, Wilkins converted to Anglicanism. His main patron was William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury. After employing him for some years as an amanuensis, Wake made him librarian at Lambeth Palace in 1715, and gave him the Kentish rectories of Mongeham Parva (30 April 1716) and Great Chart (12 September 1719). Wilkins resigned them both on obtaining the rectories of Hadleigh and Monks Eleigh in Suffolk in November 1719, and the place of joint commissary of the archiepiscopal deanery of Bocking in Essex. On 21 November 1719 he became Wake's domestic chaplain. He acquired the twelfth prebend in the church of Canterbury on 26 January 1721 and on 19 December 1724 the archdeaconry of Suffolk. 
Wilkins was an industrious scholar. In the three years he spent as librarian at Lambeth he made important contributions to the cataloguing of manuscripts. In 1721 he edited the Anglo-Saxon laws, in 1725-6 the complete works of John Selden, and in 1731 the Coptic 'Pentateuch'. His main work was his 'Concilia Magnae Britanniae et Hiberniae', an account of British church councils from 446 to 1717 (4 vols., 1737). 
The quality of Wilkins's output was uneven. He was primarily a copyist and a compiler, often lacking thoroughness and discrimination. His edition of Selden is careless, but credit must be given to his diligence in assembling unpublished material. Despite his assurance to Lacroze that he read Coptic as easily as Latin ('Thesaurus epistolicus Lacrozianus', 1.376), his Bohairic 'New Testament', as Lacroze himself observed (ibid., 3.97, 154-61), betrays an inadequate familiarity with the language and suffers from an arbitrary use of different manuscripts with no indication which they are. His 'Concilia' was indebted to Henry Spelman and Thomas Tanner, and still more to Wake. It can be criticized for the mistakes in Anglo-Saxon, the use of inferior manuscripts, and the treatment of chronology, but remains a formidable achievement and has provided the basis for much later work. 
Wilkins had many detractors -- John Gagnier, the professor of Arabic at Oxford, who deplored his incompetence in Arabic and Hebrew ('Remarks', 8.50, 11.296), Edward Harley, who described him as 'a very great scoundrel' (Yoewell, 420), and the cantankerous Thomas Hearne, who, as librarian at the Bodleian, had watched him turn from a young man 'of a civil, Courteous and modest behaviour' ('Remarks', 2.108) into 'a vain ambitious man, of little judgement, tho' great industry' ('Remarks', 11.115), ready to 'do anything in the World for a little Money' ('Remarks', 7.283). Wilkins's pomposity emerges from his portrait and his correspondence, and suspicions of his mercenary nature were strengthened by his marriage on 15 November 1725 to Margaret ('c'.1692-1750), the half-witted eldest daughter of Thomas, fifth Lord Fairfax, of Leeds Castle, Kent, with a dowry of $4000. Yet there was another side to Wilkins. He had loyal friends, and behaved generously to the son of Bishop Tanner, whose offer of $50 for copying out his father's 'Bibliotheca Britannica' he refused to accept before the book was published. Wilkins had no children. He died of gout at Hadleigh on 6 September 1745, leaving his wife as his sole heir. He was buried in the chancel of Hadleigh church. 


@@@@@


doc= 29418


Wilkins, George (d. 1618), playwright and pamphleteer, was the son of George Wilkins, identified at his death in 1603 as 'George Wilkins the Poet'. Together with his father he may have written the two sonnets signed 'G. W. Senior' and 'G. W. I.' (Junior) that preface the volume of Spenser's 'Amoretti' published in 1595. The evidence suggests that he was an ambitious and, for a time, well-connected writer who none the less failed to make a prosperous living at his craft. He published all his known work in a brief period of intense activity between 1606 and 1608, but was probably writing for a decade before that. By 1610 he had set up as an innkeeper in the seedy district of St Sepulchre's in London. 
Of Wilkins's early life nothing is known. He was probably the George Wilkins who married Katherine Fowler at St Lawrence Jewry on 13 February 1602, and the union produced a son, Thomas, baptized at St Giles Cripplegate on 11 February 1605. Wilkins regarded himself as a man of education, and projects himself more than once in his writings in the stock image of the poor and unregarded scholar, but he is not known to have attended a university. His first known published work was a translation of a Roman chronicle, 'The History of Justine' (1606), in which he extensively plagiarized an earlier translation by Arthur Golding. He then moved downmarket to collaborate with Thomas Dekker on the pamphlet 'Jests to Make you Merrie', published in 1607. By this time Wilkins was also active as a freelance writer for the stage. 'The Miseries of Enforced Marriage', his only known unaided play, was first acted by the King's Men probably in the middle of 1607, since on publication in the late summer of that year (having been registered in July) it was described on the title-page as a current production. Also entered on the Stationers' register that summer was 'The Travels of the Three English Brothers', on which Wilkins worked with John Day and William Rowley. It was performed by the Queen's Men at the Red Bull in Clerkenwell, and described on its title-page 'As it is now played'. 

'The Miseries of Enforced Marriage' is based on the sensational story of Walter Calverley, which also provided the plot of another and better-known King's Men play, 'The Yorkshire Tragedy'. Wilkins's play was a popular one, and new editions were published in 1611, 1629, and 1637. He probably also collaborated with John Day in the writing of the play 'Law Tricks' in 1608. But his chief claim to modern fame rests on his association with Shakespeare's 'Pericles'. Scholarship has confirmed Wilkins's authorship of the first nine scenes of the play, and has constructed a plausible narrative from initial collaboration to its first publication in 1609. Following the success of 'Miseries', Wilkins was employed by the King's Men to work on the new play, which was either a collaborative project from the outset, or one that Shakespeare took over after Wilkins had roughed out a plot and written the opening scenes. The subject matter could be described as a new departure for either writer, though its peripatetic theme recalls 'The Travels of the Three English Brothers', which dramatizes the wanderings of the Sherley brothers; and the two plays may be connected also by their popularity with Catholic private audiences. 'Travels' and 'Pericles' were both in the repertory of Cholmeley's Players, a Yorkshire-based company of recusant players, who performed them on tour in the homes of Catholic families in 1608-10. It is quite possible that Wilkins himself was a recusant: Roger Prior suggests that he may have been the 'George Wilkinson' who was convicted of not going to church in 1608, though firm evidence of his religious affiliations is lacking. Wilkins's pamphlet 'Three Miseries of Barbary' (probably published in 1607) may have owed some of its information to Sir Anthony Sherley, who was in north Africa in 1605-6 and was by then a formal convert to Rome. 
The latter pamphlet was published by Henry Gosson, who also brought out the first edition of 'Pericles' in 1609. The defects of this edition are generally thought to be the result of its being a memorial text, unauthorized by the company and surreptitiously reported by one or more of its actors. Wilkins may have been the means by which Gosson obtained the copy for his edition (though Gosson does not credit Wilkins on the title-page, perhaps because ascribing the play solely to Shakespeare would improve sales). The publisher had secured a lucrative title, for 'Pericles' was a very popular play, holding the stage into the 1620s; and this could explain why Gosson was later prepared to stand bail for Wilkins on an assault charge in 1611. 
Wilkins had already found another way to capitalize on the play's success when in 1608 he published a prose romance, 'The Painful Adventures of Pericles Prince of Tyre'. This explicitly claims to be based on the play, and has a good deal in common with it; but all the signs are that Wilkins was working from memory rather than from a manuscript -- as junior collaborator he would probably not own a copy of the playtext, which was the sole property of the King's Men. 'Pericles' was officially registered for publication by Edward Blount in 1608, but no book under his imprint emerged, and the entry may have been designed to block Wilkins or others from publishing without the company's consent. It is notable that, despite having created two major successes for the King's Men in 1607-8, Wilkins's connection with them was severed after the publication of 'Pericles', and as far as is known he did no further work for the stage. 
The King's Men may have had other reasons to distrust George Wilkins. Records show that he was in trouble with the law as early as 1602, and he was regularly in court from 1610 until the end of his life. His later belligerence was probably aggravated by disappointment at the termination of his writing career, as he struggled to make a living as a victualler in an insalubrious urban quarter -- the area around Cow Cross and Turnmill Street, notorious for thieves and prostitutes. But it is likely that Wilkins was always a difficult and untrustworthy character. The case in which he was bailed by Henry Gosson was one in which he was accused of 'abusing one Randall Borkes and kicking a woman on the belly which was then great with child' (Prior, 'Life of George Wilkins', 144), and this was not the only time he was arraigned for violence against women. In 1611 Wilkins was arrested for helping a prostitute suspected of theft to escape justice, and after his release on bail was accused of abusing a constable in the execution of his office. The tangled story that emerges from the court records prompts the suspicion that Wilkins's tavern also operated as a brothel. In another case in 1614 involving his wife, a witness testified that Wilkins's house was frequented by lewd women. This is supported by a later misfortune that befell Wilkins: in 1616 he was in court to testify against a group of rioters who had pulled down 'a great part' of his house -- almost certainly an example of the action habitually directed against theatres and brothels. 
In 1612, as a result of his misdemeanours, Wilkins temporarily lost his licence to operate as a victualler. During the next two years he avoided further charges, though he himself was the object of assault. Having regained his licence, however, he was once more in trouble in 1616, when he was fined for assaulting one John Parker and stealing his hat and cloak. The final chapter of his life, like several earlier ones, is written in court records. In 1618 he was accused of harbouring a felon and, having been bailed, was recorded as discharged on 2 October 'because he is dead'. His death must have taken place after the sessions on 3 September, when his case was postponed. Wilkins died intestate, and his estate was awarded to his widow on 14 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 29419


Wilkins, George (1785-1865), Church of England clergyman, born at Norwich in May 1785, was the third son of William Wilkins (1751/2-1815), an architect, and his wife, Hannah Willett, and the younger brother of William Wilkins. He was educated at Bury St Edmunds grammar school, and in 1803 entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1807, MA in 1810, and DD in 1824. Ordained in 1808, Wilkins became curate of Great Plumstead, Norfolk, and then of Hadleigh, Suffolk, under Dr Edward Auriol Hay-Drummond (died 1829), uncle of the earl of Kinnoull. He married Hay-Drummond's daughter Amelia Auriol on 3 September 1811, having first run away with her to Gretna. That year he published 'Lines Addressed to Mrs Hay Drummond'. The first Earl Manvers presented him to two Nottinghamshire vicarages: Laxton, on 1 December 1813, and Lowdham, on 19 January 1815. On 8 November 1817 the second earl presented him to the important parish of St Mary's, Nottingham; he continued to hold Lowdham in plurality until 1839. In 1823 he was collated by the archbishop of York to the prebendal stall of Normanton in Southwell collegiate church. Lord Eldon presented him to the rectory of Wing in 1827, mainly on the strength of his book 'Body and Soul' (1822), though its publication provoked some controversy, especially with Revd J. H. Browne, archdeacon of Ely. An earlier publication, 'The History of the Destruction of Jerusalem as Connected with the Scripture Prophecies', appeared in 1816. 
On 24 April 1832 Wilkins became archdeacon of Nottingham in succession to William Barrow. His ministry at Nottingham, a parish with a population of 28,000 souls, was controversial. He took an active interest in the Nottingham dispensary for the sick poor (1831), and established an elementary school for girls (1835). But his relations with the large number of dissenters in his parish were not harmonious; he attacked dissent in his archidiaconal charges of 1834 and 1837. His attempt to collect tithes in 1833 failed. The refusal in 1843 of the vestry, dominated by dissenters, to vote a rate to pay for essential repairs to the tower of St Mary's Church caused the church to be closed, and demonstrated the unenforceability of church rates in many parishes. Wilkins announced his resignation as vicar in October 1843, accepting in its place the rectory of Beelsby, Lincolnshire, in the gift of the Southwell collegiate church, though he never resided there. He concentrated instead on the assiduous discharge of his archidiaconal duties, building two chapels of ease in Nottingham itself, and collecting $2000 to restore St Mary's Church and provide sittings for 2000 people. 
Tall, active both in body and mind, and of a fine presence, Wilkins was famous for his pulpit oratory. He wrote various sermons, charges, letters, and addresses. The latter part of his life was spent at Southwell as the last canon residentiary. There he devoted himself for many years to the restoration of both the services and the fabric of Southwell church. He died at the residence, Southwell, on 13 August 1865, and was buried south-east of the church. Of his sons, Henry St Clair Wilkins was a general, John Murray Wilkins (died 1881) was the last rector of Southwell collegiate church before it became a cathedral, and George Dashwood Wilkins (died 1885) was in the service of the East India Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 29420


Wilkins, Henry St Clair (1828-1896), army officer, son of George Wilkins (1785-1865), archdeacon of Nottingham, and his wife, Amelia Auriol, 'nee' Hay-Drummond, niece of the ninth earl of Kinnoul, was born on 3 December 1828. After attending Addiscombe College, he was commissioned lieutenant in the Bombay Engineers on 11 June 1847. His further commissions were: captain, 27 August 1858; lieutenant-colonel, 1 March 1867; colonel, 15 August 1870; major-general, 21 December 1877; lieutenant-general, 31 December 1878; and general, 18 January 1882, when he retired on a pension. 
Wilkins served with the field force from Aden against Arab dissidents in 1858. He commanded the Royal Engineers throughout the Abyssinian expedition of 1868, where the difficult terrain required engineering skills of the highest order. He was mentioned in dispatches by Lord Napier of Magdala for his 'invaluable and important services', and was appointed aide-de-camp to the queen, with the rank of colonel in the army. 
As well as an able soldier Wilkins was an accomplished draughtsman and artist. Employed in architectural and engineering works in the public works department of India, his designs were considered notable for their fitness and beauty. Among them were: at Aden, the restoration of the ancient tanks in the Tawella valley; at Bombay, the government and the public works secretariats (he also won the first prize in a competition for his design for the European general hospital); at Poona, the Sassoon Hospital, the Deccan College, the Jewish synagogue, and the mausoleum of the Sassoon family; and at Bhuj, the palace of the rao of Kach. 
Wilkins married, in 1856, Eliza Violet, daughter of Colonel Colin Campbell McIntyre of the 78th highlanders. Wilkins published 'Reconnoitring in Abyssinia' (1870) and 'A Treatise on Mountain Roads, Live Loads, and Bridges' (1879). Wilkins died suddenly, on 15 December 1896, at his residence, 77 Queen's Gate, South Kensington, London, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 29421


Wilkins, John (1614-1672), theologian and natural philosopher, was probably born at Canons Ashby, Northamptonshire, the second of the six children and eldest son of Walter Wilkins (died 1625), an Oxford goldsmith, and Jane (died 1635), daughter of the noted puritan divine John Dod. After his father's death, his mother married another Oxford man, Francis Pope. She gave birth to a daughter, who did not survive childhood, and to Walter Pope, who became close to her eldest son and was the successor to Christopher Wren as professor of astronomy at Gresham College. 
Wilkins entered Edward Sylvester's grammar school in Oxford at the age of nine. He matriculated at New Inn Hall, Oxford, in May 1627, but soon transferred to Magdalen Hall; he took the degrees of BA in 1631 and MA in 1634, and for a brief period was a tutor in his college. His moderate puritan background may have influenced his move to Magdalen Hall, where Laudian Arminianism was resisted longer than at other colleges. Even there, however, Laudianism prevailed, and this may have precipitated Wilkins's decision to leave Oxford in 1637. In view of his mature theological position it seems reasonable to infer that he was influenced early on by his grandfather John Dod. Described as a passive nonconformist, Dod focused on the unanimity of certain beliefs rather than on those things that caused difference and strife, and (like Wilkins later) he emphasized the importance of practical morality. 
Wilkins was instituted as vicar of Fawsley, near Daventry, Northamptonshire, on 2 June 1637, and ordained as a priest at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, on 18 February 1638. When Wilkins resigned to become private chaplain to William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, a leading puritan and anti-Laudian, he was succeeded by his grandfather John Dod, whose ministry had long centred on Fawsley without his actually holding the benefice. Wilkins's brief tenure at Fawsley, while his grandfather stepped down, may have been a stratagem to circumvent a Laudian policy of limiting ordination to those granted a benefice (to prevent would-be puritan clerics from becoming lecturers and private chaplains). 
By 1641 Wilkins was in London acting as private chaplain to George, eighth Lord Berkeley, a moderate in both religious and political outlook. In late 1644 he entered the service of Charles Louis, prince elector palatine, but their rapport seems to have been based more on mutual scientific interests than on a similarity of religious perspective. He must also have made a reputation for himself as a theologian or preacher by this time, because he was appointed preacher to Gray's Inn in 1645 and also seems to have been a regular preacher at the Savoy Chapel. His first published religious work, 'Ecclesiastes' (1646), was subtitled 'A Discourse Concerning the Gift of Preaching', and was intended as a handbook for preachers. He appears to have married before 1 December 1645, as a letter sold in 1984, written by Wilkins, arranged for a creditor to pay debts to his wife. This first wife, about whom nothing is known, was possibly still alive in January 1652, when the parliamentary visitors abolished the statutory requirement that wardens of Wadham College, Oxford, should be unmarried, but had certainly died by 1656. 
Wilkins's interest in the latest developments affecting natural philosophy was apparent in his earliest publications. In 1638 he published 'The discovery of a new world, or, A discourse tending to prove, that ('tis probable) there may be another habitable world in the moon'. He added to this in 1640 his 'Discourse concerning a new planet; tending to prove, that ('tis probable) our earth is one of the planets'. Powerful and influential works of popularization, these books aimed to expound and defend the new world picture developed by Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler. The first book argued that the earth was not uniquely different from other heavenly bodies, while the second tried to remove philosophical and religious objections to the earth's motion and show how it might be physically possible. 
In 1641 Wilkins published 'Mercury, or, The secret and swift messenger: shewing how a man may with privacy and speed communicate his thoughts to a friend at any distance'. Concerned primarily with means of encoding or otherwise protecting the secrecy of communications, orally or in writing, it also discussed how messages may be secretly and swiftly conveyed over great distances. In the course of this work Wilkins briefly considered the possibility of a 'Universal Character' that would be legible to readers in any language. This was a theme to which he would later return. 
While in London, Wilkins became a regular member of a group devoted to the study of natural philosophy and the sciences related to it, such as geometry, mechanics, magnetism, chemistry, and medicine. This group has been seen as one of the forerunners of the Royal Society ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. Its principal convener may have been Theodore Haak, but it seems clear that Wilkins was a leading member of the group as it broke up in 1648, at about the time that he moved to Oxford. Shortly after this Wilkins became a prominent member of a similar group that began to meet in Oxford with some of the same personnel as the London group. 
In 1648 Wilkins published 'Mathematical Magick, or, The Wonders that may be Performed by Mechanical Geometry'. The first part of the book, on mechanical powers, showed how simple machines like the lever, pulley, and screw could be used to bring about remarkable effects, while the second part, on mechanical motions, discussed among other things flying machines, the submarine, automata, and perpetual motion. Offered as a practical manual rather than as a work of theoretical exposition, it can nevertheless be seen as a foreshadowing of the mechanical philosophy and of the increasing importance of the geometrical approach to an understanding of nature. It was influenced by the work of Guidobaldo del Monte and Marin Mersenne, and formed an attractive and highly effective medium of popularization. 
Wilkins was chosen in 1648 as warden of Wadham by the visitors appointed by parliament to reform the University of Oxford. The committee included Lord Saye, Lord Berkeley, and Richard Knightley, another of Wilkins's early patrons, but why they should have thought of Wilkins in this connection remains a mystery. The warden was required to be a doctor of divinity, but Wilkins was given a year's dispensation because of his service to the elector palatine. He took the degrees of BD in April 1648 and DD in December 1649. In the interim he accompanied the elector palatine to The Hague. 
Wilkins proved to be an excellent warden and Wadham thrived under his direction. It was during this period that the practical implications of his latitudinarian theological outlook became evident. Under his tolerant and conciliatory regime Wadham became a place where scholars of different political and religious persuasions could live and work together. Because of Wilkins the college also became attractive to scholars with an interest in the new philosophy. Seth Ward and Lawrence Rook left Cambridge to become fellow-commoners at Wadham, while John Wallis, Jonathan Goddard, William Petty, Ralph Bathurst, Thomas Willis, and Robert Boyle moved to Oxford to attend the scientific meetings that Wilkins encouraged as a continuation of those he used to attend in London. He also attracted some brilliant students, most notably Christopher Wren, but also his stepbrother, Walter Pope, William Neile, Thomas Sprat, William Lloyd, and Samuel Parker. He created a formal garden at Wadham, which included a number of scientific instruments, a statue that appeared to talk, and transparent apiaries from which the honey could be extracted without the bees' being killed. 
Wilkins was also influential in the university at large. In October 1652 he was appointed to a five-man committee to which Cromwell effectively delegated his powers as chancellor. Wilkins used this position to fight against the visitors for the restoration of the independence of the university and the colleges, to mediate between contending factions within the university, and to defend the university from outside threats. The most visible example of the last was 'Vindiciae academiarum' (1654), a response written by Wilkins and Seth Ward to John Webster's 'Academiarum examen' (1654). Representing radical sectarian views of a rather antinomian and illuminist kind, Webster called for an end to the standard university education of clergymen: in its place he called for a reformed curriculum that would concentrate on a practical utilitarian knowledge of nature. Wilkins and Ward responded to both of these issues, defending the role of education in fitting men for the ministry and refuting Webster's charges about the inadequacy of the scientific and mathematical education available at Oxford. 
During this period Wilkins published two further religious works. 'A Discourse Concerning the Beauty of Providence' of 1649 was a sermon intended to bring comfort to those adversely affected by the recent upheavals in church and state. Showing the influence of Senecan Stoicism, Wilkins advocated patient submissiveness to Providence in times of suffering. 'A discourse concerning the gift of prayer: shewing what it is, wherein it consists and how far it is attainable by industry' (1651), like the earlier 'Ecclesiastes', was intended as an advice manual to aid in the organization of thoughts and in effective communication between man and God. These three religious works proved highly influential in the contemporary shift to a plainer, clearer, and more simply ordered style in sermons and other forms of writing. 
In 1656 Wilkins married the lord protector's youngest sister, Robina (died 1689), and became stepfather to her son and two daughters. Robina was the recent widow of Peter French, canon of Christ Church, who was, like Wilkins, one of the five men to whom Cromwell delegated his powers as chancellor. The marriage seems to have been an opportunistic move by Wilkins, some said to preserve or promote the university's interests, others suggested it was for his own. Even Wilkins himself (though admittedly after the Restoration) implied that he married Robina under duress, but he did not make clear who was exerting this pressure. 
When Richard Cromwell was appointed chancellor of the university in 1657, Wilkins became his closest adviser at Oxford. Late in 1658 there were rumours that Wilkins would be appointed provost of Eton or that he would be made vice-chancellor at Oxford, but these came to nothing. He was, however, appointed as master of Trinity College, Cambridge, on 17 August 1659 (he resigned from Wadham on 3 September). Although this may have been initiated by Richard Cromwell, the new lord protector, it was the fellows of Trinity who petitioned for Wilkins to be appointed master, and this was granted by parliament. Wilkins immediately began reforms at Trinity and made such a success of his mastership that the fellows petitioned Charles II for his retention after the Restoration. Charles, however, was obliged to fulfil a promise made by his father to Henry Ferne, who replaced Wilkins on 3 August 1660. At the end of that same month, however, Wilkins was installed as dean of Ripon Cathedral, and was also made a prebendary of York Minster. 
After leaving Cambridge Wilkins took up residence in London and again became preacher at Gray's Inn. George, ninth Lord Berkeley, the son of his former patron, granted him the living of Cranford in Middlesex at the end of 1661, and in April 1662 he became vicar of St Lawrence Jewry, London. Effectively excluded from active participation in ecclesiastical politics (since he seemed a turncoat to all sides), Wilkins unhesitatingly accepted the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662 and tried to persuade moderate dissenters like Richard Baxter, John Howe, and Edmund Calamy that it was in the best interests of the church. He now began to emerge as the leader of the growing latitudinarian party, which argued in favour of allowing a broad measure of theological and philosophical dissent where there was agreement on key basic principles, formulated so as to gain the ready assent of the majority of ordinary Christians. 
Wilkins was also influential once again in the organization of natural philosophy in England, being a founder member and extremely active fellow of the newly formed Royal Society of London. He chaired the initial meeting on 28 November 1660 to discuss the nature of the society, and was subsequently elected fellow (22 April 1663) and one of the society's two secretaries, a position he held until leaving London for Chester in 1668. He was a council member until just before his death, and was even sometimes referred to as the society's vice-president (an unofficial title). He was not only an active contributor to the scientific meetings and an indefatigable member of the various investigative committees that were a prominent feature of the society, but was also a busy administrator and fund-raiser. Furthermore, he was one of the leading shapers of the society's characteristic experimental method. Perhaps the most influential way in which he did this was through his close and detailed supervision of Thomas Sprat's official 'History of the Royal Society' (1667), which was not so much a history (Sprat and Wilkins began work on it as early as 1663) as a manifesto of the society's aims and methods. 
During these years Wilkins also produced what is perhaps his most significant work, his 'Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language'. This was published in 1668, though it seems that he began work on it with the help of Seth Ward shortly after their collaboration on 'Vindiciae academiarum'. Calls for a universal language had increased as a result of the flourishing of vernacular literature and an increasing dissatisfaction with Latin, partly with regard to the difficulty of learning it, but also with regard to its ambiguities and complexities. Wilkins rejected the approach of those who believed that the supposed language of Adam might be recovered, but tried to develop an artificial equivalent based upon a classification of knowledge. The vocabulary of this new language was to be built up by systematic modifications of the basic generic terms that were deemed to cover all the major categories of existence. A knowledge of the system would enable the reader, or listener, not just to recognize the signification of a word but also to understand how the referent fitted into the entire scheme of things. This is what made Wilkins's artificial language 'philosophical', not just universal in the sense that a unanimously agreed upon lingua franca would be. 
During the final stages of work on his 'Essay' Wilkins lost his house, and most of his belongings and papers, in the great fire of London, but being eager to complete his scheme he enlisted the help of John Ray and Francis Willoughby to improve the botanical and zoological nomenclature. This was a major factor in stimulating Ray to develop his own classificatory studies. Similarly, Samuel Pepys reported that he helped to draw up a table of naval terms, such as the names of rigging. Even with this and other help, Wilkins admitted his scheme's shortcomings and called upon the Royal Society to improve it. Although various fellows of the society spoke highly of the scheme for a while, only Robert Hooke showed any lasting commitment to it, and the committee established to improve on the 'Essay' never reported. Scholars have argued about the major influences upon Wilkins's linguistic studies. There is little evidence that the universal language schemes of Amos Comenius played any significant role; Mersenne may have been an inspiration but George Dalgarno, to help whom Wilkins had begun to draw up classificatory tables of knowledge after 1657, was a more direct influence. 
Wilkins re-entered ecclesiastical politics after the fall of Clarendon. Supported by the duke of Buckingham, he drew up proposals for the comprehension of dissenters within the framework of church and state, based on the principles of the declaration of Breda (1660). Thanks largely to information supplied by Wilkins's close friend Seth Ward, parliamentary opposition was able to organize itself and reject the proposals in February 1668. In spite of the damage this did to Wilkins's reputation in the eyes of the high-church party he continued to find favour with Buckingham and the king. He had been appointed as one of the king's chaplains in July 1667 and by May 1668 it was widely believed that he would be made a bishop at the next opportunity. 
On 15 November 1668 Wilkins was consecrated bishop of Chester. The diocese was a stronghold of both Roman Catholicism and Presbyterianism, but the bishop's tolerant and conciliatory approach to dissenters succeeded in bringing some nonconformists back to the Church of England, and ensured good relations with those who remained recalcitrant. During this period Wilkins lived in the episcopal palace in Chester, though he occasionally made protracted visits to Wigan, a rich parish that supplemented the bishop's income. He was also active in the House of Lords, and served on at least fifty parliamentary committees before his death. He was a major organizer of opposition to the 'Conventicle Act' of 1670. He still managed to maintain his scientific interests: Ray and Willoughby were frequent visitors to Chester, and he continued to support the Royal Society. 
With Buckingham's continued patronage and the flourishing of latitudinarianism, it was often assumed that Wilkins would rise above Chester, if only to a more lucrative and important diocese, but ill health overtook him. Having suffered throughout 1672 from what were supposed to be 'fits of the stone' (though this was not confirmed at autopsy), he died on 19 November in London, at the house in Chancery Lane of John Tillotson, husband of Wilkins's stepdaughter Elizabeth French. On his deathbed he was said to have declared himself to be 'prepared for the great experiment'. He was buried at St Lawrence Jewry, London, on 12 December 1672. His widow was buried there on 17 June 1689. He bequeathed about $700 to his widow, $400 to the Royal Society, and $200 to Wadham. 
Wilkins's last book, 'Of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion', was prepared for publication in 1675 by Tillotson. Arguing that the existence of God, knowledge of his attributes, and the requirement of a suitable demeanour towards him could all be established by the use of reason, the book also included a discussion of religious epistemology. Wilkins insisted that 'moral certainty', as opposed to physical or mathematical certainty, is all that can be expected in religion. The book was a major statement of latitudinarian principles. 
Wilkins was described by Aubrey as 'lustie, strong growne, well sett, and broad-shouldered', and even those who opposed or disapproved of him acknowledged his considerable talents and merits. He made a profound contribution to English ecclesiastical history and theological method, being a major figure in the forging and the promotion of latitudinarianism and one of the earliest contributors to the English tradition of natural theology. He also played a crucially important role in the establishment of the Royal Society's self-professed experimental methodology, and thus in the establishment of the characteristic method of English scientific empiricism. Finally, as a result of his strong interest in and commitment to the development of so-called universal language schemes, he made an important contribution to the history of linguistics. 


@@@@@


doc= 29422


Wilkins, William (1778-1839), architect and antiquary, was born on 31 August 1778 in the parish of St Giles, Norwich, the son of William Wilkins (died 1815), a successful building contractor in East Anglia who in 1780 moved the family to Cambridge and became agent to Viscount Newark (later Earl Manvers), and his wife, Hannah ('nee' Willett). George Wilkins was his brother. Architectural design and history increasingly occupied his father's interest. Partner to Humphry Repton between 'c'.1785 and 1796, the elder Wilkins then established an independent practice designing houses in the neo-Gothic and neo-classical styles, most notably Donington Park, Leicestershire (1798-1800), and Pentillie Castle, Cornwall (with his son; 'c'.1810; dem.). Thereby he founded the intellectual and professional foundations of his son's more distinguished career as architect and scholar. Moreover, the financial competence Wilkins senior displayed in his architectural business and management of a profitable circuit of theatres in Norfolk and Suffolk enabled him to support his son's scholarly bent and consequent social elevation to the ranks of the gentry. In this respect William Wilkins typifies proto-professional architectural practice, combining the skills of the artisan with the learning of the antiquary, but also anticipates the incorporation of gentrified social and academic values which elevated the status of architecture to that of a profession within the Victorian period. 
At Norwich school, Wilkins was a talented draughtsman and a scholar, in both classics and mathematics; he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1796, shortly after his father repaired the master's lodge; he graduated sixth wrangler in mathematics in 1800. In 1798 he had begun a fine set of drawings of King's College chapel which were contemporaneous with its repair by his father, and twice exhibited at the Royal Academy, in 1810 and in 1837. These heralded a profound respect for medieval design further indicated in his first publication, 'Some account of the prior's chapel at Ely' in 1801 in 'Archaeologia', the journal of the Society of Antiquaries of London, to which he had been elected in 1796. 
In 1799 Wilkins made his first set of architectural designs for improvements to Earl Manvers's seat, Thoresby Park, Nottinghamshire, which demonstrated his growing interest in classicism and formed the earliest example of what was to become a pattern of aristocratic patronage. Wilkins's gregarious, amiable, and inoffensively ambitious personality, matched by a commanding stature and bluff good looks, later remarked upon in the obituaries published by the 'Gentleman's Magazine' ('GM', 426-7) and 'Civil Engineer and Architect's Journal' (1839, 388-9), undoubtedly assisted him in securing commissions from distinguished patrons. His intelligence drew the attention of George Gordon, fifth earl of Aberdeen, who became a friend and later collaborator, and led to his being awarded the Worts travelling bachelorship in 1801. The bursary funded his tour of the ancient Greek empire (mainly the modern Sicily and Greece) that lasted until 1803. His regularly dispatched letters, written in Latin, testify to his dedicated if conventional mind, which he occupied in studying the inconsistently documented Greek remains in Italy and Sicily. 
In 1807, supported by a fellowship at Gonville and Caius and a mastership of the Perse School, Wilkins published 'The Antiquities of Magna Graecia', which sealed his reputation as a scholar. During the preparation of this work, he applied the fruits of his studies to his pioneeringly consistent Greek revival scheme of 1805 for the projected Downing College at Cambridge. Backed by influential alumni, including Sir Busick Harwood of Downing, who had nominated him for the Society of Antiquaries, and endorsed by the collector and virtuoso Thomas Hope, Wilkins won a reconstituted competition with a typically lucid design. The requisite facilities and accommodation were efficiently arranged in four separated blocks forming an innovative campus plan. Only the side ranges housing the fellows, the undergraduates, and the common room were built (1807-13 and 1818-22), owing to budgetary restrictions which prohibited the construction of the northern entrance and the lecture-room block, modelled on the Athenian Propylaea, and the southern library, chapel, and dining hall block, fronted by porticoes adapted from the Erechtheum, which were imitated more modestly on the completed buildings. Wilkins's pragmatically learned approach, whereby he organized the required space into appropriate three-dimensional volumes, themselves moderated by the scale and form of his chosen ancient models, and then applied the identifying motifs to the main facades, was necessarily somewhat less deft in contemporary additions to Osberton House, Nottinghamshire, but yielded an even more harmonious construction for the East India College, Haileybury (1806-9; now Haileybury School). This last commission possibly led to his meeting Alicia Carnac Murphy, daughter of Matthew Murphy of Ravendale, Lincolnshire, who held a senior post with the East India Company; the couple married in 1811. 
Wilkins's pure style, informed by classical study and enabled by mathematical acuity, clarified contemporary neo-classical practice. Yet if Wilkins gave preference to pure form rather than architectural expression he was genuinely interested in matters of ideology and technology. The construction of Downing College extended the facilities for legal and medical education at Cambridge, and East India College was the institution where reforms in the government of Britain's major imperial possession could be studied. In the Nelson Pillar at Dublin (1807; dem.) and in revised form at Great Yarmouth (where the Doric column has a statue of Britannia atop a globe and peristyle of caryatid figures of victory in synthetic Coade stone) he combined Roman and Greek motifs. He also embarked upon a series of Gothic revival country houses beginning with the Tudor Gothic Dalmeny House, Linlithgowshire (1814-17), for the fourth earl of Rosebery, after also drawing a neo-Greek scheme that recalled his remarkable attic transformation of Grange Park, Hampshire (1808-9), for his friend the antiquary Henry Drummond. He turned again to East Anglian Tudor architecture when enlarging Tregothnan, Cornwall (1816-18), for the fourth Viscount Falmouth and designing the more austere Dunmore Park, Stirlingshire (1820-22; dem.), for the fifth Earl Dunmore. 
Where appropriate, however, Wilkins reverted to the Periclean forms of his formative years. He fronted the fashionable Freemason's Hall, Bath (1817-18), with a handsome Ionic recessed (antis) portico, and dignified the economical commissioners' church of St Paul's, Nottingham (1821-2; dem.), with a portico and steeple adapted from the Athenian octagonal Tower of Winds and circular choragic monument of Lysicrates. His compilation with Lord Aberdeen in 1812-13 of 'The Civil Architecture of Vitruvius', published in 1817, and his participation in the Elgin marbles debate of 1816, bear witness to Wilkins's continuing interest in classical design. His reservations about the presumed unique and pre-eminent qualities of the sculptures, reiterated in 'Atheniensia, or, Remarks on the Topography and Buildings in Athens' (1817) and in 'Memoirs Relating to European and Asiatic Turkey', edited in 1820 by his Cambridge friend the Revd Robert Walpole of Trinity College, were troubled by evidence of Greek realism and polychromy. None the less, Wilkins reproduced the Panathenaic frieze in the salon of Argyll House, London, which he altered in 1809 for Lord Aberdeen, and for the staircase of his fashionable United University Club, London (1821-6; dem.), another work in which he was aided by J. P. Gandy. Wilkins was also assisted by the young Irish designer James Gallier, and he superintended the training of G. F. Jones, J. H. Stevens, and the better-known Benjamin Ferrey. 
Such assistance was important, since Wilkins was by then heavily involved with three major works at Cambridge and the editorship of the Society of Dilettanti, to which he had been elected in 1809. Since 1814 he had been preparing 'The Unedited Antiquities of Attica' (1817), a finely illustrated volume that would be cited in the testimonial presented toward his successful election to the Royal Society in 1831. He gathered the remaining findings of the 1811-13 Dilettanti expedition into the five-part revised edition of the society's 'Antiquities of Ionia' (1769-1915), the third part of which was completed shortly after his death. From 1822 to 1830 Wilkins acted as secretary of the Dilettanti in lieu of his more hard-pressed friend Sir Thomas Lawrence. During these years Wilkins was elected an associate of the Royal Academy and then Royal Academician in 1823 and 1826 successively. 
Three Cambridge college commissions, at King's (1824-8), Trinity (1823-5), and Corpus Christi (1823-7), brought greatest professional satisfaction, succinctly recorded in a remark to the Revd Christopher Wordsworth, master of Trinity College, that Gothic was 'my forte' (Liscombe, 131). Not that Wilkins abandoned the classical ideal. In 1821 he had designed a neo-Greek scheme to marry with Wren's work at Trinity, and completed a striking if unbuilt design for Bylaugh Hall, Norfolk, which was still at the forefront of the English Renaissance revival when exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1818. He had the greatest latitude in terms of site, specification, and budget at Corpus Christi. There the new quadrangle designed in 1822 and completed by 1827 added a new chapel, hall, library, and accommodation for the master, fellows, and undergraduates alongside the Old Court, part of which he preserved. The visual effect and spatial ambience of the quadrangle and main interiors won Wilkins recognition as an accomplished Gothic revivalist. By comparison, Trinity New Court (1823-6) is less substantial, and his additions to King's College, notwithstanding the remarkable felicity of his screen and hall, are compromised by the divergent size of the quadrangle and the style of James Gibbs's building. Respect for medieval architecture informs the thorough restoration scheme he drew up for the vestry of the abbey church of St Mary, Sherborne, in 1828, where he envisaged the installation of wrought-iron beams in the tower to ensure the conservation of the ancient fabric. 
Midway through this productive period Wilkins sought to record his fortunate position. Over several weeks in 1824 A. E. Chalon painted his portrait and that of his wife of thirteen years, Alicia, surrounded by their children Henry Robert ('b'. 1813), Alicia ('b'. 1817), and William Bushby ('b'. 1822) in the drawing-room of his main residence at 36 Weymouth Street, London. (His sons would both enter the Anglican ministry, Henry after working as an architect, while Alicia married Ruskin's friend the Revd William Kingsley.) He could afford a fashionable address and to entertain quite lavishly, owing to his successful practice and also to the theatrical business he had inherited. This consisted of a chain of theatres in East Anglia, which remained profitable over much of the decade, as Wilkins stated in evidence before the 1832 parliamentary select committee on dramatic literature. The theatres included houses in Cambridge (designed with his father in 1814; remodelled), Great Yarmouth (reconstructed by Wilkins in 1816; dem.), Norwich (Theatre Royal, refurbished including a Greek Doric colonnade, 1825-6; des.), and the Bury St Edmunds Theatre (1818-19), which has been restored to its original neo-classical elegance. Wilkins engaged companies that presented plays by contemporary playwrights as well as Shakespeare, and attracted talented actors including Irving, Kean, and Macready. His taste for theatre and for art, each coloured by his fascination with cultural history, is evident in the Carolingian costumes in which he and his family are attired in the 1824 family portrait by Chalon. Behind them are displayed pictures from his collection of mainly Dutch and Italian painting with, most prominently, a copy of Raphael's 'Transfiguration'. Besides indicating his relatively conventional connoisseurship (the catalogues of the sales of his collection at Christies in May 1830, April 1838, and May 1840 number several pictures subsequently identified as copies), the visual reference to Raphael's painting reflects a religious conviction, which, interwoven with stoicism, would course through the letters Wilkins wrote through the final months of his life. 
The enlargement of King's College was finished by 1828 but did not lead to further college commissions despite the expansion of both Cambridge and Oxford. The restrained style of Wilkins's designs was losing popularity, and his neo-Greek and neo-Gothic designs for the 1821-2 and 1825 competitions for a university observatory and new quadrangle for St John's College at Cambridge were placed second. His resulting frustration is evident in letters on redevelopment at Cambridge addressed to the editor of the 'Cambridge Chronicle' (November 1826 and March 1828), followed by two surprisingly critical pamphlets, 'A Letter to the Members of the Senate of the University' (February 1831) and 'An Appeal to the Senate on the Subject of the Plans for the University Library' (April 1831). The pamphlets were composed after the double rejection, in 1829 and 1830, of a well-conceived neo-Greek design for the Cambridge University Library that was eclipsed by the more dynamically composed revivalism of C. R. Cockerell. The rejection of Wilkins's learned but moderate historicism signalled the decline of his career at Cambridge, though he did receive a large commission in 1825 to complete the reconstruction of East India House, London, started by Cockerell's father. Completed in 1830, this work coincided with less extensive additions to the company's military seminary at Addiscombe, Surrey (1825-7; both dem.). 
The depth of Wilkins's disappointment in the library competitions derived from his erstwhile fame within Cambridge, where he maintained a home at Lensfield House, Lensfield Road (remodelled with a Greek Doric antis portico, 1811; dem.), and success elsewhere. Besides the prestigious East India House, however, he had recently finished the new St George's Hospital at Hyde Park Corner, London (1825-8; now redeveloped as the Lanesborough Hotel). He was also supervising realization of his impressive classical edifice for University College on Gower Street (1825-32), in which he was assisted by J. P. Gandy, and transforming a proposal to convert the old Royal Mews in Trafalgar Square into a design for a combined National Gallery and Royal Academy. Each of these commissions reflected the enlargement of Wilkins's understanding of architectural function and of the social space in which it operated, which had been stimulated by reading the works of John Howard, Jeremy Bentham, and continental Enlightenment authors. His growing awareness of the social distress and activism precipitated by post-war recession and reactionary politics had an impact on the design of the new Norfolk gaol and shire house in Norwich (1822-4) and the county gaol at Huntingdon (1826-8). Here Wilkins endeavoured to implement the improvements advocated by Howard in order to increase ventilation and sanitation but reduce communication between petty and hardened criminal. The Norfolk gaol was the most innovative, inserting a radial penitentiary within the castle walls alongside the historic keep. The penitentiary contained separate cells, categorized by gender and degree of criminality, central supervision of eating, worship, and exercise, together with a treadmill engineered by his friend the ironmaster T. J. Bramah. In the case of Huntingdon gaol Wilkins surely also came to appreciate the curtailing of professional opportunity experienced by his clerk of works, James Gallier. Within three years Gallier, lacking the connections to attract patronage, was forced to emigrate with many other British architects to North America. 
The impact of industrial society similarly affected Wilkins's plans for St George's Hospital and University College, London. An 'H' plan layout, curtailed for the college, ensured ample ventilation and lighting, both to combat contagion in the former and nurture learning in the latter. His use of the simpler square columns of the Athenian choragic monument and Thrasyllus signified his acceptance of a more scientific functionalism paralleled by the adaptation of Bramah's structural ironwork and water closets, both incorporated at the college. It was the first non-sectarian and faculty-centred university in Britain. The neat disposition of internal space facilitated the provision of diverse departmental needs, later mirrored in miniature in the Yorkshire Philosophical Society Museum (1827-30; superintended by R. H. Sharp), where Greek ornamentation was combined with functional exhibition and study rooms supplied with gas lighting. Wilkins had intended a much grander urban presence for the university, with porticoed wings and a domed great hall projecting forward onto Gower Street, an intention which was curtailed by insufficient capital consequent upon strident conservative opposition. The elevated central portico, deriving from the Hadrianic Temple of Jupiter Olympus at Athens, was built, however, and remains a testament to his considerable powers of design. Breaking rank with several among his circle, not least Lord Aberdeen, Wilkins embraced liberal views in his lively 'Letter to Lord Viscount Goderich on the Patronage of the Arts by the English Government' (1832), in which he advocated government support of the creative arts and more comprehensive state education. He maintained always a belief in the need for traditional academic training: in evidence to the 1836 parliamentary select committee on arts and manufactures he commended the study of pre-eminent ancient models. Such orthodoxy can also be discerned in the brief allusion to his proposed teaching strategies as professor of architecture at the Royal Academy, a post to which he was elected in 1837, in his last scholarly book, 'Prolusiones architectonical, or, Essays on subjects connected with Grecian and Roman architecture' (1837). 

'Prolusiones' was dedicated to the second Earl Grey who had supported Wilkins in the fulfilment of the gallery and academy commission (the academy opened in 1837 and the gallery in 1838). The constraints imposed by the government, and by the duke of Northumberland, who owned adjacent property, limited Wilkins's naturally unostentatious architectural vision. He was obliged to reuse the Corinthian columns from Carlton House, diminishing the scale of the facade, and to insert two public lanes through the building, partly to ensure rapid deployment in Trafalgar Square of troops from the extant barracks at the rear, for which he also had to supply further accommodation in the basement of the gallery wing. The consequence is an insufficiently imposing and fractured edifice, surmounted by an attenuated and inelegant drummed dome, that, despite surviving to become an icon of late twentieth-century international tourism, belittled Wilkins's contemporary reputation -- although John Constable considered it 'a very noble house' ('Constable's Correspondence', 37). The technical innovations of the Bramah-manufactured cast- and wrought-iron skylighting of the major galleries and the economical provision of diverse accommodation for both institutions did nothing to mitigate criticism of the exterior. Two competitive schemes he prepared in 1835 both foundered; one, now lost, was for the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and the other for the Houses of Parliament competition, was memorable for a ceremonial entrance court to the Thames and as the subject of his final polemic, 'An Apology for the Designs of the Houses of Parliament Marked Phil-Archiamedes' (1836; repr. 1837). 
By this date Wilkins was suffering from the early phase of his terminal kidney disease, first diagnosed as gout. The condition could have been precipitated by recent anxieties and obliged him to withdraw from the professorship of architecture at the Royal Academy and to return to Cambridge in late 1838. He endured an increasingly painful illness with surprising good humour, to judge by correspondence with his old friend Hudson Gurney and the accounts of visitors such as Joseph Romilly. He lived to finish a suitably studious essay on 'The Lydo-Phrygian inscription' for the 1834 volume of the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature of the United Kingdom'. He died at his Cambridge home, Lensfield House, on 31 August 1839, the sixty-first anniversary of his birth. He was buried under the sacrarium of the chapel at Corpus Christi College, and in his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' prominence was given to a view expressed in 'The Athenaeum' that though his works 'bespeak taste and genius... the opinions as to the degree of merit to which these may be thought entitled are various' and concludes that 'perhaps of all his public buildings, none was so generally admired and approved of, and none upon which he prided himself more, than the College of Corpus Christi... it was in this work that he was left to the full scope of his genius, without restraint, his employers resting wholly upon the responsibility of his professional character. ('GM', 426-7)' Wilkins's achievement as a scholar-architect continued to be undervalued until the revival of interest in Enlightenment and Romantic architecture that culminated in the 1972 Council of Europe exhibition 'The Age of Neo-Classicism', though the taint of calculation and copyism, summed up by James Elmes as 'so much Greek, so much cold' ('Civil Engineer and Architect's Journal', 10, 1847, 382), still distorts recognition of his measured contribution to early nineteenth-century architecture and culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 29423


Wilkinson, Charles Smith (1843-1891), geologist, was born at Potterspury, Northamptonshire, on 22 August 1843, the fourth son of David Wilkinson, civil engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bliss. He early gained enthusiasm for geology from his uncle, a Gloucestershire quarryman. After the family migrated to Melbourne, Australia, in 1852, he attended T. P. Fenner's Collegiate School and, from 1859, was employed by the geological survey of Victoria, carrying out geological mapping in various parts of the colony. He published on the formation of nuggets and experimented on the treatment of ores. 
In 1868 lung inflammation caused Wilkinson's resignation from the survey, and he moved to Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, to recover. In 1871 he moved to Sydney, where he became a licensed surveyor in that colony's surveyor-general's department. The previous year to a royal commission on the goldfields he made a case for the close relations between geology and mining, recommending the formation of a department of mines. Appointed geological surveyor in the department of lands in 1874, he transferred to the newly created department of mines in the following January and formed a geological survey. Following the work of Samuel Stutchbury and W. B. Clarke, he began systematic mapping, publishing the first geological map of New South Wales in 1880. Wilkinson travelled widely in the colony, as government geologist and for the prospecting board, and encouraged the development of a mining museum to educate the public and assist prospectors. 
On 4 May 1887 Wilkinson married Eliza Jane Leitch at Berry Jerry near Wagga Wagga; there were two sons from the marriage. Although often absent from Sydney, Wilkinson was active in the colony's cultural life as an office holder in scientific bodies and a commissioner for international and intercolonial exhibitions. He was a fellow of the Geological and Linnean societies of London, and the Victoria Institute, the last-named reflecting his interest in the relations between science and religion, about which he frequently lectured. Wilkinson died of cancer at Burwood, Sydney, on 26 August 1891, cutting short a fine career as geologist and administrator. He was buried in the Anglican cemetery at Enfield, Sydney, the next day. Tall and with a handsome presence, Wilkinson was liked and admired as an unostentatious but enthusiastic worker, and his more than ninety maps and reports remain widely used a hundred years after his death. He produced numerous articles for the popular press, and at his home gave classes on geology for working men. He is remembered in the names of numerous fossils. 


@@@@@


doc= 29424


Wilkinson, Henry (1610-1675), Church of England clergyman and ejected minister, was born on 4 March 1610 at Waddesdon, Buckinghamshire, the son of Henry Wilkinson (1566-1647) and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Arthur Wake of Salcey Forest, Northamptonshire, and sister of the diplomat Sir Isaac Wake. The elder Henry Wilkinson, born in Halifax, matriculated in 1582 at Queen's College, Oxford, graduated BA in 1585, was elected fellow of Merton College, Oxford, in 1586, and proceeded MA in 1590 and BD in 1597. From 1601 until his death on 19 March 1647 he was rector of Waddesdon. He published 'A Catechism' (which went through four editions between 1623 and 1637) and 'The Debt Book' (1625) and was a member of the Westminster assembly from 1643. The younger Henry Wilkinson was one of a family of six sons and three daughters. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, aged twelve, on 14 February 1623, graduating BA on 25 November 1626, and proceeding MA on 11 June 1629 and BD on 16 November 1638. 
Wilkinson preached in and about Oxford, but, because of his outspoken puritanism, at first the bishop of Oxford refused to ordain him. In his 'Sermon Against Lukewarmness in Religion', preached at St Mary's on 6 September 1640, Wilkinson challenged hearers to be zealous in their faith, condemned superficial and formalistic worship, and proclaimed the Scots' taking of Newcastle to be God's judgment upon England's empty religiosity. For this he was suspended from his divinity lectureship at Magdalen Hall and all priestly functions in the university until he should recant. He appealed to the Long Parliament, which restored him on 23 December 1640 and ordered the sermon to be printed. Wilkinson moved to London, was appointed minister of St Faith's under St Paul's in August 1644, chosen as a member of the Westminster assembly, and on 29 August 1645 became rector of St Dunstan-in-the-West. On three occasions he preached official sermons before parliament and had them published. There was a touch of irony in his last one: 'Miranda stupenda' was delivered on 6 July 1646 in thanksgiving for the fall of Oxford to the army. 
In 1646 parliament dispatched Wilkinson to Oxford, where he was chosen senior fellow of Magdalen and deputed a parliamentary visitor. The next year he signed 'A testimony to... the solemn league and covenant'. On Dr Thomas Iles's expulsion, parliament appointed him, on 1 March 1648, canon of Christ Church, Oxford, where he was installed on 12 April. When the medieval stained glass was taken out of the cathedral windows, Anthony Wood records, Wilkinson 'stampt upon many parts of [it] and utterly defaced them' ('Calamy rev.', 530). Wilkinson was created DD on 24 July 1649 and elected Lady Margaret professor of divinity in the place of his fellow visitor, Francis Cheynell, on 12 July 1652. In 1654 he was an assistant to the commission for ejecting scandalous ministers in Oxfordshire. By then he had married Lady Vere Ker (or Carr), daughter of Robert Ker, first earl of Ancram, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby. They had four children. He was known at Oxford as Long Harry or Senior to distinguish him from Henry Wilkinson (1616/17-1690), the principal of Magdalen Hall. 
At the Restoration, though his predecessor was dead, Wilkinson's petition for royal confirmation of his prebendary failed. After ejection as canon in favour of Jasper Mayne (27 July 1660) and as professor in favour of Thomas Barlow (1 September), Wilkinson preached at All Hallows, Lombard Street, London, then at Clapham, Surrey, where he occupied a large house of fourteen hearths. A conventicle of sixty or more persons to whom he was preaching was broken up at Camberwell in August 1665, and some of his congregation were arrested. On 2 April 1675 Wilkinson took out a licence under Charles II's declaration of indulgence for either his house or the schoolhouse at Clapham to be used as a presbyterian meeting-house. 
Wilkinson was a renowned preacher; three of his sermons were published after he delivered them at Cripplegate and Southwark in Samuel Annesley's popular 'Morning Exercises' (1661 and 1674). When he died on 5 June 1675, either at Deptford or Putney, hundreds of people attended his funeral at Drapers' Hall and his burial in St Dunstan-in-the-West Church. Wilkinson was survived by his wife, one son, Robert, and two daughters, Ann and Elizabeth. His will, made at Clapham on 2 April 1675 and proved on 1 July, showed that he still owned a leasehold in Oxford and was able to leave $600 to each of his daughters. He should not be confused with the Roman Catholic apologist Henry Wilkinson of the same period who published 'Meditation upon the Marks of the True Christ' (1655). 


@@@@@


doc= 29425


Wilkinson, Henry (1616/17-1690), college head and ejected minister, was the son of William Wilkinson, curate or chaplain of Adwick-le-Street, Yorkshire, where he was born. John Wilkinson (died 1650), principal of Magdalen Hall and president of Magdalen College, Oxford, was his uncle. After studying under John Langly in Gloucester and Edward Sylvester in Oxford, Henry matriculated at Magdalen Hall on 10 October 1634 aged seventeen. His tutor was Dr Henry Wilkinson, later canon of Christ Church, Oxford. He graduated BA on 28 November 1635, proceeded MA on 26 May 1638, and became tutor and dean of his college. 
When the civil war started Wilkinson left Oxford, joined the Westminster assembly, and became a popular preacher. He became lecturer or minister of Buckminster, Leicestershire, in 1642; lecturer at Carfax church, Oxford, on 10 October 1642 (albeit that he was hardly in a position to exercise while the town was the royalist headquarters); and vicar of Epping, Essex, on 30 October 1643, upon the sequestration of Martin Holbeach. He was appointed a parliamentary visitor of Oxford University on 1 May 1647. Created BD on 14 April 1648 he became fellow and vice-president of Magdalen College on 25 May, principal of Magdalen Hall on 12 August, and Whyte's professor of moral philosophy on 24 March 1649. He was known as Dean Harry, to distinguish him from his former tutor. A strong parliamentarian, Wilkinson signed the Essex 'Testimony... to the solemn league and covenant' (1648) and entertained Oliver Cromwell and his commanders at Magdalen Hall on 19 May 1649. Preaching before them next day he 'prayed hard for the army' (Bloxam, 2.cviii). 
In 1652 Wilkinson was created DD and was elected prebendary of Worcester Cathedral, though he was never installed. Wilkinson's wife, Elizabeth (1612/13-1654) ['see 'Wilkinson, Elizabeth], the daughter of Anthony Gifford of Devon, died on 8 December 1654, and on 4 September 1655 he married Anne Benson (died 1698) of Hackney, Middlesex. On 27 May 1658 the council of state voted him a salary of $60 for his Carfax lectureship. Reputed for his scholarship he catalogued the Magdalen Hall Library (published in 1661), published six Latin sermons and treatises between 1654 and 1660, and regularly preached in the university church. He fervently pleaded presbyterian reform against all 'prophane' influences: rising Socinianism; Antinomian 'spirits' and unordained sectarians who were 'self-conceited Seducers'; and Arminians, who were a blend of Jesuits and superficial protestants. Wilkinson was fearless. In 1660 he offended returning episcopal powers with his 'Three Decads of Sermons' urging readers not to 'hanker after superstitious Ceremonies, a formal Service Book, [or] a Lordly Prelacy'. 
After the Restoration Wilkinson's petition to remain in place was successful (29 March 1661), but in September the chancellor of the university, the earl of Clarendon, chided Wilkinson for the nonconformity of Magdalen, complaining that it contained only 'factious and debauched persons'. Wilkinson was ejected from his livings by the 'Act of Uniformity' in August 1662, though some university officials desired to retain him because he was a good disciplinarian. He preached at Buckminster, Leicestershire, until he was gaoled on erroneous charges of complicity in the Farnley Wood plot. Upon release, in September 1665, he settled at Gosfield, Essex, when, between the tenures of Thomas Wardener and Henry Elliot (1669-72), apparently he officiated at the parish church. An entry in the visitation book of the archdeaconry for 9 June 1671 notes his citation for reading divine service not according to the rubric. On 19 July he was pronounced contumacious and was excommunicated. 
After Charles II's declaration of indulgence he got licences, dated 16 May 1672, for himself as a presbyterian teacher at Gosfield and for his house as a presbyterian meeting-house. When these were revoked he wrote to Anthony Wood in Oxford, in July 1672, seeking employment as a Latin translator to eke out a living. In 1673 or 1674 he moved to Sible Hedingham, Essex, where his library was distrained on his refusing to pay the fine for unlawful preaching. Afterwards he occasionally relied on charity from patrons such as Mary Rich, countess of Warwick, to sustain him. His last years were in Suffolk: at Great Cornard near Sudbury (1680), and at Castle Honingham (1690). He died on 13 May 1690 and was buried on the 15th at Milding, near Lavenham. His widow, Anne, moved to Dedham, Essex, where she lived with her daughter, Martha, the wife of the vicar, William Burkitt, until her death in November 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 29426


James John Wilkinson (bap. 1780, d. 1858), lawyer, the eldest son of Martin Wilkinson, attorney, and Jane Rawling. James Wilkinson was baptized at St Mary-le-Bow, Durham, on 19 June 1780, and entered Gray's Inn, London, on 26 November 1802; he practised as a special pleader and was also a judge of the county palatine of Durham. On 4 September 1811 he married Harriet Robinson of Sunderland. By 1849 he had married again; his second wife, Anne Wilkinson, wrote a number of legal works. She predeceased him. He died at 8 Church Row, London, on 25 December 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 29427


Wilkinson, (James John) Garth (1812-1899), Swedenborgian writer and homoeopath, born in Acton Street, Gray's Inn Lane, London, on 3 June 1812, was the eldest son of 
Garth Wilkinson was educated at a school in Sunderland, and afterwards at a private school at Mill Hill kept by John Charles Thorowgood and at Totteridge in Hertfordshire. At the age of about sixteen he was apprenticed by his father to Thomas Leighton, senior surgeon of the infirmary at Newcastle upon Tyne. In 1832 he went to London to train at various hospitals, and in June 1834 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of England and a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. On 4 January 1840 he married Emma Anne, daughter of William Marsh, a jeweller. They had one son and three daughters. 
Wilkinson was attracted by the writings of William Blake, and in 1839 he edited his 'Songs of Innocence and of Experience', with considerable alterations. A volume of his own poems, entitled 'Improvisations from the Spirit', which appeared in 1857, showed many traces of Blake's influence. Early in life Wilkinson was also introduced, by his maternal uncle George Blakiston Robinson, to the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, and he became a member of the committee of the Swedenborg Society and of the subcommittee for promoting the issue of a uniform edition of Swedenborg's works. From 1839 he devoted most of his literary energies to the translation and elucidation of Swedenborg's writings. 
When in 1840 Wilkinson began to contribute to the 'Monthly Magazine' the originality of his philosophic intellect immediately attracted attention. A paper which appeared in 1841 dealing with Coleridge's comments on Swedenborg's 'De oeconomia regni animalis' and his 'De cultu et amore Dei' gained him the admiration of the American writer Henry James, father of the novelist. James corresponded with Wilkinson at length, and two of his works, 'The Church of Christ not an Ecclesiasticism' (2nd edn, 1856) and 'Christianity the Logic of Creation' (1857), were composed of letters originally addressed to Wilkinson. In 1843 and 1844 Wilkinson published his translation of Swedenborg's 'De oeconomia regni animalis' as 'The Animal Kingdom Considered'. These volumes were followed by further translations, one of which, 'Outlines of a Philosophic Argument on the Infinite', won him the friendship of Ralph Waldo Emerson. Wilkinson's translations were accompanied by preliminary discourses which were declared by Emerson to 'throw all contemporary philosophy of England into shade' ('Representative Men', 1882, 65; cf. 'English Traits', 1857, 140). Besides enjoying the esteem of Emerson, Wilkinson was intimate with Thomas Carlyle, James Anthony Froude, Charles Dickens, Alfred Tennyson, and the Oliphants, and he was the friend of Edward Augustus Freeman, who was a relative. 
For Wilkinson, Swedenborg promised not merely a linkage (mystical in some definitions) between everything natural and supernatural but also a new organization of knowledge and thus of medical and social relations. 'All power' (as he worded one sentence of his own translation of the Swede's 'Animal Kingdom', xxxix) 'resides in the least things'. This core principle made him a readier listener when Emma Anne refused, on homoeopathic grounds, to administer a drug he himself had just prepared for their first baby. Her mutiny precipitated his conversion to homoeopathy. (This incident is recounted in Wilkinson's own words in his biography by C. J. Wilkinson on pages 247-9.) Wilkinson then established himself as a homoeopath in Wimpole Street, London. 
The same Swedenborgian principle helped make Wilkinson, along with Swedenborgians such as William White but unlike some homoeopaths, into a furious opponent of vaccination. This, for him -- along with the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and vivisection -- exemplified an already current misdevelopment in the natural sciences and in any version of medicine that claimed to derive from them. This misdevelopment was, he believed, compartmentalization, and one of its silliest results was materialism; its ghastliest was, towards the lay and powerless in general and towards women and animals in particular, a coldly objectifying arrogance, or 'specialism' as he called it. This had social (not least anti-woman) dimensions. Crucially it applied primogeniture to the terrain of knowledge: 'aim[ing] rather at increasing intellectual property in a few hands, and transmitting it unimpaired from generation to generation, than... [at] the public service.... All the... fences, and other arrangements of intellectual estates, are especially adapted for the system of individual proprietorship, and would be useless under a different mode of tenure. ('Science for All', 1847, 3-16)' By contrast Wilkinson agreed with most plebeian medicators in wanting every person to be their own and their neighbour's healer, unintimidated by what he called the 'corporate quackery' of orthodoxy. 
All this made Wilkinson, despite his membership of the Royal College of Surgeons, not merely someone for whom surgery had become 'ever an abomination' (Wilkinson, 264) but also an increasingly shrill Cassandra against the dominant intellectual and social trends in medicine. His own allegiance to 'leasts' harmonized with spiritualists and with many medical heretics in their belief in the power of what came to be called 'imponderables'. In common with mid-nineteenth-century medical botanists and others, he attempted to work out the democratic implications of this apparent power. In the 1880s he was still looking forward to 'new doctrines' which would renew 'all business, all property, all relations' and would amount to 'the Second Coming of Christ' ('Swedenborg's Doctrines and the Translation of his Works', 1882, 5, 7). During the 1840s he had been stirred by Fourierism and in 1848 he had visited Paris and felt sympathy with its insurgent workers. 
Wilkinson was versed in Icelandic and Scandinavian literature. He was a member of the Icelandic Society of Copenhagen, and corresponded with Gunnar Rudberg, the Scandinavian philologist. He was associated with Jon A. Hjaltalin in translating Swedenborg's 'Divine Love and Wisdom' into Icelandic (1869). He visited the United States, and about 1850 was the English correspondent of several New York and Boston papers. His earliest residence in London was 25 Church Row, Hampstead. About 1848 he moved to Finchley Road. He died at 4 Finchley Road, London, on 18 October 1899, and was buried on 21 October in Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29428


Wilkinson, John (1728-1808), ironmaster and industrialist, was born in Clifton, Cumberland, the eldest son of Isaac Wilkinson (bap. 1695, d. 1784), ironmaster, and his wife, Mary Johnson (died 1786); William Wilkinson was his brother. In the 1720s Isaac Wilkinson was iron-founder at Clifton furnace; in the 1730s he moved to Backbarrow furnace and later to Lowwood in Furness, north Lancashire. John was sent to the dissenting academy at Kendal, run by Dr Caleb Rotherham. On leaving the academy at the age of seventeen, he was apprenticed to a Liverpool merchant for five years and then returned to enter into partnership with his father. When his father moved to Bersham furnace in north Wales in 1753 John remained behind in the north, living at Kirkby Lonsdale in Westmorland, perhaps to wind up their local business. There, on 12 June 1755, he married Ann Maudesley, the coheir to two manors. In the following year a daughter, Mary, was born at Kirkby Lonsdale. Ann died on 17 November 1756, shortly after the couple moved to Bersham to join Isaac Wilkinson. 
From 1755 John Wilkinson is named as a partner in the Bersham concern, but he soon operated partly independently, becoming a managing partner in the New Willey Company of 1757 which took over the early coke-iron furnace at Willey, near Broseley in Shropshire. New furnaces and casting-houses produced a wide range of coke-pig castings, including cannon and shot, pipes, and cylinders; wagon-railways delivered raw materials to the works and carried finished goods to the Severn. While it is difficult to date, it was probably at the end of the 1750s that Wilkinson erected a furnace at Bradley, in Bilston parish, Staffordshire, but this was only of local importance until redeveloped in 1772. New Willey and Bradley were operated as coke furnaces, and Bersham for some time alternated between coke and charcoal iron but turned permanently to coke-pig after a difficult period during which Wilkinson developed his father's patented blowing engine successfully at all three works. He was operating New Willey with blowing-cylinders powered by a Newcomen engine before 1776, at which time a Watt engine was installed. Bersham in particular became an important producer of ordnance, Wilkinson selling through agents until 1770. Bersham and New Willey became producers of quality steam engine cylinders, making a price agreement for their sale with the original producers, the Darbys of Coalbrookdale, in 1762. 
A key business change came from the bankruptcy of Edward Blakeway, partner in Bersham, New Willey, and Bradley, entailing the take-over of his shares by his sister-in-law, Mary Lee, who became the main shareholder. She married John Wilkinson in December 1763. In the depression following the end of the Seven Years' War there were disputes at Willey and also at Bersham, from where Isaac Wilkinson left to embark on foundry and furnace projects in Bristol and south Wales; but by 1766 John Wilkinson had emerged in control of both. Bersham became celebrated for high-quality casting and its guns sold well. Wilkinson developed a technique for boring iron guns from the solid, rotating the gun barrel rather than the boring-bar. Patented in 1774, this method produced guns less likely to explode and with a more accurate bore. While bronze cannon were already being bored from the solid, the boring of large naval iron cannon from the solid was a new method. The navy sought to overthrow the patent, though on the grounds that it was against the national interest and created a monopoly rather than on any technical invalidity. It was quashed in 1779, but this did not prevent Wilkinson remaining a major manufacturer of ordnance of high repute. 
In 1775 Wilkinson made his first steam engine cylinder for the firm of Boulton and Watt, which proved very satisfactory when other ironmasters had been unable to meet Watt's specifications. He built a Watt engine for his New Willey works, but quickly devised a new lathe, the cylinder lathe, for the more accurate casting of cylinders -- an invention of great importance which secured him a virtual monopoly, for Watt would not recommend other cylinder makers to those who wished to install his engines. For many years there were good personal and business relations between Wilkinson and the engine partners. Wilkinson continued to improve the cylinder lathe until 1779; he did not patent it, and it was copied by the Coalbrookdale Company and others. In 1774 Wilkinson had made his younger brother William a partner in Bersham, but during the visit of the Frenchman Marchant de la Houliere to his Broseley works in 1775 he recommended William to him to go to France to set up ordnance works on his own pattern, which William did, at Indret, near Nantes. Subsequently, William was the technological adviser to the scheme to set up great coke-iron furnaces and associated plant at Le Creusot in Burgundy. It is clear that John acted as consultant to his brother in both projects. During the 1780s the works under John Wilkinson's control expanded and became more important. Bersham was less significant in furnace output but became outstanding for high-quality castings, ordnance, and calendered and other engineering goods, while its requirements in pig iron were satisfied from Wilkinson's other furnaces. These included one at Snedshill, Shropshire, in which he became a partner in 1777, and he soon added a second there; both furnaces were cylinder-blown by Boulton and Watt engines, and they were said to be very large for their time. 
From 1772 the Bradley works was further extended and additional furnaces and rolling mills built. In the 1780s, first at Broseley, Wilkinson began to set up forges at his works to employ the Wright and Jesson 'stamping and potting' process for the conversion of coke-pig to wrought iron, thus expanding the market, and in 1782 he set up forges for this process at Bradley, too, his forges being provided with steam-powered hammers worked by Boulton and Watt engines. The association with Boulton and Watt was very close from the late 1770s. It provided the engines for the Paris water company of which J.-C. Perier was the engineer and leading entrepreneur; Wilkinson made the cylinders for the engines and great quantities of iron water pipes. The engine parts were shipped to Paris with the collaboration of both governments, despite France joining in the American War of Independence; and the presence of Wilkinson's water pipes on British wharves gave rise to the belief that he supplied the French with cannon during the war. He was involved with Boulton and Watt, and even more the copper magnate Thomas Williams, in the intense negotiations over the future of the copper industry in the 1780s. At this period the main market for Boulton and Watt engines -- Wilkinson supplying the cylinders -- was the Cornish copper mines, and they, and Wilkinson, had invested in them. Wilkinson invested $25,000 in the Cornish Metal Company of 1785 and he and Williams were decisive in the trade agreements of that year and their revision in 1787. Wilkinson became a shareholder in two of the subsidiaries of the Anglesey mines managed by Williams, and he was a partner in a Birmingham metal warehouse with him and Boulton and Watt. 
The important innovation of the 1780s in the iron industry was Henry Cort's puddling and rolling process for converting coke-pig to wrought iron. It had a period of difficult development under the patronage of Richard Crawshay. Wilkinson did not adapt it at once, though by 1789 he had himself produced improved rolls and dispensed with the old second, or chafery, stage of forging. He was experimenting with puddling itself by 1790. After nearly abandoning the experiment he began to succeed in the same year and was using it extensively by the mid-1790s. Bradley was further extended around 1790 with great use of steam power for furnace-blowing, boring, and turning, and for rolling mills and slitting mills. 
In 1792 Wilkinson bought the Brymbo Hall estate in Denbighshire, where furnaces and other plant were installed. This great phase of expansion, well in place for the war demand after 1793, meant that he was producing in 1796 about one-eighth of the nation's iron (15,274 tons). Bersham alone was valued at over $40,000 in 1789. Wilkinson was also important in the lead industry, being a major investor in Minera and other mines in north Wales, and he had several smelters, one of which was at Bersham. He had devised a process for producing lead pipe and had a works and depot for this at Rotherhithe, London. 
In the 1790s Wilkinson was involved in two bitter disputes. One was with his brother William, and it related to William's shares in Bersham, which John had offered to let him increase, but only at a new and realistic valuation. William seems to have resented the expansion in other works, especially the nearby Brymbo, in which he did not have an interest, and the terms for renewed investment in Snedshill, in which he did. John may have been resentful at paying William his due share of the profits when he had long taken no part in management but had earned large sums from the French government by an arrangement secured for him by John. William believed that John's accounts for Bersham were drawn up in a way unfavourable to him, and that John had concealed profitable transactions with Thomas Williams and others. The quarrel went to chancery in 1794, and John put Bersham up for sale, which led to an action in king's bench. Eventually John bought out William's share in Bersham fairly cheaply, but arbitrators awarded William over $8000 in dividends owed. 
This suit tangled with a more celebrated one, between John Wilkinson and Boulton and Watt, and William moved into the latter's camp, recruiting key Bersham workers for its new engine-building works, Soho Foundry. It also acted as arbitrator in another quarrel between the brothers relating to lead mining in north Wales. Its own quarrel with John Wilkinson arose because he supplied a number of firms with 'pirate' Boulton and Watt engines which he did not declare to the partnership, and the proprietors of these firms did not pay Boulton and Watt engine premiums (a fee for the use of their engines based on the fuel savings of Boulton and Watt engines in comparison with ordinary Newcomen engines). The partners probably knew of the piracies by 1795, but it was only in that year that Boulton was able to discharge a debt of $5000 to Wilkinson. Some of the engines were owned by industrialists with low coal costs, certain to pay low premiums, and to such orders Boulton and Watt was believed to give low priority. Eventually Wilkinson had to compound with them for the payments on nineteen engines he had supplied to others and for some he had built for himself, but it was not until after 1798 that Boulton and Watt was able to dispense with his cylinders. While William and the Boulton and Watt circle tended to report with glee on John's business problems, John himself was building new furnaces in 1803-4, and Bradley was certainly flourishing in the early years of the nineteenth century. 
One of John Wilkinson's last inventions was the cupola furnace; originally thought of as a small smelter, it became popular for remelting pig for casting. He was a great advocate of the increased use of iron as a raw material, and while his more eccentric creations, such as his own coffin and memorial column, are often cited, he was an original subscriber to the world's first iron bridge of 1779 -- that over the Severn at Ironbridge -- though he withdrew in favour of Abraham Darby III, its main advocate and constructor. He had two iron canal barges and a river barge built, the first iron cargo-carriers. Like many contemporary industrialists Wilkinson overcame the shortage of regal coin by issuing his own trade tokens, which were of high quality and displayed his own head and the inscription 'John Wilkinson Ironmaster'. The first, of 1787, was struck by Thomas Williams, and later issues by Boulton and by Westwood. A silver version of the token was struck in small numbers. Wilkinson invested in two banks; one, a Shrewsbury bank, had been founded in 1792, Wilkinson entering it in 1795 when it was having difficulties. He joined a new Birmingham banking partnership in 1801. At his death he was still an investor in both banks. 
Wilkinson was attracted to the profits to be made from canals. He was particularly involved in promoting the Flint Coal Canal, the Shropshire Canal, and the Shrewsbury Canal, and in the Glamorgan Canal primarily promoted by his friend Richard Crawshay. He was a leading shareholder in the less successful Chester and Ellesmere Canal. He was a committed agricultural improver, especially near his principal residences. In the late 1770s he bought Castlehead Hill near Grange-over-Sands, north Lancashire, building a mansion and improving 1000 acres of nearly worthless mossland surrounding it, typically developing new techniques to drain it so that it could produce crops. He seems to have been more interested in the achievement than in any economic return. At Brymbo he enhanced the value of the infertile land, largely by liming, so that it produced worthwhile yields. He employed a very early steam-powered threshing machine there by 1798. As well as Brymbo Hall and Castlehead, he had The Lawns (a much used house at Broseley), and a house at Bradley. 
While Wilkinson was sometimes referred to by other industrialists making representations to government, particularly on the iron trade, he tended to dislike any interruption to his iron making and generally wanted government to leave industry alone. His political attitudes surfaced rarely. He was very friendly with his brother-in-law, the scientist Joseph Priestley, who had married his sister Mary in 1762. When Priestley moved to take charge of the Unitarian New Meeting in Birmingham in 1780 Wilkinson bought him a house, and for a time he tried to train Priestley's son as a manager in the iron trade. Wilkinson seems to have shared Priestley's early enthusiasm for the French Revolution, and he gave him immediate and continuing financial aid after his house was burnt down in the Birmingham Church and King riots of 1791; he also made large investments in French 'assignats', mainly for Priestley's benefit. His own use of countersigned 'assignats' as a form of token payment at Bersham was stopped by parliament in 1793. 
Originally a Presbyterian, Wilkinson is thought to have moved to the Unitarianism of Priestley, and his early approval of the French Revolution is even taken as indicating deism or atheism. But while his burial memorial at Castlehead, an abbreviation of his own draft epitaph, dedicates his achievements to the glory of God, the full version also hoped for 'a Heavenly Mansion as promulgated by Jesus Christ, in whose gospel he was a firm believer' -- seeming evidence that he was thus neither atheist nor deist. His sexual morals were easy-going. He and his second wife Mary had no children, she being about forty at the time of their marriage; however, he had a series of mistresses, some of whom were his servants. From 1800 he had a regular mistress, Ann Lewis, by whom he had three children when in his seventies. After his wife's death at Castlehead, probably in 1806, he legitimized these children and bequeathed his property in trust to them, but he left Castlehead to Ann. His nephew Thomas Jones, whom he had trained as a manager in the iron industry, was now only residuary legatee when he had expected to be sole heir. 
After a short illness Wilkinson died at Bradley on 14 July 1808. He was buried at Castlehead, where an iron obelisk was erected in his memory. His nephew then contested the will in chancery, and with lawsuits continuing to 1823 and reaching the House of Lords at a time of depression and change within the iron industry, the works declined, the property was sold off, and Wilkinson's great industrial empire ingloriously disappeared. The only works that was bought was Brymbo, in 1842 by the railway engineer and investor William Robertson and others. It became once again an important works, and in the 1850s Robertson became a founder partner in Beyer Peacock, the well-known locomotive builders of Manchester. Wilkinson's son John, after attending Cambridge University and undergoing a spell in the army, was said to be profligate and to have emigrated to the United States. His daughters married well; the elder married William Legh, and their son became the first Lord Newton of Lyme. 
Wilkinson is said to have been strongly built; he had a long, heavy face badly scarred by smallpox, and a strong deep voice. In the first great period of technology-driven expansion in the British iron industry -- even with contemporaries such as Abraham Darby III, Richard Crawshay, Richard Reynolds, and William Reynolds -- Wilkinson was the dominant figure, making a great impression on contemporaries at all levels and combining technological leadership and inventiveness with business ability. His confidence in his technical lead meant that his works were normally open to the inspection of foreigners. His imperious, almost despotic, attitude made him disliked by some contemporaries, but his excellent relations with Richard Crawshay, William Reynolds, and Thomas Williams are in contrast; too much weight, not unnaturally, has perhaps been put on the evidence of the Boulton and Watt correspondence. Though at times ruthless, he was generally considerate to good workmen, and alone among contemporary ironmasters he was a folk hero, celebrated in popular song, and the subject of myth, so that thousands are said to have gathered seven years after his death to await his prophesied reappearance. 


@@@@@


doc= 29429


Wilkinson, Sir John Gardner (1797-1875), Egyptologist, born on 5 October 1797, probably at Little Missenden Abbey, Buckinghamshire, and baptized at Chelsea, London, on 17 January 1798, was the only surviving child of the Revd John Wilkinson and his wife, Mary Anne, daughter of the Revd Richard Gardner. From his father, a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, Wilkinson derived his early interest in the scholarship of the past. His mother was also a classical scholar. She taught him how to draw -- the only artistic training he ever received. He was orphaned at an early age; his parents left him a small income, which later financed his researches. He became the ward of the Revd Dr Yates. In 1813 Wilkinson entered Harrow School where he came under the influence of its headmaster, George Butler, who encouraged his interests. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1816, but left three years later without taking a degree, to begin his grand tour. He planned to make a leisurely journey through Europe followed by a voyage to Egypt, then a subject of great popular attention, before returning to England and purchasing a commission in the army. As Wilkinson passed through Italy, however, he impressed the accomplished classical scholar Sir William Gell with the depth of his interest in the past and his artistic ability. Gell, who was well connected to scholarly developments, convinced him that he could make a contribution to the study of ancient Egypt and gave him a course of preparatory instruction to that end. 
Wilkinson arrived in Egypt on 22 November 1821. He soon became so fascinated with the land that he abandoned all thoughts of an army career and spent the next twelve years there. During that time he travelled widely throughout Egypt, twice ascending the Nile into Nubia and exploring both the eastern and the western deserts. He accomplished an extraordinary amount of work at most of the major archaeological sites then known in Egypt and recorded them in his numerous notebooks and sketchbooks. His sketches are rendered with an accuracy and consistency that make them valuable evidence for monuments that were damaged or destroyed after he drew them. He was among those at the forefront of the field of Egyptology, a discipline so new that its very name had yet to be coined. He followed the decipherment of the hieroglyphs closely and corrected some of Jean Francois Champollion's early translations, though the latter's contribution is by far the more important. 
The primary focus of Wilkinson's work in Egypt was at ancient Thebes. It was he who initiated the numbering system for the tombs in the Valley of the Kings: some of the numbers that he painted over their entrances may still be seen. He was especially interested in the Tombs of the Nobles on the hill of Shaykh 'Abd al-Gurna, recognizing that their naturalistic mode of representation made them evidence for daily life in ancient Egypt. He remodelled one of the tombs (TT 83) into a comfortable habitation that became a well-known landmark for the rest of the century. 
During his Egyptian years Wilkinson published several works, among them an account of some of his earliest eastern desert explorations in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' in 1832. He also published two short Egyptological books, both quite rare, 'Materia hieroglyphica' (1828) and 'Extracts from Several Hieroglyphic Subjects' (1830). The Royal Geographical Society sponsored the publication of his map of Thebes (1830), an extraordinarily accurate and detailed survey, but so large and expensive as to limit its circulation. 
Wilkinson returned to Britain in 1833 and soon afterwards published a survey of both ancient and modern Egypt entitled 'Topography of Thebes and General View of Egypt' (1835), the most substantial work on Egypt since the French 'Description de l'Egypte'. Wilkinson's greatest published work was 'Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians' (1837), a profusely illustrated description of ancient Egyptian society. Drawing upon his work in the tombs at Gurna, Wilkinson was able to present a poignant picture of daily life in ancient Egypt that instantly caught the popular imagination. Praised by one reviewer as a 'restoration to life, as it were, of the ancient Pharaohs, and their subjects' ('QR', Jan 1839, 120), it passed through many editions, influencing generations of English-speaking readers. Melbourne's government recognized Wilkinson's accomplishments with a knighthood on 26 August 1839. Many observers were impressed that Wilkinson, unlike many continental scholars, had received no government assistance for his researches. 
The two decades following the publication of 'Ancient Egyptians' were years of travel and writing. In Britain, Wilkinson ranged widely and was a frequent guest at country houses. He made several trips to Europe and through the Mediterranean, resulting in numerous publications. For example, a trip into south-eastern Europe in 1844 provided material for 'Dalmatia and Montenegro' (1848). While it displayed naivety about the region's ethnic conflicts, it also contained much significant material, such as documentation of regional costume and a description of the Paulician heresy. Wilkinson returned to Egypt in 1842, 1844, and 1848-9. While these trips hardly matched the first one in range or intensity of research, they provided new experiences, such as an exploration of the eastern delta on one occasion and an ascent of the Nile as far south as Jebel Berkel on another. His last trip to Egypt was in 1855-6; during it he suffered sunstroke while sketching a monument at Thebes. Wilkinson published several other works about ancient Egypt including 'The Architecture of the Ancient Egyptians' (1850) and 'The Egyptians in the Time of the Pharaohs' (1857), but none of these matched 'Ancient Egyptians' in originality or scope. His popular 'Handbook for Travellers in Egypt' (1847) for John Murray's series of travellers' guides went through many editions. 
On 16 October 1856 Wilkinson married Caroline Catherine Lucas (1822-1881), botanical author, daughter of Henry Lucas, of Uplands, Glamorgan. After some years of searching, the Wilkinsons found a permanent residence at the village of Reynoldston in Gower, near Lady Wilkinson's childhood home. In the course of thoroughly renovating their house, named Brynfield House, Wilkinson added a large library where he arranged and rearranged his collections, especially his notebooks and sketchbooks, which he believed still contained unrealized potential. During his Gower years Wilkinson became deeply involved in British antiquities, many of which were only a short walk from his home. He was an officer in the Cambrian Archaeological Association and a contributor to its journal. In 1867 he lent his influential support to the successful effort to save the medieval gate at Tenby. Wilkinson died at Llandovery on 29 October 1875 while returning from an extended visit to his relatives, the Harpur-Crewes, at their estate, Calke Abbey, in Derbyshire. He was buried on 3 November in the churchyard at Llandingad, under a monument of his own design, an obelisk atop a pedestal. 
A revised edition of 'Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians' was published in 1878, brought up to date by Samuel Birch of the department of Egyptian antiquities at the British Museum. Lady Wilkinson's plans for publishing various of her husband's manuscripts came to naught, however. Particularly regrettable in that regard is his 'Desert plants of Egypt', which was drawn in colour on stone, and was ready for publication in every way when a misunderstanding with the printer over the subvention caused the project to be cancelled. The stones were erased soon after, leaving just one lovely lithograph on the prospectus to the never published work. Wilkinson's most enduring legacy to scholarship is probably his notebooks, sketchbooks, and other Egyptological papers, the full value of which has yet to be assessed. These, with most of his other papers, Wilkinson willed to be deposited at Calke Abbey; they subsequently went to the Bodleian Library, Oxford. His collections of antiquities, including his excellent collection of Greek vases, were donated to Harrow School, an indication of his lifelong affection for that institution. 
Wilkinson was a member of many scholarly societies and, besides his knighthood, received numerous other honours, more than any Egyptologist of his day. He also published many works in addition to those mentioned above and in many different fields, but his most important contribution by far was to the study of ancient Egypt. With some justice he has been referred to as 'the real founder of Egyptology in Great Britain' (Dawson and Uphill, 443). 


@@@@@


doc= 29430


Wilkinson, Tate (1739-1803), actor and theatre manager, was born in London on 27 October 1739, the son of the Revd John Wilkinson (died 1757) and his wife, Grace, 'nee' Tate (died 1763), the daughter of an alderman of Carlisle. His father was chaplain to the Savoy, chaplain to Frederick, prince of Wales, rector of Coyty in Glamorgan, and curate of Wise in Kent. Wilkinson's own life and the anecdotal sweep of his colourful stage career can be found recorded, in considerable detail, in the four volumes of his 'Memoirs of his Own Life' (1790) and in the four volumes of 'The Wandering Patentee, or, A History of the Yorkshire Theatres from 1770 to the Present Time' (1795). 
Wilkinson's early education was provided by the schooling of a Mr Bellas in Church Lane, and later that of a Mr Tempest, near Wandsworth. He might have been expected to follow dutifully the example of his father and enter the church, but at the age of ten he became unexpectedly stage-struck. The theatre housekeeper of Covent Garden, a family acquaintance, allowed him privileged access to rehearsals and productions in what must have seemed to the young boy the most hallowed of secular surroundings. At the age of thirteen he was sent to Harrow School, where the zeal he now displayed for things theatrical found outlet in his skill at mimicry and in the performance of roles such as Lady Townly in Vanbrugh's 'The Provok'd Husband' and Romeo. When he was seventeen his father was sentenced to fourteen years' transportation to America for the illegal conduct of marriages by his own licence at the Savoy, and in March 1757 his father died when storms forced the convict ship to put in for shelter at Portsmouth. Although Wilkinson and his mother were close to destitution, the young man now surprised and offended Jonas Hanway, a close friend of his father, by spurning the security of an arranged commission in the army. Wilkinson, ambitious for a stage career, applied instead to John Rich, manager of Covent Garden Theatre, who offered him some instruction then promptly admonished him as being incapable of acting. The prospect of employment with Rich was further diminished by making an enemy of Covent Garden's renowned leading lady, Margaret Woffington. Believing she had heard Wilkinson mimic her one evening, Mrs Woffington had insisted on his dismissal. Wilkinson's 'Memoirs' capture the off-stage drama of the green room confrontation with Woffington: 'Mr Wilkinson, I have made a visit this morning to Mr Rich to command and to insist on his not giving you any engagement whatever -- no, not of the most menial kind in the theatre. -- Merit you have none -- charity you deserve not, -- for if you did my purse should give you a dinner... I heard you echo my voice when I was acting, and I sincerely hope in whatever barn you are acting as an unworthy stroller, that you will fully experience the same contempt you dared last night to offer me.' Ned Shuter, a comic player and friend of Wilkinson's, invited him, however, to play a role, that of the Fine Gentleman, in Garrick's farce 'Lethe', staged for Shuter's benefit performance on 28 March 1757. Wilkinson was introduced 'as a person who had never appeared'. On the second evening, playing the same role in a benefit for the actor James Bencraft, he was taunted and hissed off the stage. A few weeks later he was present as an onlooker in the wings when Woffington suffered the collapse and paralysis that was to end her career. He went to the assistance of the actress and later recorded the incident in his memoirs, recalling her kind words as he helped her from the stage. 
With the help of aristocratic patrons, Wilkinson managed to gain an audience with David Garrick, the revered actor-manager of Drury Lane. Garrick was so taken with his mimicry and impersonation of his rival Samuel Foote that he engaged him for Drury Lane's autumn season 1757-8 at 30's'. a week. At this same time Wilkinson also joined a company under the management of Wignall in Maidstone, Kent, opening as Aimwell in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem'. He played other roles without much success and on appearing at Drury Lane under Garrick was given only walk-on parts. The unpredictable Garrick, now cold towards Wilkinson, encouraged him to leave for Ireland with Foote. Towards the end of 1757 he appeared with Foote at Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, under Sheridan, playing the part of Puzzle in Foote's then popular entertainment 'Tea'. The role gave Wilkinson scope for his imitations of contemporary performers, which proved a great success with Dublin audiences. The suggestion to Sheridan that he now add an imitation of the manager himself was, however, coldly received. Sheridan dismissed Wilkinson from the stage until his contracted benefit performance on 25 February 1758. The measure, though, of his popularity was in the considerable takings of 130 guineas. He returned to London, flushed with his Irish success, to find himself still denied acceptance by Garrick. With the help of influential friends he managed to find employment from 9 June to 14 August 1758 in Portsmouth, where the fleet was then stationed. With the Portsmouth company he extended his repertory with roles such as Romeo, Hotspur, Richard III, Lear, Hamlet, and Orestes. 
Wilkinson's first appearance under Garrick at Drury Lane took place with Foote in October 1758 in Foote's two-act farce 'Diversions of the Morning'. In the role of Bounce, Wilkinson again gave a range of imitations of well-known actors, to the delight of audiences. One of his victims, the actor Luke Sparks, complained to Garrick and demanded that the imitations be withdrawn. Garrick consented to this, but the reaction of the audience to the censorship of the imitations was so riotous that Garrick immediately capitulated. In an attempt to pacify feelings in the theatre community, Garrick submitted now to Wilkinson's additional impersonation of Garrick himself. Garrick's outrage was softened, however, by the obvious success at the box office. At the close of the season in May 1759, for his benefit performance, Wilkinson played his imitation of Foote, and also acted Othello, to a crowded, distinguished, and appreciative audience. 
Wilkinson continued to enjoy theatrical success in Dublin and Winchester. In November 1760 he made his first appearance at Covent Garden in Foote's 'The Minor', a satirical comedy which made fun of Sheridan's schemes to set up an academy and which played in direct competition with Foote's own production at Drury Lane. As well as parodying Foote's style of playing, Wilkinson also imitated Garrick to such effect that Garrick never again spoke to him. 
Wilkinson's fame was now spreading, and for three years, from 1762 onwards, he lived a peripatetic life with appearances at Birmingham, Bath, Chester, London, Portsmouth, and Bristol. He also played for the first time at Norwich and York, and in February 1765 in Edinburgh, once again performing in 'The Minor'. In York he had come into contact with Joseph Baker, the owner and manager of a newly built and unlicensed theatre, who had once been an actor as well as a painter of church interiors and theatrical scenery. This relationship proved to be one of the most significant in Wilkinson's life. Baker's warmth and affection towards him was such that he came to feel like an adopted son. Baker was heavily in debt, partly due to investment in a new theatre, when it was suggested that he consider taking on Wilkinson as a business partner. At the age of twenty-six, Wilkinson joined Baker's enterprise, eventually investing some $1400, attending to refurbishment, reordering costumes with richer fabrics, and generally improving the theatrical stock. He also developed an ethical approach to the employment and working practice of the acting profession, introducing much needed reforms such as an end to the custom of actors knocking on doors to solicit for their benefit performances. 
On 11 October 1768 Wilkinson married Jane Doughty in York, and in August 1769 the first of their seven children was born. Baker died in 1770, leaving Wilkinson sole manager of the York circuit, a mixture of Yorkshire-based theatre buildings, including, additionally, those of Hull and Newcastle. Wilkinson abandoned Newcastle a year or two later but built and opened, at considerable expense, a new theatre in Leeds in 1774. Company performances were given in the race week at Doncaster and, at other times, in Beverley, Halifax, Pontefract, Sheffield, and Wakefield. But managerial responsibilities did nothing to diminish Wilkinson's appetite for acting. He continued to make visits and appearances in Dublin, Birmingham, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Norwich, and elsewhere. In January 1778 he returned to Covent Garden at the invitation of Mr Harris, his friend and manager of the theatre: 'This journey with others, was the occasion of my adopting the title of the WANDERING PATENTEE, as from my quitting my Yorkshire home to trip to Dublin, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and other places, occasioned Mr Woodfall's whimsically favouring me with that appellation. (Wilkinson, 'The Wandering Patentee', 278)' In 1780 Wilkinson took an additional responsibility for the management of the Edinburgh theatre, resulting in his command now of three patent theatres, his royal trio of York, Hull, and Edinburgh. In 1788 he broke his leg and suffered feverishly for many months. Although he continued to move around the circuit in pursuit of his duties, sometimes carried in a litter, his more active and juvenile roles had now to be abandoned and visits to fellow managers limited. A bad attack of gout in 1792 signalled deteriorating health. By the mid-1790s he was quite worn down with the stress of management and excessive travel, and he made use of the enforced rest to pursue his writing and reminiscences for 'The Wandering Patentee'. He also contributed a series of articles, with lively anecdotes of actors, to the theatrical periodical the 'Monthly Mirror'. None of this, after such an active and varied life, could quite prevent the tendency to bouts of depression in his final years. 
Wilkinson still acted on occasion until 1801 and continued to control the affairs of his northern circuit until his death, in York, on 25 August 1803. He was buried shortly afterwards at All Saints' Church, York. (His monument inscription remains at All Saints' Pavement.) He left five surviving children, one of whom, John Joseph Tate Wilkinson, like himself an actor, succeeded him in the management of the York circuit. Little exists by way of critical commentary on Wilkinson's achievements as an actor. His reputation was founded on enormous popularity as a gifted mimic of exceptional skill and ability. He caught the very appearance of the people he imitated, even if they were young women. His friend Stephen Kemble once called him 'the ugliest man he ever saw'. George Anne Bellamy, however, described him as 'tall, his countenance rather sportive than beautiful, and his manners agreeable'. In retrospect it may be Wilkinson's remarkable thirty-seven years' tenure as a theatrical manager that stand as his most formidable achievement. As Highfill points out: 'Few indeed were the British actors of the latter half of the century who were not at some point in their careers beneficiaries of the alternate cosseting and scolding of 'the wandering patentee'' ('BDA'). In his lifetime, Wilkinson came to be admired and respected for his probity and his fairness in the conduct of a profession that had long endured fraudulent practice, exploitation, and desperate insecurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 29431


Wilkinson, William (c.1551-1613), religious writer and ecclesiastical lawyer, was a Yorkshireman by birth. His precise origins are unclear, though it is known that his family held land in Bradford. His university education began when he matriculated as a pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1571. He took his BA degree in 1575. Shortly afterwards, Wilkinson began to make intensive investigations of the Family of Love, a mystical religious fellowship; he would become one of its principal opponents. 
Wilkinson became a fellow of St John's in 1577, by which time he was also working as a schoolmaster in Cambridge. His plans to publish a book criticizing the Family of Love were already well advanced, and he sought and received encouragement from Richard Cox, bishop of Ely. In 1578 he took his MA degree and busied himself with his research. He knew several members of the Family of Love personally, and responded to their request for written articles setting out his objections to their theology. In 1579 this document, accompanied by the Family's responses, was published in Wilkinson's 'Confutation of Certain Articles Delivered unto the Family of Love'. The work was dedicated to Bishop Cox, who added a short commendation on the cover, and it also included notes written against the Family by John Young, bishop of Rochester. The 'Confutation' drew attention to what Wilkinson regarded as the Family's gross doctrinal and moral errors. These included a belief in human perfectibility, a penchant for allegorizing scriptural facts, and a collective lifestyle characterized by extreme secrecy. Wilkinson warned that the Church of England was in terrible danger, and rebuked its ministers for the general laxity of their religious attitudes. 
Wilkinson's sympathy with puritanism in this phase of his life was demonstrated again in 1580, when he wrote the dedicatory epistle in 'A Very Godly and Learned Treatise, of the Exercise of Fastyng', which was almost certainly by Thomas Cartwright. Wilkinson's dedication was addressed to the Lady Paget and to Mr Edward Carie, a member of the queen's privy chamber, and was written 'at my Poore house' in St Botolph, Aldersgate, London. 
From 1588 Wilkinson held the prebend of Fridaythorpe in York Cathedral, receiving a dispensation so that he could do so despite being a layman. His future, however, lay in the southern province. Early in 1589 he was awarded a doctorate in law at Cambridge. Wilkinson was then elected, with Lord Burghley's support, to the chancellorship of the diocese of Salisbury. He took up the post in 1590 and held it until the end of his life. Throughout this period he discharged his functions with admirable skill and sensitivity. It was also in 1590 that Wilkinson became an advocate in the court of arches, and received a warrant from the archbishop of Canterbury for admission to Doctors' Commons. His academic allegiance subsequently shifted from Cambridge to Oxford, where in 1593 he took a doctorate in civil law (by incorporation). Wilkinson was probably the W. W. who, at some point before 1594, translated and published passages from Luther in 'A Methodicall Preface Prefixed before the Epistle to the Romanes'. Between 1608 and 1613 he also served as a justice of the peace for the county of Wiltshire. 
Wilkinson died in October 1613, and his will was granted probate by the prerogative court of Canterbury. He bequeathed his lands in the parish of West Wellowe, Wiltshire, to Mary, his 'loving and welbeloved wife', during her lifetime. The date of his marriage has not been established. Mary was also granted the right to occupy his dwelling house, held by lease from the vicars-choral of Salisbury Cathedral. There were no surviving children, and Wilkinson consequently made cash bequests totalling $216 to a number of siblings, nephews, nieces, and servants. 


@@@@@


doc= 29432


Wilks, John (c.1793-1846), swindler, was the only son (there were three daughters) of 
Wilks junior was the subject of bankruptcy proceedings in 1818 and had such little success in his father's profession of attorney that he sought popularity as author of 'A Christian Biographical Dictionary' (1821), 'Memoirs of Queen Caroline' (1822), and 'Bianca' (1823). In 1822 he attempted to float a joint-stock company to enforce Tudor laws on sabbath observance; its prospectus contained 'a good deal of cant, and rigmarole, and lamentation' ('The Times', 20 Sept 1826). In 1824-5 he promoted joint-stock companies interested in mining, gas lighting, railways, Paddington stages, and a fishmarket. He inveigled noblemen and parliamentarians onto the boards of these companies, including Viscount Palmerston, who wrote of him: 'a bit of a rogue if Nature writes a legible hand; at the same time he is a clever fellow' ('Letters', 175). Wilks, who married before 1826, kept a sumptuous house at 36 New Broad Street, a mansion at Mill Hill, and a summer establishment at Ramsgate; travelling from Mill Hill in his carriage and four, preceded by outriders, he ran the lord chief justice off the road. His reputation was destroyed in 1826 when his swindling of the Welch Iron and Coal Mining Company was publicized, and he became notorious as Bubble Wilks. Having ruined thousands of investors, he was much involved in litigation, and besieged by sheriffs' officers for debts. In order to protect himself with parliamentary privilege from imprisonment, and as the candidate of religious liberty, he was elected in June 1826 as MP for Sudbury, but bilked paying promised expenses. His fraudulent manipulation of the Devon and Cornwall Mining Company (formed to exploit properties owned by the duke of Cleveland) was debated in the House of Commons on 9 April 1827. He had become vestry clerk of St Luke's Church, either at Finsbury or Chelsea, but in 1827 the parish began proceedings to recover over $5000 which had vanished. He resigned his parliamentary seat in April 1828 shortly before being charged with forgery in a different transaction. Following his acquittal on the non-appearance of the prosecutor, his family offered him an annuity on condition that he live abroad, and he became Paris correspondent of 'The Standard'. His deceitful rumour-mongering on the bourse almost resulted in his expulsion from France on police orders; he was banned from the bourse's precincts. His next projects -- the 'London and Paris Courier', 'La Revue Protestante', and the Paris Parcels Delivery Company -- were all as unsuccessful as he was hypocritical. Supposedly he settled at Chiswick about 1840 and edited the 'Church and State Gazette'. His three-volume novel 'The Tory Baronet, or, Tories, Whigs and Radicals, by One who Knows Them' was published in London in 1841. He cheated many young men with a bogus clerical register office shortly before his death of swollen tonsils, after a severe illness of only four hours, on 24 January 1846 at 24 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 29433


John Wilks (1776?-1854) and his wife, Isabella (1777?-1846). John Wilks senior, attorney and politician, was the son of Matthew Wilks (died 1829), minister at Whitefield's Tabernacle in Moorfields. He was an attorney at 41 Hoxton Square (1804-13) and at 18 Finsbury Place (1813-28). As secretary of the Protestant Society for the Protection of Religious Liberty he corresponded in 1811-20 with Perceval and Liverpool about relieving dissenters from such penal legislation as the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. He sat as radical MP for Boston (1830-37) and contested St Albans (1847). He was a Middlesex magistrate and a fellow of learned societies. He died, after vomiting blood for three hours, on 25 August 1854 at his home, 3 Finsbury Square, London, and was buried at Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 29434


Wilks, Mark (c.1760-1831), army officer, was born on the Isle of Man, and entered the East India Company's service. Earlier intended for the ministry, he had a classical education, and so went to India older than was usual. He obtained a cadetship in 1781, and on 25 September 1782 was commissioned into the Madras army. In 1786 he became deputy secretary to the military board, and in 1787 secretary to a diplomatic mission under Sir Barry Close to the sultan of Mysore. In 1788 he was appointed fort adjutant at Fort St George, and on 6 March 1789 he was promoted lieutenant, and served as aide-de-camp to the governor. From 1790 to 1792 he acted as brigade major and aide-de-camp to Colonel James Stuart during the war against Tipu Sultan of Mysore. In 1793 he was assistant adjutant-general, and in 1794 was appointed Stuart's military secretary. From 1795 to 1799 he was on furlough from bad health and on 12 October 1798 was promoted captain. On his return he served successively as military secretary and private secretary to the governor, Edward, second Baron Clive. He was next appointed town major of Fort St George, and in 1803 became military secretary to the commander-in-chief, Lieutenant-General James Stuart. From 1803 to 1808 he was political resident at the court of Mysore, and was promoted major on 21 September 1804 and lieutenant-colonel on 4 April 1808. In 1808 ill health obliged him to leave India. 
On 20 November 1812 Wilks was appointed governor of St Helena (then still under the East India Company), and he arrived there on 22 June 1813. His administration was firm and enlightened, and he was popular. He improved agriculture by introducing better methods of cultivation, and by persuading the East India Company to alter the land tenure system. He was promoted brevet colonel on 4 June 1814. He was described as, in 1815, 'a tall, handsome, venerable-looking man, with white curling locks and a courtier-like manner' (Corbett, 5). He was governor on the arrival of Bonaparte on 15 October 1815, but was not made responsible for Bonaparte, who continued in the custody of the naval officer who brought him. However, they met and conversed through an interpreter, largely on chemistry and on India, and Wilks refused to take an appeal from Bonaparte to the prince regent to England. Wilks's account of their conversations was published by Julian S. Corbett in 1901. In April 1816 Wilks was replaced by Sir Hudson Lowe and left St Helena, leaving there 'a veneration for his name which will be long affectionately cherished' (Jackson, 216). Wellington and others believed that if Wilks had been retained his relations with Bonaparte would have been better than Lowe's. He returned to England and retired from the company's service on 15 October 1818. 
Wilks's fame rested chiefly on his admired 'Historical Sketches of the South of India in an Attempt to Trace the History of Mysoor' (vol. 1, 1810; vols. 2 and 3, 1814). For early Mysore history he had access to the state records, and he had participated in the later events he described, and from his official employment had ample knowledge of state transactions. His history was impartial, and Sir James Mackintosh praised it as 'the first book on Indian history founded on a critical examination of testimony and probability, and from which the absurdities of fable and etymology are banished' ('Memoirs of... Mackintosh', 69), though he disagreed with Wilks's 'more favourable opinion of the Indian character' (ibid.). 
Wilks married twice. His second wife, whom he married at Bath on 16 February 1813, was Miss D. Taubman, youngest daughter of J. Taubman of Bath. With his first wife he had a daughter, Laura (1796/7-1888), married at Bath on 22 July 1817 to Major-General Sir John Buchan (died 1850) of Kelloe. She was famous for her beauty, on which she was complimented by Bonaparte, who gave her a bracelet. 
Wilks's publications included 'A report on the interior administration, resources, and expenditure of the government of Mysoor' (Fort William, 1805). On 23 February 1826 he was elected FRS, and he was for some years a vice-president of the Asiatic Society, in whose 'Transactions' he published an analysis of the philosophical work of Nasir ud din of Tus entitled 'Aklak i Naseri'. Wilks died of apoplexy at Kelloe House, near Edrom, Berwickshire, the residence of his son-in-law, Major-General Sir John Buchan, on 19 September 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 29435


Wilks, Robert (c.1665-1732), actor and theatre manager, was born about 1665 in Rathfarnham, near Dublin, the second of the three sons of Edward Wilks, pursuivant to the lord lieutenant of Dublin. W. R. Chetwood, in his 'General History' in 1749, says the family came from Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, and that Robert's grandfather and great-uncle both served Charles I during the civil war. 
Robert Wilks received a good education, and at the age of eighteen, being a remarkable penman, he became a clerk in the office of secretary Sir Robert Southwell. On the outbreak of the war in Ireland he was compelled to join the army of King William, but, being appointed clerk to the camp, took no part in active conflict. After rejoining his office he became acquainted with Richards, a comedian. He appeared privately in John Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar', as Colonel Pedro, and made his public debut under Joseph Ashbury at the Smock Alley Theatre in December 1691 as Othello. As a consequence of the war there was no regular company at Smock Alley, and the performance (which was to commemorate the defeat of the Stuart cause in Ireland, and to which the public were admitted gratis) was conducted by amateurs, principally officers. Wilks's performance was so successful that it made him decide to become an actor. He remained at Smock Alley, now established as a theatre, for two years. 
In 1693 Wilks visited London and was engaged by Christopher Rich at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. The only part traced to him there is Lysippus in Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy'. In moving to England he took a 50 per cent pay cut; under Ashbury he earned 30's'. weekly, whereas under Rich he received only 15's'., out of which he had to pay 2's'. 6died to be taught dancing. It was in London that Wilks met Elizabeth, the youngest daughter of Ferdinando Knapton, town clerk of Southampton and steward of the New Forest in Hampshire; her elder sister Sarah married Henry Norris. Robert and Elizabeth married in 1693 and had five children -- a son and four daughters -- all but one of whom, Frances, died in infancy. 
Some time in 1698 Wilks, together with his wife and presumably his daughter Frances ('bap'. 15 Oct 1695), returned to Dublin. There he did very well, playing parts such as Sir Frederick Frolic in 'Comical Revenge, or, Love in a Tub', Courtall in 'She Would if She Could', and Dorimant in 'The Man of Mode', all by George Etherege. When the family left Dublin to return to London in the autumn of 1698, or so the story goes, Wilks had become so popular that he had to make an escape, James Butler, second duke of Ormond, having issued a warrant to prevent him leaving the kingdom. 
Wilks's first discovered performance date after returning to London is 28 November 1699 at the Drury Lane Theatre, where he played Sir Harry Wildair in George Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple'. The play was a great success, and Sir Harry was the role with which Wilks remained associated throughout his life; it was a part that, to quote Kitty Clive, gave him his teenage image of 'idol of pretty young things' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Farquhar, an actor and playwright, had returned from Dublin with Wilks. Apart from having a professional relationship, they were close friends all their lives; after his death Farquhar even entrusted his daughters to Wilks. 
By 1702 Wilks, through admirable industry, had recommended himself to the Drury Lane manager Christopher Rich despite the fact that he was at odds with the actor and director of rehearsals, George Powell. The main reason for this was that Powell and Wilks were after the same kind of roles. Powell eventually recognized Wilks's talent and left for Lincoln's Inn Fields. Rich then put Wilks in charge of rehearsals. Wilks was also a singer. On 8 April 1706 he sang in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer' (as Captain Plume). It is also possible that he sang at his special benefit concert at York Buildings on 17 March 1703. 
Following a financial row in which Rich was accused of taking a third of the actors' benefit, a detachment of players from Drury Lane, among whom was Wilks, moved to the new Queen's Theatre at the Haymarket, which had been opened by Owen Swiny on 15 October 1706. Drury Lane, having lost most of its leading players, focused on performing Italian operas. 
Wilks remained for two years at the Haymarket, where his parts included the Prince of Wales in '1 Henry IV', Hamlet, Antony in 'Julius Caesar', Macduff, Lorenzo in 'The Spanish Fryar', Dorimant in 'The Man of Mode', Jupiter in Dryden's 'Amphitryon', Cortez in his 'The Indian Empress', and Palamede in his 'Marriage a la mode'. Among the characters he originated was Archer in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem' on 8 March 1707. The theatre then being devoted to opera -- acoustics had proved less than ideal at Drury Lane -- he reappeared as Hamlet at Drury Lane on 15 January 1708. 
In 1709 Wilks, together with Colley Cibber, Thomas Doggett, and Anne Oldfield, joined Swiny in the management of the Haymarket. The house opened on 20 September with Thomas Betterton as Hamlet. In 1710 the companies reunited at Drury Lane. When after the 1710-11 season Swiny moved to the Queen's Theatre, Wilks, Cibber, and Doggett became joint managers of Drury Lane. Under this so-called triumvirate -- Mrs Oldfield never became a shareholder, as Doggett objected to having 'more than one sex admitted to the management' (Cibber, 208) -- Drury Lane flourished. Highfill mentions how 'during the early 1710s the shares of Wilks, Cibber, and Doggett never came to less than $1000 per year each up to the end of the reign of Queen Anne in 1714' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 116). The three actor-managers had very different characters. If Cibber's 'Apology' is to be believed, Wilks was hard-working but vain, Doggett was stubborn and difficult, and Cibber himself was the sensible moderator. It may well have been the peculiar combination of characters that held the three together. In November 1713 Doggett was replaced by Barton Booth, but the new triumvirate remained strong. Life as an actor-manager was busy and often stressful. All three managers attended rehearsals of two to three hours in the mornings, and they saw every performance in which they did not act. They attended rehearsals of new plays, had to oversee all kinds of purchases, and watched that those employees handling money did not defraud the troupe. Among the many parts Wilks played as an actor-manager were Othello and Henry VI in 'Richard III'. 
When Swiny left Drury Lane in 1711 he was succeeded by William Collier, who in 1714 was replaced by Richard Steele. Although he played little or no part in active management, Steele procured a new licence and eventually patent (19 January 1715), which subsequently became a highly valued property. After Steele's death in 1729 the patent was granted to Cibber, Wilks, and Booth, empowering them to present plays at Drury Lane for a period of twenty-one years from 1 September 1732. Wilks stayed at Drury Lane until close upon his death. In 1713 he was Chaucer in John Gay's 'The Wife of Bath' and in 1717 Heartly in Cibber's 'The Non-Juror'. He had also been seen as Ferdinand in 'The Tempest'. 
Wilks's new parts at Drury Lane included Bellamar in Thomas Killigrew's 'Chit-Chat' on 14 February 1719, Eurythion in Thomas Southerne's 'The Spartan Dame' on 11 December 1719, Frankly in Cibber's 'The Refusal' on 14 February 1721, Antony in his 'Caesar in Egypt' on 9 December 1724, Lord Townly in Cibber and Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband' on 10 January 1728, and Merital in Henry Fielding's 'Love in Several Masques' on 16 February 1728. He also played Mirabell in William Congreve's 'The Way of the World', the Prince of Wales in '2 Henry IV', the title part in John Dryden's 'Aureng-Zebe', Buckingham in 'Henry VIII', and Hastings in 'Richard III'. His last recorded character was Bellamant in Fielding's 'The Modern Husband', on 21 February 1732. Avery, taking 1721-2 as a fairly typical season, notes that Wilks acted at least 140 times in addition to his participation in the management. Considering the heavy acting schedule that he carried season after season it is not surprising to hear reports of his frayed temper as a manager. But Cibber's reports are coloured. 
Wilks did not usually act outside Drury Lane, but in 1711 he played Sir Harry Wildair for eighteen successive nights in Dublin. At York Buildings on 28 May 1715 he spoke the epilogue to Steele's 'Censorum'. In 1703-4 he performed at court, playing Dolabella in Dryden's 'All for Love'. Highfill records a single excursion to Bartholomew fair, during which he played Antonio in the droll 'Maudlin' for William Pinkethman, Joe Miller, and Henry Norris (but this may have been William Wilks the younger, his nephew). He also appeared privately as a professional performer (alongside Betterton, Booth, Elizabeth Barry, Anne Bracegirdle, and Mrs Oldfield) at Richard Norton's house at Southwick, near Portsmouth, in the summer of 1707-8. 
Wilks died at his house in Bow Street, Covent Garden, on 27 September 1732, and was buried at midnight (at his own request) on 4 October at St Paul's, Covent Garden. A prologue to his memory was spoken at Drury Lane on 14 October. His wife had died on 21 March 1714, and was buried in St Paul's, where her husband raised a monument to her memory. Robert Wilks had married again, on 26 April 1715. His second wife, Mary Fell, 'nee' Brown (died 1740), a widow with four children living, survived him. Throughout his career Wilks was well paid, earning as much as $753 6's'. 8died for acting and serving as co-manager, and his clear benefit brought him $60. Yet at his death he had squandered most of his wealth, and his widow was left with little more than his share in the patent. She appointed the portrait painter John Ellys her representative. 
Wilks enjoyed acting on a daily basis. Booth mentions how the exercise 'kept the spirits in motion, and always gave him a good Stomach'. Steele compares Wilks and Cibber, saying how they were 'perfect actors in their different kinds. Wilks has a singular talent in representing the graces of nature: Cibber the deformity in the affectation of them' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Although Wilks's tragic creations were praised for sorrow, tenderness, and resignation, his greatest triumphs were all in comedy, and particularly in the comedy of Farquhar. His chief characteristics as a comedian were ease, sprightliness, and a distinction of manner, which caused him to be accepted as a model of behaviour in fashionable society. One of his most popular characters from Shakespeare was Prince Hal in 'Henry IV', but little is written about it. Davies, in his 'Dramatic Miscellanies' (1784), called Wilks's Hal in '1 Henry IV' 'one of the most perfect exhibitions of the theatre'. Yet it is the part of Sir Harry Wildair for which he is most remembered: '
Wilks with genteel and unaffected air 

In gay Sir Harry charm'd th'attentive fair. 
(Weeks)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29436


Wilks, Samuel Charles (1788-1872), Church of England clergyman and journalist, was born in Churchyard Row, Newington Butts, Surrey, on 11 December 1788, the son of Samuel Charles Wilks (1760-1819) of Newington, Surrey, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Stephen Barber of Walsall. He matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 8 June 1810, aged twenty-one, and graduated BA in 1814 and MA in 1816. While an undergraduate he won in 1811 the premium of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and Church Union in the diocese of St David's for an 'Essay on the Signs of Conversion and Unconversion in Ministers of the Church', which was published in 1814. Through this achievement and through his grandfather, also Samuel Wilks, who had risen high in the East India Company, he came to the notice of members of the influential evangelical Clapham Sect. In consequence, following ordination he was appointed lecturer at St Swithin, London, and in 1816 succeeded Zachary Macaulay as editor of the 'Christian Observer', the sect's journal. On 23 June 1818 he married Rebecca Emma Langstone Earle (1792-1861), daughter of Joseph Earle. They had at least two sons and two daughters. 
In 1817 Wilks dedicated to Hannah More two volumes of 'Christian Essays', and in 1835 published a new edition of Lord Teignmouth's 'Memoirs of Sir William Jones', to which he prefixed a life of Teignmouth. He continued to edit the 'Christian Observer' until 1847, when he became rector of Nursling, near Southampton. Wilks was the author of many tracts, essays, and letters of a religious and theological character, mostly reprinted from the 'Christian Observer'. He also acquired considerable knowledge of contemporary geology, rejecting the natural theology still prevalent at the English universities, as defended in the 'Bridgewater Treatises'. Wilks died at Nursling on 23 December 1872, in his eighty-fourth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 29437


William Wilks (c.1696-1726), actor, the nephew of Robert Wilks, was the son of William Wilks ('fl'. 1716-1725), an office keeper at Drury Lane Theatre. He appeared at Drury Lane in 1715 as Sir George Airey in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Busybody', though he had trained to become an attorney. His uncle tried to dissuade him from adopting the stage, yet in 1714 sent him to Joseph Ashbury, the manager of the Dublin theatre, whom he urged to show him his faults. According to Chetwood, William Wilks performed for one season at Smock Alley, was engaged at 30's'. a week for Drury Lane, and died before he was thirty. Parts he played include Tressel in Cibber's 'Richard III', Farewell in John Crowne's 'Sir Courtly Nice', and Dapperwit in William Wycherley's 'Love in a Wood'. Among his original parts between 1719 and 1723 were Sicinius in John Dennis's 'Invader of his Country', Fainwell in Centlivre's 'The Artifice', and Young Clifford in Theophilus Cibber's alteration of 'King Henry VI'. The last part to which his name is attached is Sir Harry Beaumont in the premiere of Eliza Haywood's 'Wife to be Let' on 12 August 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 29438


Willan, Robert (1757-1812), physician and dermatologist, was born on 12 November 1757 at Hill, near Sedbergh in Yorkshire, the younger son of Robert Willan (1717-1777), a man-midwife, and his wife, Ann Weatherald. He received his early education at Sedbergh grammar school where he became an accomplished classicist. In 1777 Willan went to Edinburgh to study medicine at the university and graduated MD on 24 June 1780 with a thesis on inflammation of the liver. He completed his education by attending lectures in London, where he met and won the support of John Fothergill, a fellow Quaker. 
Willan had been promised the practice of a relative, John Trotter, and on his death in 1781 he travelled north to Darlington to begin work. However, Willan found two rivals already ensconced there, and after only a year he gave up the contest and instead set up in practice in London. Through Quaker patronage he supplemented his private practice with posts in the new dispensaries springing up in London. Willan was appointed physician to the Public Dispensary in 1783, and later held similar posts at the Finsbury Dispensary and the Fever Institution. He briefly used the Public Dispensary as a base from which to deliver lecture courses. This was unsuccessful, but a scheme to take on pupils there proved popular. In 1785 Willan became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians by examination and in 1791 he was elected to the Society of Antiquaries. Willan attended Quaker meetings in London until 17 July 1800 when he was formally disowned for his marriage by non-Quaker rites. It is possible that his wife was Eleanor Pool and that they had married at St Luke's, Old Street, Finsbury, on 15 February 1798. 
Willan's reputation rests on his contribution to nosology -- that archetypal eighteenth-century enterprise of classifying disease -- through a seminal work on the description and categorization of skin complaints. At the time a number of practitioners produced new classificatory schemes of skin diseases, realizing that the existing terminology, based on classical authors, was inexact and did not cover all known conditions. Willan worked on the problem from 1784 and in 1790 he laid out his new classification to a meeting of the Medical Society of London. His division of skin disease into eight groups according to their structure and appearance quickly won the approval of the profession. By 1801 Willan was an acknowledged expert on the subject and was able to give up his dispensary posts and build a private practice based on his specialist knowledge. In recognition of his work he was awarded the Fothergill medal in 1790, and in 1809 was elected to the Royal Society. 
Willan set out to publish a comprehensive account of the appearance and treatment of all skin diseases, arranged according to his classification. Between 1798 and 1806 he produced works on his first four disease categories -- the papulae, squamae, exanthemata, and bullae -- all vividly illustrated with coloured plates. These were collected as 'On Cutaneous Diseases' (1808). The remainder of his classificatory scheme was published after his death by Ashby Smith, who saw Willan's manuscript on porrigo through the press, and by Thomas Bateman, whose much reprinted 'Practical Synopsis of Cutaneous Diseases' (1813) provided an abstract of the complete classification. In addition to his 'magnum opus' Willan also published 'On Vaccine Inoculation' (1806) which described the skin lesions produced by vaccination and the diseases most commonly mistaken for subsequent smallpox. 
Willan's other medical works reflected another typically eighteenth-century concern -- the effects of the environment upon health and disease. During his brief stay in Darlington he produced 'Observations on the Sulphur Waters of Croft' (1782) which analysed the chemical content of some local springs and advocated their use for a number of chronic ailments. In 1794 he edited John Whitehurst's 'Observations on the Ventilation of Rooms'. From 1796 to 1800 Willan published monthly accounts of the weather and the prevailing diseases in London in the 'Monthly Magazine' and the 'Medical and Physical Journal', which were subsequently collected as 'Reports on the Diseases of London' (1801). An 'Account of the Dreadful Effects of Dram-Drinking' (with advice on how to give up the habit) was extracted from the 'Reports' and published by the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor in 1803. Willan also produced one religious work -- an account of the life of Christ, drawn from the gospels, published in 1782. 
From 1810 Willan began to show symptoms of tuberculosis. In 1811 he moved out of London to Craven Hill, although he continued to travel into the city to attend patients. On 10 October 1811 Willan sailed with his family to Madeira. The climate temporarily alleviated his condition, allowing him to continue work on his manuscripts on skin disease. He died on 12 April 1812 at Funchal and was buried there in the English burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 29439


Willehad (d. 789), missionary and bishop of Bremen, was one of a number of Anglo-Saxons to embark on missionary work in north-western Europe in the eighth century. His life, written probably in the ninth century (though perhaps not, as sometimes claimed, by Anskar, archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen), states that he came from Northumbria, and this is likely to be correct. A letter of 789 from Alcuin (died 804) to an unnamed abbot, conveying warm greetings to Willehad, suggests that the two may have been educated together at the episcopal school at York. 
At a date in the late 760s (modern historians variously give 'c'.766 and 'c'.770), Willehad was formally sent, at his own behest, to missionize in Frisia by Alhred, king of the Northumbrians. According to his life, he went immediately to Dokkum, the site of the martyrdom of Boniface in 754. The area of his mission covered the east of the Frisian lands, extending as far south and west as Utrecht. 
In 780 Charlemagne sent Willehad to preach in the land of the Saxons, between the lower Weser and the lower Elbe. The Frankish king's overlordship was recognized by the still-pagan Saxons only intermittently, the region being conquered finally only in 803-4, after thirty years of periodic warfare. His life credits Willehad's mission with some success, but in 782 a revolt against the Franks by the Saxon duke Widukind forced him to flee the area. He made a pilgrimage to Rome and, on his return, resided at the monastery of Echternach, then governed by the Anglo-Saxon Beornred, where his life tells that he occupied himself by making a copy of the epistles of St Paul. 
Willehad resumed his work among the Saxons after Widukind had submitted to Charlemagne and accepted Christianity in 785. In 787, on Charlemagne's orders, he was consecrated at Worms to a new diocese based at Bremen. Willehad consecrated the first cathedral there, built of wood and dedicated to St Peter, in 789, but fell ill and died shortly afterwards, apparently on 8 November, his feast day, at Blexen in Lower Saxony. He was buried in his new church. In 860 Anskar, the archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen (the two bishoprics had been united as an archdiocese in 845), elevated Willehad's relics to the new cathedral. This may have been the occasion for the writing of his life. His cult was never an important one, but at least eighteen churches, from northern Jutland to Lower Saxony, are dedicated to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29440


Willement, Thomas (1786-1871), writer on heraldry and stained-glass artist, was baptized at St Marylebone Church, Marylebone, Middlesex, on 15 August 1786, the son of Thomas Willement, coach, herald, and house painter and artist to his royal highness the duke of York, and his wife, Hariett. His formative years were very likely spent helping in his father's business at 25 Green Street, Grosvenor Square, London -- the premises were subsequently leased to him in 1822 -- where his artistic ability and interest in heraldry would have developed. He married Katherine Griffith (1796-1852), the daughter of Thomas Griffith, master of the Sadlers' Company, some time before 1833. Their son, Arthur Thomas, died at Oxford, on 5 June 1854 in his twenty-first year. 
Willement was pre-eminent among a small group of stained-glass artists, who, in the early nineteenth century, utilized the medieval method of making a stained-glass window from separate pieces of coloured glass bound together with lead strips, rather than, as with eighteenth-century artists, using coloured enamels to paint pictures on glass. Where he received his training is not known but his first window, as recorded in his manuscript 'Chronological list of the principal works in stained glass' (British Library, London), was made in 1812 for J. T. Trevanion's house, Caerhays, in Cornwall. As with the bulk of his work until the 1840s it was heraldic in character, reflecting an absorbing interest underlined by the publications he produced in the same period, which included: 'Regal heraldry: the armorial insignia of the kings and queens of England, from coeval authorities' (1821); 'Heraldic Notices of Canterbury Cathedral; with Genealogical and Topographical Notes' (1827); 'Fac simile of a contemporary roll with the names and the arms of the sovereign and of the spiritual and temporal peers who sat in parliament held at Westminster AD1515' (1829); and 'A Roll of Arms of the Reign of Richard the Second' (1834). At some time Willement was appointed heraldic artist to George IV and in 1832 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. According to Clive Wainwright (Wainwright, 16 Dec 1971, 1716), he was involved with two other members of the society, Henry Shaw and Sir Samuel Rush Meyrick, in the publication of 'Specimens of Ancient Furniture' (1836) and he certainly provided material for one of the plates in Shaw's 'Details of Elizabethan Architecture' (1839). He had already made windows in 1829, for Meyrick's country house, Goodrich Court, in Herefordshire, a building designed by the architect Edward Blore, someone he was to work with on a number of future occasions, including at St George's Chapel, Windsor, and at Hampton Court Palace. Country houses were to be a significant source of employment. In 1831 when work was completed at Charlecote Park, Warwickshire, for George Lucy, Willement's records noted: 'The whole of the ancient stained glass in the windows of the great hall repaired and releaded. Eight additional panels executed to complete the series of descents. Very considerable painted decorations through the whole mansion' (BL, Add. MS 52413). The following year saw him working with the architect Anthony Salvin at Mamhead in Devon, where he was engaged in plumbing, painting, and stained glass -- again he continued the association in later years at Rufford Abbey, Nottinghamshire, Scotney Castle, Kent, and Harlaxton, Lincolnshire -- while in 1833 he was at Alton Towers, Staffordshire, supplying windows and decorating the interior for the earl of Shrewsbury. 
Royal commissions followed and with them the appellation 'artist in stained glass to Queen Victoria'. In 1840 four heraldic windows were ordered for the choir clerestory of St George's Chapel, Windsor -- ultimately the work extended to the choir aisles, the Beaufort and Lincoln chapels, and the chapter room, with restorations to heraldic decoration, monuments, and furnishings, all of which took until 1861 to complete -- and in 1843 an armorial window for the great hall at Hampton Court. A description of the early work, including the restoration of the great west window at St George's Chapel, was published by Willement in his 'An account of the restorations of the collegiate chapel of St George, Windsor, with some particulars of the heraldic ornaments of the edifice' (1844). Church windows also came within Willement's compass, examples including: Epsom church, Surrey (1824); St Peter, Hampton Lucy, Warwickshire, (1837); and the cathedral of Barbados (1838). 
In 1840 Willement joined A. W. N. Pugin, the driving force behind the revival of the medieval principles of stained-glass design, to make the east window of the Convent of Our Lady of Mercy, Handsworth, Birmingham. Pugin was extremely put out by Willement's 'stupid mistake about the hand of the Blessed Virgin' (Parl. Arch., historical collection No. 339, letter 71) and this perhaps was in his mind when he wrote to Lord Shrewsbury, stressing the control he exercised over the designs for the windows made by Willement in 1841, for the Chapel and School of the Hospital of St John, Alton, Staffordshire: 'The figures too are very devotional & well drawn I made full sized drawings of every detail so there is great variety' (P. Stanton, 'Welby Pugin and the Gothic Revival', PhD thesis, University of London, 1950, appendix 8). Willement's retention in his papers of two of Pugin's sketches (BL, Add. MS 34873) is perhaps an indication of his regard for the latter's ability and ideas. Pugin, however, tired of the association, wrote to Lord Shrewsbury in February 1842: 'I believe that Willement thinks only of making money... I will never work with Willement again for I have had immense trouble drawn everything out in detail and then at the last he charges twice as much as anybody' (A. Wedgwood, 'Catalogue of Drawings in the Victoria and Albert Museum, A. W. N. Pugin and the Pugin Family', 1985, 105, letter 24). 
In 1842 Willement worked on the restoration of the Temple Church in London, together with the architects Sydney Smirke and Decimus Burton. He provided figured medallions on a mosaic ground for the three lancet windows at the east end and ornamental painting for the walls, reredos, and all the vaulting. Although deemed a 'memorable restoration' by 'The Ecclesiologist' (2.98), the journal of the Cambridge Camden Society, the publication nevertheless made a long list of complaints against the internal arrangements. Willement's work, however, must have given satisfaction, for he was engaged by the society to produce the stained-glass windows for the church of the Holy Sepulchre, Cambridge, which Salvin restored during 1841-3, and in 1845 he carried out the polychrome decoration at Kilndown church, Kent, for the leading ecclesiologist A. J. Beresford-Hope. 
That same year, Willement purchased Davington Priory, Faversham, Kent, which was to be his home until his death in 1871. The church and domestic buildings were badly in need of restoration. Willement's contributions included polychromatic painted decoration, stained glass, and designs for encaustic tiles, together with purchases of furniture and fittings, to give an authentic medieval character to the interiors. The restoration is described in his 'Historical Sketch of the Parish of Davington, in the County of Kent and of the Priory there' (1862). In 1845 he also painted the ceiling of the chapter house at York Minster and the vault of the lady chapel of Wells Cathedral. Additionally, he releaded the centre window of the lady chapel and provided for it several new figures of prophets. Praise for Willement's polychromatic painting of the apses, chancel roof, and aisles and organ of St Mary and St Nicholas, Wilton, Wiltshire, appeared in 'The Ecclesiologist' (November 1846, 173) and in the same and the following year, Willement supplied windows, including the main east window, for R. C. Carpenter's restoration of St Nicholas, Kemerton, Gloucestershire. Willement's prolific output continued into the 1850s and 1860s and included windows for St Luke's, Chelsea; St Lawrence, Ludlow, Shropshire; the continuation of the work at St George's Chapel, Windsor; and other windows and painted decoration at Windsor Castle. His last work, windows and painted decoration for the royal chapel of the Savoy, London, was completed in 1865. He died on 10 March 1871 at Davington Priory, and was buried, six days later, in the sacristy vault of the priory church of St Mary Magdalene. 
If Willement led the way, in the nineteenth century, in the design and execution of heraldic stained glass, he was less convincing in his figure windows. Unlike Pugin, who sought to emulate the medieval masters through a complete understanding of their principles of design, Willement adopted an imitative approach, looking to create medieval effects by reproducing directly from ancient models or their likenesses. Nevertheless, he did much to advance the cause of English Gothic revival stained glass, through his influential patrons, the widespread distribution of his works, and the tutelage of two window makers, William Warrington (1786-1869) and Michael O'Connor (1801-1867). 


@@@@@


doc= 29441


Willes, George Wickens (1785-1846), naval officer, was the son of Lieutenant John Willes RN (1753-1797), who lost a leg at Gibraltar in 1782. In 1794 he was entered on the books of the 'Royal William', flagship of Sir Peter Parker at Spithead. In 1796 he was on the books of the sloop 'Fairy', commanded by his maternal uncle, John Irwin, whom, early in 1797, he followed to the 'Prince George'; in this ship he was present at the battle of Cape St Vincent ['see 'Parker, Sir William (1742-1802)]. He was afterwards with Irwin in the 'Lively', the 'Boston', the 'Formidable', and the 'Queen Charlotte'. He was in the 'Success' with Captain Shuldham Peard at the blockade of Malta, and at the capture of the 'Genereux' on 18 February 1800, when he was severely wounded; he was still on the 'Success' when she was captured by Ganteaume on 13 February 1801. 
On 6 November 1801 Willes was promoted lieutenant; he served in the sloop 'Sophie', in the 'Active' (one of the ships which passed the Dardanelles in February 1807), and in the 'Spartan' with Captain Jahleel Brenton. During 1809, in command of the frigate's boats, he was repeatedly engaged in storming batteries or destroying coasting vessels in the Adriatic and among the Ionian Islands. He was still in the 'Spartan' when, in the Bay of Naples on 3 May 1810, she defeated and put to flight a Franco-Neapolitan squadron, with 95 guns and 1400 men. Brenton was wounded, and his place ably and bravely taken by his first lieutenant, Willes. Brenton praised him as 'one of the best and most gallant officers I ever met with' (O'Byrne, 1294). Willes, who was himself severely wounded, was promoted commander on 2 June 1810; he was also permitted to accept from the king of Naples the order of St Ferdinand and Merit, third class. 
In 1811-12 Willes commanded the brig 'Leveret' in the North Sea, where he captured several privateers; he was later in the sloop 'Bacchus' on the Irish station, and on 7 June 1814 he was made captain. Willes married, on 8 January 1814, Anne Ellen, second daughter of Sir Edmund Lacon, first baronet, MP for North Yarmouth. Among their children was Admiral Sir George Ommanney Willes. In 1817-18 he commanded the 'Cherub' (26 guns) on the coast of Africa; in 1819-20, the 'Wye' (26 guns) in the North Sea; in 1823-7, the 'Brazen' (26 guns) on the South American and African stations, on the latter capturing eight armed slavers and liberating 998 slaves; and in 1836 the 'Dublin' (50 guns) as flag captain to Sir Graham Eden Hamond on the coast of South America. In February 1845 he commissioned the 'Vanguard' (80 guns), in which, after a few months in the channel, he went out to the Mediterranean. He died at Malta on 26 October 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 29442


Willes, Sir James Shaw (1814-1872), judge, was born in Cork on 13 February 1814, the son of James Willes (1775-1852), physician, and Elizabeth, daughter of John Shaw, mayor of Cork in 1792. He came from a protestant family settled in Cork and may have been descended from Edward Willes (1704-1768), who became chief baron of Ireland, and related to the English family of Willes of Newbold Comyn, which produced the lecherous chief justice Sir John Willes (1685-1761). James was the eldest of six children, three boys and three girls. He was educated at Dr Porter's school in Cork, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he matriculated in 1831 and graduated BA in 1836 after taking the general degree examination. There was at the time virtually no law teaching at Trinity. Later, in 1860, Trinity conferred on him the degree of LLD. After initially intending to practise at the Irish bar, according to one account, and spending some time as a pupil of Stephen Collins QC in Dublin, he moved to London in 1837, joined the Inner Temple, and became a pupil and thereafter a salaried assistant to the special pleader Thomas Chitty (1802-1878). The Willes and Chitty families were otherwise connected, and James's younger sister Mary (Minnie) later married Thomas Chitty's son, Thomas Edward. 
Willes was called to the bar on 12 June 1840 and joined the home circuit, though his practice was principally in London in mercantile and shipping cases. He lived in chambers in the Temple. He became a close friend of John William Smith, who established a reputation for learning through his 'Compendium of Mercantile Law' (1834) and innovatory 'Leading Cases in Various Branches of the Law' (1837 and 1840). After Smith's death Willes, together with Henry Singer Keating, edited the fourth and fifth editions of this very successful work. It was a task for which Willes was well suited, for he possessed an extraordinary knowledge of case law, and was reputed to have read the entire corpus of published reports, including the medieval yearbooks. Willes became tubman of the court of exchequer in 1851; this was an honorary position in the gift of the lord chief baron, ranking below that of postman. He never took silk. He developed a high-class practice, principally in commercial cases. In recognition of his abilities he was appointed in 1850 to the second common law commission which was to inquire into common-law procedure and recommend reforms; the commission produced three reports, and Willes played a considerable part in the legislation which followed, especially the 'Common Law Procedure Act' of 1854. He also served on the Indian law commission (1861), the English and Irish law commission (1862), the digest of law commission (from 1870), and the judicature commission (from 1869). Unlike many judges of the period he never became a member of parliament nor had any political affiliations. 
In July 1855 Willes succeeded Sir William Maule as a judge of the court of common pleas on the nomination of Lord Cranworth. He was knighted at Osborne in August. In 1871 he was invited to become one of the four new salaried members of the judicial committee of the privy council, but declined; he was, however, sworn of the privy council in November 1871 for reasons which remain a little obscure. He was one of the first judges appointed to try election petitions, and in this capacity established the principles applicable to this new judicial task. 
Willes continued as a judge of the common pleas until his death. Strongly patriotic, he also served as a private soldier in the Inns of Court Volunteers from 1859 until shortly before his death. 
On 17 May 1856 Willes married Helen Jennings, daughter of Thomas Jennings of Cork, a mineral water manufacturer; there is some reason to believe that Willes married under threat of a breach of promise action arising out of a youthful romance in Dublin. The marriage, which produced no children, does not appear to have been a happy one. At about this time he moved to a house at 16 Eaton Square. From 1865 Willes's home became Otterspool, a house on the River Colne near Aldenham outside Watford in Hertfordshire, where he appears to have lived apart from Lady Willes. In London he lived in the Judges' Chambers, Rolls Garden, Chancery Lane. His recreations at Otterspool were walking his three dogs, boating, and feeding the trout; in youth a keen fisherman, he came to forbid fishing in his water. 
Willes was a man of wide general culture, with a mastery of all the major European languages and some knowledge of oriental languages as well. He was an enthusiastic traveller in Europe, America, and the East (it is not clear which countries he visited). In common with virtually all the major figures of the classical age of the common law he received no formal legal education. His reputation for legal learning was unrivalled and fully deserved; he wholly lacked pedantry, and as an active law reformer of liberal sympathies he had no respect for valueless legal technicality. He was familiar with European legal culture as well as with the common law. He served as a judge at a period when legislative reform was cleansing the legal system of archaisms; substantive law, developed by the common-law judges sitting collegially, was replacing jury discretion, and the judicial conventions of the period encouraged a judicial style which presented legal decisions as legitimated more by their rationality than by their conformity to precedent. Though Willes nowhere explicitly set out his own judicial philosophy, he belonged to the school of legal science. He conceived of the common law as a body of general principles, and the displays of erudition and elaborate analysis of case law which are to be found in some of his opinions were used by him as a means towards the end of isolating a rationally defensible legal principle. Notable examples of his style are to be found in 'Indermaur v. Dames' (1866), dealing with the liability of an occupier of property to entrants who suffer injuries, 'Phillips v. Eyre' (1870), dealing with the jurisdiction of English courts over acts committed abroad arising out of the suppression of a supposed rising in Jamaica by Governor Eyre, and 'Beamish v. Beamish' (1861), dealing with the ecclesiastical law of marriage. In 'Marks v. Feldman' (1870) he gave one of the briefest opinions in the reports: 'Dolus circuitu non purgatur'. Willes's effectiveness as a judge was enhanced by the simplicity and lucidity of his style. Professional opinion placed him in the first rank of common-law judges of his period. With the lapse of time, however, few of his opinions are now read. 
Willes was a tall man with a prominent nose and eyes; no portrait is known to exist, but a photograph does. There is a print in the 'Illustrated London News' in 1872. He never lost his Irish accent. His manner was reserved and courteous, but was said by Serjeant Ballantyne to have lacked cordiality. He had a slightly eccentric streak, illustrated by his behaviour when taking the judicial oaths. He declined to abjure King James and his descendants audibly, insisting that he was 'abjuring them in his mind'. He was an emotional man, somewhat given to tears, with a reputation in criminal cases of being merciful. After the death of his brother William Henry Willes (1822-1863), a county court judge, he suffered poor health, in particular heart disease and, in later years, severe attacks of gout. His poor health has been attributed to overwork; there is no doubt that he was indeed a compulsive worker. In the long vacation of 1872, after the conclusion of the assizes at Liverpool, he became noticeably depressed, sleepless, and forgetful, and on 2 October shot himself fatally in the chest with a revolver at his home, Otterspool. He was survived by Lady Willes, who died in 1887. He was buried in Brompton cemetery on 7 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 29443


Willes, Sir John (1685-1761), judge and politician, was born on 28 November 1685 at Bishop's Itchington, Warwickshire, the son of John Willes (1647/8-1700), rector of Bishop's Itchington and canon of Lichfield, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Walker, mayor of Oxford. His younger brother Edward Willes (1694-1773) became bishop of Bath and Wells. Willes was educated at Lichfield grammar school, and on 28 November 1700 matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1704, and proceeded MA in 1707, BCL in 1710, and DCL in 1715. He was a fellow of All Souls from 1705 to 1719. Having been admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 20 January 1709, he was called to the bar on 17 June 1713. Lord Carteret related how Willes had spent part of his time at Oxford writing libels against the tory ministry and that only Carteret's intervention had saved him from the pillory. Later Willes wrote: 'I was not wanting in my poor endeavours to promote his Majesty's interest at a time when it was not only very unfashionable, but very dangerous to do so' (Campbell, 6.114-15) and on 1 July 1718, after only five years at the bar, he was rewarded by being appointed king's counsel. On 11 May 1719 he was called to the bench of Lincoln's Inn. Soon afterwards he married Margaret Brewster, of a Worcestershire family; they had four sons and four daughters. He followed the Oxford circuit, and in 1720 he had a moderate practice in king's bench, chancery, and the House of Lords. 
Despite his narrow escape at Oxford, like many ambitious barristers Willes saw politics and government service as the keys to his advancement. In 1719 he corresponded with Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland and first lord of the Treasury, and in 1721 he came under investigation during the Minehead by-election for causing the writ to be sent to a candidate before the result had been determined. In 1722 he stood for Bishop's Castle, in Shropshire, but withdrew from the contest on the understanding that the borough patron, James Brydges, first duke of Chandos, would find him a seat elsewhere. Chandos arranged for him to stand for Launceston, in Cornwall; he was defeated but was returned to the Commons on petition on 17 March 1724. He was a loyal supporter of Sir Robert Walpole; though there is no record of him speaking in the parliament of 1722-7 it is said that he assisted in the proceedings against Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester. He applied to become solicitor-general in April 1726, on the death of Sir Clement Wearg, while so doing reminding Lord Chancellor King of his loyal services, but King favoured Charles Talbot instead. However, he was appointed second justice on the Chester circuit in May. By taking office he vacated his seat at Launceston, but on 9 June he became a member for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis at a by-election, following the expulsion of John Ward, a convicted forger. The election was expensive, and at the 1727 election Willes was returned for West Looe, a Cornish seat in the gift of the ministry, where he remained until he left the Commons in 1737. In February 1729 he was promoted to chief justice of Chester. He was also active on the governing bench of Lincoln's Inn, being a member of the committee that met with the benchers of the Middle Temple in 1730 to agree a uniform method for calling candidates to the bar. 
On 30 November 1733 Willes succeeded Yorke as attorney-general and on the same day was granted a patent of precedence for life next after the attorney-general -- an unusual insurance policy. He was not knighted at this time, however, and he did not prosecute in any of the published state trials during the three years that he was a law officer. His only recorded parliamentary speech before his promotion was firmly whig, opposing (unsuccessfully) the resolution of 30 March 1732 that the sale of the Radcliffe annuity and the Derwentwater estates, forfeited to the crown when James Radcliffe, third earl of Derwentwater, was attainted in 1716, should be declared void. As attorney-general he spoke for the ministry; in March 1734 he eloquently outlined the case for the 'Septennial Act' against a motion for its repeal, arguing that 'I believe it cannot be shewn that so many good laws have passed in any number of years, as have passed since septennial parliaments took place' and insisting that with frequent elections 'a vast encouragement would be given to drunkenness and idleness among all ranks of men' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 9.436). He also supported the subsidy to Denmark on 28 February 1735. On 28 January 1737 he succeeded Sir Thomas Reeve as chief justice of the common pleas, having been knighted five days earlier. But he remained ambitious, and after Walpole's fall in 1742 he sought to attract new patrons. In 1745 he offered to organize a volunteer regiment of lawyers to guard the royal family during the king's absence abroad, but his scheme was rejected. According to Horace Walpole he refused the proposal of becoming lord chancellor in February 1746, when William Pulteney, earl of Bath, and his old friend Granville (formerly Carteret) formed their short-lived ministry, but after this date he allied with the friends of Frederick, prince of Wales, and moved his two sons into opposition against the Pelham ministry. Francis North, seventh Baron North, supported the entry of Willes's eldest son, John, into parliament, at Banbury in 1746, while Thomas Pitt brought his second son, Edward Willes (bap. 1723, d. 1787), in for Old Sarum in 1747, both as supporters of Frederick. The prince envisaged Willes becoming lord chancellor in his reign but this prospect, which must have appeared tantalisingly close, disappeared when Frederick died suddenly, in 1751. 
Though he was an able lawyer Willes presided over an era of stagnation in the court of common pleas. Dudley Ryder said that he offended the attorneys, who ultimately governed the flow of business, by attending in court only 'by fits and starts'. In 1754 Hardwicke believed that the 'court of C[ommon] B[ench] is in danger of being lost to the public' (Ryder, diary, 19 Dec 1754, doc. 27, pt 5a, 19-20). At this time Willes proposed the abolition of the serjeants' monopoly in common pleas as a means of reviving business there, but the scheme was rejected by a meeting of all the judges, and he was accused of wanting to open the court for the benefit of his son Edward, a rising barrister. However, as lord chief justice he was involved in some important crown cases. He was one of the judges who tried the Jacobite rebels at St Margaret's Hill in 1746, and on 29 October it was Willes who ruled against the plea to the jurisdiction made by Alexander and James Kinloch on the ground of the 'Act of Union' ('State trials', 18.395-401). He also presided at the Old Bailey in the abortive proceedings for perjury of September 1753 that arose out of the alleged abduction of Elizabeth Canning. Indeed he was on the bench at the sensational trial of Canning herself, held in April and early May 1754, but the recorder of London summed up, and Willes was not present for the guilty verdict, when two of the jurors presented affidavits maintaining that it was not given according to their consciences. The issue was referred to the next sessions, and on 30 May Willes ruled against a new trial, taking the opportunity to inveigh against the popular collections carried on for Canning, which he said would render a sentence of imprisonment 'rather a diversion than a punishment'. Several of the aldermen on the bench recommended her for mercy in open court but Willes declared that 'he thought her notoriously guilty', and on taking a vote the majority of the bench followed his lead in sentencing her to seven years' transportation (ibid., 19. 672-3). Despite the low level of litigation in common pleas, Willes's greatest contribution to the law was probably the series of reports that he compiled recording civil cases decided before him as chief justice. These were unpublished at his death; a selection, edited by Charles Durnford, appeared in 1799. The reports have been called the most authoritative of the reign of George II; Holdsworth commented that they demonstrate Willes's 'complete mastery of legal principles and the complex rules of procedure and pleading' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 12.448). 
Following Hardwicke's resignation in 1756 Willes was appointed chief commissioner of the great seal on 19 November. He was offered the great seal as lord keeper on the formation of the Pitt-Newcastle administration in 1757 but held out for a peerage. George II, who was still offended by Willes's alliance with Frederick's court in the late 1740s, refused, and he was passed over in favour of Robert Henley. Willes remained chief justice until his death, at his home in Bloomsbury Square, London, on 15 December 1761; he was buried on 24 December at Bishop's Itchington, Warwickshire. Despite his obvious talents, ultimately his judicial career was probably damaged by an unwillingness to dissemble his personal sentiments, especially his ambition; certainly Hardwicke regarded him as an inveterate trouble-maker. He was also notorious for womanizing. Dudley Ryder said of him in 1755: 'He seems to me to be so agitated within that he has no ease but when in motion' (Ryder, notebook, p. 26). His son Edward became a puisne justice of king's bench in 1768. 


@@@@@


doc= 29444


Willes, Richard (1546-1579?), poet and geographer, was born on 5 January 1546, one of several sons of a yeoman, possibly Catholic, family of Pulham, Dorset. In 1558 he went to Winchester College, where he was taught by Christopher Johnson, and to New College, Oxford, as a scholar in 1562, but lost his scholarship in April 1564 because of his absence abroad at Louvain. He entered the Society of Jesus in 1565 at Mainz, graduated MA there in 1568 and moved to Trier, where in late 1569 he began training for the priesthood. Sent on a pilgrimage to Rome, he lingered until June 1572 at Perugia as professor of rhetoric. Abandoning his religious vocation, Willes returned to England later that year. 
Willes soon published his 'Poematum liber' (1573), a volume of academic Latin verse, dedicated to William Cecil, Lord Burghley. Included in its second part of scholia was 'De re poetica', the first formal defence of poetry to be printed in England, which, like the book as a whole, displays Willes's indebtedness to his studies abroad and to continental scholars such as J. C. Scaliger. Having affirmed his loyalty to the Church of England, he was incorporated MA at Oxford (1574) and Cambridge (1578). His new religious allegiance, although sometimes questioned, seems genuine and he obtained the patronage of the firmly protestant family of Francis Russell, earl of Bedford. In this milieu he studied geography, an interest that went back to his youth, and published the 'History of Travayle' (1577), dedicated to Bridget, countess of Bedford; it included a treatise on Frobisher and the north-west passage, addressed by Willes to the earl's daughter, Anne, countess of Warwick, an investor in Frobisher's ventures. A major revision of Richard Eden's 'Decades of the Newe Worlde' (1555), the 'History' added substantial new material on Asia, nearly all derived from continental sources and including accounts of China and Japan translated by Willes and never before printed in English (he refers to G. P. Maffei, the Jesuit historian of the Indies, as his 'olde acquaynted friend'; fol. 253'v'). It has been judged 'one of the outstanding compilations of travel literature to be published in England' (Parker, 81). 
The remainder of Willes's life is uncertain. Gabriel Harvey called him 'a greate travelour, very well lernid' (Smith, 1.126). Edmund Spenser mourned his death in the 'Teares of the Muses' (first published in 1591, but possibly written earlier, or incorporating earlier material). Francis Meres lauded Willes in 'Palladis tamia' (1598) among the English Latin poets who 'have attained good report and honourable advancement in the Latin empyre' (Smith, 2.315). Richard Hakluyt used material from Willes's 'History of Travayle' in the 'Principal Navigations' (1589; 1598-1600). Willes may be the Richard Willis who married Cicely Bosbye at St Dunstan-in-the-East on 10 July 1575, or the Rycharde Willis buried at St Mary Somerset on 5 March 1579. 


@@@@@


doc= 29445


Willet, Andrew (1561/2-1621), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at Ely, the son of Thomas Willet (1511?-1598), rector of Barley, Hertfordshire, and prebendary of Ely Cathedral, the latter on the presentation of his patron Bishop Richard Cox. After studying at the collegiate school at Ely, Willet went to Cambridge, where on 2 February 1577, aged fifteen, he was admitted to Peterhouse (whose master was his godfather Andrew Perne, after whom he was named). His move to Christ's College in the same year foreshadowed the godly convictions that would animate his subsequent career. He was elected a scholar, graduated BA in 1581, and proceeded MA in 1584 (being incorporated at Oxford the same year). As a fellow of Christ's from 1583 he moved in puritan circles: his collection of sacred emblems (published in 1588 with a dedication to the earl of Essex) contains verses dedicated to all the famous Cambridge godly divines of the day, including William Whitaker and Laurence Chaderton. 
Ordained deacon in London on 25 April 1584 and priest the following year, Willet was preacher at Bourn and Fen Drayton, Cambridgeshire, between 1585 and 1588, and was presented by the queen on 21 June 1587 to his father's prebendal stall at Ely. The following year he left the university and resigned his fellowship on marrying Jacobine (died 1637), daughter of Roger Goad (1538-1610), the godly provost of King's College, and his wife, Katherine (died in or after 1610), and being presented to the rectory of Childerley in Cambridgeshire. In the following years he gave series of lectures at both Ely Cathedral and at St Paul's in London. He proceeded BD in 1591 and DD in 1601. Appointed to the rectory of Gransden Parva, Huntingdonshire, in 1597, he swiftly exchanged it for the living of Barley when it fell vacant on his father's death in April 1598. He was instituted to the living on 29 January 1599 and served there until his death. 
A prolific author, Willet published in 1592 the first edition of what became his most famous work, 'Synopsis papismi'. Throughout Willet's career this survey of all the controversies between the protestants and the Church of Rome went through a series of new editions and expansions, which saw it swell from a quarto edition of 600 pages to its posthumous fifth edition of over 1300 folio pages (including a life of the author by Peter Smith), published in 1634. The royal patent for this fifth edition, 'tendring the good of our loving Subjects in matters of Religion especially', noted approvingly of Willet's work that 'it hath beene seene and allowed by... the Reverend Bishops, and hath alsoe ever since byn in greate esteeme in both of our Universities, and also much desired by all the Learned both of our clergy and laity throughout our Dominions' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 100-02). 
For all his godly contacts, Willet seems to have managed to avoid the presbyterian and nonconformist activities of his day. Holding the family prebendal stall in Ely, he had natural sympathies with the established church, even if he was far from being an uncritical admirer of its ceremonies. He was most concerned, however, by the growth of anti-Calvinist doctrines in Cambridge in the 1590s, and by the writings of Richard Hooker and his disciples in particular. He may well have been involved in the anonymous 'Christian Letter' published against Hooker's 'Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity' (many of the 'Letter''s arguments appear in Willet's later writings in 1603-4), and the dedicatory epistle to the third edition of the 'Synopsis' (published in 1600) bore a dedication to Archbishop John Whitgift and Bishop Richard Bancroft which applauded their actions against the puritan movement, but warned of the broaching of new semi-popish doctrines. 
The conditional nature of Willet's support for the ecclesiastical 'status quo' became clearer with the accession of James I to the throne in 1603. Sensing the opportunity for further church reform, Willet hastily presented James at Hinchingbrooke with a copy of the 1600 'Synopsis', but with the previous dedicatory epistle removed and a new one to the king substituted in which he urged James that 'God hath a greate worke to be perfected by your hands' ('Synopsis', 1603, sig. A4'v'). In a series of tracts over the next two years -- most notably 'An Antilogie' (1603) and 'Ecclesia triumphans' (1604) -- Willet petitioned the king that in the case of those indifferent ceremonies which had generated such puritan hostility, James might remove 'the just occasions of offence; or so indifferently moderate them, that they breede no strife' ('Antilogie', preface). His hope was that under James, the reformation of religion begun under the Tudors 'might in good time be perfected and accomplished' ('Ecclesia triumphans', 86). At the same time, he appealed for the suppression of new books by writers (presumably including Hooker) 'maintaining offensive doctrine, too much declining to poperie' ('Antilogie', preface). Such audacious appeals soon won Willet enemies, but it seems to have been his appeal to parliament in 'Limbo-mastix' (1604) for an official augmentation to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' which would prevent the recent 'Arminian' glosses that prompted severe attacks on the book and its author by William Barlow in the preface to Barlow's official account of the Hampton Court conference, and in the 1604 convocation. Another minor author, Richard Parkes, falsely accused Willet of promoting presbyterianism. Willet vehemently denied these charges, protesting (correctly) that he had dedicated more works to bishops and prelates than had any other contemporary Church of England author (although he did in his 'Synopsis' deny that episcopacy existed by divine right). 
But in the face of these attacks and the passing of the 1604 canons, Willet shrank from any further direct involvement in religious politics. He appealed for Bancroft's support, and it seems to have been Bancroft who advised him to turn his attention to the less controversial world of biblical commentary. In the following years Willet dedicated his energies to the production of a remarkable series of encyclopaedic works of biblical exegesis, which provided the reader with a detailed guide to variant readings and doctrinal issues pertaining to every single verse of the text under study. His 'Harmonie' on '1 Samuel' (1607) was followed by commentaries on 'Genesis' (1595 and 1608), 'Exodus' (1608), 'Daniel' (1610), 'Romans' (1611), '2 Samuel' (1614), and 'Leviticus' (posthumously published in 1631). The regular appearance of these folio works in clerical libraries testifies to their enormous practical value to contemporary clergymen. These works of exegesis provide important commentaries on virtually every religious issue and controversy of the day, and although they continued to warn of vanities, or elaborate ritual, in cathedral churches and services, a gradual moderation of Willet's views can sometimes be traced. For example, while his 1611 commentary on 'Romans' still maintained a firmly Calvinist position on predestination, he explicitly retracted the supralapsarian stance that he had espoused in his 'Synopsis' of 1600, and maintained a sublapsarian position 'as the safest from any inconvenience, and the fittest to give satisfaction to the contrarie objections' ('Hexapla on Romans', 1631, 443). 
In producing this extraordinary body of work, Willet combined eight hours of work a day in his study with his busy domestic life according to a careful schedule described by his biographer, Peter Smith. He would rise earlier than anyone else in his family and begin his studies, then take his family to the church for morning prayers, and then return to work 'until near dinner-time, when his manner was to recreate himself a while, either with playing upon a little organ which he had in his house, singing unto it, or else sporting himself with his young children'. After dinner he would walk abroad 'now and then taking some little view of the business of his husbandry about the grounds' before returning to his study to work until supper time (Willet, 1852, 1.50). Smith, who himself lived in Willet's house for a while, memorably describes the extraordinary religious discipline that pervaded the household, with the family attending services twice a day, the many children required to read and learn passages of scripture daily, and laws and ordinances for the household (complete with penalties for offences) set up in notices around the house. 
Whatever his hours of study and absorbing domestic life, however, it would be misleading to imply that Willet retreated from public life. His lifelong concern to increase the stipends of clergy meant that he was active in persuading the dean and chapter of Ely to provide grants from their impropriated rectories and tithes. One of his DD theses in 1601 had stated that tithes should be 'jure divino', by divine right, and in his later 'Hexapla in Leviticum' (1631) he declared that usurpers of tithes committed the sin of sacrilege and incurred the danger of eternal damnation. Willet also had a broader interest in the matter of charity. Later editions of his 'Synopsis' contain an enormous catalogue of charitable activities by English protestants which he industriously assembled (through circulation of questionnaires throughout the country) to refute Roman Catholic claims that protestants neglected such good works. But Willet was as adept at securing such bequests as he was at listing them. He was active in persuading people then resident in Cambridge and London to make bequests to the poor of Barley, and is credited by Smith with having been particularly influential in securing the erection of Sutton Hospital. On a personal level, Willet gave doles of bread to the poor, but with a pointed religious message -- on coronation days and on 5 November. 
Despite his chastening experiences on the public stage at the beginning of James's reign, Willet still remained closely involved in public affairs. His living of Barley was located a very short distance from King James's favourite hunting-lodge at Royston, and a mere 14 miles from Cambridge. Willet retained his contacts in court circles: he continued to dedicate his books to the king as well as the principal bishops, and he served as chaplain to Prince Henry, to whom he also dedicated several works (indeed, 'A Catholicon' (1603) stands out as the only work which Willet dedicated to his immediate neighbours). He also published a sermon celebrating the marriage of Princess Elizabeth to the elector palatine, declaring that 'the combination of religion, and propagation of the Gospel is principally sought in this hopeful mariage' ('A Treatise of Salomons Mariage', 1612-13, 56), and contrasting it with the country's perverse and unsuccessful marriages with Catholic France and Spain. These remarks made it inevitable that Willet would be vehemently opposed to the projected Spanish marriage for Prince Charles. In December 1617 Willet wrote to Sir John Higham urging him to distribute a paper among those Norfolk and Suffolk JPs likely to be elected to the next parliament. Willet's paper argued that the next parliament should make a liberal contribution to the king in order that financial problems did not induce him towards the Spanish marriage. He included a series of arguments against the planned marriage, including the reflection that Catholics held it lawful to kill heretical kings, and that any children of the marriage would 'suck in there Mothers Religion with there milk' (a prophecy which ultimately, of course, was proved correct). Despite the fact that Willet's tract hoped to hinder the match by helping the king in other ways, Willet was imprisoned when Higham's correspondence was intercepted, although he was apparently released after a month. 
From 1613 Willet was briefly rector of Reed as well as of nearby Barley, but he resigned the office in 1615 in favour of his eldest son, Andrew ('bap'. 1591, died in or after 1646). In 1620 he was presented to Chishill Parva, just over the border in Essex, but in the following year he died in unusual circumstances. While journeying back from London after discussing the future printing of his 'Hexapla in Leviticum', his horse stumbled and he fell, breaking his right leg; it was subsequently set so badly that he died ten days later, on 4 December, at the nearby inn at Hoddesdon to which he had ridden. He was buried four days later, as he had requested, in the chancel of Barley parish church. His will, made on 24 November 1621, shows him to have been a prosperous man at his death, owning several properties and advowsons, and he made generous settlements on his wife (who was buried in 1637 at his side) and his thirteen surviving children, who included Thomas Willet (1610/11-1674). Two funeral sermons were given, by Thomas Newcomen, parson of nearby Heydon, and by Mr Greene of Royston, and for a long time afterwards his death was lamented in their sermons by the lecturers of Royston. Willet left behind over twenty published works, many of which went through several different editions as well as numerous reprintings, although Smith claimed that he left a further nine unprinted works, which do not appear to have survived. Different sections of the 'Synopsis papismi' were also published abroad in Latin translation in a number of different editions, and were read approvingly by divines as varied as the Dutch Calvinist Festus Hommius and the German Lutheran Johannes Gerhard. 
Historians have long debated whether Willet should be labelled a puritan, with Daniel Neal and Benjamin Brook happy to reckon him as such, whereas others such as Augustus Toplady were keen to deny this, the better to recruit Willet as an unimpeachable source for the Church of England's doctrinal Calvinism. The matter ultimately comes down to how a puritan is to be defined. There is certainly no evidence that Willet failed to conform to the ceremonies and discipline of the established church. It is also clear, however, that he was prepared to argue for further reform of the church, that he enjoyed good relations with puritan divines, who regarded him as one of their own, and that his published writings reflect a strongly Calvinist and vehemently anti-Catholic world-view. Unlike many conforming Calvinists, he seems to have been ready to oppose the writings of Richard Hooker, as well as to question the 'jure divino' status of episcopacy, and his anxiety at the turn of the century that semi-popish opinions were being maintained which required official suppression would seem to ally him naturally with those more emphatically puritan writers who voiced the same concerns. His efforts to encourage further reformation at the beginning of James's reign were innocent of the presbyterian agenda that his opponents claimed, but would have made him a natural signatory of the millenary petition and supporter of those moderate puritans who spoke at the Hampton Court conference (his 'Retection' of 1603 anticipates their complaints at the conference concerning lay baptism, for example). Ultimately, however, Willet was, like his father, an instinctive supporter of the established church: 'to complaine of some abuses of the Church', he explained, 'is not to exclaime against the Church' ('Loidoromastix', 1607, 16). He was happiest when he could praise the deeds of doctrinally orthodox preaching bishops such as George Abbot and John King. The attacks made upon him by William Barlow and Richard Parkes shocked him into political silence, but the troubles surrounding the Spanish match make it clear that Willet would have struggled to acquiesce to those moments in the 1620s when a violently anti-Catholic political agenda might not accord with government policy. The question of his 'puritanism' is thus a semantic one: Willet's real significance lies in the evidence that he provides of just how strongly anti-Catholic and Calvinist ideas could be held at this period by a clergyman who combined active membership of the established church with readiness to question the orthodoxy of Richard Hooker and his allies as spokesmen of that church. Willet thus became a favourite source for anti-Laudian writers in the 1630s, and in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries for those divines anxious to maintain the Calvinist and strongly anti-Catholic credentials of the Church of England. In 1852 his most substantial work, the 'Synopsis papismi', was republished in ten volumes by the British Society for Promoting the Religious Principles of the Reformation, with the editor urging that influential people should arrange for a copy of the work to be placed in every parish library in the country, the better to promote the protestant cause and frustrate the designs of the pope. Willet's shade would surely have smiled at the thought. 


@@@@@


doc= 29446


Willet, Thomas (1610/11-1674), mayor of New York City, was one of thirteen surviving children of Andrew Willet (1561/2-1621), rector of Barley, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Jacobine (died 1637), daughter of Roger Goad, provost of King's College, Cambridge. Nothing is known of his early life, but in his youth he joined the puritan exodus from England, moving first to Leiden in the Netherlands, and by 1629 to the New England colony of Plymouth plantation. His diplomatic skills first surfaced during successful trading with native Americans, for which he was complimented by Governor William Bradford and awarded the freedom of the colony by 1633. He later managed the Plymouth fur interests in Maine and continued to treat native Americans with respect. In 1636 he married Mary (died 1669), daughter of Major John Brown, with whom he had thirteen children. He slowly acquired stature in the colony, serving on committees distributing cattle to the poor in 1638-44, appointed captain of the militia in 1647, and elected an assistant from 1651 to 1665. A 1647 pub brawl, during which Willet and others smashed their mugs after being affronted by some Dutch men and were chased off by the landlady wielding a lead bludgeon, does not seem to have damaged his reputation. While trading with native Americans, he acquired shares in ships and extended his business interests to the Dutch colony of New Netherland, where he became a familiar and trusted figure among Dutch leaders. When problems arose between the English and Dutch in 1650, he was appointed by Peter Stuyvesant as one of two arbitrators for the Dutch in final negotiations. Regarded as well educated, he was one of four men chosen by the town of Rehoboth in 1660 to 'transcribe the land records out of the former book' (Anderson, 3.1997), and in the same year moved to and helped found Swansey, Rhode Island. He also became a major landowner around Narragansett Bay. 
When in 1664 the English expedition to conquer New Netherland arrived off Long Island, its leader, Colonel William Nicolls, contacted Willet and asked him to negotiate on his behalf with the Dutch. While his friend Stuyvesant wanted to resist the invasion forces, the terms Willet offered on behalf of Nicolls were attractive to civilian leaders, who forced Stuyvesant to surrender on 7 September. Nicolls spent the following year creating a government for the colony, and then turned to forming an administration for the newly named city of New York. He appointed Willet the first mayor in 1665, who served with a mixed group of English and Dutch aldermen. As he gave invaluable aid to Nicolls in the transition to English rule, Willet was reappointed two years later. He also served as a member of the provincial council under Governor Francis Lovelace, but had withdrawn from New York affairs by 1673 and retired to Swansey. His wife having died in 1669, in 1671 he married Joanna, 'nee' Boyse, widow of Peter Prudden. He died on 4 August 1674, 'in the sixty-fourth year of his age' according to his gravestone (Anderson, 3.1999), and was buried at the Little Neck cemetery, Riverside, in what is now East Providence. His will, dated April 1671 and proved in November 1674, reveals he was of some wealth, the inventory of his estate totalling $2798 14's'. 7died, including $1289 in real estate. He also left a substantial library containing over 100 volumes on subjects including theology, history, law, and navigation. He was survived by six of his children from his first marriage, including Thomas, who served on New York City provincial council; his grandson Martinus, a noted patriot, was also appointed mayor of New York City. 


@@@@@


doc= 29447


Willett, Ralph (1719-1795), book collector and connoisseur, was born on 8 August 1719, probably on St Kitts in the West Indies, the elder child of Henry Willett ('c'.1680-1740), plantation owner on the island, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1691-1724), daughter of Colonel John Stanley of Nevis. The Willett family originated in Gloucestershire, but their fortunes, which had been ruined by their royalist sympathies, were repaired by Willett's grandfather Ralph Willett ('c'.1652-1694), who migrated to the West Indies about 1671. In 1729 Willett was sent to England with his brother Henry (1721-1733). He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 23 June 1736 but did not take a degree, and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 4 January 1739. On the death of his father the following year Willett became immensely rich. Samuel Baker's map of 1753 records him as owning five plantations on St Kitts. In 1751 he acquired an estate at Merly in the parish of Great Canford in Dorset where, from 1752 to 1760, he oversaw the building of a grand house notable for its splendid interior. A view was engraved at Willett's expense for John Hutchins's 'Dorset' (1774). Willett was pricked sheriff of Dorset on 1 February 1760. He was elected FSA on 15 December 1763 and FRS on 21 June 1764. 
Willett's wealth allowed him to indulge an interest in early typography. He visited the Imperial Library in Vienna, took lessons in typefounding, and presented two papers to the Society of Antiquaries in support of Mainz as the birthplace of printing. The first ('Archaeologia', 8.239-50), read on 26 May 1785, was addressed to Owen Salusbury Brereton, and the second (ibid., 11. 267-316) to John Topham. A third paper, on British naval architecture (ibid., 11. 154-99), drew on manuscript material in Willett's possession. Willett's library of over 8000 volumes contained more than 80 incunabula, including seven Caxtons and four block books. Most of the books were in fine bindings, and many on vellum and large paper. A large room was built to house the library in a wing added to the south-east of Merly in 1772. The books were placed in huge ornately carved mahogany bookcases topped by a total of twenty-four busts of eminent men. Executed in plaster on the coved ceiling by the modeller William Collins were elaborate designs by which Willett, assisted by Joseph Banks and James 'Athenian' Stuart, traced the rise and progress of knowledge. Above the doors were paintings by Richard Wilson and Solomon Delane representing Athens in its flourishing and ruined states. In 1776 Willett printed for presents 200 copies of an octavo pamphlet describing the room. He also produced a French translation, and in 1785 reprinted both versions in a folio with twenty-five engravings. In 1790 he printed a classed catalogue of the library in octavo. 
Willett was twice married, on both occasions by special licence at the town house in Dean Street, Soho, London, which he occupied from 1760. Although he married his first wife, Annabella Robinson ('c'.1718-1779), on the day before her death on 10 December 1779, a joint tablet erected by Willett in the chancel of the parish church at Great Canford records forty years spent by the couple in mutual happiness. His second wife, whom he married on 15 May 1786, was Charlotte, 'nee' Locke ('c'.1746-1815), the widow of Samuel Strutt, an assistant clerk in parliament. Willett died at Merly on 13 January 1795 and was buried at Great Canford parish church twelve days later. His lengthy will with seven codicils contains generous bequests to various relations, including the MPs John Stanley, John Willett Payne, and Sir Ralph Payne. Willett's heir was his second cousin John Willett Adye (1745-1815), MP for New Romney (1796-1806), whom he had adopted from his infancy. By the terms of the will Adye changed his name to John Willett Willett. 
With the depreciation of West Indian property in the early years of the nineteenth century Willett's collections were dispersed, and the two pairs of balancing wings he had added to Merly, including the library building, were torn down. The bulk of his extensive collections of prints and drawings was sold by Thomas Philipe in eight sales between June 1808 and May 1814. Many of the drawings were the work of the botanical artist George Dionysius Ehret, whose friendship Willett enjoyed for over twenty years, and for whom he acted as executor. A large part of the engravings had been purchased by Willett at the Mariette sale of 1775, and the finest examples were acquired by William Beckford. Willett's paintings, from the Orleans Gallery and other fine collections, were auctioned by Peter Coxe over three days commencing on 31 May 1813. Although a number of the 128 lots were bought in, the sale realized over $7000. The Merly library was auctioned by Leigh and Sotheby over seventeen days between 6 and 24 December 1813, the 2720 lots of books fetching $13,223 7's'. 6died The sale excited great interest, and many of the choicer items found their way into the Spencer, Grenville, Devonshire, and White Knights collections. Thomas Frognall Dibdin helped compile the catalogue, and it was while examining the block books at his house in Kensington that William Young Ottley's interest in the origin of printing was first aroused. 


@@@@@


doc= 29448


William I (1027/8-1087), king of England and duke of Normandy, was born at Falaise. 
William's father was Robert (II), duke of Normandy (died 1035), called 'the Magnificent'. The origins of his mother, who was named Herleva ('fl'. 'c'.1010- 'c'.1055), have been much debated on the basis of evidence which all dates from the twelfth century; she has been variously identified as the daughter of an undertaker or a tanner of Falaise, or as a woman of the ducal household. Although a permanent liaison unconsecrated by the church was fairly normal among the rulers of the emergent Norman duchy in the tenth and early eleventh centuries, William's birth was by standards which were becoming the norm during his own lifetime, and which have endured ever since, illegitimate; he is regularly described as 'bastardus' in non-Norman contemporary sources. At a date for which the evidence is both late and contradictory, but which was probably shortly before the year 1030, Herleva was married to Herluin de Conteville. This marriage produced at least two sons and two daughters, the former of whom, Odo (d. 1097) and Robert (d. 1095), were subsequently to be advanced to the summit of Norman society by their brother as bishop of Bayeux and count of Mortain respectively. Probably in 1050 William married Matilda of Flanders (d. 1083), the daughter of Count Baudouin (V) of Flanders. The marriage produced four recorded sons and, in all probability, five daughters between 1051 and 1068. The males, in order of birth, were Robert Curthose, duke of Normandy from 1087 to 1106, Richard, who was killed in a hunting accident in the New Forest between 1069 and 1075, William Rufus ['see 'William II], king of England from 1087 to 1100, and Henry I, king of England from 1100 to 1135 and duke of Normandy from 1106 to 1135. The known females, whose order of birth is unclear, were Adelida, Cecilia, Matilda, Constance, and Adela, countess of Blois (c.1067-1137). 
Tutors named Ralph the Monk and William appear in charters which date from the late 1030s and early 1040s. Their presence, along with later indirect evidence, such as the poetry and histories written to celebrate the conquest of England, suggest that the young William received some sort of literary education, but specific detail is entirely lacking. The main contemporary narrative sources for William's career from the Norman side are the histories written by William of Jumieges and William of Poitiers and, from the English, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. All present problems of interpretation. Jumieges, who initially finished writing in the late 1050s, subsequently resuming work after 1066 and finishing in 1070 or 1071, wrote to glorify the history of Normandy's rulers. Poitiers, whose history was finished before 1077, wrote specifically to praise and justify William's career and the conquest of England. The chronicle, though annalistic and factual, has something of the character of a lament for the English defeat. The two most important historians of the first half of the twelfth century, Orderic Vitalis and William of Malmesbury, also have their own angles on events; both were of Anglo-French parentage, with the former seeing the conquest as a moral problem to be analysed and the latter aiming to set events in the longer-term course of England's history. 
William's father's control over his duchy was at times precarious. His problems, such as the rebellions of two close relatives, Archbishop Robert of Rouen and Bishop Hugues of Bayeux, highlight the theme of volatility within the ducal kindred, a powerful disruptive force in Norman political society. Another well-established theme in Normandy's history was regular conflict between the Norman rulers and their neighbours; William of Jumieges records that Robert fought wars against Brittany and the lords of Belleme. Robert gave notable support to the English princes Edward (the Confessor) and Alfred, the sons of King AEthelred the Unready, who had been in exile in northern France since 1016. The suggestion that Robert may have been briefly betrothed to a daughter of Cnut, king of England and Denmark ('r'. 1016-35), which was made by the Burgundian writer Ralph Glaber, raises the possibility that William might have been pushed to one side if his father had ever produced a son as the result of a Christian marriage. However, the young William's appearance in charters which date from his father's short reign surely indicates that he was acknowledged as a likely heir from the beginning. In January 1035 he was formally designated as Robert's heir, with the Norman magnates swearing fealty to him and the French king Henri I confirming the arrangement. Robert's death at Nicaea on the return journey from his pilgrimage to the Holy Land meant that William became duke of the Normans during his eighth year. 
There are signs that William's guardians tried initially to continue Duke Robert's policies on his son's behalf. In 1036 in particular, support was given to two separate invasions of England by the brothers Edward and Alfred, who both sought unsuccessfully to profit from the disorder in England which followed Cnut's death; Alfred was captured and killed, while Edward circumspectly withdrew when he appreciated that the English had by and large accepted Harold Harefoot as king. Although a chronology of William's first years is difficult to establish, it is as good as certain that those acting on his behalf were increasingly unable to maintain control within the duchy from the later 1030s onwards. At one point William's own entourage seemingly became so unsafe for the young duke that Herleva's brother deemed it necessary to conceal the boy in poor people's cottages at night for his safety. Two of William's aristocratic guardians were killed 'c'.1040 and much of the duchy was disturbed by feuds between leading aristocratic families. Given the difficulties of these times, it is also extremely unlikely that William's power and reputation were in any way responsible for Edward the Confessor's succession to the English kingdom in 1042, as his panegyrist William of Poitiers would wish us to believe. From 'c'.1042 onwards, when William was declared to be of age, he and those around him began steadily to reassert ducal authority. None the less in 1046-7 William's right to be duke was attacked by his cousin, Gui, count of Brionne. Gui and his associates, most of whom came from the leading aristocratic families of western Normandy, were defeated by an army led by William and the French king Henri I to the south-west of Caen at Val-es-Dunes. Although William of Poitiers suggests that William played a leading role in the battle, the earlier -- and in his case certainly more credible -- account by William of Jumieges assigns a great deal of credit for the victory to Henri I. 
The Truce of God was probably proclaimed throughout Normandy 'c'.1042. According to Orderic Vitalis, after the battle of Val-es-Dunes a siege lasting for three years was required to remove Count Gui from his castle at Brionne. So long a siege seems unlikely, because William was very active elsewhere in 1048 and was involved in campaigns outside Normandy by late 1049. Similarly improbable is William of Poitiers's assertion that William offered to pardon Count Gui, who, however, insisted on going into exile; the story is likely to be a topos of princely magnanimity, since William in later life treated all close kindred who opposed him very harshly indeed. Other rebels of 1047 were imprisoned or exiled. From the mid-1040s the lists of attestations to ducal charters begin regularly to include the names of William fitz Osbern, Roger de Montgomery, and Roger de Beaumont, men who were to be William's closest political associates in the decades ahead. His brother Odo, although in his mid- to late teens at most, was appointed to the bishopric of Bayeux in late 1049 or early 1050, a significant step in the assertion of William's authority in western Normandy. 
The troubles of William's late childhood had been characterized by unauthorized aristocratic castle building and the consolidation of both the local territorial power of the greatest aristocratic families and their grip on the central and local offices of ducal government. Despite assertions in William of Poitiers that William destroyed unlicensed castles, it is clear that the young duke by and large accepted the changes in patterns of power which had taken place. He started to play an active role in the politics of northern France by the mid-1040s, and, by 1049, negotiations were under way for his marriage to Matilda, the daughter of arguably the most powerful of all the great territorial princes of northern France, Count Baudouin (V) of Flanders. The marriage, initially condemned by Pope Leo IX as within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity, apparently took place in 1050. Norman bishops were present at the Council of Rheims at which the marriage was first condemned and, in 1050, the prior of Le Bec, Lanfranc, who was to be appointed to the archbishopric of Canterbury at William's behest after the conquest, visited Leo IX in Rome. This intense diplomatic effort was probably enough to allow the marriage to take place, although all the outstanding business connected with it was not cleared up until 1059. 
The sequence of events during the five years after 1047 is difficult to determine precisely, with the dating of some events, notably the sieges of Alencon and Domfront, both uncertain and controversial. The nature and the chronology of William's contacts with King Edward the Confessor during 1051-2 in particular remain the subject of differing interpretations. Late in 1049 William joined the French king's campaign against Geoffroi Martel, count of Anjou, taking part in the successful siege of the castle of Mouliherne near Angers. William's participation in the campaign is likely to represent a continuation, not only of the victorious alliance of Val-es-Dunes, but of a policy of support for the Robertian/Capetian kings of France which had been consistently followed by the rulers of Normandy since the middle of the tenth century. 
William of Jumieges and William of Poitiers tell that Robert of Jumieges, the Norman archbishop of Canterbury, conveyed a promise from Edward to William that he would be king of the English after his death. Although this promise is not mentioned in the contemporary English sources, the information they provide about Archbishop Robert's itinerary suggests that William must have been informed of the promise in April 1051. The silence of the English sources makes it impossible to know precisely how far the offer of the succession contributed to the rebellion and exile of Godwine, earl of Wessex, and his family in 1051-2. It is, however, a reasonable supposition that the promise was one among a series of factors which drove Godwine to defy the king; the dispatch by Edward to William of Godwine's youngest son and his nephew as hostages suggests his antipathy to William's succession. This in turn almost certainly indicates that there was from the first a powerful opposition to William's succession among the English or Anglo-Danish aristocracy. The D text of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's' unique statement that William visited England during 1051 after Godwine's exile has sometimes been doubted, on the grounds of the chronicle's northern provenance and the absence of any reference to the visit in the Norman sources. Neither of these objections is convincing, especially now that the chronicle's compilation has been persuasively relocated to Worcester. Not only is the manuscript of the D text contemporary and pre-1066, the absence of any mention of the visit from the more politically sensitive C and E texts of the chronicle could be a consequence of a comprehensible desire not to embarrass the king and the kingdom's leading family. The silence of the Norman sources may well be explained either because they did not want to show William as a supplicant, or because William of Poitiers wanted to argue not only that William had been designated by Edward, but that his succession had the assent of the most powerful English magnates, something which was manifestly impossible when Godwine and his sons were in exile. William's visit, at a time when Edward must have seemed triumphant within his kingdom, must have been intended to confirm the earlier offer and to clarify the duke's prospects. 
The status of any offer made to William must have been immediately thrown into doubt, however, when Godwine returned to England in 1052 with the backing of a powerful army. Poitiers's version of the events states that the promise to William received the assent of earls Godwine, Leofric, and Siward, as well as of Stigand, archbishop of Canterbury, indicating that their assent must have been a part of the peace terms between Edward and Godwine. In the context of Godwine's earlier attitude and his power in 1052 this seems unlikely; Poitiers has probably compressed the real or feigned agreement which all four individuals may at some moment have given into a single collective assent, in a manner rather typical of his style. After 1052 William's prospects of succeeding peacefully to the English kingdom were remote, given the advance of Godwine's sons Harold and Tostig to the earldoms of Wessex and Northumbria respectively and the return to England in 1057 of Edward the Exile and his son, Edgar AEtheling. 
Although the dating is controversial, it is likely that William also campaigned in southern Normandy in 1051-2, capturing and securing the castles of Alencon and Domfront, which their lord, Yves, bishop of the southern Norman diocese of Sees and holder of the lordship of Belleme, had apparently made available to his ally, Geoffroi Martel, count of Anjou. The political situation in the region to the south of Normandy had been drastically changed from the mid-1040s by Count Geoffroi's acquisition of lordship over the county of Maine, which placed him in a position directly to threaten Normandy if he wished to do so. After failing to take Domfront by a surprise attack, William's army settled down to a long siege. Count Geoffroi's retreat, attributed by William of Poitiers to the count's fear of Duke William, was more likely a strategic decision that it was not worth fighting a risky battle for the two castles. William then advanced rapidly on Alencon and captured it, before returning to take Domfront. William's conduct of this campaign displays the same capacity for tactical manoeuvring and for patient accumulation of advantage which was to be very often evident later. The capture of Alencon was preceded by a famous incident in which the defenders beat furs and pelts as an allusion, according to Orderic Vitalis, to the duke's maternal origins. After capturing the town, William reacted by having the culprits' hands and feet cut off. Such calculated cruelty was also to be a feature of his later career. 
William's circumstances were rendered difficult by the developments which followed. By 15 August 1052 at the latest, Count Geoffroi and King Henri had formed an alliance which turned out to be directed primarily against William. William had apparently attempted unsuccessfully to forestall this development, since a charter shows that he made a visit to Henri on 15 August 1052. William's uncle, Guillaume, count of Arques, rebelled against his nephew soon after the siege of Domfront and established himself in his castle at Arques backed up by a formidable coalition of neighbouring princes from north-eastern France. The reasons for both developments are obscure. It is possible that William's English involvements alarmed his northern French contemporaries. Alternatively, Henri I may have decided that Count Geoffroi was becoming so successful that it had become folly to oppose him. Count Guillaume, who seems to have been a considerable support to his nephew during his adolescence, may well have been offended by William's advancement of his own proteges. William again moved with a rapidity which disrupted his enemies' attempts at co-ordination. Arques was speedily invested and a relieving force beaten off on 25 October 1053. After the castle's capture, King Henri retreated. A subsequent two-pronged attack aimed at Rouen and Upper Normandy was nullified when a group of Upper Norman magnates loyal to William defeated one of the two invading armies at the battle of Mortemer in February 1054. The other army, led by Henri and Count Geoffroi, left Normandy soon after. 
As a consequence of these campaigns, William was able to gain some allies and some territory around Normandy's frontiers. Gui, count of Ponthieu, to the north-east of Normandy, who had been captured by William, made an agreement with him and, to the south of the duchy, the duke was able to establish a castle at Ambrieres, some miles south of Domfront, which he was able to hold against Count Geoffroi's subsequent assault. Count Guillaume of Arques was permanently exiled from Normandy and his lands were redistributed to loyalists and, in 1054, William was able to secure the deposition from the archbishopric of Rouen of Count Guillaume's brother, Malger. In 1057, however, Count Geoffroi and King Henri were able to launch a second invasion of Normandy, again using the alliance with Bishop Yves to facilitate access to the duchy. William's army shadowed the invaders to the channel coast near Caen, evading battle until an opportune moment appeared, and pouncing only when his enemies were crossing the River Dives at Varaville. This victory at Varaville is a major landmark in William's fortunes since Normandy was not invaded again until near the end of his life. Bishop Yves of Sees abandoned his Angevin alliance and allowed the heiress to Belleme to be married to William's loyal follower Roger de Montgomery. William was pressing the attack into France when both Henri and Geoffroi died in 1060. 
The deaths of Henri I and Geoffroi Martel created the conditions in which William was able to make territorial gains in northern France and establish a Norman predominance there which lasted for his lifetime. The new French king, a minor, came under the guardianship of William's father-in-law, the count of Flanders. The county of Anjou suffered a succession dispute and other powerful princes, such as Ralph, count of Amiens, Valois, and the Vexin, became William's allies. 
In 1063 William was able to secure the succession of himself and his eldest son, Robert, to the county of Maine. The way in which William covered his acquisition in an apparatus of legitimacy in significant respects anticipates his treatment of the English kingdom. From William of Poitiers it is learned that Herbert (II), count of Maine from 1051 to 1062, had promised the succession to William. Not only are there good reasons for thinking that the promise may not have been as clear-cut as Poitiers suggests, but the prospect of a Norman succession to Maine also provoked extensive local resistance and the county's inhabitants offered it to Galtier, count of the Vexin. William campaigned by ravaging the countryside, accepting the surrender of individual castles and gradually isolating the town of Le Mans until it surrendered. Galtier was captured and died shortly afterwards; Orderic Vitalis reported rumours that William had him killed, but the evidence to support these accusations is not convincing. William proceeded to rule Maine within the social and customary framework of previous counts of Maine, to the extent, for example, of allowing his son Robert to do fealty to the count of Anjou. 
William's final campaign in northern France before 1066 was a destructive advance into Brittany as far as Rennes, on which he was accompanied by Harold, earl of Wessex. Although no major acquisitions were made, the expedition undoubtedly served to overawe the count of Brittany, whose power was in any case rather insecure, and completed the establishment of a cordon sanitaire of friendly powers around Normandy's frontiers. Harold's presence enabled William to extract an oath from him to accept the duke's succession to the English kingdom. The reasons why Harold visited Normandy were the subject of disagreement among historians writing in the eleventh century. The basic version of events recorded most clearly by William of Jumieges and William of Poitiers, that Harold was sent by Edward the Confessor to renew his earlier offer of the succession, should probably be accepted; it is perhaps, however, open to doubt whether Harold expected to be asked to swear oaths on relics to that effect. The Norman sources show William treating Harold with full diplomatic courtesy, rescuing him from captivity at the hands of the count of Ponthieu and treating him as a distinguished soldier. William of Poitiers and subsequently Orderic see the oath-taking as essentially a means to allow William to succeed peacefully to the English kingdom and for Harold's political pre-eminence therein to be guaranteed. In practice, William had also established persuasive arguments for portraying Harold as a perjurer should he break his promise and take the English kingdom. Another sign that William had been preparing for an invasion of England after the Confessor's death is his early designation of his son Robert as his heir in or before 1063. Norman rulers had generally waited until the last months of their lives before clarifying the succession; like his father before him, William was preparing against a potentially fatal outcome to a hazardous project. 
William's victorious campaign in 1066 was a triumph of co-ordinated warfare, diplomacy, organization, and propaganda. His reaction to Harold's coronation, which followed a deathbed grant of the succession by Edward the Confessor, was to dispatch an embassy to Rome to secure the papacy's approval for the forthcoming invasion. The mission convinced Pope Alexander II to sanction the invasion with a papal banner. Although it has at times been suggested that no such banner was conferred, the combination of William of Poitiers's statements, later comments by Pope Gregory VII, and the whole apparatus of ritualized penance and crown-wearings which followed the conquest, which must be regarded as a logical consequence of the banner, constitutes convincing testimony. Assemblies of the great Norman magnates were also held, at one of which William of Poitiers portrays William persuading the faint-hearted that the enterprise was not too risky to be undertaken. The consecration of Duchess Matilda's abbey of La Trinite at Caen on 18 June 1066 was without doubt a ceremony intended to secure further divine approval of what lay ahead. The government of Normandy was placed in Matilda's hands, assisted by Roger de Montgomery and Roger de Beaumont, for the duration of the expedition. 
William spent the summer of 1066 travelling around the duchy, meeting with his chief magnates and playing host to the many warriors from beyond the Norman frontiers who intended to take part in the forthcoming expedition. The invasion fleet had assembled in the estuary of the River Dives and in neighbouring harbours by July. Ships and men were subsequently moved to St Valery-sur-Somme in Ponthieu, from where they crossed the channel on the night of 27-8 September, arriving at Pevensey before dawn. William of Poitiers in particular puts William's long delay down to a wait for a favourable wind. This may be correct, but it is also notable not only that the English fleet stationed in the channel was forced to disband on 8 September, but that King Harold had been forced to march north to meet the invasion by King Harald Hardrada of Norway and Harold's own brother Tostig. Waiting for a favourable wind may well have to be interpreted as waiting for the most favourable military conditions in which to cross. After the landing William moved his army from Pevensey to Hastings. His strategy was to wait on the south coast for Harold's advance. His troops deliberately ravaged the surrounding countryside to demonstrate Harold's inability to defend his people as well as to provision the army. The psychological pressure appears to have been very effective, since Harold marched his forces south very rapidly after decisively defeating Harald Hardrada at the battle of Stamford Bridge on 25 September, reaching the area of modern-day Battle on 13 October. 
Once he was aware of Harold's advance, William marched his army out in good order, choosing a battle site on which the English were confined to the steep ridge on which the town of Battle now stands. Harold's attempt to surprise William by a rapid advance south seems to have backfired, since William had engineered a situation in which Harold's tired and under-manned army was trapped south of the woods of the Weald and was obliged to give battle at a time of William's choosing. The conduct and the course of the battle of Hastings remain topics of controversy among historians. It is nowadays generally accepted that the armies must have been roughly equivalent in size, with the English being possibly slightly larger; William is frequently thought to have deployed around 7000 troops, although it is quite likely that he had more. The battle lasted all day, an extraordinarily long period for the middle ages, indicating that the two armies were evenly matched. The site presented difficulties for both sides, since William's troops had to advance up a steep incline, while the manoeuvrability of the English was restricted by the surrounding woodland. William's generalship may well have been one decisive difference, since he was able to use his cavalry's mobility in one or more feigned retreats to disrupt the closely packed English infantry; another must have been the English lack of archers, a crucial weakness caused by the rapidity of Harold's advance, since his army did not possess the ability to keep their opponents at a distance or to disrupt their advance to close quarters. Harold's death late in the day, as his army disintegrated around him, proved ultimately to be decisive since it deprived the English of military leadership. 
William's advance through the south-east of England and his march around London were both the tactics of a general who believed that his opponents might rally, and who did not wish to be cut off in a hostile country. By first securing important towns such as Dover, Canterbury, and Winchester, William safeguarded his rear. His opponents in London, who had proclaimed Edgar AEtheling as king, were thereby increasingly isolated within the south of the kingdom. Once William reached Wallingford the submissions began to come in and, although there was further fighting, he was able to be crowned in Westminster Abbey on Christmas day 1066. The ceremony, conducted according to an English ordo, emphasized William's belief that he succeeded as the Confessor's designated and rightful heir, and was held amid maximum security. The guards were so jumpy that the shouted acclamations within the abbey caused a panic and the burning of neighbouring houses, because a rebellion was feared. 
William took further submissions in the weeks which followed his coronation, including, crucially, those of the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, Eadwine and Morcar. He also confirmed the privileges of the city of London and, according to William of Poitiers, made some laws. Before his departure for Normandy in March 1067, he seems to have done everything he could to project the image of a king who wished to rule in collaboration with his new English subjects, as well as with the support of the Normans, Bretons, Flemings, and other French who had accompanied him. It is likely that William fitz Osbern and Bishop Odo, nominated as earls at this time, and left in charge during William's absence, were given jurisdictions equivalent to the pre-1066 English earldoms of Wessex and Kent respectively. The writ confirming London's privileges, whose original survives, was written in Old English in traditional English style. Likewise a new issue of coinage was soon minted, again following pre-1066 patterns. 
The six years after 1066 saw the breakdown of the Anglo-Norman regime of these first months. A combination of factors contributed to this. Not only were the incoming French greedy for lands and money, but William's wish to display himself as a king and the need to maintain security also meant that heavy taxes were levied. The expectations of the leading English were disappointed; Orderic Vitalis's description of Earl Eadwine's reasons for rebellion suggests that many must have thought their treatment by William not to be commensurate with their status. The temptation to revolt was increased by the arrival of invading armies from Scandinavia. The period between the battle of Hastings and the conclusion in 1072 of the peace of Abernethy with the king of Scots was dominated by a succession of demanding campaigns which gradually subdued England and the British Isles. The result, evidenced very clearly in 'Domesday Book', was the transference of lordship over almost all of England to Normans and other Frenchmen by 1086. 
William spent from March to December 1067 in Normandy. He took with him several leading Englishmen, including Edgar AEtheling, Archbishop Stigand of Canterbury, and earls Eadwine and Morcar. Easter was spent at Fecamp, with many Normans and some northern French princes in attendance. The subsequent progress around Normandy included the consecration of two new abbey churches at Jumieges and St Pierre-sur-Dives. The contents of a narrative charter drawn up at Le Vaudreuil, regulating a property dispute at St James-de-Beuvron with the abbey of St Benoit-sur-Loire, do, however, indicate that even moments in this period of triumph had to be devoted to the perennial problems of defending Normandy's southern frontier. In the meantime, William's representatives in England, Bishop Odo and William fitz Osbern, had struggled to maintain control and had been able to hold down a restive population only by extensive castle building. Early in 1068 William led an army to the south-west, forcing Exeter's surrender and advancing into Cornwall. He returned to Winchester for Easter and at Whitsun Matilda, recently arrived from Normandy, was crowned queen at Westminster. Two charters which survive from this time show the king and queen surrounded by a large court attended by English and French, arguably the apogee of William's attempt to establish an Anglo-Norman state in England. 
Shortly afterwards, earls Eadwine and Morcar rebelled and, at about the same time, Edgar AEtheling left court and took refuge with Malcolm Canmore, king of Scots. According to Orderic Vitalis, Eadwine rebelled because William had denied him genuine authority over his lands and because he had withheld a daughter promised to him in marriage; if correct, it indicates a telling lack of trust between William and one of his chief English subjects. Although Eadwine obtained Welsh allies and there was a rising in northern England, William was able to prevent his enemies combining by a swift march to the midlands and then to York. As in south-west England, where he had installed a Norman castellan at Exeter and a Breton earl in Cornwall, William had castles built at Warwick, Nottingham, and York and did the same on the return journey through Lincoln, Huntingdon, and Cambridge, in every case entrusting the site to a trusted follower. These fortifications were also undoubtedly intended as defences against an invasion from Scandinavia which William by then must have known was forthcoming. He and Matilda are known to have gone to Normandy for the winter of 1068-9. William returned to England in the spring in response to successful English attacks on York and Durham. He scattered his opponents, led again by Edgar AEtheling, outside York and returned south. 
The years 1069 and 1070 undoubtedly represent the severest crisis of the post-conquest period. A large Danish army landed in northern England in the summer of 1069, apparently as a preliminary to a full-scale invasion by Swein Estrithson, king of Denmark. The Danes were joined by Edgar AEtheling and a large force of English rebels, and the combined army captured York on 20 September; the English were apparently ready to accept Swein as king. At approximately the same time a local rebellion overthrew Norman authority in Maine. It seems that William learned of the Danish invasion while hunting in the Forest of Dean, moving north after the fall of York. His initial strategy was one of containment, but after forcing a crossing of the River Aire near Pontefract, he advanced to York and spent Christmas there amid the ruined city; with a typical sense of royal magnificence, he sent to Winchester for his crown in order to hold a crown-wearing on the feast day. The Danish army, having refused to confront William in a pitched battle, retreated to the Humber and agreed to leave in the spring. After Christmas William took his army north into Northumbria, devastating the countryside as it went. This so-called 'harrying of the north' was condemned as barbaric by Orderic Vitalis and was described in lurid terms by Symeon of Durham. The objective, which was achieved, was to make the north of England temporarily uninhabitable and unable to support further rebellion. In either January or February 1070 his army crossed the Pennines in severe weather, defeated further revolts on the Welsh border, and organized the construction of castles at Chester and Stafford. He returned to Winchester for Easter to meet legates sent by the pope. 
William's coronation by the cardinals at Winchester was an event without precedent in English history. It must be seen as a stage-managed ceremony by which the final seal of legitimacy was put on the conquest of England. Since 1066 William had worked closely with Pope Alexander II to give a religious aura to what had from the beginning been presented as a legal and divinely sanctioned enterprise in pursuit of William's just rights. In conformity with this pattern, for example, a papal legate with long experience of Norman affairs, Ermenfrid, bishop of Sion, confirmed a code of penance drawn up by the bishops of Normandy to be administered to all who had taken lives in the Hastings campaign and subsequently. The year 1070 may well also have been important in the foundation of Battle Abbey, the great monastery which William had founded on the field of Hastings as an act of contrition and as a memorial to the dead. Everything was done that could be done to sanitize the act of violence which the Norman conquest of England in the last resort was. There is ultimately no convincing reason to doubt the sincerity of William's efforts to placate what the eleventh-century mind saw primarily as a punishing God; they did, however, of course also serve a crucial political and propaganda purpose. 
During 1070 the papal legates were involved in ecclesiastical synods which legislated for the reform of the English church. The 1070 Council of Winchester also began a process of depriving a number of English bishops of office, foremost among whom was the aged Archbishop Stigand of Canterbury. Their replacements were universally of continental origin, with the crucial see of Canterbury being given to Lanfranc, who thereafter played the central role in establishing the new Norman-French religious order in England. In 1071 William subdued the last pockets of English resistance, involving earls Eadwine and Morcar and Hereward the Wake on the Isle of Ely, and in the summer of 1072 he led an army into Scotland, supported by a fleet. King Malcolm Canmore, following a well-established tactic, retreated before the invader and then negotiated. By the resulting peace of Abernethy William became his lord, he gave hostages from his family, and he agreed to expel Edgar AEtheling from his court. Both the siege of Ely, which involved the construction of a causeway on to the isle, and the combined land-and-sea invasion of Scotland were considerable military feats. As a consequence of both, William had persuasively impressed his power on all his English and British enemies. 
The balance of William's priorities and the character of his rule manifestly changed from 1072. For the rest of his life he spent around four-fifths of his time in Normandy and France. This shift of interest may up to a point have been the result of personal preference. As a people, the English had after all done little to gain William's affection. According to Orderic Vitalis, he did set out to learn the English language, but abandoned the attempt. Political and military necessity must, however, have played a big part in determining William's new itinerary as the power of old rivals in northern France revived and new ones appeared. William had in fact returned to Normandy in the winter of 1070-71. His preoccupation at that point must have been the succession dispute in the county of Flanders between the widow and children of his wife's eldest brother, Count Baudouin (VI), and her next eldest, Robert the Frisian. A small army of intervention dispatched under the leadership of William fitz Osbern was, however, defeated at the battle of Kassel (20 or 22 February 1071), and fitz Osbern himself was killed. Robert the Frisian's victory meant that a very powerful, and previously friendly, northern French principality was henceforth hostile. In 1073 William organized a campaign which restored Norman authority in Maine. The expedition, which is notable for the participation of English troops, involved a typically systematic ravaging of the countryside and the eventual isolation of the town of Le Mans within the county. William appears, however, to have treated the rebels leniently in conformity with a pattern established since the county was first acquired in 1063. 
Potentially very threatening was the revival of French kingship under Philippe I and of the county of Anjou under Foulques Rechin. In 1074 enemies on both sides of the channel sought to combine against William, as King Philippe offered the castle of Montreuil near Normandy's north-eastern frontier to Edgar AEtheling. Edgar's fleet was wrecked by storms in the North Sea, however, after which he bowed to the inevitable and made his peace with William and thereafter resided at his court; henceforth there was no longer a claimant of English birth to oppose William. 
A combination of English and northern French enemies did, however, cause him great distress in 1075-6. The so-called 'revolt of the three earls' was hatched at the wedding feast of the Anglo-Breton Ralph, earl of East Anglia, and a daughter of the Norman William fitz Osbern. Ralph was joined in revolt by fitz Osbern's son, Roger, earl of Hereford, and, rather half-heartedly, by the last Englishman still holding an earldom, Waltheof of Northumbria. William, who was in Normandy, left the containment and the defeat of the revolt to deputies, returning to England only when he was informed that a Danish invasion was imminent. In fact, his generals prevented the rebel forces from uniting and the threat from Denmark evaporated. He spent Christmas at Westminster, attending the funeral of Edward the Confessor's queen, Edith. The rebels were harshly treated. Earl Roger lost his lands and was condemned to long-term imprisonment, many of the Bretons who had been involved with Earl Ralph were mutilated and exiled, and Earl Waltheof, who had thrown himself on William's mercy, was tried and then beheaded, according to English law, on 31 May 1076. Earl Ralph, however, escaped to his Breton lands and set about harassing Normandy from the castle at Dol. He received military support from Foulques Rechin, count of Anjou, and held firm when William commenced a siege in September 1076. 
Some time later, probably in November, William's forces were surprised and defeated by a relieving force organized by King Philippe. This was the first serious military set-back of William's career. Orderic Vitalis, seeing God's hand at work, blamed the defeat on William's treatment of Waltheof, at whose tomb at Crowland Abbey miracles began to occur. Orderic also noted that thereafter William never drove his enemies from the field of battle and that life in general became more difficult for him. Given William's piety, the consecration of the church of his great monastic foundation of St Etienne of Caen on 13 September 1077 may well have been intended as an act of religious propitiation at a time of mounting problems. 
Conflict broke out between William and his eldest son, Robert Curthose, either in late 1077 or in early 1078. Orderic Vitalis, the main source for events, describes a family quarrel at L'Aigle, after which Robert made an abortive attempt to capture the castle at Rouen before fleeing Normandy to recruit allies. The main source of friction is said to have been Robert's increasing irritation at his father's reluctance to give him real authority. The crisis may well be a consequence of disappointed expectations fomented by William's almost constant presence in Normandy after 1072. Robert had been designated as William's successor in Normandy in or shortly before 1063, and had also been declared count of Maine. Although William of Jumieges, whose history was completed by 1070-71, described Robert as being actually duke of Normandy, his real position was more ambiguous. Orderic in particular makes it clear that after 1066 responsibility for governing Normandy resided with Matilda and a group of major magnates, with charter evidence suggesting that this was still the case in 1075. After leaving Normandy, Robert sought support from the likes of King Philippe and Count Robert the Frisian. By the winter of 1078-9 he was established in the castle of Gerberoi to the south-east of the duchy. He appears to have met William's advance in open country and, in the resulting skirmish, William was wounded by his own son. The humiliated king retreated to Rouen. A settlement was finally brokered in the summer of 1080 and king and eldest son apparently reconciled. 
The impact of the quarrel had kept William away from England for over three years and had given hope to old enemies such as the king of Scots, who had ravaged northern England in 1079. William's visit to England in 1080-81 was notable for great crown-wearings held at Christmas at Gloucester and at Whitsun at Winchester. It must have been during this period that William refused Pope Gregory VII's request that he become a vassal of the papacy; the letter written on William's behalf (probably by Archbishop Lanfranc) is a masterpiece of elegant simplicity: a payment of Peter's Pence would be sent to Rome because the levy had been paid by William's English predecessors, but as there was no precedent for vassalage, therefore the request was refused. In the autumn of 1080 William dispatched his son Robert to deal with the king of Scots, whom he pursued to Falkirk, where the terms of the peace of Abernethy were renewed. In 1081 William undertook an expedition into Wales, which was partly a pilgrimage to St David's, but also a military expedition to impose order after relatively stable relations among the Welsh princes had broken down after the death of King Caradog ap Gruffudd of Morgannwg at the hands of Rhys ap Tewdwr, king of Deheubarth. Later in 1081 the problems of maintaining order across his large lands took William to Maine to repulse an attack on the castle of La Fleche by Count Foulques Rechin. Christmas was spent at Le Mans before his return to Normandy. The result of these far-flung campaigns was to establish a 'modus vivendi' with all the powers concerned which lasted until William's death. 
William returned to England late in 1082 to arrest his brother Odo, bishop of Bayeux. Two twelfth-century sources, Orderic Vitalis and William of Malmesbury, agree that Odo was involved in a scheme to purchase the papacy for himself and that he was recruiting warriors to assist him when William apprehended him in the Isle of Wight. An earlier source, the 'Gesta Dei per Francos' of Guibert de Nogent, suggests that Odo was making preparations to succeed William after his death. Orderic, who described the scene of the arrest in a dramatic set-piece account, also has William accuse Odo of oppressing the English during the periods when he was acting as William's regent in England. The breach with Odo must have been a considerable loss to William. Although the bishop's extravagance and excessive ambition are well recorded, the combined evidence of 'Domesday Book', a number of chronicles, and records of land pleas shows that he had played a central role in the organization of the land settlement of conquered England and had at certain times undeniably acted as regent on his brother's behalf. William had him shut up in prison at Rouen during the rest of the king's life and allowed the estates of his bishopric to be plundered. 
Further family misfortunes hit William in 1083, with the death of Queen Matilda on 2 November. This was followed, probably early in 1084, by Robert Curthose's second departure from court, again as a result of strained relations with his father. Matilda's death was an exceptionally serious blow, not only because he is said to have loved her deeply, but because she had often represented William in his absence and had played to the full the traditional role of early medieval queenship, organizing the household, distributing alms, and holding the royal kindred together. Robert's second exile, which lasted until after the king's death, was less significant than the first, since he did not attract support on anything like the same scale as before. 
William's movements become very unclear in 1084 and 1085. In the former year, he certainly travelled at some point to Maine to tackle a local insurrection by Hubert, vicomte de Ste Suzanne, eventually leaving the task of reducing the rebel's castle to his military household. He may have visited England in the winter of 1083-4 when the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records that an exceptionally heavy geld of 6's'. on the hide was levied. This was undoubtedly related to organizing England's defences against an invasion from Denmark and Flanders which was known to be in preparation. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' tells not only of exceptionally heavy taxation, but of troop movements on an unprecedented scale. 'Domesday Book' demonstrates that parts of the east coast were ravaged to make a landing unattractive. The anticipated invasion did not, however, take place because the Danish king, Cnut IV, was murdered while at prayer in the church of Odense in July 1085. 
William spent Christmas 1085 at Gloucester. There, as the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' tells, in one of its most famous entries, he had 'deep speech with his counsellors about the nature of the kingdom and of the kind of people with which it was peopled' ('ASC', s.a. 1085). The result was the 'Domesday' survey. William's reasons for having the survey made and its results written down remain controversial. Its contents suggest above all an interest in resources and, therefore, in general terms in taxation; used selectively, and in specific relation to its basic units of lordship, shire, and hundred, it offered an excellent means to estimate what are traditionally called 'feudal incidents', as well as the general capacity of communities to pay. Although its interest in land disputes is erratic, its value as a record of tenure cannot be dismissed; in all probability it sought not to solve the massive problems consequent on the settlement of a new aristocracy in an alien land, but to set out once and for all who had gained what, with the settlement of disputes being left to the regular workings of the courts. Modern work has clarified greatly how the record was made. Above all, it has demonstrated how all the fundamental communal courts of shire and hundred and the central and local administrative capabilities of the English kingdom were focused for a short time on a single task. Crucial were the willingness of the newcomers to supply information about their lands and the capacity of local communities to supply evidence on oath. The 'Domesday' survey also demonstrates how the newcomers had fostered the basic units of central and local government in England -- often, of course, for their own selfish and exploitative purposes. 
William travelled around the southern counties while the survey was in progress. The returns were brought to him before he left for Normandy in the autumn -- it is, incidentally, unlikely that he saw any of the document now known as 'Domesday Book', since it is clear that this finished text was produced over a period which lasted into his son's reign. It is indeed possible, as has recently been suggested, that 'Domesday Book' was entirely a product of William II's reign. The returns may well have been brought into William's presence on the occasion of the so-called 'Salisbury oath', taken from his tenants-in-chief and their major tenants, on 1 August 1086. A general oath of loyalty of this kind lies within a long early medieval tradition going back to the Carolingian period. Although its 1086 context remains somewhat mysterious, it, along with the 'Domesday' survey, should probably be seen as setting a legal and tenurial seal on the Norman conquest of England. In the minds of William and his chief followers, a long and complex process of settlement and adjustment had been brought to a conclusion. 
In the autumn, William left again for Normandy, taking with him, as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicler grimly noted, as much money as he could, obtained, as was his custom, by fair means and foul. His objective was to counter raids being launched into the Evrecin by King Philippe I from bases in the French Vexin -- it is noteworthy how often after 1066 William's preoccupation on one side of the channel had encouraged his enemies on the other side to launch an attack. In this case, his response was notably aggressive. Instead of merely defending the frontier, as had been his normal policy, he claimed that overlordship over the Vexin had been granted to his father by Philippe's father in 1033. There is no trace of such a grant in sources earlier than Orderic Vitalis, even though there is undeniably a history of good relations between the Norman rulers and the counts of the Vexin during the 1020s and 1030s; the counts' known attendance at the Norman ducal court could possibly therefore be constructed in terms of lordship. It is, however, remarkable that William had not made any claim to the county in 1077 when the death of his godson Count Simon had created the circumstances which Philippe was exploiting. His actions in 1086 smack of opportunism. In July 1087 his army advanced into the Vexin and sacked the town of Mantes. But during the sack William was taken ill, either because of the heat, or because the pommel of his saddle ripped into his stomach as his horse tried to jump a ditch. The ailing king was carried back to Rouen and then moved for peace and quiet to the priory of St Gervase outside the city. Surrounded by clergy and magnates, he apparently remained lucid until the end, which came on 9 September. His corpse was transported by river and sea to Caen where he was buried in the abbey church of St Etienne which he himself had founded. 
The two chief accounts of the Conqueror's deathbed pose interpretative problems. Orderic Vitalis's long account of the deathbed and the events which followed is filled out with rhetorical speeches. The whole is clearly intended as a parable on the morality or otherwise of the Norman conquest of England and on the vanity of worldly achievement. The earlier anonymous 'De obitu Willelmi', which may have been written in the last decade of the eleventh century, may well be a literary pastiche intended to illustrate how a great king died, rather than a record with any pretensions to historical accuracy, since it is plagiarized wholesale from two Carolingian sources, with only a small number of names and phrases changed to fit the personnel and circumstances of 1087. 
Used carefully, these and other records make it clear that William sought atonement through extensive benefactions to the church and gifts to the poor. There was an amnesty for prisoners, although, according to Orderic, William tried to exclude his brother Odo from this; yielding to supplications, he eventually relented, while prophesying future trouble -- here, as elsewhere, Orderic's attribution of foreknowledge to William could owe everything to the author's hindsight. The most acute problems concern the arrangements for the succession. William clearly honoured with great reluctance his promise that the absent Robert would succeed him as duke of Normandy. No source treats the English succession in an entirely clear-cut way. 'De obitu Willelmi' records that he gave his crown and other regalia to his second surviving son, William Rufus. Orderic has him fatalistically leave the English kingdom in God's hands, while at the same time expressing the hope that William Rufus would succeed him and sending a letter to Archbishop Lanfranc ordering him to receive him. If it is accepted that the coronation was constitutive, then this can reasonably be interpreted as a bequest of the English kingdom to William Rufus. The whole issue needs to be set in the context of the permanent state of ambiguity in which William had left the English succession since 1066. There are occasional hints that Robert might have been expected to obtain both Normandy and England, such as his command of the 1080 expedition against Scotland, but no promise was ever made and Robert was too rarely resident in England for his succession to be taken for granted. From the 1070s onwards, the dissensions within the ruling family were such as in all probability to make a clear-cut solution impossible. William would also have been aware that the large cross-channel estate held by William fitz Osbern had been divided on the apparent basis that the first son received the Norman patrimony and the second the English acquisitions. Dividing England and Normandy also fitted into a long-standing Norman tradition whereby landed provision was made for the male siblings of the ducal family. 
A single thigh bone found when William's tomb was opened in 1961 is the basis for the suggestion that he was a tall man, about 5 feet 9 inches in height. He became extremely fat in the final years of his life. One of the few independent sections in the 'De obitu Willelmi' makes it clear that his voice was harsh and rough. All this concurs with statements to the effect that he was physically imposing and with a great deal of anecdotal evidence which demonstrates that he was exceptionally strong; William of Malmesbury, for example, recounts that, while spurring on a horse, he could draw a bow which other men could not even bend. His one well-established pastime was hunting, which in the eleventh century was effectively a means of keeping in trim for war; the creation of large areas of royal forest in England, of which the New Forest is the best-known, was the result. He has no reputation at all for the patronage of letters, although he was not averse to having his achievements widely celebrated in verse. 
Unusually for a young early medieval aristocrat, he showed little interest in sexual activity during adolescence, to the extent that William of Malmesbury reported rumours of possible impotence. His marriage to Matilda of Flanders appears to have been a loving one and the king was faithful to her in a way which was unusual in a medieval king. Interestingly, however, all three of their sons who reached adulthood turned out to be dissolute in one way or another. William Rufus was probably his favourite son. He is said by Orderic Vitalis to have treated his eldest son, Robert, contemptuously in public. Orderic also stresses William's generosity, cheerfulness, and magnificence; he was clearly a king who knew the value of display. He followed a chivalric code of behaviour, punishing, for example, those who hacked at Harold's corpse on the field of Hastings and keeping Edgar AEtheling at his court despite a multitude of offences, presumably because he was of royal blood. The faults most often remarked on were greed and cruelty. The former theme was most eloquently developed by the Anglo-Saxon Chronicler who says that it was William's habit to sell land on very hard terms. The latter is suggested by Guibert de Nogent's comment that it was William's practice to incarcerate prisoners taken in war, whereas other contemporaries ransomed them. The fate of many who opposed William, from counts Gui of Brionne and Guillaume of Arques through to earls Roger of Hereford and Waltheof of Northumbria and the king's own brother Odo, is testimony to his ruthlessness. While the devastation of northern England in 1069-70 arguably replicates the behaviour of some of his English predecessors, the scale and the violence of his actions nevertheless stand out. 
Throughout his life William's rule always paid respect to tradition and custom. His charters and, above all, William of Poitiers articulate the philosophy that his authority was legitimately constituted and legitimately justified. Although profoundly conservative, he possessed an energy and an instinctive political intelligence which still seem awesome across a gap of nine hundred years. He was a master at cloaking an act of violence or expediency within a framework of morality and law. In Normandy before 1066 he structured his power on the customary foundations of Norman ducal rule, while shaping a political society which carried all before it in 1066 and the years which followed. The pre-1066 Norman diplomas show a notable increase in the numbers of ducal 'prepositi' and household officers, indicators in general terms of much more intensive administration which undoubtedly drew strength from the prevailing economic growth. The shaping of the Norman aristocracy through selective patronage and forfeiture created a formidable alliance of interest among a small group who dominated Norman and Anglo-Norman society during William's lifetime. Orderic Vitalis, describing the misfortunes of benefactors of his monastery of St Evroult, condemned William's rule in Normandy before 1066 as being at times arbitrary and partisan. 
There is no doubt that some of the more authoritarian aspects of William's rule, most notably his insistence on his right selectively to install garrisons in magnates' castles, provoked resentment. The 1050s and 1060s also witnessed the evolution of the close co-operation between ducal government and the church which subsequently became so central to Norman rule in England. The clear-sighted and scholarly Lanfranc was established as William's chief adviser in ecclesiastical matters by the mid-1050s at the latest. Secular and religious authority were formidably combined in pre-1066 Normandy. As a result, a papal legate visited Normandy in 1054 to carry out a canonical deposition of William's uncle Archbishop Malger; not for the last time, the excellent relations which William had with the papacy were turned to political advantage. William and his wife's foundation of the two abbeys of St Etienne and La Trinite of Caen in the late 1050s and early 1060s as a penance for their once-forbidden marriage further enhanced their religious standing. Among the aristocracy, the king's two half-brothers, Bishop Odo and Count Robert of Mortain, and William fitz Osbern, Roger de Montgomery, Roger de Beaumont, William (I) de Warenne, Hugh, earl of Chester, and Richard fitz Gilbert stand out. William was to a degree fortunate in that a churchman of Lanfranc's stature chose to become a monk in Normandy, but the way in which he was employed to boost Normandy's, and William's, reputations in, for example, his missions to Rome of 1050, 1059, and 1066 showed exceptional judgement. 
There was no attempt before 1066 to remove the Norman duchy from the orbit of the 'regnum Francorum' nor, after 1066, to make it part of a sort of cross-channel kingdom. Both William of Poitiers and William of Jumieges stress the king's Normanness and several Norman charters triumphantly extol his military achievements as duke of Normandy. William permitted his son's designation as his successor to be confirmed by King Philippe I and, after 1066, in contrast to England, the 'Laudes' were sung in Normandy in praise of the French king. William's post-conquest scheme of cross-channel government was essentially a geographically expanded version of his pre-1066 rule in Normandy, since he relied on his close kindred, most notably Queen Matilda, Bishop Odo, and, until 1071, William fitz Osbern, to act on his behalf. As a result the disintegration of family solidarity in the last ten years of his life caused great trouble. The marriages which he arranged on behalf of his daughters continued the policies of earlier Norman dukes by creating unions with other northern French princely families; Constance was married to Alain, count of Brittany, and Adela to Etienne-Henri, count of Blois. Palpable symbols of authority, such as charters and coins, demonstrated little in the way of integration between Normandy and England, and William's seal was a double-sided one celebrating the power of the 'rex' of the English and the 'patronus' of the Normans. The political and legal traditions of Maine were also respected and treated as distinct; while the restive Manceau aristocracy were quelled in a series of campaigns, their ranks were never culled like their Norman and English counterparts. Although he sought to impose his will on the Welsh and the Scots to guarantee England's security, insisting on an acknowledgement of overlordship and the payment of tribute, and encouraged Lanfranc's attempts to spread ecclesiastical reform to Ireland, he did not seek to extend his kingly authority in the British Isles beyond the lands that his English predecessors had traditionally ruled. His method of dealing with the frontiers of the English kingdom did, however, draw on Norman, rather than English, precedents, since both on the Welsh border and in northern England he supported the establishment of territorial castellanries. Herefordshire (until 1075), Shropshire, and Cheshire became earldoms, the second two certainly on the model of a Norman 'comte', and their lords were allowed licence to make advances into Welsh territory; this in due course resulted in the subjugation of considerable parts of Wales, but it should not be assumed that this was William's original intention. 
In England the attribute of William's rule most praised by the Anglo-Saxon Chronicler was his stern enforcement of the traditional kingly responsibility of justice; he was 'stronger than any predecessor of his had been' ('ASC', s.a. 1087). His rule was structured around the belief that he was Edward the Confessor's designated heir and he claimed to govern according to the laws of King Edward. Although his visits to England after 1072 were relatively infrequent, they were characterized by a very strong sense of power and majesty. His itinerary largely replicated that of Edward the Confessor and he seems rarely to have advanced north of the old kingdom of Wessex once his authority over the kingdom had been secured. He is known to have worn his crown at his palaces at Winchester, Westminster, and Gloucester on the great religious festivals and, even if he did not always follow the sequence indicated in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', it is the majesty and the theatre which the chronicler's statements imply which are crucial; triumphalism and display are also very evident in his rule in Normandy after 1066. At Caen, Rouen, London, and Winchester he was a great builder, and surviving monuments such as the White Tower in the Tower of London and the western parts of the abbey church of St Etienne of Caen demonstrate the scale and originality of work undertaken on his behalf. 
Until very modern times, it was generally argued that William's power in the English kingdom (and as a result the strength of the kingship that he passed on to his successors) was based on the systematic introduction of what was too facilely termed 'feudalism'; the quotas of knight-service agreed between William and his tenants-in-chief and the bishoprics and chief monasteries of the kingdom were seen as the basis for a new kind of feudalized kingship which allowed the king to bind his chief subjects to him by oath and service and to exact so-called feudal incidents, such as reliefs, wardship, and aids. Although the introduction of service quotas and the collection of reliefs and the like were undoubtedly a feature of post-1066 kingship, the core of William's authority resided in the monarchical legacy of his Anglo-Saxon predecessors, and, in particular, in the numerous rights and revenues he had inherited from them, in the all-encompassing power of the king's peace, and in the extensive jurisdictional powers he held. 
These latter enabled William to oversee and intervene in the distribution of English land to the Normans and other French; it is above all evident from 'Domesday Book' that a set of principles derived from William's announced status as the Confessor's heir was used to try to contain the land disputes and the local violence which attended the Norman settlement. In the circumstances, it is likely that William's rule was perforce much more interventionist in the English localities than that of his predecessors had ever been, thereby accelerating the centralization of justice and the subsequent creation of the common law which occurred in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The regime established in England by William and his companions has elements which we would now regard as colonial; all significant resources and power were in the hands of a dominant foreign elite. Care was, however, taken to regulate relations between newcomers and natives. The 'murdrum' fine was undoubtedly developed in a way designed to protect the newcomers against guerrilla attacks. On the other hand, solicitude was shown for English women who fled to nunneries to escape either marriage or abduction by the invaders; Lanfranc, with William's concurrence, decreed that they should renounce their vows if they had no vocation. The appearance of Englishmen on juries at the time of the 'Domesday' inquest and their continued employment as moneyers are but two examples of their integration into the new regime and of how their skills were utilized to maintain English administrative practices and legal stability. 
William's personal piety was consistently praised by his contemporaries. Even that stern critic of kings, Pope Gregory VII ('r'. 1073-85), wrote that he was pre-eminent among kings and expressed admiration for his devotion to the moral and spiritual welfare of the church. In both Normandy and England he presided at and gave support to ecclesiastical synods which legislated in (it must be said) a rather cautious way for the good organization of the church and the extirpation of the perceived abuses of simony and clerical marriage; foremost among these were the series of councils held in England by Lanfranc from 1072 onwards and the 1080 Council of Lillebonne in Normandy. He was a major patron of monasteries, himself founding two great abbeys at St Etienne of Caen and Battle, and making donations to a host of other churches. His life is characterized by dramatic acts of atonement, such as the penitential foundation of the two abbeys, the holding of great consecration ceremonies at strategic moments, and acts of restitution such as his gifts to the cathedral church of Le Mans after his troops had damaged it during the siege of 1073. He was capable of extravagant religious display, prostrating himself in total humility, for example, before Archbishop Ealdred of York and the legate of Hugh, the great abbot of Cluny. After becoming king he was an ecclesiastical patron on an extensive scale, giving gifts to many churches in France and, for example, financing the construction of a tower at the great abbey of St Denis. 
William's policy towards the church within his lands and towards the papacy has been somewhat distorted by the commentary on the later quarrels between Anselm and kings William II and Henry I by the monk Eadmer of Canterbury. Throughout his life William believed it to be his right to dominate and safeguard the welfare of the church within his territories, expecting the papacy to support him when required. He respected papal authority and canon law as he understood it, as long as it did not infringe his customary prerogatives; thus, for example, he accepted fully that ultimate jurisdiction over the primacy dispute between Canterbury and York lay with the papacy, just as the deposition of bishops was something which could only be done by the papacy. He worked closely with Alexander II, and his collaboration with many of the goals of the reforming papacy stood him in good stead with Gregory VII. The suggestion that he deliberately excluded papal authority from his territories and restricted contact with Rome derives principally from new circumstances and policies initiated during the pontificate of Gregory VII. Gregorian novelties, such as the demand for fealty and the request that Lanfranc visit Rome regularly, were resisted; once more, as numerous texts make clear, William's rule was being structured around the traditional rights of English kingship. Conduct of Anglo-Norman relations with the papacy became more circumspect. In due course, as Lanfranc's letters to the anti-pope Clement III make clear, once the emperor Henry IV had attacked Rome and sponsored an anti-pope, William and Lanfranc took it upon themselves to organize the church within the Anglo-Norman lands themselves while the spiritual leadership of Christianity was in doubt. 
The Conqueror's death was followed by the collapse of order in Normandy and, within months, by the outbreak of a war of succession between his sons. Both were directly related to William's excessively authoritarian rule within the duchy and his inability to resolve problems within his family. The cohesion of the ducal and royal kindred and of the Norman aristocratic class had been quite exceptional during the period of William's rule. In sociological terms, the breakdown of the last decade of his life was, however, of a kind which resembled earlier crises in Norman history. In the same way, he failed to solve the (probably insoluble) problems associated with Normandy's place within the French kingdom. Paradoxically, the conquest of England magnified many problems by extending geographically the networks of potential hostility. His basic achievement can, however, be perceived within this confusion in that he created the circumstances which made his sons wish to continue his cross-channel realm. A very capable soldier and a formidable personality, his great qualities surely lie in the will and determination which allowed him to sustain a war of conquest over six years and then to maintain overall control over the settlement of a new aristocracy and the start of the integration of native and newcomer. 


@@@@@


doc= 29449


William II (c.1060-1100), king of England, was born about 1060, the third son of William I (the Conqueror), king of England and duke of Normandy (1027/8-1087), and his wife, Matilda of Flanders (d. 1083). His elder brothers were Robert Curthose, later duke of Normandy (d. 1134), and Richard, who died before 1074. He had at least one younger brother, Henry (d. 1135), his successor as king, and five sisters: Adelida, Cecilia, abbess of Caen, Matilda, Constance, countess of Brittany, and Adela, countess of Blois. 
On his father's side William Rufus was originally of viking, latterly of Norman, stock. His mother's father, Baudouin (V), count of Flanders (died 1067), had married Adela, daughter of Robert II, the Capetian king of France. Hence the young William was related to most of the high aristocracy of northern France and the Rhineland. Bynames like Rufus, which refer primarily to the colour of the hair but also to the complexion, were in common use. William of Malmesbury, writing about twenty years after William II's death, claimed that he had a rufous complexion and yellow hair. Guibert, abbot of Nogent, writing about the same time, said that he was called 'Rufus' because he was one. And, later, Orderic Vitalis used the nickname throughout his ecclesiastical history. Although it would seem unlikely that William was in fact called 'Le Ros' or 'Le Rossel' (the vernacular equivalents of Rufus) in his own lifetime, the epithet Rufus serves to distinguish him from all the other Williams of the period. Despite his mother's being very short, apparently little over 4 feet tall, and the pope's condemnation in 1049 of her proposed marriage as incestuous, her children were, although probably small, in general healthy and vigorous. All four sons were adventurers and active hunters and soldiers. And even if Rufus was less intelligent than his brothers, he was endowed with steadiness, common sense, and some wit. 
By the time of William Rufus's birth his father had overcome most of the difficulties he had faced after inheriting as a bastard child a turbulent duchy, and was about to start on a series of conquests. In 1063 he acquired the county of Maine and in 1066 England. Rufus, as the third son, could, perhaps, have expected an appanage. But there was a tradition that for his education he was put in the household of the scholar and monk Lanfranc, presumably in 1065-6 when Lanfranc was abbot of Caen. If, however, his parents had intended him for the church, the death of their second son, Richard, some time between 1069 and 1074 (and also Rufus's obvious unsuitability for a clerical career) brought him back to the Conqueror's side to serve as a knight bachelor. An intimate acquaintance with the monastic life at an impressionable age could, however, have inspired in him the ribaldry and contempt for the church he was to display when king. All observers agreed that Rufus was a good and dutiful son. But it was easier for him than for the heir, Robert, to accept dependence on their father. 
Robert was recognized by the duke and the duke's overlord, the king of France, both before and after 1066, as titular duke of Normandy and count of Maine, but increasingly resented his lack of independence and his poverty. Orderic Vitalis tells a story which explains why Robert first ran away and also throws light on how the brothers got on together. Probably in 1078, when Robert would have been about twenty-five, Rufus eighteen, and Henry ten, they were with their father at L'Aigle, on the south-east frontier of Normandy, when he was about to attack one of his neighbours. The two younger sons were lodging with the king in the house of the merchant Gunher, while Robert, who had his own household, was quartered on another burgess. Rufus and Henry paid Robert a visit, went upstairs, began to play dice, 'as soldiers do', made a great commotion and then urinated on the heads of Robert and his friends. Robert dashed upstairs to punish his juniors, and the brawl was so fierce that it brought the king onto the scene. He restored order and forced them to make friends. But Robert had lost face, and the following night he and his companions decamped and made for Rouen, probably about one day's forced march away, where they tried to seize the keep. When they failed and the king ordered their arrest, they fled from Normandy. In the following year both Rufus and his father were wounded when they attempted to expel Robert from the fortified town of Gerberoi, where he was living as a robber baron, and, since the father's wound was inflicted by Robert himself, this incident probably determined Rufus's future. 
In 1080 Robert made his peace with the king and he and Rufus went with him to England, where Malcolm III Canmore, king of Scots, who was attacking the northern shires, had to be contained and south Wales had to be overawed. Rufus could have taken part in Robert's invasion of Lothian in that year and the king's march to St David's in the next. Then they returned to the duchy to deal with Foulques of Anjou's invasion of Maine, and Rufus was presumably in the ducal army which invaded Anjou and secured the peace of Blanchland which confirmed Robert's tenure of Maine. Rufus was with his father in both Normandy and England in 1082 at the time when the Conqueror had his half-brother, Odo, bishop of Bayeux and earl of Kent, arrested and thrown into prison for reasons which are by no means clear. In 1083 Robert left Normandy again to make his fortune in the wide world; and he made no attempt to return before the king's death. Rufus's attendance on his father is noticed only occasionally between 1084 and 1087; but there is nothing to suggest that they were ever separated for long. 
In the summer of 1087 the Conqueror suffered an injury while attacking Mantes, a town in the French Vexin, and lay on his deathbed in a suburb of Rouen for five weeks. His testamentary arrangements were variously reported and have been endlessly discussed. It would seem that his original intention was to disinherit Robert Curthose entirely in favour of Rufus, but that he was dissuaded by the Norman magnates who had done homage to Robert and bore him no ill will. Nevertheless, the Conqueror was determined that Rufus should have some substantial reward for his loyalty. Almost at the end, on 7 or 8 September, he sent him to England with a letter addressed to Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, possibly the royal regalia, and some of the English hostages: probably Harold's brother Wulfnoth (who may have languished in Norman captivity since 1051) and Morcar, the former earl of Northumbria. Rufus, with a small retinue, sailed probably from Touques to the Hampshire or Sussex coast, made for Winchester to secure the royal treasure, and within a fortnight, on 26 September, was crowned king of England by Lanfranc in Westminster Abbey. It was a 'coup d'etat', legitimatized by unction and investiture and made possible only by Rufus's audacity and Lanfranc's decisive action in deference to the Conqueror's wishes. 
William was about twenty-seven years old at his accession, a seasoned soldier and commander but with only a limited knowledge of England, and, although well acquainted with his father's ways, without experience of government. But, backed by Lanfranc, he secured without difficulty the submission of the royal administration, the sheriffs and ministerial nobility; and any opposition there might have been among the baronage was stifled by the absence of most of the greatest nobility in Normandy and ignorance of Robert's whereabouts and intentions. It remained to be seen, however, whether Rufus could withstand the inevitable reaction of the 'true heir' and his supporters. Robert had returned as soon as he heard that his father was dead, and was accepted by the baronage and church as duke of Normandy and count of Maine. He was naturally angry at the presumption of his junior, probably all the more since, on the several occasions on which he had been recognized as his father's heir, William would have done him homage. But, in many ways a foolish man, he seems to have imagined that the Anglo-Norman baronage would simply expel the 'usurper'. Rufus, however, was taking root. He had distributed the Conqueror's treasure among the churches and counties and recruited the clever bishop of Durham, William of St Calais, as his adviser. Within a few months he had gained the support of much of the English church and baronage. His main imprudence -- and it was one he could hardly have avoided -- was to allow at Christmas 1087 his half-uncle, Odo, bishop of Bayeux (who had been close to Robert and had been imprisoned by the Conqueror), to recover all his English fiefs and the earldom of Kent. Odo, a powerful man through his blood ties to king and duke and his patronage of other prelates and barons, had at that point done no wrong to Rufus. Once he had secured his own position, however, he began to organize a rebellion against the king. His main supporters were his brother, Robert, count of Mortain, Roger de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury, and Geoffrey, bishop of Coutances, all large landholders in England. They resented the inconvenience of having to serve two masters and preferred the feckless Robert to Rufus, whom they regarded as even more authoritarian than his father. It was a rebellion of high-ranking Normans against an Anglo-Norman establishment supported by insular society as a whole. 
In the spring of 1088 the conspirators fortified their castles, primarily Rochester, Tonbridge, and Pevensey, attacked royal estates, and awaited Robert's invasion. There were also minor satellite revolts in East Anglia and the Welsh marches; and the duke sent Eustace (III), count of Boulogne, and three sons of Roger de Montgomery with some knights to Odo as an advance party. But the king, based in London, mobilized all the forces he could and, losing no time, knocked out Tonbridge, invested Rochester, forced Pevensey to surrender, and in July took Rochester and, with it, most of the rebel leaders. This victory caused the collapse of all the peripheral rebellions. Rufus's treatment of the rebels was shrewd. While disinheriting and banishing Odo, he was selectively magnanimous with the rest. Among the exceptions was his younger brother, Henry, who had stayed with Robert but took this opportunity to cross to England and ask William for their mother's lands which, he claimed, she had bequeathed him. He returned to Normandy empty-handed. And the king had one other score to settle. William of St Calais had deserted from the royal army and fled to his cathedral city of Durham in March. On 2 November he appeared under a safe conduct at the royal court, meeting at (Old) Salisbury, to answer a charge of treason. A vivid eye-witness account of the trial, a 'libellus' probably composed by one of the bishop's clerks for use at the papal curia, has survived. The king, supported by Archbishop Lanfranc and most of his court, demanded that the accused should stand trial under feudal law as a baron. But the bishop refused: he must be tried as a bishop under ecclesiastical law and only by his episcopal peers. Neither side would give way. After much wrangling the exasperated king exclaimed (in French, but reported in Latin), 'By the face of Lucca, you'll never escape from my hands before I have your castle. Believe me, bishop, you're not going back to Durham, and your men are not going to stay at Durham, and you're not going free until you release the castle. (Barlow, 'William Rufus', 89)' And in the end the bishop did surrender Durham and was allowed to cross to Normandy, where for two years he acted as Robert's chief adviser. Rufus's victory over the rebels allowed him to reward his friends and supporters, such as Robert fitz Haimon (honour of Gloucester), Henry de Beaumont (earldom of Warwick), Simon (I) de Senlis (earldoms of Huntingdon and of Northampton), and Walter Giffard (earldom of Buckingham). When Archbishop Lanfranc died on 28 May 1089 the restraints on the king were even more reduced. 
The most elaborate portrait of the new ruler is given by William of Malmesbury. Although not firsthand, it seems likely enough. A short man, thickset and muscular, with a protruding belly, he was a dandy dressed always in the height of fashion, however outrageous. The short tunics and the shoes with long points which curled like scorpions' tails aroused most criticism. He wore his blond hair long, parted in the centre so as to leave his forehead (shamelessly) bare; and in his red choleric face were lively eyes of changeable colour, speckled with flecks of light. He was at ease with his cronies in private and cracked jokes as he dealt with the business of the day; and he was never so facetious as when he was doing wrong, for he hoped that the jest would dispel the stigma. In public, however, his lack of eloquence was noticeable, and when angry he was reduced to stuttering incoherence. He was apt to assume a ferocious manner, and with his haughty inflamed face, threatening eyes, and loud hectoring voice sought to intimidate the company. Yet, if the Malmesbury monk's picture of a boorish figure, foppishly dressed, and puffed up with an exaggerated sense of his rank and dignity, would seem to make him a rather ridiculous figure, there is no evidence that men thought him so. Those who approached him must have been aware of a cautionary menace. Anselm, his second archbishop of Canterbury, thought of him as a wild bull. 
Moreover, although he easily took offence and paid back any imagined insult with interest, like most good soldiers Rufus appreciated boldness in others and was easily pacified. He was also generous, indeed often shamelessly extravagant, by conspicuous consumption proclaiming his aristocratic insouciance. To a servant who bought him a pair of shoes for a shilling, he shouted, 'You son of a whore! Since when has a king got to wear shoes as cheap as that! Go and buy me some for a mark of silver [13's'. 4died]' ('De gestis regum', 313). He was famous for his bravery and chivalry, what William of Malmesbury calls magnanimity. And the monk gives an example. In March 1091, when Rufus and Robert were besieging their brother Henry in Mont-St Michel, the king saw from his tent some enemy knights riding insolently past in the distance. Unable to restrain his valour, he immediately mounted a most expensive horse he had bought that very day and dashed off on his own to attack them. But he was over-confident; his horse was brought down, and, with a foot caught in a stirrup, he was dragged along the ground, saved from serious injury only by his armour. His assailant was about to strike him with his sword when Rufus, realizing his danger, called out, 'Stop, you fool! I'm the king of England!' At this, Henry's men picked him up, brought him another mount, and Rufus, without waiting for further assistance, vaulted into the saddle. Then, running his eyes over the group of soldiers, he asked who had unhorsed him. The one responsible called out, 'It was me. But I didn't know you were the king. I thought you were only a knight.' This greatly amused Rufus, and with sudden affability he replied,'By the face of Lucca, from now on you'll be my man and in my service get a proper reward for your courage and spirit.' The Malmesbury monk was reminded of Alexander the Great and the Persian soldier ('De gestis regum', 309). Yet Rufus, although fighting against the odds, had been beaten. And his military record as a whole does not seem to be quite tip-top. Unlike his father and brothers he fought no pitched battle and seldom a completely decisive campaign. Nevertheless, he was a lucky commander, and, as he boasted in 1099, his men would follow him even through raging seas. He was specially generous to soldiers and always ransomed his knights when captured. By never suffering a really serious defeat he earned the reputation of a victorious king. 
Monastic writers, although acknowledging some of William's virtues, looked askance at his morals. By associating him with what they considered effeminate fashions in dress and comportment they hinted at his homosexuality. And since he never married and is not known to have had any bastards this has been generally accepted. On the other hand, no lovers or 'favourites' can be identified; most of his close associates were heterosexual; and he would appear to have considered marrying Edith of Scots in 1093. It may be that he was bi-sexual, an indiscriminate lecher. Rufus has also been judged not only irreligious but also atheistical, even heretical. Certainly he shared the soldier's disrespect for Christian morality and the clerical life. He took no part in the first crusade. Stories, although almost certainly apocryphal, about his interest in Judaism were in circulation. He was thought to have ridiculed the fairness of trials by ordeal. According to Anselm's biographer, Eadmer, when fifty Englishmen, accused of crimes against the forest laws, were all found innocent by the ordeal of hot iron, the king was reported to have exclaimed, 'What's this? God's a just judge? Damn him I say who believes that after this! I swear by -- and -- [Eadmer suppresses the words] that from now on matters that can be bent by any man's nod shall be brought before my court, not God's. ('Historia novorum', 102)' Rufus's habitual oaths, 'By the (holy) face of Lucca' and 'By the mountains and valleys', were considered remarkable and are indeed curious. But even if the latter is a 'double entendre', the former appears harmless. Perhaps the invocation of the sacred image at Lucca by such a man was considered blasphemous. But in this area the most serious charges do not seem to stick. He clearly retained to the end of his short life the louche habits he had acquired as a knight bachelor in his father's military household. He was ever a coarse soldier, a boon companion. But he was quite generous to monasteries, and, when he thought he was dying in 1093, he made abject submission to the church. It would seem likely that had he survived beyond the age of forty he would have conformed. Piety was for old age. In his last years he was sometimes the military companion of Guillaume, count of Poitou (VII) and duke of Aquitaine (IX), one of the earliest troubadours and a poet of distinction. They may have had something in common beyond a love of fighting. Rufus was a patron of at least one of the arts. In London he finished his father's White Tower and considerably improved the fortress. At Westminster likewise his Great Hall still stands and impresses. He was not just a buffoon. 
The relations between the three surviving sons of the Conqueror had always been uneasy. After Robert Curthose's failure to unseat Rufus in 1087-8 he could expect, and received, a backlash, while Henry flitted between the two, relentlessly playing for his own hand. Henry, a clever, rather unpleasant, prince, was determined first to get an appanage and then to inherit the territories of one or both of his elders. He had respect and a preference for William but was aware that Robert was the weaker and the easier to exploit. Both William and Henry used their wealth against the extravagant and improvident Robert. In 1087-8 Henry bought with $3000 of his father's bequest the Avranchin and Cotentin and assumed the title of count. Rufus used his English revenues to seduce Robert's vassals and prepare for military intervention once the time was ripe. The Norman barons and church soon realized that Rufus was the stronger and richer ruler and had to decide whether tyranny was preferable to anarchy. The church in general was never in doubt and always regarded Rufus as a deliverer from misrule. The barons had mixed feelings and mostly preferred to wait on events. 
By the summer of 1090 Rufus had secured the allegiance of perhaps the greater part of Upper Normandy, the old heartlands, centred on Eu, while Henry was aiming at making his appanage an independent county. The duchy was falling apart; and in October Rufus's friends instigated a revolt in Rouen, the capital city. But Henry's adherence to Robert and his personal intervention in the fighting at Rouen in November undoubtedly saved the duke. Rufus himself took no active part until February 1091, when he crossed the channel and set up his headquarters at Eu. There was, however, little fighting; William of St Calais, bishop of Durham, did the king a service, was reconciled to him, and seems to have negotiated the treaty 'of Rouen' between the king and the duke. Robert was to grant to his brother the county of Eu, the abbey of Fecamp, and the town of Cherbourg, both useful entry ports, and leave in his lordship all those Norman barons who had gone over to him. He must also have agreed to expel Edgar AEtheling, Edward the Confessor's great-nephew, for he is next noticed in Scotland, where his sister, Margaret, was queen. In return, apart from the cash which must have changed hands, the king was to help Robert to recover all other territory he had lost, give him some estates in England, and reinstate there all those who had been disinherited on account of their support of the duke. Moreover, each of the contracting parties was to become the other's heir. A subtext is the immediate and permanent disinheritance of Henry, who had displeased both his seniors. Accordingly, Robert and Rufus invaded the Cotentin and besieged Mont-St Michel, where Henry had taken refuge. In the end, after Rufus had earned some renown for his magnanimity and Robert some contempt for his lack of purpose, they allowed Henry to march out with his men and baggage. The cadet became a wanderer in France until, in 1092, he acquired the fortified town of Domfront in the southern marches of Normandy, at the expense of Robert de Belleme, one of the greatest of the border princes. 
Meanwhile the king tried to bolster Robert's authority in the duchy. In June 1091 the archbishop of Rouen held a provincial synod in the city, presumably to further the pacification of Normandy, and on 18 July duke and king held an inquest at Caen into the judicial rights which the Conqueror had possessed. Immediately afterwards they left together for England because Malcolm III Canmore, king of Scots, had invaded in May and there was also trouble in Wales. The condominium of the 'two heirs of the Conqueror' was still working. They made a show of strength against the Welsh and then Rufus mobilized an army and fleet to invade Scotland by the east coast route. On the march north, on 11 September, the bishop of Durham re-entered his city. And when the king and duke, having crossed the Tweed, made contact with Malcolm's army, intermediaries, Robert for Rufus and Edgar for Malcolm, arranged terms. It was agreed that the relationship between the two kings should be exactly as it had been in the Conqueror's time. Malcolm, therefore, did homage and fealty to Rufus, but not unconditionally, although the reservations were not spelt out. And, in return, Rufus restored to him the English lands and pension he had enjoyed before 1087. Edgar AEtheling was reconciled with William; and he and Duncan, Malcolm's eldest son, decided to accompany the English king south. Two days before Christmas 1091 Robert and Edgar sailed from the Isle of Wight to Normandy. There had been a quarrel between the brothers. The king may have been evasive about granting English lands to Robert and clearly he had no desire to return immediately to Normandy to help his brother against his enemies. Rufus did not revisit Normandy until 1094, Robert England before 1101. In the meantime, in May 1092, the king invaded north Britain by the west coast route, expelled Dolfin, who was ruling Cumbria, at least nominally under Malcolm, and refounded Carlisle as an English borough. He was restoring the historical frontier with Scotland, and, after Malcolm's death in 1093, there began an English advance, confirmed by feudal lordships and agricultural settlements, towards the Liddel and Tweed. 
This resurgence of the English kingdom under William, however, almost came to a premature end in March 1093 when the king fell seriously ill of an unstated disease in the Welsh marches and lay incapacitated at Gloucester for the whole of Lent. Everyone, including the patient, believed that God was punishing him for his sins, and Rufus made a full confession to Anselm, abbot of Bec, who happened to be at hand, and promised to mend his life and carry out a series of reforms in the kingdom. More immediately, he ordered all his prisoners to be released and all his debts forgiven. He gave the vacant archbishopric of Canterbury to Anselm and made gifts to monasteries. The problem of who would have succeeded him had he died is not mentioned by the chroniclers. But no one would have been happy with the advent of either Robert or Henry. And it may well be that among Rufus's undertakings to Anselm, who was much concerned with his moral welfare, was a promise to take a wife. This can be associated with his unsuccessful diplomatic exchanges with Malcolm in the summer. When the king of Scots pressed him to carry out the terms of their treaty, Rufus summoned him to Gloucester, and sent him hostages and then Edgar AEtheling to conduct him south. But in August he refused to receive the visitor, who, naturally, returned to Scotland in a fury. Meanwhile, it seems, Rufus had called in at Wilton Abbey. Among the nuns there was, or had been, Gunnhild, the late King Harold's daughter, who got scandalously involved with the Breton counts of Richmond; and among those being educated there were Edith (or Matilda) and Mary, the two daughters of Malcolm and Margaret. Matilda, a girl of twelve and a niece of Edgar, would have been a most suitable match for Rufus. However, the abbess, apparently to save the girl from such a fate, disguised her as a nun. And when Rufus entered the cloister, 'as though he wanted to look at the roses and the other flowering shrubs' (quoted in Barlow, 'William Rufus', 312), and found Matilda veiled, he abruptly left the church. A week later her father arrived at Wilton, ripped off her veil, stamped it under foot, and took her away. In the autumn the humiliated Malcolm invaded England for the fifth time, only to be ambushed and killed on 13 November by the earl of Northumbria, Robert de Mowbray. Rufus had evaded the bonds of matrimony and Matilda was left to marry his brother, King Henry I, hardly a more satisfactory husband, in 1100. As for Scotland, it became Rufus's policy to support Malcolm's sons, first Duncan and then, more successfully, Matilda's brother, Edgar, in defiance of a Gaelic reaction against this Anglicized family. 
Although Rufus remained in diplomatic touch with Robert after their quarrel, he made no great effort to heal it. He managed to keep lordship over Guillaume, count of Eu, and in 1093 reactivated an alliance with the count of Flanders. At Christmas 1093 Robert notified Rufus that unless he carried out the terms of the treaty of Rouen, or justified the delay, he would repudiate it. Rufus attended on 11 February the consecration of Battle Abbey, his father's penitential foundation, by Archbishop Anselm. He then crossed the channel on 19 March 1094 and, after a fruitless meeting with his brother and a declaration by the guarantors of the treaty that he was to blame, he too denounced the agreement. But, although Robert secured the active support of his overlord, King Philippe I of France, and Rufus summoned Henry from Domfront to his aid and himself raided from Eu, a military solution was always unlikely. 
In January 1095 the king, having achieved little at enormous cost, returned to England. Indeed, his fortunes had reached their lowest ebb: during his absence there had been a general revolt of the Welsh against their Norman lords; he was having trouble with Anselm, his archbishop of Canterbury; and he discovered a baronial conspiracy against him led by Robert de Mowbray, earl of Northumberland. It was thought that the conspirators intended to replace him not by Robert Curthose but by his cousin, Stephen of Aumale, the son of one of the plotters, Odo of Champagne. In the summer the king led an army north. Pushing on from Durham he forced the surrender of the new castle on the Tyne and set siege to the great coastal fortress of Bamburgh. From there, on hearing that the Welsh had captured Montgomery, he went immediately to the aid of Hugh, earl of Shrewsbury. An army was raised and several columns were dispatched to rendezvous in Snowdonia early in November. But the Welsh did not give battle. The baronial rebellion also collapsed. When Robert de Mowbray escaped from Bamburgh and took refuge in the monastery at Tynemouth, he was dragged out, imprisoned at Windsor, and in January 1096 tried with some others of the conspirators for treason at (Old) Salisbury. The earl was kept in prison until he died many years later. Guillaume, count of Eu, defeated in the trial by battle, was blinded and castrated, mutilations which he did not survive. The count's steward was hanged. Some others suffered mutilation, heavy fines, or banishment. In 1096 Rufus was not as merciful as in 1088. 
On 27 November 1095, while the king was finishing his campaign in Northumberland, Pope Urban II preached the sermon at Clermont in the Auvergne which inspired the expedition against the Saracens, known later as the first crusade. In February 1096 Robert Curthose took the cross, and a papal legate negotiated a settlement between the brothers. It was arranged that Rufus should pay Robert 10,000 marks of silver in return for the custody and revenues of the duchy for three years. This sum, less than a quarter of Rufus's ordinary annual revenue from England, can be considered a shrewd investment. And, as part of the settlement, the king granted Henry the counties of Coutances and Bayeux, except for the city of Bayeux and the town of Caen, an appanage somewhat larger than he had obtained from Robert. In September Robert abandoned his turbulent duchy and his troublesome brothers with relief. It was probably generally accepted that it was unlikely that he would ever return. 
Although William Rufus had no mind but to walk in the ways of his father, his unavoidable almost continuous presence in England until 1096 was a novelty which increased the pressure of royal government on the baronage, the sheriffs, and the church, while the preparations he made to break out of his confinement intensified the burden. He recruited knights for his military household; his progresses round the country were likened by the sufferers to the ravages of an invading army; and his wars and subsidies to allies had to be paid for by his subjects, especially the church. William was not a creative governor or lawgiver. He maintained the traditional powers of the English monarch, newly reinforced by the conquest and the bonds of homage and fealty, and thereby consolidated many of his father's improvisations. And he maintained control over the new feudal society in the kingdom, often regulating the succession to the honours, and, through the judgments of his court, helped to mould the emerging body of Anglo-Norman feudal law. He pushed his own rights hard and in some unpopular directions. His enlargement of the royal hunting preserves (the forest, especially the New Forest) and his tightening of the severity of the laws to protect them were generally resented. Nevertheless, since he was a generous lord and a successful military commander, increasingly committed to the reunification of the Norman 'empire', a policy popular with the baronage, church, and mercantile class, he faced little overt opposition. 
Such a pleasure-loving king needed loyal and able servants. And Rufus acquired them. His close vassals and military friends, a rather miscellaneous group of the highest Norman and Anglo-Norman aristocracy and 'new' men, were qualified to advise him on military and estate-management matters, on diplomacy, and on feudal law. One of them, Urse d'Abetot, a royal constable, played a part in the financial administration. Another, Robert fitz Haimon, a close friend, the son of a sheriff of Kent, himself the son of the lord of Torigni in Normandy, served him in many out-of-court capacities. Bishops, literate and educated in the classics, had their part to play at this exalted level; and the king, despite his anti-clerical reputation, was ably served by some of his most respectable prelates, including Lanfranc of Canterbury, William of St Calais of Durham, Gundulf of Rochester, Wulfstan of Worcester, and, in the later years, Walkelin of Winchester. For the more detailed administration he took over some members of his father's clerical household; and one of these, the chaplain Ranulf Flambard, a very remarkable man, handsome, athletic, and a good talker (but certainly no homosexual), served him devotedly throughout the reign. He became the king's completely trusted factotum, a precursor of the later chief justiciars, and was rewarded in the end with the bishopric of Durham. The royal government in the shires, including collection of the king's revenues, depended on the sheriffs, his omnicompetent executive officers. Once again Rufus rewarded loyalty and made only such changes as were forced on him. In at least ten cases he took over his father's men and most of these either retained the office for the whole of the reign or passed it to their heir. The king's government was directed to two basic purposes: to keep good order by exterminating criminals and settling disputes by law and to collect the royal revenues: rents from the demesne, the land tax (danegeld) levied on most agricultural land, the profits of justice, the profits of tenure ('feudal incidents'), and miscellaneous sales and profits. The recently completed survey of the kingdom, known as 'Domesday Book', which was kept in the royal treasury at Winchester, was of some help with the collection of the first two of these. William's servants, driven by their master, were hard and efficient exactors. Rufus became a rich king and a great spender. There was hardly another ruler in western Europe who could have, like him, raised at a few months' notice in 1096 the 7000 pounds of silver in cash (10,000 marks) he lent his brother on the security of the duchy. The baronage and the church, however, became aggrieved. And when Henry I succeeded to the throne he thought it advisable in his coronation charter to renounce his brother's 'unjust exactions' and all 'bad customs'. 
The pleasure that Rufus took in the royal title and dignity is not surprising since by birth he was only the younger son of a count. And not only the Conqueror's children but also the Norman baronage had benefited from his promotion to duke and king. The new English nobility which Rufus inherited was largely a selection his father had made from the Norman aristocracy, itself of no great antiquity. But these men, whom Orderic Vitalis thought the Conqueror had raised almost from the dust, had quickly taken root in the kingdom and, moreover, had obtained formal registration, for they and their valuable estates had been listed in 'Domesday Book'. This record did not create an untouchable caste, but it did help towards stability. Rufus was completely at home in this society. His accession to the throne and even two rebellions caused only the minimal changes necessary. He dispossessed some of the most culpable magnates, like Eustace, count of Boulogne, Odo of Bayeux, and Robert de Mowbray, and left the earldom of Hereford vacant; but in compensation he created new earls mostly from the oldest Norman families, and rewarded some of his friends, including a few of his favourite household knights, such as Roger de Nonant and Simon (I) de Senlis. In the middle and lower ranks of the baronage there seems to have been even less movement. But if the picture is one of general biological continuity, the baronage had to pay for it. Through royal generosity they had obtained large estates and sometimes titles. The king required in return military and other services and payments on certain occasions. By 1100 the baronage was of the opinion that Rufus had taken too much. According to Henry's coronation charter, on the death of a baron, earl, or other royal tenant he had forced the heir, instead of paying a just and legitimate 'relief', to repurchase the land. Moreover, to redress Rufus's other oppressions, Henry would not require a payment from a baron for permission to give his daughter, sister, or niece in marriage; he would only give an heiress in marriage on the advice of the barons; and he would not force a baron's widow to remarry. On the death of a baron who had left under-age children, custody of the land and children would in future go to the widow or some other close relation (that is, not to the king). Henry also gave permission for a baron, or, if prevented, his closest family, to bequeath his money and chattels for the salvation of his soul. But that Henry reintroduced all Rufus's 'malpractices' as soon as he was strong enough, proves that his brother had not been outrageously severe. He had probably simply continued his father's practices. 
Rufus probably milked the church even more effectively than the baronage. He believed, like his father, that he had considerable rights, largely proprietorial, in it (the 'ancestral customs'). Accordingly, he exploited the bishoprics and royal abbeys in two ways: he sold them (simony), but with the price disguised as a gift or aid, and only to the usually satisfactory candidate he had chosen; and he kept the abbeys, rather than the bishoprics, vacant, often for long periods, in order to take their revenues. In 1100 ecclesiastical custodies were yielding more than danegeld. Church reformers regarded all this as iniquitous. But since some bishops of good repute served the king or frequented his court, it would seem that they accepted, although with some misgivings, that he was no lawless tyrant. His greatest difficulties were caused by one of his few mistakes: his appointment in 1093 of Anselm, abbot of Bec, as archbishop of Canterbury. For this act of contrition he did penance for four years. The pious monk, who sincerely resisted the promotion, deplored both the king's morals and his treatment of the church. Except for a few months in 1095, the two were always at loggerheads. They quarrelled immediately over the 'aid' the king required from the incoming archbishop. In February 1094, while the king waited impatiently at Hastings for a favourable wind to carry him to Normandy, Anselm raised a series of tiresome matters culminating in his request to hold a general council of the English church in order, particularly, to attack the crimes of sodomy and incest which had become so prevalent in the kingdom, and, when refused permission, he turned to the matter of the vacant abbeys and the king's failure to appoint suitable heads. By this time Rufus was furious. 'What business is it of yours? Aren't they my abbeys? You do what you like with your manors. Why can't I do what I want with my abbeys?' The archbishop rejoined that really the abbeys belonged to God and were not intended to finance the king's wars. And the king finished by declaring that he found Anselm's words most objectionable. 'Your predecessor [Lanfranc] would never have dared speak in this way to my father; and I will do nothing at all for you' ('Historia novorum', 49-50). An even more difficult matter was that of Anselm's pallium, because each side had a lawful case. The pallium was the gift of the pope, and Anselm as abbot of Bec had recognized Urban II as pope. But Rufus had not found it necessary hitherto to decide between Urban and the imperial anti-pope, and claimed that by English royal custom he had the right of choice. When no solution to the impasse could be found at the royal council held at Rockingham in February 1095, Rufus decided to accept Urban in the hope that in return he would depose Anselm. Instead, the archbishop, urged by the diplomatic pope, more or less accepted the 'ancestral customs' and for a time co-operated with the king. In 1097, however, Rufus complained about the archbishop's unsatisfactory military service against the Welsh, and Anselm, realizing that his situation was untenable, in November went into exile and spent the rest of the reign either with the pope or with the archbishop of Lyons. Rufus escaped papal censure partly through Anselm's magnanimity, partly because Urban needed his support. And the pope could see that Anselm could be difficult and that Rufus's rule of the English and Norman churches was tolerable. When he did appoint to bishoprics and abbeys he usually chose suitable men, rather better on the whole than his father's selection. Except on one occasion, he may not have looked for holiness, but he had a good eye for talent. 
After the acquisition of the duchy Rufus spent more than half his time on the continent. On the second of his three visits in those four years he stayed for seventeen consecutive months. It is possible that after nine years' exile in England he was glad to be back. He certainly found plenty to do. Although he never took the title of duke, this was probably less because he was only a mortgagee than because, like his father, he believed that he was everywhere a king. And, probably like his father, he never did homage to the king of France. The Norman baronage and church seem to have accepted him without question: he represented the dynasty. As a soldier-king he regarded the restoration of the boundaries as set by the Conqueror as his first priority. His father had been mortally injured when attacking the French Vexin in the valley of the Seine, territory disputed with the king of France; and Rufus directed most of his military efforts to the recovery of the three great strongholds there of Chaumont, Pontoise, and Mantes. But the local nobility, led by the French heir, Louis (later Louis VI), who held the territory as an appanage, successfully withstood his invasions in 1097-8 and 1098-9, although Rufus had the support of his brother Henry and of a number of famous soldiers, including Robert de Belleme. In 1099 Rufus was even joined by his namesake Guillaume, count of Poitou and duke of Aquitaine, who may have been attracted by his growing reputation as a generous hero. Although Rufus was no military genius, on balance he was a successful general at a time when the defence held a great advantage over the attack and campaigning was to some extent a pastime, an end in itself. However that may be, his one important achievement in this theatre of war was the foundation of a castle at Gisors on the Epte, designed by Robert de Belleme, which was to remain one of the principal border strongholds until the loss of Normandy by King John. 
In the south, where again Rufus campaigned with the lord of Belleme, he strove to dislodge Helias de la Fleche, who had established himself as count of Maine with the support of the bishop of Le Mans, Hildebert de Lavardin, the most famous Latin poet of his age. The Angevins, hereditary enemies of the Normans, watched anxiously. In this theatre Rufus had better luck. In April 1098 Robert de Belleme ambushed and captured Helias and surrendered him to the king, who put him in honourable custody at Bayeux. But Foulques, count of Anjou, then occupied Le Mans, the chief city. By June Rufus had assembled an army and marched south. The nobility and church marginally preferred Norman to Angevin rule and Foulques was persuaded to come to terms with Rufus. It was agreed that Le Mans and all the other towns which the Conqueror had possessed should be returned to his son and that all the prisoners should be exchanged. In July the king entered Le Mans in triumph and was led by the bishop to the cathedral church, where he issued laws. When he returned to Normandy he sent for Helias, agreed to release him, but refused to recognize him as count of Maine. Their interview at Rouen is graphically reconstructed by William of Malmesbury, who, in this context, believed that the soul of Julius Caesar had, by transmigration, passed into Rufus. The king exclaimed, 'I've got you, sir.' To which Helias replied, 'Only by a fluke! And if I can escape, I know what I'm going to do.' 'You do? You clown you. You do?', the king shouted, stuttering with rage. 'Do you think I care what you would do? Get out! Clear off! You can do whatever you want. And, by the face of Lucca, if next time you're the winner, I shan't be asking you for something in return for this. ('De gestis regum', 320)' Rufus's frontier wars and the absence of some of the nobility on crusade seem to have led to a general internal peace. And, although there is little documentation, it is likely that he introduced as much as he could of orderly government on the English pattern and that he would have exercised all his judicial, financial, and military rights. He returned to England at Easter 1099, and at Whitsun held a very grand court at Westminster, when Edgar, king of Scots (died 1107), his protege, carried the sword of state before him at the crown-wearing ceremony in the abbey. Afterwards they all feasted in his splendid new hall at Westminster, an occasion so memorable that the twelfth-century poet Geoffrey Gaimar described it in detail in his 'Lestorie des Engles'. But the king was soon recalled to the continent. In June, while he was hunting in the New Forest in Hampshire, a messenger arrived with the news that Helias had re-entered Le Mans, that the Norman garrison was still holding out in the fortifications and had burnt down most of the city, and that Robert de Belleme was waiting at Ballon for the king's arrival. Rufus, it is said, immediately turned his horse and made for the coast, forced a fearful ship's captain to set sail in a storm -- joking that never had he heard of a king lost by wreck at sea and prophesying that the wind and sea would obey his commands -- gathered troops in Normandy, and quickly relieved the beleaguered garrison. But he could do little more. Although he chased Helias into his estates in the south of Maine he failed to storm the castle at Mayet, where he was almost struck by a stone thrown from the keep, and had to content himself with devastating the countryside, ordering the destruction of the towers of the unfinished cathedral at Le Mans, and carrying off the bishop as a prisoner to England. In return, Hildebert, in a poem, called the king a tyrant, in his fickleness and deceit the equal of Fortune herself, a defender of all the vices, a man who had brought nothing but shame on the heads of his ancestors. Rufus allowed Hildebert to return to his see after Easter 1100; and the poet took back many ornaments for his church, perhaps royal gifts. 
By that time William had to prepare for Robert's return from the crusade. He would have heard that his brother had distinguished himself in that remarkably successful holy war, that he was slowly making his way back, that he had wintered in Sicily, and that he had just married Sibyl, the daughter of Geoffrey of Conversano, lord of Brindisi in Apulia, a scion of the dynasty created by the Norman adventurer Tancred d'Hauteville. Robert was clearly returning with the intention of redeeming his duchy, and in his wife's dowry had the means to do so. It is not known how Rufus regarded the matter. But, as Robert was returning as a hero in a religious cause, a married man with the cash for paying off his creditor, it would seem, and to judge by Rufus's previous behaviour be likely, that the king would try to make a deal with his brother, either a condominium or a repartition. It is noticeable that Rufus, after the autumn of 1099, far from attempting to strengthen his position in Normandy, spent his time with Henry and some important Norman barons, hunting in England. He could, of course, have returned with these at any moment to confront his brother, but hardly to prevent his entry into the duchy or to disinherit him. As for Henry, on any analysis of the situation it would seem that he had more to gain by staying with the king for the time being. It also seems that Guillaume (IX) of Aquitaine wanted to imitate Robert and pawn some lands -- perhaps Poitou -- to Rufus in order to finance a trip to Jerusalem. William of Malmesbury reports that the king, on the day before he died, when asked where he intended to spend Christmas, replied 'Poitiers'. It is just possible that he was considering a substitute for Normandy. But how serious these negotiations were is uncertain. 
On Thursday 2 August 1100 Rufus was at a hunting lodge, probably Brockenhurst, in the New Forest. Contrary to his usual custom he did not go out until the afternoon, when the royal party, which included his brother Henry, broke up into small groups, each to take up position at a butt. There they would have waited, dismounted, to shoot at deer driven across their front by beaters. Where Rufus was stationed is disputed: both a site near Canterton, where the 'Rufus Stone' was erected in 1745 (more exactly, Stricknage Wood, otherwise known as Castle Malwood Walk), and the lost village of Througham, represented now by Beaulieu, have their supporters. In attendance on the king, it seems to have been widely believed, was Walter Tirel, count of Poix, near Amiens, a fine soldier whom Rufus had probably recruited during his Vexin wars. But, instead of a beast, it was the king who was brought down, killed instantly by an arrow in the heart. There is no good reason to think that it was anything but a (fairly common) hunting accident. Both the king's elder brother, Richard, and, quite recently, his nephew Richard, one of Robert's bastards, had died in this way, the latter likewise in the New Forest. The earliest description of the king's death, in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', attributes the fatal arrow to one of the king's own men. Later, William of Malmesbury, and his successors, named the count of Poix, who had immediately left the scene and returned home post-haste. But Abbot Suger of St Denis, the friend and biographer of King Louis VI of France, claimed that he had often heard Walter affirm on the solemnest of oaths that on that day he neither was in the king's company nor even caught sight of him. However that may be, all early commentators agreed that the archer was simply God's instrument to avenge the making of the New Forest and to punish a blasphemer. Most also drew attention to the portents and marvels that presaged, accompanied, and followed this event. The violent death of a king was a very disturbing affair. But it was left to a few modern historians to imagine that it was a premeditated murder to secure the throne for Henry before the arrival of Robert Curthose. 
Rufus's death initially further confused, although ultimately possibly simplified, an already disturbed political scene. Henry certainly quickly realized what he had to do. He rode to Winchester to seize the royal treasury and managed to arrange an almost immediate coronation (on Sunday 5 August) by the bishop of London, in the unavoidable absence of Anselm. No one had much time for the dead man. His body was carried on a wagon by some of the inferior hunt servants to Winchester and buried the following morning (Friday 3 August) in the Old Minster, in the centre of the choir beneath the tower, with minimal, if any, rites and a far from distinguished congregation. Henry was too busy to attend. Although the cathedral tower collapsed in 1107, it would seem that the tomb remained intact until about 1525, when Bishop Fox, as part of his improvements, erected stone screens on both sides of the presbytery and deposited the contents of the graves he disturbed, including that of William Rufus, in six mortuary chests which he placed on top of the screens. By 1683, however, a coffin of oolite stone, covered with a coped slab of Purbeck marble, which stood before the high altar in the choir and would seem to be twelfth century, was known as Rufus's tomb. This, which had been rifled by Oliver Cromwell's men in 1642, was reopened on 27 August 1868 in preparation for its removal to its present location in the presbytery. A much disturbed skeleton of a man, 5 feet 8 inches or more tall, a chalice, and the fragments of a wooden shaft and iron head, which were then discovered, have been thought to be relics of the king which had been overlooked in 1525 and 1642. But opinion is divided. 
William Rufus became a scandalous figure, the subject of much gossip. His outrageous remarks were collected and even monastic writers could not always conceal their delight. A rumbustious, devil-may-care soldier, without natural dignity or social graces, with no cultivated tastes and little show of conventional religious piety or morality -- indeed, according to his critics, addicted to every kind of vice, particularly lust and especially sodomy -- he nevertheless could not simply be written off as a degenerate wastrel. His chivalrous virtues and achievements were all too obvious. He had maintained good order and satisfactory justice in England and restored good peace to Normandy. He had extended Anglo-Norman rule in Wales, brought Scotland firmly under his lordship, recovered Maine, and kept up the pressure on the Vexin. His wars had been costly, and not all had been cost effective; but he impressed contemporaries as being a victorious general. Moreover, at the time of his death it was believed that he was about to add Poitou, even perhaps Aquitaine, to his dominions, that he contemplated invading Ireland, and that he aspired to the French throne. After all, at his death he was only of the age of his father when he had won a kingdom on Senlac Field. For those who die young the possibilities are endless. Geoffrey of Monmouth, who, towards the end of Henry I's reign, created a history of Britain, modelled his King Arthur in part on William Rufus, and Geoffrey Gaimar in turn borrowed from Arthur in order to embellish his picture of Rufus. Even the clergy did not expect a king to be a saint. They were quite happy with a hero. 


@@@@@


doc= 29450


William III and II (1650-1702), king of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and prince of Orange, was born in the Binnenhof Palace in The Hague on 14 November 1650 NS. He was the posthumous and only child of William II, prince of Orange (1626-1650), who had died from smallpox eight days before he was born, and of his consort, Mary (1631-1660), eldest daughter of Charles I and princess royal of England. He was baptized Willem Hendrik (William Henry) on 15 January 1651 NS. 
Despite the republican constitution of the United Provinces, William was destined from birth to play a central role in Dutch politics. It is true that the sovereign power in the Netherlands was not William's family, but the states (or governing assemblies) of the constituent provinces, along with the federal states general, which contained representatives from these bodies. It is also true that these assemblies were dominated by a regent oligarchy of town magistrates or burgomeesters, and that traditions of unanimity made it difficult for any one person to dictate policy. Notwithstanding this, however, William's ancestors had built up such a pre-eminent position in the Low Countries that they enjoyed a quasi-monarchical status. 
The roots of this dominance lay in the Dutch revolt. The Orange family's leadership of the long struggle for independence from Spain had given it a charismatic reputation as the founder of the nation, which in turn had brought an almost automatic claim on the office of stadholder in most of the provinces. This post, a remnant from the days of the Spanish viceroys, carried with it a package of useful powers, including the right to choose burgomeesters from lists submitted by the municipalities. Other traditional appointments as admiral and as captain-general brought further influence. They bestowed control of the federal armed forces, and added to the networks of patronage which helped build an Orange 'party' in Dutch politics. To these advantages were added the riches of the family (it owned extensive estates both within the territories of the republic and outside in Flanders, Burgundy, and Germany); the prestige which came with the hereditary sovereignty of the principality of Orange in southern France; and the recently concluded alliance with British royalty. The stadholders had also surrounded themselves with a rich ceremonial life which allowed them to represent what a contemporary called 'the Dignity of [the] State' (Temple, 73). In theory, therefore, the infant William was guaranteed a life of considerable power. 
Unfortunately for the young prince, events in the years immediately before William's birth had brought his family to one of its lowest ebbs. Extravagance had run up debts; the English regicide of 1649 meant that no Stuart support was forthcoming; and the following year William II's attempt to coerce the province of Holland into paying for larger armed forces had backfired. The city of Amsterdam had resisted the Orange army, and public sympathy had deserted a stadholder seen to have attempted a 'coup d'etat'. The sudden death of William's father therefore struck a dynasty already weakened. Worse still, the prince's demise left the family with no adult male head and divided in battle for guardianship of his son between the deceased's widow and his mother, the dowager Princess Amalia. Although an agreement of 13 August 1651 NS made Mary guardian, with Amalia and her son-in-law the elector of Brandenburg co-guardians, this formal settlement did not prevent repeated squabbles. Taking advantage of these divisions, a 'republican' alignment organized to take control of Dutch policy. Centring its strength on Amsterdam, this group was co-ordinated by Johann de Witt, the grand pensionary of Holland, and worked steadily to limit Orange power for the next two decades. William's early years were therefore dictated by struggles to overcome the debacles surrounding his birth. 
The Orange party began its bid for power in dramatic fashion at William's baptism. For the service in the Groote Kerk in The Hague the prince was dressed in regal ermine, and was accompanied by a ceremonial guard as if he were already stadholder. At the same time his mother and his grandmother wrote separately to provincial states reminding them of William's claims on public offices. Sadly for him, however, the republicans were already mobilizing, and the ill co-ordinated correspondence from the competing leaders of the Orange cause merely demonstrated their incompetence. Within days of William II's death the states of Holland had decided to leave its own stadholdership indefinitely vacant, and put successful pressure on neighbouring Zeeland to do the same. At a 'great assembly' of all provinces, which opened in January 1651, the republicans dissuaded the provinces of Utrecht, Gelderland, and Overijssel from filling their own stadholderships and suspended the captain-generalship. Taken together, these measures represented an anti-Orangist constitutional revolution. The posts the prince would normally have inherited were effectively abolished. Worse was to follow. In 1654 peace negotiations to end the First Anglo-Dutch War included pressure from Oliver Cromwell -- in collusion with de Witt -- for a permanent bar on the house of Orange from its traditional offices. This resulted in an act of exclusion by which Holland agreed never to appoint William stadholder. 
Signs of any Orangist revival among these defeats were scant. There were substantial Orange forces outside Holland, and opposition from these prevented the 1654 exclusion applying beyond that province. Also, William's uncle Frederick William, stadholder of Friesland, promoted the young prince's cause throughout the 1650s -- albeit in hopes of dominating the infant. Yet little came of this support, since the sympathetic provinces were badly divided among themselves. There were some glimmerings of hope in 1660 when William's uncle Charles II was restored to the English throne. At this point Holland's urban elites saw trading opportunities in improved relations with the Stuarts and sought to placate the new king by removing his nephew's legal disabilities. Zeeland, three inland provinces, and even some towns in Holland pressed for William to be granted the usual 'high charges' when he reached maturity (Israel, 'Dutch Republic', 751). De Witt was consequently forced to accept both repeal of the 1654 exclusion and negotiations with Mary Stuart. These ended with the prince's being adopted by the states general as a 'child of state', being granted an allowance out of government funds, and being educated in preparation for an undefined, but major, political role. Despite these setbacks, however, republicans were soon back in charge. Mary Stuart's death in January 1661 NS (December 1660 OS) -- and more especially her will, which bestowed the guardianship of William back on Amalia -- destroyed the child of state deal and so excused de Witt from having to raise a potential rival. Meanwhile, Dutch elites were disappointed by the new British monarch's hostility to their commercial interests and lost enthusiasm for his family. By September 1662 de Witt had secured agreement from the states of Holland and Zeeland that they would accept no promotion of William until he was eighteen. 
A second revival of Orangism in the difficult early months of the Second Anglo-Dutch War was similarly short-lived. Over the winter of 1665-6 de Witt faced popular demonstrations in favour of Prince William and absurd demands that the militarily inexperienced fifteen-year-old be made captain-general. Once again, however, the republican grouping soon regained control as naval victories resolidified republican support. By April 1666 de Witt had the political strength to move in on William's household. In return for granting the prince a pension, he sacked servants who he correctly believed had been co-ordinating Orangist agitation, and took charge of the prince's education. The triumph was completed over the next eighteen months. By 2 August 1667 NS de Witt had secured the 'perpetual edict... for the preservation of freedom' in the states of Holland. This abolished the provincial stadholdership and committed Holland to rejecting any captain-general who was stadholder anywhere else. In January 1668 four out of the seven provinces accepted a 'harmony' which, while it assigned William a place on the advisory council of state and promised that he would eventually be considered for captain-general, also barred the prince from stadholderships and declared he would be ineligible for either council or captaincy until he had reached twenty-three. 
In all these machinations William himself was too young to play much part. The prince had, in fact, been allowed a remarkably private early life, only marginally affected by the political storms which swirled around his schoolroom. Until he was three the child lived in his mother's household in the Binnenhof apartments. After this he was granted his own establishment in the same building, while Mary began spending long periods away with her exiled brother, the future Charles II. William's education began in 1656 under a Hague divine, Cornelius Trigland, and was put on a more formal basis in 1659 when a governor was appointed (Frederick of Nassau, heer van Zuylestein -- a dashing but conspiratorial cavalry officer) and when the household moved to Leiden so that the prince could be instructed by the university faculty. The collapse of the child of state scheme in 1661 meant that these arrangements were not affected. William therefore continued an education which ultimately proved better at imbuing a solid Calvinism, a sense of Orange historical destiny, and a passion for hunting, than affability. More disturbing for William was the republican storming of his household in 1666. The prince begged to retain Zuylestein, to whom he had become devoted, but de Witt insisted the governor be replaced and himself began to spend many hours with the boy. During these conferences de Witt tried to instil both a love of Dutch freedoms and a training in political tactics. William's later disregard for the republican constitution suggests he had little success with the first project -- but De Witt did impress with his integrity, and his practice of setting practical political conundrums as educational exercises was useful. William certainly praised the pensionary when asked about him in later years, telling Gilbert Burnet that his teacher had been 'one of the greatest men of the age' ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.321). In admitting this the prince must have been aware of an irony. De Witt had groomed a child who would soon play the major part in his destruction. 
During his youth William's personal involvement in politics had been limited to occasional public appearances. Yet from 1668, as the balance of political power within the United Provinces began to shift, William started to take an active role in the recovery of his position. The essential background here was the weakening of de Witt. This was partly the result of resentment at the pensionary's long dominance. Regents in Holland who felt excluded from power began to think more seriously about collaboration with the house of Orange. More importantly, however, de Witt lost power as a result of deteriorating relations with France. From the late 1660s it became clear that Louis XIV was intent on absorbing the strategically vital Spanish Netherlands and other border lands, and de Witt's inability to counter this threat set the Dutch searching for an alternative saviour. 
William's most significant early action was to travel to Middelburg on 19 September 1668 NS to accept the honour of 'first noble of the states of Zeeland'. Taken under the pretext of a hunting trip, this promotion to a traditional Orange office brought the prince effective control of the province and, perhaps more importantly, provided a symbolic opportunity to claim leadership of the entire republic. An English observer, Edward Browne, recorded the near-regal entertainments provided for the prince in Zeeland (BL, Sloane MS 1908, fol. 19). Acceptance of the first nobleship also signalled William's majority. On 25 October Amalia ended her guardianship and handed over control of the Orange estates. From this point, William pushed hard to secure his inheritance. Building on support in the inland provinces, mobilizing his new power in Zeeland, and forming an alliance with those in Holland willing to work with him, he campaigned for immediate admission to the council of state. Despite de Witt's claims that he could not be of age until 1673, the new political alignment carried the issue. On 31 May 1670 NS William went on to the council with the house of Orange's traditional concluding vote. Forging onward, and hoping to gain from the old Dutch tendency to look to his house in times of foreign threat, the prince pressed to be made admiral and captain-general. De Witt argued that promotion would violate the legal barriers to Orange promotion that he had put in place, but the Williamite current proved too powerful. By the meeting of the states general in 1672 all the provinces but Holland had agreed to promote him to the federal military offices. On 24 February even Holland's will collapsed after William had refused its proposal for a temporary post, and as it became increasingly clear that Louis XIV planned a wholesale invasion of the United Provinces in alliance with England and the bishops of Munster and Cologne. 
By early spring 1672 only the lack of stadholderships stood between William and his ancient family dignity. At this point, however, two things delayed any campaign to recover these. First, William had sworn not to seek these offices under the perpetual edict, and was too mindful of his honour (and of the effect on popular opinion) to break this oath. Second, and more importantly, France's war preparations had to be countered. Unless some response could be found to Louis XIV's threat, there would be no United Provinces left to lead. William therefore spent the spring concentrating on the duties of captain-general rather than campaigns for further promotion. The task facing the new commander was daunting. William had to make frantic efforts to bolster an army weakened by twenty years of inaction under de Witt, and in particular had to arrange for emergency defences along the Ijssel, since it had become evident Louis would bypass the protecting Habsburg army in the Spanish Netherlands and invade eastwards from Munster. By the time William went to the army camp on 19 April NS, it was clear that the republic was in trouble, and what he found in the field was truly horrifying. The forces were seriously under strength at only 8000 troops, and were badly under-equipped. Despite vigorous efforts William was reporting by mid-May that he doubted he could hold the Ijssel. His fears were justified. When hostilities started in earnest in June, Dutch defences dissolved. Troops from Munster and Cologne occupied large parts of Gelderland, Groningen, and Overijssel, while the French crossed the Rhine and took town after town before capturing Utrecht on 27 June NS. By the end of the month, therefore, the Dutch were left with little of their country but Friesland in the far north-west, and Holland and Zeeland, which were only saved by flooding the land between them and the French forces. 
In other circumstances such a debacle would have ended the ambitions of a captain-general. In William's case, however, the reverse was true. Within weeks he had attained an unprecedented dominance in the Netherlands. There were three main reasons for this. First, de Witt was the easiest person to blame for the disaster: his diplomacy had failed to contain Louis XIV, and his neglect of the army had weakened the state's defences. Second, although William's early refusal to withdraw his army was questionable, his determination was not, and his heroic defiance of Louis earned popular adulation. He worked night and day to find troops to man vital points of defence, and he initially refused to abandon the line of the Ijssel, stating that if the French crossed the river the Dutch should 'believe that I am dead' (Rowen, 830). Third, William was aided by a vast outpouring of propaganda. As the French advanced Orangists let loose a torrent of invective blaming de Witt for the country's peril and assuring audiences that only their captain-general could save them. 
The effects of these forces were soon evident. As the other provinces fell, pro-Orange demonstrations erupted across Holland and Zeeland. At Dordrecht riots against republican party magistrates became so bad by late June that the town's leaders feared total loss of control. In desperation they sent for William, telling him that anarchy would ensue if he did not come to the town to quell the mob. When he arrived, on 29 June NS, he was faced by a crowd demanding that he be declared stadholder. Despite William's initial attempts to ignore the suggestion, mobs trapped him in an inn until the magistrates had formally called for his elevation. The prince returned to his camp that evening, still not having accepted promotion, but the movement to have him declared stadholder was now unstoppable. Councils in Rotterdam, Haarlem, and Gouda were forced to repeat Dordrecht's actions by the end of the 29th and disturbances pulled other cities into line over the next days. Zeeland made William stadholder on 2 July NS; the next day the states of Holland set aside its (now not so) perpetual edict, and proclaimed the prince its stadholder too. After confirmation that he was now absolved from his oaths, William accepted the office in a ceremony in The Hague on 9 July NS. Nor did this end the tidal wave of Orangism. Continuing unrest forced the resignation of republican party magistrates across Holland and Zeeland, and on 20 August NS, in a mercifully rare act of actual violence, de Witt was lynched, murdered, and mutilated. Although William was visibly appalled by this last action, and although he had been careful throughout the summer to avoid seeming to promote his own cause (even staying silent at the Hague festivities), the prince had equally failed to defend de Witt, and had allowed mobs to deliver everything for which he might have hoped. 
William's objective from 1672 to his death can be stated very simply. Fired by his personal resentment at France's steady occupation of family lands, and by a deep commitment to a Europe composed of independent nations, the prince's prime aim was to contain Louis XIV. In part this policy involved bringing as many other powers as possible into conflict with France. Ultimately this would lead William to intervene in England in 1688, but before then his chief task was to preserve Dutch commitment to war. His success in this aim was finely balanced. The events of 1672 had given the prince considerable power in the United Provinces, but opposition soon revived, and for long periods proved strong enough to frustrate him. 
William's advantages stemmed partly from the formal powers of his offices. As stadholder of provinces he enjoyed the traditional influence over municipal appointments, and also gained the emergency power of 'wetsverzettingen' -- the right to purge town administrations -- which he used extensively. Appointment as admiral and captain-general gave the prince military force, while special powers granted under the 'regeringsreglement' gave him the right to reconstitute government in Utrecht, Gelderland, and Overijssel as these provinces were freed from occupation. Beyond this technical authority of office William enjoyed informal advantages. For example, extensive patronage and the continued existence of an Orange party allowed him to bypass some of the rigid mechanisms of Dutch government. Especially in the early years of his rule, aristocratic allies such as Everard van Dijkvelt and Hans Willem Bentinck were given 'ad hoc' commissions in administration and diplomacy, and displaced the regent-bureaucrats who had previously run the state. The support of Gaspar Fagel, a one-time ally of de Witt, was similarly crucial. As the new grand pensionary, he controlled debates in the states of Holland and was the head of the Dutch civil service. Added to all this was an impressive ideological power. William magnified his charisma through an efficiently organized propaganda machine. Centred on Fagel, this gathered information from across Europe, used a variety of pamphleteers and engravers to craft it into publicity material, and then took advantage of the unrivalled Dutch printing industry to mass produce its product. 
Taken together William's sources of influence were impressive, but the new stadholder still faced considerable obstacles. Most importantly, there was Amsterdam. The magistrates of this city were largely independent of William since -- almost uniquely -- the stadholder did not have the power to appoint the burgomeesters in this town. Worse, the city fathers soon became unenthusiastic about the war with France. Amsterdam made its money from international trade, which was disrupted by fighting, and was liable to pay a substantial proportion of the nation's wartime taxation because the republic's wealth was concentrated among its citizens. The town therefore tended to lead resistance to prolonged conflict and, unfortunately for William, was effectively the paymaster of the state. As William's conflict dragged on, war weariness ensured that the problems with Amsterdam spread elsewhere. Within a very few years of 1672 regents across the nation were becoming less enthusiastic for conflict, and the stadholder found even the magistrates he had put in place turned against his policy. Reluctant to endanger further support by purging again, William found his early dominance evaporating. 
At first, of course, William had little problem. In 1672 the threat to the very survival of the republic solidified sentiment around its new leader and the prince was able to lead his people in defiance of France. Over the summer he rejected English and French peace terms, telling the English ambassadors that the best way to avoid seeing his country lost was to die in the last ditch ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.327). Instead of capitulating he put his faith in flooded fields and built up his army -- both increasing its numbers to 30,000 men and reinstilling discipline through high-profile, and sometimes brutal, courts martial. By the autumn he felt strong enough to lead an expedition to Maastricht and Charleroi. While this did not capture any towns, it did give the young commander vital first experience, and allowed him to demonstrate a formidable -- if not reckless -- personal courage. It also forced the French to draw some of their troops away from the front line. By December, therefore, the Dutch could begin to look upon the prince as the providential, perhaps even apocalyptic, saviour of the fatherland which his propaganda styled him. 
The next couple of years saw a similar pattern of William's maintaining support and even beginning to enjoy victories. Although Maastricht was lost in June 1673, the prince landed his first major punch in September with the capture of Naarden, and in November joined troops from his newly secured allies of Spain and Austria in a daring attack on Bonn. Although this last action took the Dutch well outside their own territory, it drew the French out of the Netherlands as well, and meant that by the end of the year they held only isolated towns inside the United Provinces' borders. Meanwhile naval defeats forced the English out of the contest (February 1674), and two months later the bishop of Munster was brought to make peace, with the result that Gelderland and Overijssel were freed. October 1674 saw William's eviction of the French from Grave, a success which partly compensated for the bloody draw at Seneffe (11 August NS) and the bungling failure to take Oudenarde later that month. 
Initially such success strengthened William's domestic position. He had gained the stadholdership of Utrecht when that province was evacuated by the French, and continuing victories brought further elevation. In February 1674 Fagel took up the town of Haarlem's suggestion that the stadholdership of Holland be made hereditary in William's male line, and successfully piloted it through the states. Zeeland and Utrecht soon followed suit. In 1675 William was made stadholder of liberated Overijssel, and on 20 April NS the federal military offices were made hereditary as well. These promotions, however, represented the high water mark of the prince's advance. Paradoxically, while armed victory bolstered his reputation, it also gave the Dutch a security which allowed criticism of the prince's more high-handed behaviour. By 1674 the first signs of the new mood began to show. When liberated Gelderland proposed that William be made, not its stadholder, but rather its sovereign duke, reaction elsewhere was hostile. Fears were expressed that ducal status would be an attack on the free constitution of the whole Netherlands. Republican propaganda flowed; three of the six voting towns in Zeeland objected to William's promotion and in Holland normally pro-Orange cities such as Leiden and Haarlem joined Amsterdam in vigorous protest. As a result William was forced to back down. On meeting the states of Gelderland on 20 February 1675 NS the prince rejected the dukedom, satisfying himself with the stadholdership and purges of hostile magistrates. From here his popular support declined. Pamphlets criticized the cost of the war, the trade slump it had produced, and the prince's military adventures outside the provinces. Above all they attacked the corruption of the Orange party and William's use of prerogative, patronage, and purge to smother opposition. By 1677 fear of his ambition was rife and anti-Williamite Amsterdam was making the political running. 
Sadly William had little military triumph to compensate for these political troubles. The 1675 campaigning season passed almost without incident and he failed to impress in the next three years of struggle. In May 1676 he managed to outface the French army at Valenciennes without battle, but then failed to take Maastricht in a badly organized seven-week siege. Early next spring the French took Valenciennes, and then inflicted a heavy defeat on the captain-general at Mont Cassel as he marched to relieve St Omer. William failed to draw the French out into open battle at Charleroi in July, and ended the season with only the insignificant capture of Binch. When the French made significant gains in the early months of 1678 the mood in the Netherlands became noticeably anti-war, and Louis cashed in by appealing to the regent class over the stadholder's head. When France offered tariff concessions and preservation of the United Provinces' pre-conflict borders as a basis for a peace treaty, the elites of Holland's towns were won over, and Amsterdam secured a vote in the states general to cease hostilities in June. Louis nearly handed victory back to William by refusing to evacuate towns he had agreed to return but, seeing the Dutch prepared to rejoin the war, he returned to the first deal and concluded the treaty of Nijmegen on 10 August NS. Four days later William managed to use lack of confirmation of the treaty as an excuse to attack French lines at Mons, but the vicious and inconclusive battle which resulted could not hide the fact that he had lost an important round of his domestic struggle. 
The Nijmegen peace was a shock for William, but it does appear to have stimulated a re-evaluation of political tactics which ultimately led to greater success. After the treaty he gradually abandoned attempts to bulldoze or outflank the peace party, and instead conciliated its members. Thus over 1679 and 1680 William permitted the rehabilitation of many of the regents who had been expelled in his purges after 1672, and admitted to the poor quality of some he had appointed. The fruits of the new approach were soon evident. Late in 1679 the stadholder persuaded the states general to reject Louis's offer of a treaty, pointing out it was a cover for further encroachments along France's borders. In 1681 the states general confirmed an alliance William had negotiated with Sweden; and in a speech of 7 March 1682 the prince convinced the Dutch they must send 8000 troops to Luxembourg to persuade the French to lift a blockade of the city. 
1683 saw another agreement to send troops to challenge Louis, this time in the Spanish Netherlands, but the year also saw a temporary return to the old pattern of William's arousing opposition as he tried to browbeat his opponents. In the late autumn he proposed that the United Provinces raise 16,000 men to deal with any further strong-arm tactics by the French. Amsterdam objected, arguing that troops would be expensive and would provoke Louis needlessly. William's reaction was to hurl all his power at the city. In November he led a delegation from towns which approved an expansion of the army to Amsterdam, making a full ceremonial entry into the town. In January 1684 Fagel argued that decisions to raise troops did not have to be unanimous in the states of Holland (effectively removing the chief city's veto), and on 16 February NS the prince himself presented evidence that Amsterdam's magistrates had been in treasonous correspondence with France. Reaction to all this was instant and disastrous. Neither magistrates nor crowd were overawed by William's visit to Amsterdam: instead dark comparisons were made with his father's coup attempt in 1650 and mob hostility forced the prince to withdraw. Meanwhile Amsterdam's delegates protested against Fagel's interpretation of Holland's constitution in the states, and simply walked out when accused of treason, effectively blocking any further business. By spring 1684 it was clear the city had won. Few troops could be raised if Amsterdam would not pay for them, and peace-party propaganda swayed Dutch opinion. On 13 May NS the states of Holland passed a resolution forbidding its troops to travel to the Spanish Netherlands. The United Provinces did nothing when Louis besieged and took Luxembourg in May, and on 16 June NS they accepted a twenty-year truce from the French in return for their acquiescence in Louis's recent gains. This last deal was a particularly bitter blow for William, forcing him to accept the loss of family estates in Chiny and St Vith, and France's effective annexation of his ancient patrimony of Orange. 
Thus by spring 1684 William was back where he had been six years earlier. He had lost the political battle and faced a nation wholly unwilling to contain Louis. Once again, however, defeat taught the prince valuable lessons, and he returned with still more determination to conciliation. It has been said that he never again attempted any action without having squared Amsterdam first (Israel, 'Dutch Republic', 836). Certainly attempts to improve relations followed hard on the debacle of 1683-4. Over the next winter the stadholder made contact with the more moderate of the Amsterdam burgomeesters and built up a party of potential supporters. When it became clear William could not secure a large army he reacted calmly, and spoke in favour of Amsterdam's alternative suggestion that foreign threats could be contained by a strong navy. Elsewhere William balanced Orange supporters with members of the peace party in magisterial appointments, and reassured the Dutch he was not seeking to break controls on his power. Thus, although William was still a long way from persuading his nation back to war with France in the years 1686 and 1687, he was slowly dispelling its suspicion. The reward for this would come in 1688, when the states general gave unprecedented backing to his invasion of England. 
The key to understanding William's intervention in Britain is to review his interaction with the Stuart realm over the preceding two decades. The central influence upon this was, of course, the prince's parentage. The fact that his mother was sister to both Charles II and to James II (1633-1701) meant that he was an integral part of the ruling dynasty. Such clan ties could have produced a close relationship between Britain and the United Provinces. In fact, however, the connections produced only tension, with both sides wanting to exploit the other. The British kings wished to use their nephew for two main purposes. First, they hoped William would help their foreign policy. Attempting to dominate their young kinsman, Charles and James tried to moderate the United Provinces' hostility to France and so avoid a war in which they must either support Louis (and risk domestic anger at an alliance with an ambitious Catholic power) or support the Dutch (and alienate a Bourbon monarchy which backed them financially). Second, the English kings wished to employ the prince as a weapon in domestic politics. Since their main problem in Britain was their subjects' suspicion of their sympathies with popery, it was useful to parade a staunchly protestant relative at moments of crisis. In response to these attempts to use him William in turn tried to use his uncles to help him contain France. He would try to help Charles and James in domestic affairs, but only to unite the British in hostility to Versailles; and although he tried to co-ordinate his foreign policy with his uncles, he undermined them whenever they favoured Louis. With such contradictory objectives, relations within the Stuart clan were set. Constant expressions of family affection in correspondence threw only a thin veil over suspicions which culminated in the rupture of 1688. 
William's first close contact with his uncles occurred during a visit to England over the winter of 1670-71. It was inauspicious. The prince disgraced himself when forced to 'drink very hard' at court, and formed an abiding disgust at Charles's lack of religious or political principles ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 82). During this visit, Gilbert Burnet claimed, William became convinced his uncle would never give him 'any real assistance' ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.501-2). If that was the prince's opinion, it was dramatically confirmed in 1672. Then Charles joined France's attack on the Dutch republic, and tried to benefit from the elevation of his nephew which this invasion produced. Once William was stadholder Charles bombarded him with patronizing letters, urging him to accept a quick peace with Louis. Under the proposed deal the Dutch would lose large tracts of territory, but the prince would be promoted to a power which his 'forefathers always aimed at' (Bryant, 257). This was a clear attempt to bribe William into accepting British policy, using sovereignty over the rump of the provinces as bait. The prince, however, was unmoved. Astonished at Charles's opportunism, and full of patriotic faith that the Dutch would fight harder 'preserving their liberty, than for any prince', he sent the king's negotiators away disappointed ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.598). Relations worsened over 1673 as the Dutch navy humiliated the English, and as William used his propaganda machine to stir up anti-court sentiment in the Westminster parliament. Charles was rankled by the treaty of 1674 which forced him out of the war, and he spent much of the 1670s pestering his nephew to accept English mediation between the provinces and France. 
There was a temporary thaw in Anglo-Dutch relations in the later 1670s. However, this was largely because Charles was forced to surrender control of policy to the fiercely anti-French Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby, the only man who could control parliament and defend the court against growing popular hostility. The most significant effect of the thaw was William's marriage to James's elder daughter, Mary (1662-1694) ['see 'Mary II]. This ceremony took place in Whitehall on 4 November 1677 -- the prince's twenty-seventh birthday -- and obviously strengthened William's involvement in British politics. The personal aspects of this wedding are described below. Here it is important to note that, despite general Stuart satisfaction with the match -- Charles reputedly encouraged the prince on his wedding night with cries of 'Now, nephew to your work! hey! St George and England!' (Hutton, 346) -- the marriage did not break the pattern of clan cross-purposes. William hoped marrying Mary would involve England in the war with France; Charles and James hoped the match would dispel popular antipathy to their court and provide a new lever on the prince. 
Just how little progress had really been made in relations became apparent in the years of the exclusion crisis in England. This series of events began late in 1678 with rumours of a popish plot to assassinate Charles. In the uproar that followed Danby was implicated and swept from power. This was a disaster for William. He lost his firmest ally in England and could only respond with a letter assuring the earl that he believed none of the accusations made against him. Even greater challenges followed. Anti-popish hysteria led to demands in parliament that the openly Catholic James be excluded from inheriting the throne. Although the exclusion of James could bring the prince control of British foreign policy (since it might mean the crown's passing to his wife), it also posed dangers for William. If he appeared ambitious to use Mary to achieve royal status he might forfeit Dutch support, and he could be wrong-footed in British politics if he became associated with the pro-exclusionist whig party before they were certain of victory. William also knew he would have to handle relations with his uncles carefully. Still wanting an anti-French alliance, he could not alienate his relatives by suggesting their monarchy be remodelled, and he anyway had a Stuart's reluctance to see this happen. Equally, however, William wanted Charles and James to negotiate with their legislature. The prince knew that England could not be a counterweight to Louis unless the court had the backing of the purse-carrying parliament, and was therefore desperate to avoid a political rupture. 
William's response to this web of demands was extreme caution. He refused to go over to England in the early summer of 1679 when James thought this would pacify public opinion and cause demands for his disqualification to fade. Similarly, however, he repeatedly refused to visit London in 1680, when supporters of exclusion thought parading a protestant heir might help their cause. The prince entertained James in The Hague in March and April 1679 when the king sent his brother abroad out of harm's way, but in the autumn of that year showed similar hospitality to Charles's illegitimate son, James Scott, duke of Monmouth, who was being canvassed as a possible protestant alternative to James. Over the next twelve months William formally opposed constitutional changes, but collected information as Charles's court vacillated between trying to face down exclusion, considering accepting it, allowing James to succeed but putting constitutional limitations on him, and appointing William regent for his uncle. By the autumn of 1680, however, the prince had begun to feel he must come off the fence. Realizing that parliamentary demands for exclusion were strengthening, he decided acceptance of an exclusion bill was the only way to get monarchy and legislature working together. He accordingly denounced the alternative of constitutional limitations, stating they would be 'prejudicial to all the royal family', and suggested to Henry Sidney he would go to England to campaign for exclusion if Charles opted for that solution ('Diary of... Sidney', 2.139, 148). 
Disastrously, William's moves in favour of exclusion came just as Charles had fixed upon another policy. In January 1681 the king secured a pension from Louis, and used his new financial security to turn on the exclusionists. Ministers who had advocated the bill were sacked, and in March parliament was dissolved, never to be recalled in Charles's lifetime. Although William tried to patch up relations in a visit in July 1681, his trip was an ill-tempered affair. Charles was incensed by William's continuing demands that he negotiate with his legislature; James had become convinced that his nephew had been plotting with the whigs; and the new set of anti-exclusionist (or tory) ministers spread dark rumours about William's intentions. From 1681 the prince's relations with his uncles were set in a familiar -- but now deeper and more dangerous -- rut. Charles and James were so disappointed at William's refusal to be controlled that they suspected him of conspiring with their enemies. He had become so exasperated by Charles's refusal to work with parliament that he had shown himself willing to consider radical political solutions. From 1681 he was in contact with leaders of the whig party, for example meeting Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, and William, Lord Russell, during his trip to England that year. 
For the rest of Charles's lifetime the new antagonism was chiefly revealed in the English king's anger that William offered refuge to his bitterest enemies. After the discovery of the 1683 Rye House plot to assassinate Charles some of the extreme whigs behind the conspiracy fled to the United Provinces, where they were allowed to live unmolested. Most outrageously for the king, the duke of Monmouth, who had been implicated in the plot, was received by William and entertained as a full member of the family. He went hunting with the prince over the summer of 1684, lived 'in great splendour' in one of his houses (Luttrell, 'Brief Historical Relation', 1.318), and was taken to plays, balls, and skating parties by Mary the following winter. Despite William's belief that Charles's anathemas against Monmouth were only for public consumption (and therefore that treating his son well accorded with the king's real, but secret, feelings), the hospitality did severe damage. The prince wrote submissive letters to the English court, but by the time Charles died in February 1685 the personal rupture was complete. 
On James's accession there was a brief attempt by both the new monarch and the prince to improve relations. Cordial letters were exchanged, Monmouth was expelled from the United Provinces, and James refused to believe that his nephew had had anything to do with that duke's subsequent invasion of the west country in the early summer of 1685. This dawn, however, was false. As James began his controversial and prerogative-stretching campaign to emancipate his co-religionists old exasperations resurfaced. In England James's actions were condemned as attacks on his subjects' liberties and as a manifestation of Antichristian popery. The majority of Englishmen opposed the bullying of parliament to repeal anti-Catholic laws and the use of supposed royal powers to suspend these statutes. At William's court it is doubtful whether much sleep was lost over the rights of the Westminster parliament, or that the prince shared in hysterical anti-Catholicism, but James's policies were still deplored. William, in close contact with correspondents who suggested that opposition to the king was becoming desperate, feared that his uncle would plunge his realm into an internal conflict. If that happened, the stadholder knew, it would be impossible for England to be an effective counterweight to France. He would thus have lost his best chance of swinging the balance of European politics away from Louis. Accordingly William began to work to stop his uncle, either by persuasion, or by more conspiratorial methods. 
For the first couple of years of James's reign William made few active interventions in British politics, preferring to collect information and gauge public opinion. In January 1687, however, the pace quickened when the prince sent Dijkvelt on a mission to London. The envoy was to inform the king that William wanted to support his uncle, but that support was conditional upon his abandoning attempts to change anti-Catholic laws without parliamentary consent. Dijkvelt was also permitted to make contact with opponents of the king. When James refused the Dutchman an early audience the mission began to look more like an attempt to build a Williamite party in England. Gilbert Burnet reported that Dijkvelt made contact with an assorted group of anti-court politicians and assured them that William backed their efforts against the king's policy. This group ranged across the spectrum from solid whigs such as Admiral Edward Russell, Henry Sidney, and William Cavendish, earl of Devonshire, through moderate figures such as George Savile, marquess of Halifax, and on to tories such as Danby and Bishop Henry Compton of London. It continued to meet with, and eventually to plot with, the prince's agents for the next eighteen months. Over the summer of 1687 the Williamite opposition solidified further. Leading Englishmen travelled to The Hague to consult with the prince, and in July Zuylestein was sent to London, officially to commiserate on the death of James's mother-in-law, but unofficially to renew contacts with British politicians and to set up a clandestine network of Williamite correspondents. The end of 1687 and beginning of 1688 saw the writing and publication of 'Pensionary Fagel's Letter: a Letter Writ by Mijn Heer Fagel to Mr. James Stewart' (dated 4 November 1687 and published in 1688). This widely distributed and hugely successful pamphlet made William's religious stance clear. The work stated that the stadholder opposed persecution, but it also rejected unparliamentary suppression of anti-Catholic statute, and implied that Britons should look to the prince to stop James attacking their liberties. By the start of 1688, therefore, William was locked in a dangerous dispute with his uncle. Desperate to get James to reverse his policies, he had launched a popularity contest with James in the king's own realm. 
Over the winter of 1688-9 William invaded Britain and seized the Stuart crown. Debate about when he determined to do this has been vigorous, but since there is no direct evidence for the precise date of the decision the dispute will probably never be resolved. It is certain that William had wanted control of British foreign policy since at least 1672. It is equally clear, however, that, at least until the few months before the actual invasion, forcible seizure of the crown was not the most obvious way to secure this control. For example, it long seemed sensible for William to try to use his family connections to attract his uncles into alliance against France, or to support an anti-French party in the Stuart realm hoping it would become strong enough to force the court's hand. Again, the prince could simply have waited. Since Charles had had no legitimate children, and since it seemed unlikely that James would produce a son to displace Mary, William knew he should eventually come to control Britain as husband of its reigning queen. Given this, a date for his decision to invade as late as the spring 1688, and a date for his final resolution to be king as late as early December, look the most probable. He would not have risked uncertain invasions or usurpations until other possibilities had been exhausted. 
Certainly military intervention had not been an attractive answer to William's difficulties in 1687. Although personal contact with James had broken down by the end of 1686, and although some of the hotter heads among the opposition to the king were already asking the prince to invade, the prince was building a party in Britain which might prove strong enough to stop the king, and he could still hope that Mary might soon inherit the crown. Over the winter of 1687-8, however, the situation began to change. On 10 December James announced officially that his wife was pregnant. Although this was not an instant disaster for the Orange party -- the queen was ageing and had suffered miscarriages in the past -- as time went by it looked increasingly possible that she would give birth to a live child, and if that child were a son, it would displace Mary from the succession. Over the same period it looked ever less probable that parliamentary opposition would halt James's career. The king stuck by his 1687 declaration of indulgence, which had used the prerogative to emancipate Catholics, and he continued a campaign to alter parliamentary franchises to secure a pliant legislature. William's contacts in England were full of despair, warning that the monarch's disregard of public opinion might soon result in civil war. By spring 1688, therefore, moderate methods of securing Britain for a united anti-French policy were looking hopeless, and the prince was starting to realize he would have to intervene to prevent the situation from running beyond his control. 
Circumstances on the continent also increased the attractiveness of the military option. As 1688 wore on, it became increasingly likely that William could build an anti-French alliance of powers which could contain Louis while the prince crossed the channel. Spain had always looked to William to help it save its part of the Netherlands from France; the princes of western Germany had become increasingly worried by French expansion; and, crucially, on 9 May 1688 NS Frederick William of Brandenburg died. This last event elevated Frederick III to the electorate. The new ruler was more consistently opposed to Louis than his predecessor and, importantly, had hopes of being named William's heir. In the United Provinces, too, things began moving the prince's way. Conciliation after the disasters of 1684 built trust between the prince of Orange and the Dutch political elites, and a series of near-suicidal decisions by the French to end the toleration of their protestant population (1685) and to impose punitive tariffs on Dutch goods (1687-8) alienated opinion in the Netherlands. By late spring even the Amsterdam-influenced states general was convinced there was no alternative to William's attempts to curb Louis. 
Given this combination of circumstances it seems very likely that Gilbert Burnet was right to claim that the decision to invade was made about the beginning of May 1688. Even if a date as late as this is correct, however, it is still important to distinguish between a resolution to invade and one to seize the throne. Evidence about exactly when William decided to become king is again very sketchy, but again it is unlikely that he made any firm resolve early, and it even seems probable that he delayed any final choice until well after the invasion was under way. The prince's main objective was to bring a united Stuart realm into the war with Louis. After spring 1688 invasion looked as if it might help this aim, as it could force James to accept a free parliament, which, given the political mood of the electorate, was likely to be fiercely anti-French. Going further and seizing the throne, by contrast, did not initially look as if it would unite the British against Versailles. Usurpation would be more controversial and difficult than simply forcing James to change his foreign policy, and it might leave the prince as a resented ruler, a position he knew from Dutch politics could rob him of influence. Given this analysis William was unlikely to have shut off options short of the throne until he had had a chance to see how well his military action went and how popular he was once he had arrived in England. 
Whatever was going on in the depths of William's mind in 1688, its consequences in outward actions were clear. From late spring the prince made multifaceted preparations to invade England. On the military side he began assembling a fleet at Hellevoetsluis. By autumn this was large enough to transport 21,000 troops, together with their horses, weapons and supplies. Politically, he squared the states general. Over the summer he convinced even a reluctant Amsterdam that a military build-up was necessary to contain an increasingly hostile France, and then revealed his complete plans, first to a secret session of the states of Holland on 29 September NS, and then to the states general on 8 October NS. On the diplomatic front he tried to calm the other powers of Europe, sending missions to Madrid, Vienna, and Brussels, and himself travelling to Minden to speak to the new elector of Brandenburg in September. While all this was going on in Europe, William's allies in the Stuart realm were not neglected. By May the chief members of his network of informers and correspondents had been told he intended to invade and began to make preparations. Their activities included consultations with Zuylestein, who was sent to England in June (ostensibly to congratulate James, who had, as feared, had a son); plans by Danby and Devonshire to raise rebellions in the north when William arrived; and attempts by Sidney to contact officers in James's army and persuade them to defect to the prince when the invasion came. Most importantly, on 30 June the conspirators also issued an invitation to William to intervene. This secret letter, signed by the 'immortal' seven leaders of the plot, allowed the prince to claim that he had gone to England because he had been asked to do so by its citizens, and also reassured him of the success of the enterprise by declaring that 'nineteen parts out of twenty of the people throughout the kingdom' would support it (Dalrymple, 2, appx, pt 1, 228). 
Perhaps as important as these military, diplomatic, and conspiratorial moves were William's ideological preparations. The prince knew that invading another country would be controversial: to avoid alienating his new European allies, and to minimize resistance from the English population, he would have to work hard to convince the world of the justice of his actions. At the heart of this propaganda drive was his manifesto, his 'Declaration of Reasons for Appearing in Arms in England'. Carefully drafted by Fagel, this offered an explanation for the invasion couched so as to avoid offence to its various audiences. Crucially, the manifesto took its stand on English law rather than religion. Claiming that William was intervening to stop James exceeding his prerogative, the prince prevented his action's resembling an anti-popish crusade, and so calmed the anxieties of Catholic states such as Spain and Austria. Equally crucially, the 'Declaration' pitched for support from both whigs and tories. While it pleased the former group with its suggestion that monarchs should be held to account for illegal actions, it placated tories by concentrating on royal attacks upon their beloved Church of England, and by refusing to question James's right to the throne. The document placed the blame for recent policies on 'evil councillors' rather than the king himself, and eased fears that William had come to take the crown by stating he had 'nothing before his eyes' but a 'free and lawful parliament'. Once this brilliantly crafted pamphlet had been finished Fagel's propaganda machine distributed it with even more than its usual efficiency. It was translated into several languages, dispatched to foreign courts, and smuggled across the channel in thousands to be released as soon as William arrived in England. 
With all the preparations in place William was ready to move as soon as the wind would assist him over to England. For weeks it refused, and then storms dashed a first attempt at invasion launched on 29 October NS. After these early difficulties, however, William met with a success so complete that his propagandists could claim it was providential. Sailing out on 11 November NS he made stately progress down the channel on a north-easterly which kept the English fleet bottled up in the mouth of the Thames, and then took advantage of a sudden change of wind direction to bring him into the convenient harbour of Torbay. After landing unopposed on 15 November NS -- 5 November OS, so an auspicious anniversary for protestant deliverance -- William made his way rapidly to Exeter, where he set up a command centre and a printing press. For the first few days there was some concern at the lack of overt support from the local population. While crowds had cheered his early progress, and almost no forcible opposition had been shown, few Englishmen had rallied to the prince's banner. Over the next weeks, however, these worries largely vanished as local gentry started to muster at Exeter; as news arrived from the north of risings in favour of William under Danby; and as a series of pre-planned defections started from James's army officers. William could therefore march east from Exeter on 21 November with some confidence. By this time James's position had virtually collapsed. He had joined his forces on Salisbury Plain on 19 November, but was so badly shaken by rebellions, defections, and uncontrollable nosebleeds that he took the advice of his army council to avoid immediate battle and retreated to London on the 23rd. Once back in the capital the king bought time by sending commissioners to treat with William at Hungerford, but bundled his wife and son out of the country and then attempted to join them on 10 December. When news of the king's flight led to riotous panic in the capital (rumours circulated that James had gone to lead an attack by a wild Irish force on the city) William's triumph was complete. The corporation of London invited him into the capital to maintain order on 11 December and he arrived to heed their call on the 18th, somewhat farcically slipping into Westminster through St James's Park and thus missing the huge crowds that had gathered to welcome him along the Oxford road. 
Up to this point William's success had exceeded all expectations. Now, however, and repeating the pattern of earlier parts of his career, the prince's very success began to work against him. The problem stemmed primarily from an inflation of the prince's ambition. Now that he had seen evidence of popular support, and now that James was broken, he definitely decided to take the throne. Whereas his statements and actions before James's flight suggested he was still keeping his options open -- even at the Hungerford negotiations he had offered terms which gave James hope of keeping his crown -- after mid-December it was clear he wished to cut off any solution but his own accession. When, for example, James was captured on 13 December in Faversham and taken back to London, William did his best to get him out of the way. The prince insisted his uncle stay first at Ham -- ostensibly 'for the greater safety of his person' (Japikse, 1.1.25-6), but actually because he would be too far from London to whip up support -- and then that he be allowed to go to Rochester, whence everybody knew he would renew his flight to France. Similarly, when William arrived in the capital he made himself its effective master. He benefited from his wife's agreement to stay behind in Holland (as she was the closest relative of James not under his control many people thought she herself might have a claim to the throne); he garrisoned London with his own elite Dutch troops; and he ordered Danby and his forces to stay in the north where they would have less influence. Even by itself such presumption might have cost support. What made it even more damaging was that William had promised in his manifesto that his sole aim was a free parliament. The obvious mismatch between the prince's behaviour and his propaganda allowed James's supporters to accuse William of hypocrisy, while people such as Sir Edward Seymour who had joined the prince 'on the bottom of his 'Declaration'' began to fear they had been duped ('Correspondence of... Clarendon', 2.238). William thus faced a situation in which he now wanted the throne but found his path to it hindered by piles of his own pamphlets. 
William's response to this problem was partly to shift the focus of his propaganda. It is noticeable that from mid-December his spokesmen placed far more emphasis on his role as a providential deliverer than on legal arguments. Providentialism contained a strong case for William's elevation, but had not been compromised by earlier statements about the English constitution. Perhaps as importantly, William devised a strategy which he hoped would secure him the throne, while appearing to stay true to his original position. He continued to insist that the English legislature must be free to decide on a settlement of English government, but simultaneously moved to deny it any real alternative to offering him the crown. The first element of this strategy was initiated in two meetings late in December. The earlier of these, on 21 December, was with all peers present in London; the later, on 26 December, was with MPs who survived from Charles II's days. These irregular, but arguably parliamentary, bodies heard the prince repeat his commitment to 'the end of [his] 'Declaration'', and then agreed to help him secure the free legislature which that document had demanded (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 5, 21, 23 Dec 1688). They summoned a convention which was to be constituted as if it were a parliament, and which would be at liberty to decide the succession. Upholding the appearance of free parliamentary choice, William did little to influence the elections to the convention held in January and then said nothing publicly about his ambitions, either in his letter to the convention on its meeting on 22 January or when it immediately fell into bitter debates about whether to offer the crown to the prince, to declare him regent for James, or to award the throne to Mary. 
While the formal freedom of the English to decide their future was preserved, however, the other part of William's strategy was also in place. Continuing to garrison the south-east of England with Dutch troops, he made himself the only guarantor of order at a time when many feared prolonged constitutional crisis would return the country to civil war. He thus achieved a position of overwhelming influence, since a threat on his part to withdraw if he did not get the throne would be absolutely terrifying. As division in the convention delayed any settlement through the first week of February, William played this trump card, letting convention members know that he would return to Holland if he were not offered the crown. Realizing that the choice now was between William or anarchy, opponents of the prince's elevation gave way. He was offered the crown, and finally felt safe to invite Mary to join him in England. In a ceremony in the Guildhall on 13 February William was given the throne on four conditions which -- while they did something to remodel the English monarchy -- were acceptable to William because they would not hamper his ability to mobilize England against France. First, William had to share the throne with his wife in a novel 'joint monarchy'. Mary was formally included to minimize the appearance of a break in the succession, but this did not limit the king since the settlement bestowed the actual executive power of the crown on William alone. Second, the new king had to accept new oaths of loyalty which implied that he was only a 'de facto' rather than 'de jure' monarch. This was done by removing the words 'rightful and lawful' from the clause describing William's title, but while this might seem to weaken the king's claims, it actually helped him by allowing reluctant tories to proclaim obedience. Third, William could not accept the throne before he had listened to a 'declaration of rights' outlining the limits of royal prerogatives. This gave definition to traditional -- but vague -- bans on unparliamentary armies, taxes, and suspension of laws, but was less radical than it might have been since William had used his influence to kill any wholesale reduction in the monarchy's powers, and evaded any explicit recognition that the declaration's terms were conditions of his taking the throne ('Declaration of the Lords Spiritual'). Fourth, William had to acknowledge the right of his sister-in-law Anne, and her children, to succeed before any offspring he had by a wife after Mary. This condition was imposed to calm fears about the importation of a wholly foreign dynasty, but would not, of course, affect the king's own terms of rule. 
Overall, therefore, William had gained almost the whole authority of a Stuart king, less than fifteen weeks after landing at Torbay. The rapidly arranged coronation, held on 11 April, did a little more to curtail the monarch's power with its new oath binding the ruler to 'the Statutes in Parliament agreed on' ('An Account of the Ceremonial'). In essence, however, the ceremony confirmed that William had most of the old prerogative, including control over armies, foreign policy, the appointment of ministers, and the supreme governorship of the church. Supporters of William thought this success so remarkable that the 'Finger of God was visibly in it' (Tillotson, 26), and the word 'glorious' was officially attached to the revolution as early as 22 January 1689 ('An Order of the Lords'). Cynics, by contrast, might note a remarkable similarity with 1672. Once again the prince had publicly denied any wish to be raised to head of a nation, but had claimed to have bowed to the will of the people, the call of their representatives, and the manifest intentions of heaven. Once again, however, force, propaganda, and careful manipulation of mob violence had played a greater part than he might wish to admit. 
Given the extraordinary nature of his accession, William had surprisingly little difficulty making himself secure on the throne of England and Wales. Although not all the political nation welcomed his elevation, few thought there was any real alternative in February 1689, and most continued to accept the new king, either to keep out the papist James or because supporting the 'de facto' regime brought more stability than working for a Stuart restoration. It is true that William had difficulties with the old king's officer corps in the army. Only a third of these agreed to serve the new regime, and there was a series of mutinies over spring and summer 1689. It is also true that more than 300 'nonjuring' clergy, including seven bishops, refused to swear the oaths to the new monarchs; that some leading English politicians made contact with James II in the early 1690s; and that Louis XIV offered sporadic succour to the exiled king and to his 'Jacobite' supporters. As a result a Jacobite underground survived throughout William's reign; groups of conspirators published subversive literature, planned rebellions (there were major plots in 1690, 1692, 1694, and 1696), and tried to persuade the French to invade to help the cause. Yet despite all this William's rule was never in serious danger in England. Early difficulties with the army were overcome; nonjurors were deprived and then proved politically quietist; most of those who made contact with James did it only as a political insurance policy; and all Jacobite plots were uncovered before they became dangerous. 
In Ireland, by contrast, William faced three years of hard struggle to gain control. Legally his task should have been easy. The Irish crown was joined to that of England, so technically William and Mary acceded in Dublin when accepting the crown in London. In reality, however, Ireland was always going to be difficult to procure. Its majority Catholic population had done well under James II and rapidly came to support the declaration of loyalty to the old king made by the lord lieutenant, Richard Talbot, earl of Tyrconnell. By spring 1689 only isolated towns in protestant Ulster were in William's hands and, worse, the French had sent troops to aid James as he set up government in Dublin. William thus had to take urgent action, both to make good his claim to Ireland and to ensure the country did not become a dangerous base from which Jacobites and Louis might attack Britain. 
At first William was frustrated in his campaign to recapture his westernmost realm. Although he repeatedly stressed 'the dangers grown too great' in Ireland in his speeches to the Westminster parliament ('JHL', 14, 1685-1691, 128), he himself was unable to lead a force in 1689 since he needed to settle affairs in London, and the army he sent to Ulster became bogged down by poor weather and a supply system so corrupt as to become the subject of a major Commons investigation. Over the early months of 1690 things improved somewhat as the king freed additional soldiers for the Irish theatre, dismissed English ministers who had opposed his leading an expedition there, and sailed to Ireland -- he landed at Carrickfergus on 14 June. His arrival, with enthusiastic preachers and with 15,000 extra troops (Danish and Dutch as well as English), lifted morale and by 1 July he was facing James II across the River Boyne north of Dublin. In some ways the ensuing battle was the greatest success of William's career. When the bulk of James's forces, believing that an enemy flanking manoeuvre was going to be the main attack, marched west from the main point of confrontation, William himself led a charge through the water and threatened to trap the Jacobites in a bend of the stream before they retreated in some disorder. However, while this victory led both to James's withdrawal from Dublin and to the steady evacuation of French troops, it was not as complete a salvation as its subsequent celebration by Irish protestants would suggest. The Jacobites avoided rout on the battlefield and then proved strong enough to trouble William for another fifteen months. Although the English king occupied Dublin on 2 July and then marched west, he still suffered severe military setbacks, such as the capture of his artillery at Ballyneety on 12 August and his failure to take Limerick later that month. Thus when William returned to Britain in September, he may have ended any possibility that his other kingdoms might be invaded from Dublin, but he had been diverted from the struggle against Louis on the European mainland and had not quelled resistance in Munster and Connaught. Williamite commanders such as Godard van Ginkel would have to campaign for much of 1691, and offer extraordinarily generous terms for surrender, before they achieved that objective. 
Securing Scotland was less difficult than gaining Ireland but was rather more complicated than the revolution in England. Things began smoothly enough for William. In December 1688 he met waves of Scots magnates who had streamed south realizing that he was now the effective power on the island. At a gathering of almost the entire Scottish political nation in London on 7 January William accepted responsibility for maintaining order north of the border, and sent out letters ordering the Scottish estates to convene. This body met as a constitutional convention on 14 March 1689 and immediately set about resolving who should be king of Scotland. For a moment it was not clear that William would carry the day as many members still leaned towards James, but soon the new English monarch's tact in dealing with parliamentary bodies won through. When letters from William and his rival were read out to the convention on the 16th, members were flattered by William's assurance that 'it lyes to you to enter upon such consultations as are most probably to settle you' ('APS', '1689-1702', 9), but were alienated by James's 'Threats and Promises' ('An Account of the Proceedings'). Once the leading Jacobite, John Graham of Claverhouse, had stormed out of the convention the way was clear for it to declare that James had 'forfaulted' the throne, and for William and Mary to accept a joint monarchy of Scotland (where William became William II) in a ceremony in London on 11 May. 
After this good start, however, William's progress in the north faltered. First, the Scottish estates proved far more willing than the English parliament to press its rights and take advantage of the crisis of monarchy. In April 1689 the convention approved two documents -- the 'claim of right' and the 'articles of grievance' -- which asserted a vigorous interpretation of parliamentary power, declared crown-appointed episcopacy intolerable, and demanded the abolition of the 'Lords of the Articles' (the committee of the estates dominated by royal ministers which approved the Scottish privy council's actions when the full parliament was not sitting). To William, these calls were outrageous. They cut away at the means by which he hoped to control Scotland, and he feared that radical calls for the abolition of bishops would worsen divisions in a nation riven between episcopalians and presbyterians. William did not, therefore, commit himself clearly to the claim or the articles when accepting the throne; he opposed the translation of their demands into parliamentary legislation throughout 1689; and briefly tried to distract Scots with suggestions for a parliamentary union with England. Yet while the king's displeasure was clear, his political weakness was also obvious. Over the summer and autumn the estates blocked any vote of supply and threatened to make the kingdom ungovernable. As a result William was forced into a humiliating retreat. Although he had prorogued the parliament in anger on 2 August 1689, when it met again in March 1690 he conceded its demands. The Lords of the Articles were abolished along with episcopacy and the royal supremacy over the church, so that the final revolution settlement in Scotland proved far more damaging to William's formal power than that in England. 
A second development to trouble William in Scotland was a Jacobite rising. When Graham left the convention in April 1689 he did not limit himself to this protest, but rode north to raise the highland clans for the old king's cause. On 27 July his victory at Killiecrankie seemed to open up the lowlands to his forces, and only his death on the battlefield (which left the resistance leaderless) saved the fledgeling Edinburgh regime. Fortunately for William the Jacobites were decisively defeated at Dunkeld on 21 August, and this ended any threat to southern Scotland. However, resistance in some highland areas smouldered on until 1692, and was only ended by granting indemnities to clans who would swear loyalty, along with the treacherous slaughter of the MacDonalds at Glencoe. In general, therefore, the pattern of events in Scotland reflected the broader picture of William's securing control in the British Isles. At the metropolitan core, political acceptance of the new regime was surprisingly rapid and complete. This still meant, however, that extensive military action and political compromise were necessary to counter opposition elsewhere. 
William had invaded the Stuart realms in order to bring their resources into conflict with Louis XIV. While he had been preparing and executing his expedition, the need to do this had become even more pressing as the French king had resumed his eastward expansion. Ignoring William's threat to England, Louis had decided to try to cow the German princes by invading the Rhineland in the autumn of 1688, and had then declared war on the United Provinces once the recently emboldened Netherlands refused to acquiesce in his actions. Thus containment of France would have to remain William's priority, and it is therefore essential to describe his continuing military and diplomatic action against Versailles before examining his longer-term relations with his new subjects. In almost every area of domestic policy the king's decisions were shaped by the progress of his struggle, and the need to maintain support for it. 
The first stage in William's new attempt to stop French expansion was completed over the first half of 1689 as he mobilized most of Europe against his old enemy. His earliest success was with the United Provinces. Reassured that Britain would not be thrown into the scales against them, the states general held firm in the face of Louis's declaration of war. In fact, William had very little difficulty mobilizing the Netherlands in the years after 1689. The old peace party was disabled by Louis's intransigence; and although Fagel had died in 1688, robbing William of one of his ablest political allies in the provinces, the stadholder found a brilliant new pensionary in Anthonie Heinsius. This new agent managed Dutch politics successfully during William's long absences, consulting the Amsterdam regents sufficiently to keep them on board, and outmanoeuvring republican party factions in that city in the early 1690s. When Heinsius's skill was added to continued outpourings of Orange propaganda, and to the fact that the prince was no longer present to irritate the regents with his hauteur (he spent the bulk of his time after 1689 in England or at the battlefront in Flanders), William's dominance of Dutch politics was secure. 
Coronation in England, meanwhile, gave William a chance to press his new realm into the battle with Louis. Benefiting from horror that the French supported the Jacobite rising in Ireland, William persuaded the Westminster parliament to participate in the fight. On 5 May England declared war, and she was in turn joined by the other members of a 'grand alliance' (Scotland, Austria, Spain, Savoy, and many German states) which the stadholder-king negotiated over the next two months. This alliance determined to reduce France to her 1659 borders and agreed to block any future Bourbon claims to the throne of Spain by promoting the Austrian Habsburgs as rightful heirs to the Spanish empire when its ruler, Carlos II, died. 
After this early diplomatic success, however, things went badly. William was kept away from the European battlefield by English politics in 1689 and by the campaign in Ireland the next year, and during his absence the French defeated the English navy at Beachy Head in June 1690, and captured Fleurus in July. In 1691 William crossed back to the Netherlands for the first time since 1688. He received a triumphal welcome in The Hague that demonstrated a strong hold on Dutch public opinion, but his presence on the continent did not prevent the French taking Mons, and still worse catastrophes followed during his visits to Flanders over the next two years. In June 1692 the French captured Namur, despite the fact that 40,000 English troops were in Flanders with their king, and William's attempt to storm the French camp at Steenkerke on 3 August NS ended in disaster. In July 1693 the French army defeated William and inflicted 16,000 casualties at Landen, while in October they went on to capture Charleroi. 
The next two years saw a brief respite in the string of defeats. In 1694 William captured Huy, thus reversing most of Louis's gains of 1693, and on 5 September 1695 NS he managed to recapture Namur. However, by this stage war strains in England and the Netherlands were starting to show. Both countries endured heavy taxation and disruption to trade routes; Holland was experiencing an economic depression which led to rioting in Amsterdam in February 1696; and England was suffering a crisis of public credit and a collapse in confidence in a coinage devalued by clipping and the shipment of specie to Flanders. When these difficulties caused an effective cessation of payments to the army over the summer of 1696 it was clear the allied war effort could not continue much longer. As early as 1692 William had realized that his stated aim of reversing all of France's recent gains was impractical, and he had consequently begun four years of secret contacts with Louis to explore terms for a possible peace. In 1696 these feelers were taken seriously by a French king whose country was equally exhausted, and in May real bargaining started between Dijkvelt and Francois de Callieres -- though English and Dutch politicians were still not informed. The principle of a return to the territorial position of 1688 was quickly agreed but discussions dragged for months over whether and at what point Louis would have formally to accept William as king of the Stuart realms. As a result open diplomatic negotiations did not start until May 1697, and the treaty of Ryswick was not signed until September. Under this all territories captured by any side since 1688 were handed back; the Dutch were allowed to garrison eight 'barrier' fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands; Louis promised not to aid William's enemies and finally recognized him as rightful king in London; and the town of Orange was handed back to its ruling prince. 
Although some of the terms of the Ryswick peace were useful to William, it is hard not to regard the settlement as a disappointment for him on a scale comparable to 1678. He had been forced to stop fighting before France was definitely defeated; Louis had kept most of his recent gains; French recognition of William was rapidly called into question as it became clear James would not be ejected from his lodgings near Paris; and, most frustratingly, the issue of the Spanish succession was left out of the treaty, keeping open the possibility that the Bourbons would gain a massive prize on Carlos II's death. As if to underline William's failure, his plans to keep up a large English army to threaten and contain Louis were thwarted by a war-weary Westminster parliament in the two years after the peace. Arguing that a standing army was a drain on national resources and a threat to English liberties, MPs used their powers to cut the forces to 7000 men by the end of 1699 -- far too small a figure to impress foreign powers. 
As a result of these reversals William entered the post-Ryswick world greatly weakened. Therefore, when he was faced with the problem of what to do about Spain he resorted to diplomacy, rather than military threat, to try to contain the French. Relying on Louis's own reluctance to go back to war after a long bruising conflict, William used Heinsius and his new confidant, Arnold Joost van Keppel, to approach Versailles with offers to divide the Spanish empire. Without consulting his wartime allies, or the domestic governments of either Britain or the Netherlands, William negotiated the first partition treaty (1 October 1698). This proposed to grant Spain, the Indies, and the Spanish Netherlands to Joseph Ferdinand, the electoral prince of Bavaria, while compensating the French with Naples and Tuscany and the Austrians with Milan. When this deal was undone four months later by the death of the electoral prince, William renegotiated, again consulting no one outside his immediate circle. The second partition treaty (15 March 1700) granted to the Bourbons Spain's Italian possessions and gave the rest of her empire to the Austrian emperor's second son on the understanding that the main branch of the Habsburg family would never inherit them. 
At first sight the partition treaties seemed to offer a chance for a new beginning in relations between Louis and William. Twice in two years the old enemies had concluded agreements which would have allowed the English king to contain his French counterpart without further European warfare. Unfortunately, however, circumstances soon swept the two men back towards conflict. Partition was popular nowhere outside the monarchs' courts, and the principle was soon effectively dead. While English and Dutch politicians were angry that they had been kept in the dark during the negotiations and were worried that the French had been granted too much power in the Mediterranean, partition was effectively scuppered by the refusal of either the Spanish or Austrian governments to accept it. Consequently, when Carlos finally died in October 1700, leaving his entire inheritance to Louis's second grandson, Philip of Anjou, the French monarch accepted the will. With Spain and Austria against partition, Versailles realized that imposing the superseded treaty would bring war as certainly as betraying William, and braced itself against the stadholder-king's anger. 
William's initial response to French actions was to try to rescue partition. In spring 1701 he offered terms to Louis, under which Philip could keep Spain and the Indies, if the Austrians could be compensated with old Spanish territories in Italy. In April he even recognized Philip as king of Spain. Yet in the end Louis's intransigence killed this compromise, and William was forced to try to remobilize the grand alliance. At first this was difficult. Although Austria was willing to fight for her claims on the Spanish empire, and the Dutch remained solid behind their captain-general, others were less committed. Many Spaniards were happy to accept Philip as monarch; the German princes were still wary of war; and much of the English parliament thought the accession of a separate, cadet, branch of the Bourbons to the whole Spanish empire was better than granting its Italian possessions to the main branch as partition had done. However, despite this inauspicious start, actions by Louis over 1701 steadily consolidated his old foes behind William. In February French troops occupied the Dutch barrier fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands and in September, on the death of James II, Louis reversed the position he had taken at Ryswick and recognized the exiled monarch's son as rightful king of England. Consequently William was able to pull the old alliance slowly back towards war. In April 1701 the English Commons voted to support the Dutch in the face of French threat, and on 12 June the same body voted to restore the old wartime alliances with Austria and the United Provinces. In The Hague on 7 September NS William formally achieved this restoration with the second grand alliance. Under this the British kingdoms, the Netherlands, and the empire agreed to seek a Habsburg succession to Spain. They also agreed to seek further allies to pursue these goals, and that war would have to ensue if they could not be secured by diplomacy. Thus by the time William died in March 1702 he had placed Europe back on the road to military action against France. 
As William tried to contain Louis in Europe he faced quite as difficult a challenge in maintaining English support for that containment. Unless he could preserve his new realm's early willingness to counter French ambitions, his entire continental strategy would be in danger. English resources were vital to his military efforts: England's armed preparedness was essential to maintain any credible diplomatic pressure on Versailles. 
Unfortunately, maintaining England's commitment was not easy. Most demandingly, William was faced with persuading the Westminster parliament to back his policies. Not only had the events of 1688-9 boosted legislators' confidence about their place in the polity, it was obvious that the new king could not rule without parliament, since it would have to consent to the taxes needed to finance his war. Moreover, political circumstances made it difficult to unite parliamentarians behind an aggressive foreign policy in the 1690s. At a basic level, William's origins raised suspicions that the king had Dutch rather than English interests at heart. Throughout the reign parliamentary speeches voiced concern that England had been tricked into conflict which could not benefit her, but merely served Holland's security. Moreover, William's war stoked renewed legislative fears of court corruption and arbitrary power. Because conflict gave the king huge revenues and vast armies, many feared English liberty would be lost to military coercion or political bribery, and some referred back to William's early behaviour in the United Provinces to suggest that he might try to rule unchecked. Finally, party battles threatened any united support for the king's policies. Bitter rivalry between whigs and tories survived 1689; as a result factional enemies could be relied upon to stir up trouble for any statesmen co-operating with William. 
The king's response to these difficulties can be described in terms of three main strategies. First, to convince the English that containing Louis was essential, he embarked on a wide-ranging propaganda campaign. Centring on royal speeches to parliament, sermons, pamphlets, and a series of fasts and thanksgivings, this sought to convince the English that opposing the French was both their protestant duty (since Louis was an antichristian persecutor), and in their prudential interest (since the French king was also potential 'universal monarch', ambitious to destroy the autonomy of all other nations). Second, to reduce parliamentary suspicion of the court, William attempted to win confidence by defusing points of tension between the executive and the legislature. Although he was occasionally outraged that parliament 'used him like a dog' (Foxcroft, 2.207), and although he had a personal preference for retaining the old prerogatives of the crown, William had learned in the Netherlands that co-operation with powerful representative assemblies was the only viable policy. He thus allowed parliament to examine areas of executive expenditure and action which it had never scrutinized before, and he retreated -- at least ultimately -- in the face of its campaigns to limit his powers. Finally, to deal with party battles the king made it clear he would never become a prisoner of one faction. He refused to countenance witch-hunts by one grouping against the other (especially discouraging retrospective investigations into politicians' actions before 1689), and he made it clear that the way was always open for oppositions to come back into office if they could offer more effective leadership of the war and parliament. 
On accepting the crown William's task was to assemble an administration which could organize the conflict with Louis. At first he attempted to ease political tensions by sharing political prizes. He balanced one whig secretary of state, Shrewsbury, with a tory, Daniel Finch, earl of Nottingham, and, while he appointed many hot whigs to the administration, he also rewarded his old tory friend Danby with the lord presidency. Unfortunately, however, partisan rivalries rapidly destroyed this even-handed strategy, and soon had the king expressing outrage at ministers' attempts to undermine their colleagues. Although tories upset him by demanding a generous revenue for his sister-in-law Anne (who had set up a rival court to his own), whigs infuriated him even more with a series of attempts to prosecute tories for their actions under the king's two predecessors. As the king pressed an indemnity for past crimes to cool the political temperature, whigs demanded investigations of these transgressions -- so that by July 1689 the king had convinced himself that they were stirring up trouble in hopes of bringing in a republic. In these circumstances William began to abandon his earlier ties with the whigs, and confided ever more closely with the tory earl of Nottingham. By the start of 1690, when the whigs finally alienated the king by opposing his plans to join the war in Ireland, the alliance between the two men was complete. To the bitter denunciations of Nottingham's enemies (the whig comptroller of the household, Tom Wharton, went as far as to write to the king questioning his monarch's honesty), William swung behind the tories, and called a general election early in February 1690. Although breaking with earlier royal practice by refusing to use the court's influence to help his favoured politicians (the king was still determined to prove he was a monarch above party), the new parliament provided Nottingham with a working Commons majority, and the king made ministerial changes which removed many, though not all, whigs from office. 
The main problem for the new ministry was parliamentary suspicion of the executive. This had been apparent as early as 1689; then, fears about royal power had led the Commons to delay its customary grant of the revenue from customs and excise to the king for life, and suspicions continued through the early 1690s as the war continued to go badly. While the king finally secured a revenue settlement in spring 1690, this granted only customs for life and insisted that excise revenue be reviewed again in four years time. Similarly the period to the mid-decade was dominated by attempts to scale back royal influence over parliament through 'place' legislation to evict government employees from the Commons and 'triennial' legislation to force the king to call a new general election every three years. William's reaction to these campaigns was hostile. Determined to preserve traditional royal influence over the legislature, he mobilized supporters in the two houses to defeat place and triennial bills in 1692, and then used the royal veto on a triennial measure in 1693 and a place bill early the next year. The last incident almost led to a constitutional crisis. An outraged Commons sent an address to the king on 27 January 1694, accusing him of listening to 'the secret advice' of evil counsellors and suggesting he had no right to use his veto. William only just managed to calm matters on the last day of the month by responding that he would 'ever have a great regard for the advice of parliaments' -- an ambiguous phrase, but one accepted by at least a majority of the house as a promise not to reject bills again (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 5, 31 Jan 1694). 
Yet while William's attachment to the crown's old influence over parliament soured relations with that body, his strategy of co-operating with it wherever possible produced a more productive relationship in the field of public finance. As early as 28 June 1689 -- and pretty much unprompted -- William offered the Commons scrutiny of the public accounts. He wanted, he said, to prove 'how very little of the Revenue has been applied to any other Use, than that of the Navy and the Land forces' ('JHC', 10, 1688-1689, 200). This was an extraordinary move, inviting parliament into an area which had long been regarded as the monarch's private business. The next year William went further, floating the idea of a parliamentary commission of public accounts which would meet regularly to audit the government's activities. Although this body produced some damning accounts of financial mismanagement after it was established in 1691, it would be wrong to see it as the core of a 'country' opposition. It formed part of the king's strategy of working with parliament; it harnessed Commons suspicion of the executive to the useful task of rooting out waste and corruption in the management of the war, and William consequently thanked the commissioners for their work on even the most hostile reports. In the end, conciliation also won through in other areas. William calmly accepted the limitations of his 1690 revenue settlement; he allowed a triennial bill to pass in 1694; he permitted a series of parliamentary investigations into public servants between 1689 and 1696; and he co-operated with the establishment of the 'civil list' which effectively granted the Commons control of all finance except that sum needed to run the king's household and civil administration. Overall the king did enough to forestall any breakdown in relations between court and parliament. Legislative support for the war was remarkably solid. By 1695 parliament was voting over $4 million a year in tax revenue, and had begun to construct innovative systems of long-term funded government debt. 
However, if William's strategy of working with parliament saved his war effort, it could not save Nottingham's administration. Despite his guiding the country through William's early absences in Ireland and Flanders, the secretary of state was attacked mercilessly for presiding over the maladministrations uncovered by the Commons, and for the disastrous course of the war in the early 1690s. By 1693 his position was so weak that even the king began to realize the unpopularity of his trusted minister might damage support for the conflict. William consequently asked for Nottingham's resignation on 6 November, though he told him he was convinced of the earl's 'fidelity and zeal to his service' (Horwitz, 146). By this time the king was turning back towards a group of court or junto whigs led by Sir John Somers, who had tried to gain his favour by abandoning destructive factional posturing. Encouraged by the advice of Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland -- a man who had been a close adviser to James and so himself benefited from William's determination not to damn people for their political pasts -- the king began to see this group as a ministry which might control the Commons. Consequently he appointed Somers lord keeper early in 1693, and brought back many other whigs -- along with Sunderland himself -- following Nottingham's dismissal. By the end of 1695 even William's old ally Danby had been eased out, and in February 1696 a failed Jacobite assassination plot against William weakened the tories further. As always, the conspiracy was discovered before it presented any real threat to the king, but it did give the whigs an opportunity to benefit from a surge of support for the endangered monarch. An 'association' was drawn up in the Commons promising vengeance on William's enemies, but many tories found they could not sign it because it referred to the king as 'rightful and lawful', and would therefore force them beyond 'de facto' loyalty ('House of Lords MSS', new ser., 2.204). Despite the king's discouragement of the association movement (he was still determined not to anathematize either party), whigs used the opportunity to denounce their rivals as crypto-Jacobites, and winkled them out of many national and local offices. 
Yet while the whigs appeared to have triumphed, their position was no more secure than Nottingham's had been, given William's willingness to look to another party if his ministers failed to promote his containment of Louis. Indeed, since the king's personal relations with the junto (except Somers) were cool, it is arguable that they were on even shakier ground. It was, therefore, no surprise when they were removed in 1699 after years of declining success in delivering the king's policies. 
The whigs' central problem was that, like Nottingham, they could not dispel suspicion of the court's ambition in the House of Commons. This became particularly apparent in 1697, when the junto had to defend William's unpopular desire for a peacetime standing army. After the treaty of Ryswick the king was determined to contain Louis by retaining an effective English force of about 35,000 men. In his speech opening parliament on 3 December 1697 he stated that England could not be 'safe' without a substantial military capability ('JHL', 16, 1696-1701, 174). A 'new country' opposition, however, disagreed. Now led by Robert Harley, and bringing together tories and dissident whigs, it argued that a standing army would be an expensive threat to English liberties. Capitalizing on popular hostility to the military, Harley launched a series of parliamentary attacks on the junto, and succeeded in cutting troop numbers to just 10,000 by the end of the 1697/8 session. 
The court's response to this assault was confused, and fatally soured relations between king and ministers. William, incensed that his judgement was being questioned in an area vital to his struggle with France, adopted an unusually intransigent attitude. He continued to demand large forces in speeches to parliament; he refused to allow the whigs to suggest 15,000 soldiers as a compromise figure in the debates of 1697-8; and over the summer of 1698 he attempted to defy parliament by hiding troops in the Irish establishment and among the officer corps. As a result the Commons reassembled in the autumn of 1698 in even more belligerent mood. On discovering that William had retained 14,834 men rather than 10,000, it voted to reduce numbers by another 3000, and so outraged the king still further. During the session William refused to allow his ministers to argue for 10,000, and started to talk of leaving England, perhaps permanently. On 29 December he told Somers he intended to leave England since the nation entertained such 'distrust and jealousies of him' ('Private and Original Correspondence of... Shrewsbury', 572-3). Over the next month Somers was able to talk William back into his more usual policy of bowing to parliament, so that the king's speech on 1 February 1699 accepted army disbandment on the ground that rupture between monarch and legislature was even 'more fatal' than leaving the kingdom undefended ('JHL', 16, 1696-1701, 372). Unfortunately, however, the lord chancellor could not improve relations between monarch and junto. In 1698 the king had shown his disgust at the whigs' failure to save the army by refusing to support them in the general election of that year. In 1699 he calmly accepted the resignations of leading junto figures frightened of Commons impeachment if they stayed in office, and on 27 April 1700 dismissed even Somers after the minister had failed to stop parliament reconfiscating lands in Ireland which the king had granted to his supporters. 
The loss of the whigs left William without a strong ministerial team. On past practice the king would have turned to the tories, but in 1699-1700 he delayed, angry at that party's role in disbanding his forces. Consequently junto ministers were replaced by stopgaps. Quite rapidly, however, the king's strategy of working with anyone who could work with him (whatever even their recent past) won through. Over the winter of 1699-1700 Harley gained credit for piloting the king's supply through the Commons from the back-benches as the junto administration collapsed, and William was consequently converted to negotiations with tories. By December 1700 the king had concluded a deal under which Harley's allies Laurence Hyde, first earl of Rochester, and Sidney Godolphin would gain major posts in the administration; parliament would be dissolved to try to increase the number of supporters of the new ministry; and the king would support Harley's campaign for the speakership of the Commons when it reconvened. The fruits of this deal came in the spring of 1701. Harley was elected to the chair in February, and then piloted through the 'Act of Settlement', which finally blasted the hopes of the exiled Stuarts. The act stated that should both William and Anne die without heirs -- now a virtual certainty, since the death of Anne's only surviving child, William, duke of Gloucester, in July 1700 -- the throne would pass to the Hanoverian electors. 
Yet again, however, William's co-operation with his new ministry was no guarantee that he would not look back towards the alternative party as soon as trouble arose. As the French threat re-emerged in the last months of the king's life, the whigs positioned themselves as the people most enthusiastic to return to war, and so began to appeal to a monarch who found his own country-tory ministers still worried about the advantages which conflict handed to the court. Urging a vigorous response to Louis's occupation of the barrier fortresses, the junto looked more natural allies of the king than an administration which counselled caution and denounced agitation outside parliament for a return to battle. Worse still, in April 1701 the tories offended William by attempting to impeach leading junto whigs for negotiating the partition treaties. This was not only grossly unfair -- since the ministers had known almost nothing about the king's diplomacy -- but also questioned the king's judgement in foreign policy. As a result William began to wonder if he was backing the correct party, and once again consulted Sunderland. The earl urged one last swing back to the whigs, and by October 1701 the king was negotiating with Somers. In November parliament was dissolved on request from the junto, and William was in the process of constructing a new whig ministry when he died. 
Read quickly, this account of William's role in politics at Westminster might seem little but a dizzying record of ministerial reshuffles and royal spats with parliament. Underneath this, however, there was a greater significance to his actions. The king's prioritization of the struggle against Louis in Europe meant that he was willing to accept changes in England which earlier kings would not have entertained. Lacking any real interest in English politics beyond the need to maintain the country's willingness to face France, the king gave up powers to parliament which the monarchy had long resisted surrendering, and showed an absence of personal grudges or favouritism unprecedented in the Stuart dynasty. As a result William's actions in the 1690s remodelled the constitution and the political process, perhaps more completely than the revolution of 1688. By 1702 the king's determination to avoid fights with his legislature which might disrupt the war effort had handed over key elements, the 'flowers', of the prerogative, including control of royal expenditure and of the size of the army, and the right to call and dissolve parliament at will. Similarly, the king's willingness to work with any team of ministers who would lead the struggle against Louis had done much to regularize factional struggle into a working party system. Once it was clear William would not use the court's power to attack political opponents, and would always be looking for alternative parties which might be more effective in government, the rules of political engagement changed. The route to power no longer lay through dominating the royal court and hoping to use it to destroy enemies. Rather, it became the responsible demonstration that a party could provide more effective administration than its rivals, that it was better able to manage the parliaments which could scupper that project, and therefore that it had built political alliances and won elections. In these ways a foreign king with foreign priorities broke the cycle of political instability into which England had fallen in the seventeenth century. Once there was a king whose main attention was focused outside the realm, monarchy found ways to work with legislators, and parties found more peaceful ways of trying to win power. 
Once William had secured control of Scotland and Ireland his dealings with them followed a remarkably similar pattern. In both kingdoms he worked for a rapid end to any close personal involvement in order to free himself to organize the war in Flanders. His strategy for achieving this was to entrust royal policy to local politicians. He hoped that these would manage local parliaments, which in turn would provide enough appearance of consultation to secure supply and avoid any dangerous build-up of grievances. Unfortunately, however, this neat plan failed in both Scotland and Ireland -- and for very similar reasons. From Dublin and Edinburgh the king's strategy looked like neglect. This was especially true as the monarch in London could not afford to offend his European allies or the Westminster legislature (as it was his greatest source of finance), and so sometimes had to sacrifice the interests of the northern and western kingdoms to placate others. As a result the 1690s saw growing hostility to William's rule. In both Scotland and Ireland, factional enemies of the king's ministers took up a 'country' rhetoric which accused administrations of absolutism, corruption, and bowing to England's demands. 
This pattern emerged in Scotland as early as 1689. Then, William's attempts to fend off the claim of right and articles of grievance had been weakened by the structural difficulties of Scottish politics. The central problem was that the country was divided into many bitterly opposed factions. As a result, when the king appointed a minister to a plum job, all that person's rivals would be alienated. They would band together in parliamentary opposition and would garner support by adopting a country position. Exactly this happened to the king's first lord high commissioner, William Hamilton, duke of Hamilton. As Hamilton tried to preserve the royal prerogative over the summer of 1689, his enemies coalesced into the 'Club' which denied supply until the demands of the claim and articles were met. The king solved this difficulty by dismissing Hamilton and appointing George Melville, Lord Melville, to offer concessions in 1690, but this obviously left the danger that a similar train of events would occur every time a chief minister was appointed. In the early 1690s the nightmare was realized. The king had to give up successive servants when they were attacked for mishandling religious tensions, for their parts in the Glencoe massacre, or for their toadying to an English-dominated court. One possible solution to this instability, circulating within the Edinburgh administration from the winter of 1689/90, was that William go to Scotland himself to flatter the faction leaders. This, however, was never attempted. The king's attentions were always directed towards securing victory on the battlefields of Ireland and Flanders, and on pleasing the purse-carrying Westminster Commons, and he was determined not to be distracted from these arenas by affairs in Edinburgh. Nothing, therefore, stemmed factional skulduggery or the growth of anti-English, anti-Williamite, and country sentiments. 
William's problems in holding his northern kingdom were neatly encapsulated by the controversy surrounding the Company of Scotland. This body was founded in 1695 to allow Scots to trade overseas, but as it pursued its commercial expansion, and especially when it launched a plan for a commercial colony on the Darien isthmus in Central America, William was forced to oppose it. The English Commons protested against commercial competition from Scotland, while the Darien scheme outraged the king's Spanish allies, on whose territories the colony would be illegally planted. Consequently William sacrificed his Scottish subjects in order to pursue his conflict with Louis XIV. In 1695 he sacked the ministers who had approved the foundation of the company, muttering he had been 'ill-served' in Scotland (Riley, 99). Later he thwarted the company's attempt to raise money on European stock markets by informing investors in Hamburg that it was 'an Affront to his Royal Authority' ('Memorial Given'), and in 1699 he ordered his governor in Jamaica to give no aid to the Darien colonists, with the result that the settlement was a disastrous failure. Reaction in Edinburgh was predictable. Popular anti-English sentiment grew and factional enemies of the new high commissioner, James Douglas, second duke of Queensberry, exploited it. Consequently William faced a series of stormy parliamentary sessions between 1698 and 1701, in which supply was in constant danger and in which Queensberry maintained control only by massive use of patronage and strategic prorogations. 
Ireland too was a scene of parliamentary discontent in the 1690s. Problems here again stemmed from the priority of English and European interests in the king's mind. The first source of discontent was the treaty of Limerick. As William's commanders tried to mop up Jacobite resistance in the west of Ireland in 1691 it became clear that a long operation could only be avoided by offering generous terms to the rebels. Accordingly the king decided to free his troops for Flanders by agreeing that those Jacobites who chose not to leave for France (and those under their protection) could keep their estates and could exercise the religious freedoms they had enjoyed under Charles II. For the Irish protestants represented in parliament, this was outrageous -- the Limerick terms sacrificed their security by allowing Catholic Jacobites to live and worship unmolested, and demonstrated that the king was more interested in his European war than in loyal Irish subjects. As a result of protestant anger the legislative sessions of the 1690s ran beyond William's control. In 1692 his first parliament ended in less than a month, with only insufficient supply granted and a blow to William's diplomatic honour. One clause of the Limerick treaty had bound the king to use his 'utmost endeavour' to have it ratified, but the mood in parliament prevented his even raising the issue. The parliament of 1695 went better -- but only because the lord lieutenant, Henry Capel, Baron Capel, surrendered the initiation of money bills, remained silent about Limerick, and accepted the first penal law against Catholics in contravention of the treaty's spirit. Only in 1697 did William dare ask the parliament to confirm the deal he had struck in 1691. Even then he had to accept further penal legislation, and a further erosion of his reputation when the ratification ignored earlier promises on religious freedom and the rights of those who had been under Jacobite protection. 
After this session bitter new issues arose between William and his Irish protestant subjects. First, in May 1699 the Westminster legislature attempted to protect the English sheep industry by banning the import of Irish wool. William accepted the 'Woollens Act' to placate a body in full cry against his army, even though it damaged a vital part of the Irish economy. Second, in April 1700 William avoided tension in London by assenting to a resumptions act which reconfiscated Irish estates originally forfeited by Jacobites and subsequently granted by the king to his protestant allies. In both cases Irish public opinion railed against English claims to legislate for Ireland. Pamphlets and petitions implied the king had sacrificed Ireland for English gold, and William found he dared not call his Irish parliament again before he died. 
In the end, therefore, William's handling of the legislatures in Edinburgh and Dublin was far less successful than his dealings with the assembly in Westminster. Whereas in England the king's rule provided solutions to the structural problems of politics, in Scotland and Ireland it merely underlined the difficulties of ruling parliamentary polities at a distance. William had to rule through parliaments in Dublin and Edinburgh because he needed supply. He could not, however, go in person to manage them, or redress their central grievances, because of his priorities in Flanders and Westminster. As a result local ministries merely provoked factional rivalry to add to national and 'country' sentiment, so that by the last years of the reign radical action to end instability was being urged. By the late 1690s William himself returned to urging parliamentary union between England and Scotland, while Irish politicians debated the merits of union or of autonomy under the crown as routes out of political chaos. 
William's personal faith was profound if simple. At its foundation lay a deep piety which drove him to attend prayers at least once a day, to follow regimes of close spiritual self-examination, and to share in his wife's efforts to make the English court a more godly and chapel-centred institution. Upon this firm base the king's religion rested on three principal pillars. First, he retained a basic belief in the Calvinist doctrine, plain worship, and presbyterian government of the Dutch Reformed church. William remained a practising member of that congregation whenever in the Netherlands; he was initially disappointed that his wife continued to worship according to Anglican rites and at Torbay in 1688 he asked Gilbert Burnet what that Arminian thought of Calvinist predestination now he had seen God's blessing on the prince's expedition ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.789). Second, and notwithstanding his commitment to the Dutch form of faith, William believed that religion should never be imposed by persecution. He urged religious toleration in all the countries in which he had influence; he employed a wide range of denominations in his armies and administrative service -- including even Catholics and Jews; and in 1689 he objected to a phrase in the Scottish coronation oath binding him to root out heresy until it was explained that the clause was an empty form of words. Third, William had a strong sense of his providential role. Although always careful to reject the notion that heaven had sent him to conquer Europe for reformed Christianity (for example, his 1688 manifesto avoided whipping up protestant crusading sentiment), he at least believed that the deity had charged him with saving the continent from Louis XIV's brand of persecuting Catholicism. He therefore allowed his propagandists in both Holland and England to paint him as the almost millennial saviour of the faith and told the English fleet in 1688 that he was intervening to preserve their religion 'the total ruine of which in these kingdomes is designed as itt is already accomplisht in France' (Herbert). 
However, while these beliefs ran deep with the stadholder-king, circumstances meant that William had to compromise them in individual situations. In particular, his overriding concern with defeating Louis ensured that he would be prepared to abandon any promotion of Dutch reformed orthodoxy, or even to dilute his commitment to toleration, if these ideals might alienate people who would otherwise join in the struggle against France. For example, William was helped to power in the United Provinces by the preaching of the pro-Orange Calvinist wing of the Dutch church. Once it became clear, however, that this alliance strengthened opposition to the stadholder among more 'liberal' Dutchmen, William reached out to other sections of spiritual opinion, and from the 1680s deliberately balanced strains of faith in his appointments. In England similarly he showed flexibility. Although his first advisers on religion were dissenting whigs who shared his commitment to toleration and advocated a Dutch-style church, William changed tack on realizing that support for dissenters antagonized the Anglican majority in his new realm. From the first, allies warned him he must make a visible commitment to the Church of England by being seen at its services. William took this advice, attending Anglican worship as early as his sojourn in Exeter in November 1688 and flattering the London clergy on arrival in the capital. A few months later he shifted even more decisively towards Anglicanism after his first intervention in English ecclesiastical politics had ended in disaster. On 16 March 1689 William appealed to the House of Commons to abandon the religious tests which kept non-Anglicans out of public office. This enraged a large group of MPs, who began to threaten the king's hold over the parliament, and forced William to abandon his dissenting allies. From March the king began taking advice on ecclesiastical affairs from the committed Anglican Nottingham and, although the king's advocacy secured a limited toleration act in April, he effectively gave up hope of further concessions to nonconformity. Instead he spent the autumn flattering the established church and assuring it that its protection was his highest priority. After 1689 the king never again questioned the 'Test Acts'; he continued to attend Anglican services regularly (even sitting through implicitly anti-Calvinist sermons), and left churchmen to run their own affairs. Until 1694 Mary -- who was a loyal and pious member of the Church of England -- handled ecclesiastical policy; after her death William rubber-stamped the injunctions of a commission of leading bishops. 
In Scotland and Ireland, too, William's personal religious preferences were sacrificed to political priorities. In the northern kingdom William had hoped for a generous religious settlement which would satisfy his commitment to toleration, and might unite all shades of religious opinion behind his rule. Once it became clear, however, that much of the Scottish episcopalian clergy had sympathies with Jacobitism, and once the country opposition began using hostility to prelates to whip up resentment against English influence, the king was forced to conciliate the rigid presbyterians. In June 1689 he gave his assent to the act abolishing episcopacy, and despite writing to the general assembly of the kirk in October 1690 asking it for 'moderation' in its dealings with the episcopal clergy (NA Scot., CH1/1/12, fol. 19), the king did nothing as non-presbyterians were investigated, condemned for scandalous conduct, and deprived. Meanwhile, in Ireland the terms of the 1691 treaty of Limerick, granting a degree of religious freedom to Catholics, clearly gelled with William's general determination not to persecute. Once again, however, the king had to bend to political circumstance. As the Irish parliament expressed its opposition to any generous settlement with papists, William was forced to give way simply to retain any influence in the Dublin Commons. In 1695 he assented to an act disarming Catholics and forbidding them to own horses worth more than $5 or to send their children abroad for education. Two years later he accepted a bill banishing both the regular clergy and Catholic 'dignitaries' (a category which included bishops), and was forced to abandon the grant of religious freedom when the treaty of Limerick was ratified. Overall, therefore, William's political needs meant that he had limited opportunity to shape his realms according to his religious convictions, and forced him to be a rather different spiritual head in his various realms. A tolerant but committed member of the reformed church in the United Provinces, he became a pious Anglican in England, accepted a rigid presbyterian settlement in Scotland, and put his name to a penal code of intolerant legislation in his westernmost realm. 
William's union with Mary in London in 1677 was a political convenience. The prince had pursued it in hopes of gaining influence over English foreign policy, and had not formed any deep attachment to his fifteen-year-old bride. Predictably, therefore, the early years of the marriage passed with little emotional commitment from the prince. Within a short time of his return to The Hague, one of Mary's maids of honour, Elizabeth Villiers, may have 'intercepted his favour' sufficiently to become his mistress ('DNB'), and a further wedge was driven between the prince and his wife by his suspicion that she hoped to exercise the plenitude of royal power if she ever came to the throne in Britain. Mary's miscarriages in 1678 and 1679 also meant there were no children to cement bonds between the couple. 
Yet despite this dreadful start the marriage was ultimately a success. Mary fell deeply in love with William soon after the wedding, and after the princess confronted her husband about his relationship with Villiers in 1685 the prince became more discreet about his affair. Also, some time in 1686, Gilbert Burnet seems to have corrected William's misconceptions about Mary's political ambitions. After talking to the princess Burnet was able to tell her husband that she would resign all effective power to him were she ever to become queen of England. With such stumbling blocks removed the way to an effective partnership was clear. During his invasion of England William may have been careful to keep Mary out of the country until he was in control and she could not form an alternative focus for anti-Jacobite feeling, but he soon came to recognize her value in helping hold his new realm and quickly invited her to join him. As the article on her in this dictionary ['see 'Mary II] makes clear, William's wife could perform a large number of useful functions for the regime. The fact that Mary was English, and was the daughter of the displaced king, helped to ease local scruples about accepting a foreign monarch with a relatively weak hereditary claim. The queen also soothed fears about the fate of the Church of England under William, and rapidly proved an asset in the field of public relations. Her open character helped her husband build a welcoming court; her piety enabled him to construct an image of a godly royal household; and her active attempts to present the monarchy as an engine of moral reform served as a centrepiece of government propaganda. Finally, Mary proved useful during William's absences in Ireland and Flanders in the early 1690s. Although the queen was reluctant to take up executive responsibilities, she was the obvious person to govern while the king was abroad and she guided England through successive difficult summers between 1690 and 1694. In these periods her loyalty to her husband, and especially her refusal to take any but urgent decisions before consulting him by letter, ensured continuity. Such steadfast service eventually had personal as well as political consequences. When Mary died from smallpox on 28 December 1694 it became clear how attached her husband had become to her. For nearly a month he was inconsolable, and he organized an impressive funeral. His grief was well placed. It is arguable that the increasing difficulty William found in preserving support for his policies after 1695 stemmed from the loss of his popular consort. 
Outside his marriage William's sexuality was, and has remained, controversial. It is probable that Elizabeth Villiers continued as his mistress until Mary's death, at which point she was put aside. The king -- counselled by an admonitory Archbishop Thomas Tenison -- came to believe that the queen's loss was a punishment for his sins, and resolved to amend his personal life. What has been far less clear is the nature of his relationship with his two closest friends. Jacobite propaganda, and much contemporary gossip, accused William of homosexual liaisons -- first with Bentinck (who was made earl of Portland once in England), and after 1695 with the handsome courtier Keppel, who seems to have displaced Portland in William's affections. Historians will probably never know the truth of these accusations. It can be said that William was very close to both men and frequently stayed up late into the night with them. It is also true that the king's apartments interconnected with his friends' during their successive periods of favour, and that Portland wrote to William in 1697 telling him he must break with Keppel because his behaviour was fuelling allegations of unnatural vice (Japikse, 1.1.198-9). However, there are other explanations for the relationships. Portland had been a long-standing ally of the prince, whose wife William enquired about with affection. Keppel was a faithful servant who shared the king's passions for hunting and warfare. As for the other evidence: interconnecting apartments were appropriate for men who served as the king's private secretaries; Portland's letter can be put down to jealousy of a factional rival; and other parts of the case such as Burnet's reference to a secret royal vice 'of one sort' ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 1.439), or supposedly homoerotic ceiling decorations in the king's bedchamber at Hampton Court (Antonio Verrio's 'Endymion in the Arms of Morpheus' in the great bedchamber), are highly circumstantial. Thus although the argument is not proved that the king was too busy dictating letters late in the evenings to engage in same-sex affairs (Baxter, 'William III', 352), nor is there clear evidence that he ever did get involved in them. The most important thing about William's private life remained his close relationship with his wife. Without Mary's support in presenting the new regime, the king would have met with less success. 
Comparing William's style of kingship to that of his recent predecessors it would be easy to argue that 1688 marked a revolution in the image of monarchy at least as profound as that in its prerogative power. William had ideological reasons for scaling down monarchical splendour which might suggest he was consciously working towards a plain, perhaps even bourgeois, style of kingship. He was from the Netherlands, a republic which had rejected regal magnificence; he was aware that the English had just reacted against a Stuart dynasty they suspected of self-aggrandizement; and he wished to distance himself from Louis XIV, a man whose public image was marked by glorifications of his absolute power. Added to this was the personal reticence which made William reluctant to act as the focus of a glittering court life. Never a socialite, the king was uncomfortable among the English (a nation whose mores and sense of humour he never quite fathomed); he found life in smoky London unbearable because of a respiratory complaint; and his favoured pastimes -- hunting, art connoisseurship, and adultery -- he pursued with only a few close companions. 
The impact of all these influences on the presentation of monarchy were noticeable. After 1688 there was less glitter surrounding the ruler; there was less sense that the court was the cultural and social centre of the realm; and there was less grandiose suggestion of the semi-divinity of the king. For example, William abandoned the practice of touching for scrofula. This ceremony, which had suggested the miraculous powers of monarchs to cure disease, was particularly unsuitable for a post-revolutionary ruler. Similarly, William stressed his service to the nation in every public statement. His speeches, especially those to parliament, were full of deference to legislators, promising them from the first that he would 'never do any thing that may lessen your good opinion of me' ('JHL', 14, 1685-1691, 128). Again, monarchical extravagance was scaled down. The king lived for much of his reign in the domestic suites he built for himself at Kensington and Hampton Court, rather than entertaining lavishly at Whitehall, and his propaganda stressed the taxpayers' money was used for national defence, not on 'sumptuous Palaces' ('Short Reflections', 25). Major projects to enhance monarchy were rejected as too expensive or too absolutist in style. Sir Christopher Wren's blueprints for wholesale redevelopment at Hampton Court (in 1689) and Whitehall (in 1698 after the old palace was destroyed by fire) were never adopted, and this left Greenwich Hospital, which was for the use of naval heroes rather than the king, the most impressive architectural achievement of the day. In fact, so pinched was William's style of rule that it began to occasion critical comment. Retreat from a visible court in Westminster to isolated rural seats fed rumours of homosexuality and entrapment by evil counsellors (Sir Charles Sedley told the Commons that courtiers kept the king at Kensington 'as in a box' ('Parliamentary Diary of Narcissus Luttrell', 55)), while close advisers became worried that the king was harming himself by his lack of spectacle, visibility, and social grace. In 1689 Burnet complained to William's face that he was too reserved and private for his new subjects. When cut off by the monarch, he immediately retired to his closet to finish his observations by letter: the incident cooled relations between the two men for several months (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. D.24, fol. 211). 
Yet for all that has been said, it would be a mistake to portray William as rejecting regal grandeur completely. The United Provinces may have been a republic but the Orange family were hereditary princes who had married repeatedly into royalty, and who had maintained courtly magnificence and regal distinction from the rest of the Dutch population. It was unlikely, therefore, that William would utterly abjure personal grandeur. In the Netherlands he insisted on ceremony and etiquette which emphasized his elevated position, and built himself an impressive -- if not grandiose -- house and gardens at Het Loo. In England too the new king preserved much of the majesty of 'his majesty'. For example, he reversed the cuts in the numbers of court personnel which had been made under James II, and much of the ritual life surrounding the English king was preserved. The coronation, attendance at lord mayor's shows, and triumphal celebrations after military victories were staged as lavishly as ever, and some regal ceremonial was actually expanded. The frequency of parliamentary sessions in the 1690s meant that royal openings of the legislature occurred far more regularly than ever before and the new open piety of the court meant that the monarch's daily visits to chapel became more visible affairs involving greater numbers of courtiers. Similarly, the 1694 funeral for Queen Mary -- including the attendance of the entire Commons and Lords, and the draping of the funeral route with $50,000 worth of black cloth -- was the largest yet staged. 
Cultural magnificence, too, was not as curtailed as may have been implied. William attracted leading English artists to his court, including the musician Henry Purcell, the painter Godfrey Kneller, the architect Christopher Wren, and the woodcarver Grinling Gibbons. He also indulged his passion for connoisseurship by enhancing and displaying the Royal Collection of paintings in his residences. While under his patronage the Chapel Royal became a leading force in the production of English sermons. Again, building at Hampton Court -- pushed forward under Mary in 1689-94 and renewed in 1698 after the burning of Whitehall -- may have been on a smaller scale than Wren's original plans but, with a richly decorated new courtyard, was still prodigious. Outside the palace extensive gardens dominated the landscape and demonstrated the wealth of the king through elaborate parterres, 'wildernesses', and fountains. Moreover, the whole palace spoke allegorically of William's royal status and providential elevation to rule. An iconographic scheme based on Hercules, who was endlessly encountered in garden sculptures, wall decorations, and paintings, reminded viewers of William's descent from Henri IV of France (for whom Hercules had been a favoured symbol) and of the king's role as a divinely chosen godly champion. Thus, while William avoided the regal dazzle of Henry VIII, or Charles I, he nevertheless cut a more impressive figure than any 'bourgeois' monarchy would allow. 
In popular folklore William is supposed to have died after his horse tripped over a molehill. The incident for years after allowed Jacobites to toast the vanquishing creature as 'the little gentleman in black velvet'. Sadly for romance, the story is only partly true. Certainly William's horse stumbled on 21 February 1702 and the king broke a collarbone in the fall. However, he made a steady recovery from his injuries in the next couple of weeks, and was soon back conducting business, if not appearing in public. It was only on 5 March that the true cause of death -- a pulmonary fever -- became evident. The king collapsed after walking in the gallery of Kensington House, weakened rapidly, and became convinced on the 7th that he was dying. He died on the morning of the 8th, having been attended in his final hours by his spiritual adviser Tenison, his close counsellor Burnet, and his still squabbling friends Keppel and Bentinck. 
The privy council buried William privately in Westminster Abbey on the night of 12 April. In the British and Irish realms he was succeeded by his sister-in-law Anne, but in the Netherlands he was denied his wish that his cousin, John William Friso, stadholder of Friesland and Groningen, inherit his political offices. The Provinces had remained loyal to William's war policy in the 1690s but, despite earlier declarations that his position was hereditary, enough republican sentiment remained in the Low Countries to block any accession of a cadet branch of the Orange family. The stadholderships of William's provinces, and the federal military offices, were therefore left vacant. William's will was opened in The Hague on 12 May. It bestowed a large legacy on Keppel but gave the bulk of the personal estate to John William Friso. 
William's subsequent reputation has been patchy, but generally muted. For centuries he has been exalted by the protestants of Ireland. Eighteenth-century commemorations of William's 1690 campaign solidified later into badges of Ulster protestant identity and as a result the king has been celebrated in the northern province in wall paintings, banners, processions, and the Orange order. In Scotland, England, and Wales, by contrast, the king has received little honour. He has not been greatly lauded, despite exerting himself in ways which usually earn lionization from the British: opposing a continental threat and acting to establish a parliamentary constitution. His disappearance began almost immediately. The monuments the privy council planned for the king in Westminster Abbey, and in some 'public place' (Luttrell, 'Brief Historical Relation', 5.154), were never erected, and the political nation seemed willing to forget him under Queen Anne. 
Subsequently English and Scottish commentators remained unenthusiastic. To be sure some early writers praised William greatly, especially those such as Burnet and Paul de Rapin Thoyras who had been intimately connected with his cause. After this, however, there were few Georgian panegyrics, and while Thomas Babington Macaulay made him the hero of 1688 in his youthful writings, by the time he came to write his 'History of England' (1848) this worship had abated. The 'History''s William is still admirable, but it was the parliamentary politicians, finally coming to their senses in the convention, who truly laid the foundations for English greatness. In the twentieth century enthusiasm was cooled further by the sense that William had cared little for his British realms. That was the burden of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' article (1900), reinforced by G. M. Trevelyan's observation that William had come to England in 'cold judgement' of his European interests (Trevelyan, 54), and confirmed in the historiographic outburst at the tercentenary of 1688 which tended to present the revolution as a Dutch invasion (see especially Israel, 'Dutch role'). William thus went for 300 years with few champions, and the king remains a shadowy figure in British perceptions in the early twenty-first century. Public houses explicitly named after William III are vastly outnumbered by those celebrating the far less significant William IV, and the present author still has to explain who William was, when he lived, and what he got up to, when asked by non-historians what he studies. 
There are various reasons for this obscurity. Most importantly, perhaps, William's foreignness has told against him. The British like their icons British, and the contemporary perception that the prince of Orange was loyal primarily to Holland (Queen Anne launched her reign with a ringing statement that her heart was entirely English ('JHL', 17, 1701-1704, 68)) was never fully dispelled. Similarly there may have been some embarrassment that the country had to be rescued from James II by a Netherlander. From the earliest days the revolution of 1688 was extolled as the foundation of Britain's free constitutions. However, commentators such as Edmund Burke, Macaulay, and Trevelyan tended to play down William's role in the events of 1688-9, making the revolution look less like a foreign incursion and more like an indigenous movement to settle the nation's affairs. Again, William's unpopularity towards the end of his reign may have curtailed praise at his death and prevented celebration taking root. By 1702 gratitude at his actions against an ambitious Catholic king had been replaced by resentment at tax burdens, and this resentment lived on in the national memory. Paradoxically also, attempts to celebrate the stadholder-king may have helped to submerge him. In Ireland a special day -- the anniversary of the Boyne -- was given over to remembering the Orange legacy. As a result it passed into popular culture. In England by contrast, the thanksgiving for William's arrival was piggy-backed onto the 5 November pyrotechnics marking the discovery of Guy Fawkes's plot. This move was justified on the ground that the prince's landing at Torbay had occurred on the anniversary of the discovery of the gunpowder treason, and was supposed to magnify William by fitting him into a grand providential plan. In practice, however, it told against celebration. Memory of the Dutchman was lost in the established excitement of exploding effigies of Fawkes. 
Other important explanations for William's unpopularity centre on his personality. Those close to the king (Bentinck, Keppel, Dijkvelt, Fagel, Heinsius, Tenison, Mary) were very close indeed, and he elicited great loyalty from them. Beyond this inner circle, however, the king had traits which made it hard for contemporaries to warm to him, and have not endeared him to subsequent generations. Most obviously, he was a monomaniac. The defeat of Louis gripped him his whole adult life, and took him away from his British subjects. Instead of appearing among, or trying to charm, his people, William spent much of his life in sieges of Flemish towns or in hours of diplomatic correspondence. Compounding this obsession was a multifaceted lack of sociability. William detested all frivolity. He did not suffer fools at all. He accepted contradiction of his opinion only with bad grace, and kept a small group of intimates to which outsiders could not gain easy access. Above all, he was cold and taciturn. Burnet, who ultimately despaired of correcting this flaw in his master's personality, commented that he 'took little pains to gain the affections of the nation', and that 'his silence, when he admitted any to an audience, distasted them as much as if they had been denied it' ('Bishop Burnet's History', ed. Burnet and Burnet, 2.85). The only cracks in the austere facade came on the occasions when William got drunk. Then, unfortunately, he was as likely to disgrace himself with wild behaviour as impress with alcohol-induced conviviality, and it has been said his inebriety was a 'dark, moody thing' (Kenyon, 'Stuarts', 185). 
Even William's health and appearance told against him. He was not a fit man. In 1675 he had been floored by smallpox, and ever after was plagued by bouts of fever and asthma. These conditions were debilitating enough in themselves, but when they made it still less likely that William would join in court hospitality, and increased his preference for rural retreats, they added to the damage done by his social reticence. Nor was the king's physical presence inspiring. Despite thick brown hair (which in his youth allowed him to follow fashions without resorting to wigs), and a striking roman nose which made him instantly recognizable on coins, paintings, and prints, he was not an imposing or impressive figure. Almost diminutively short, he was not conventionally handsome, and his illnesses rendered him pale and thin. Taken together, these features made it improbable that any cult would grow round the man. 
Alongside these physical and social failings were political traits which alienated his subjects. Most importantly, William's personal aloofness was often matched by arrogance about his position. Although the stadholder-king was frequently politically flexible -- especially in the face of representative assemblies -- he also tended to stand on his dignity. He had a keen sense of the prerogatives of his offices, and of the rights of the Orange and Stuart families, and would often compromise these only once bitter struggle had convinced him there was no alternative. Thus William's early high-handedness in the United Provinces was ended only by the overwhelming opposition it provoked, while in Britain the king's initial instincts seemed more absolutist than parliamentarian. In the early 1680s he opposed the scheme of constitutional limitations on the monarchy which might have solved the exclusion crisis. In 1689 he fought hard to beat off parliamentary encroachments on royal power, both resisting the claim of right and articles of grievance in Scotland and trying to water down the declaration of right in England. Indeed William's conversations with Halifax in 1689 reveal an intense irritation at the Westminster parliament's attempts to control him. He sank into a paranoid delusion that there was a republican conspiracy against him, and admitted that he would have refused to confirm the revolution's limitations on his powers had it not been for 'the condition of his affayres' (Foxcroft, 2.21). Later, in the 1690s, William's gradual surrender to the English legislature was also accompanied by tensions which threatened to erode the goodwill generated by his otherwise conciliatory attitude to parliament. Only last-minute changes of heart avoided ruptures over the place bill in 1694, and the standing army in 1698. 
Of course there were excuses for the defects in William's character. He had been isolated from any affectionate family in his youth; his childhood household had been a cauldron of Orangist plotting; and he had seen his country devastated by the French in his early twenties. Perhaps, therefore, it was predictable that he would grow into a distant and driven adult. There was also much to admire in the man. He was deeply loyal to those few who made it into his close circle of friends. On the battlefield he showed an incredible courage which compensated for a lack of tactical finesse. At key points in his career -- especially in 1684 in his relations with Amsterdam, in 1689 in his approach to English ecclesiastical politics, and in 1690 in Scotland -- he showed a readiness to learn from political mistakes. Throughout his life he was committed to religious toleration, and the reverse side of his arrogance was a single-mindedness which kept him to his central goals and allowed him to distinguish between what was essential and what could be compromised. The problem with most of these virtues, however, was that they won few supporters. Toleration was not widely popular, and personal courage on the battlefield was sometimes at the expense of the troops. Even loyalty to friends could be dangerous. William's closeness to favourites fed British fears that he was in the pockets of foreigners, while overly lavish gifts to associates provoked Commons forfeitures of estates given away in Ireland, and damaging accusations that the king had turned Bentinck into a 'Dutch prince of Wales' by grants to him there ('Gloria Cambria'). 
For all these reasons the British did not take William to their hearts in his lifetime, and have not subsequently changed their opinion. Yet while the king's lack of fame is explicable, it is almost certainly unjust. There will always be historical disagreements around a person as remarkable as William, so few of whose actions can be praised without qualification, but the stadholder-king can still claim considerable achievements, which should have made him one of the greatest figures in British, and European, history. First, it is arguable he preserved Dutch independence in 1672. It is true that Holland was rescued from the French by flooding its fields, rather than by Orange strategic genius, and that the military tide turned with naval victories over the English, and the willingness of Spain and the empire to come to the United Provinces' aid. Notwithstanding this, however, William's role was vital. There was serious talk of surrender once Louis had occupied Utrecht, and it was only the prince's insistence that the Dutch must resist that gave floodwaters, battleships, and allies time to save the day. Again, and on a larger scale, the stadholder can be credited with keeping Europe free of French control. Certainly the Habsburg powers played a central part in this, and William's personal military record against Louis's commanders was poor. Yet without this leader's constant determination to build alliances against Versailles, it is likely that France would have come to dominate Britain, Germany, and Italy, and could have dictated to the Habsburgs from that position. It was, after all, William who kept the Dutch in the fight through the 1670s and 1690s; it was William who persuaded the German princes to resist pressure on the Rhine in the 1680s; it was William who took the risks of expeditions to England and Ireland; and it was William again who brought together the grand alliances of 1689 and 1701. 
In Britain the last Stuart king could claim equal renown. Most traditionally, but also most controversially, William could be seen as the saviour of England's parliamentary constitution. There is little space here to articulate objections to this view. Some commentators would deny that James II had been abusing his prerogatives or that he intended to introduce absolutism, while others would point to William's continuing attachment to royal power, to the limited nature of the revolution's checks on the prerogative, or to the role of the English and Welsh themselves in establishing the new regime. Yet whatever the caveats, the stadholder-king's place among the heroes of parliamentary government seems plain. James had been pushing his rights beyond general acceptability (if not beyond all interpretations of the law); contemporary English commentators admitted that there had been no way to stop him doing this until William intervened; and -- while the new king may not have welcomed restrictions on his power in 1689 -- he tolerated statements (such as his coronation oath) which settled many long-running constitutional disputes on parliament's side. Similarly, in the years after the revolution William continued to accept expansion of Westminster's influence. Desperate for war finance, he was the first monarch to meet his parliament for a substantive session every year. Although he protested vigorously about legislative ambition, he ultimately accepted control over the length of time parliaments could sit, and the size of his army -- and he positively encouraged Commons' investigations into government finance. Taken together these developments represented a revolution in the legislature's position. Called infrequently before 1688, parliament under William became a standing, and perhaps even the central, instrument of government. 
Beyond this, the stadholder-king could argue for three further achievements. First, William played a significant role in establishing religious toleration in England and Wales. At the end of the twentieth century, scholars were moving away from the idea that the 'Toleration Act' of 1689 encapsulated a gradually enlightening public opinion. Historians are realizing that objections to liberty of conscience remained too vigorous to suggest that persecution had become unacceptable: instead some are arguing that the Anglican monopoly was broken by royal pressure. A new king, tolerant himself, could not afford to be seen as a bigot by religiously diverse allies abroad, and insisted on relief for his non-Anglican subjects -- virtually as a condition of his taking the throne. Second, William set Britain on the road to great power status. His prolonged war with Louis XIV taught governments to mobilize tens of thousands of soldiers and sailors, and demanded solutions to long-standing difficulties in financing sustained military campaigns. Six years into their war with Louis the British states were employing over 100,000 people in their armed forces (nearly 2 per cent of their entire population), and were paying for them through both new types of taxation and pioneering systems of funded debt. Thus while William's predecessors had often withdrawn from conflict for lack of money or effective armed forces, his successors could rely on the experienced fighting machines and the robust structures of public finance which had been developed in the 1690s. Finally, the stadholder-king brought a fresh approach to the handling of political rivalries, at least in England and Wales, which did much to ease those countries towards a more peaceful political system. Before 1689 the state had frequently been brought towards civil conflict by factional frustrations at rivals' monopolization of power. Under Charles I, at points in the exclusion crisis, and under James II, important political actors had been drawn into conspiracy and revolt because these seemed the only ways to dislodge 'evil counsellors' from supposedly dominating the monarch's court. After the revolution William's political style prevented such frustrations. Keeping parliament in session, he provided a forum where disagreements could be aired peacefully. Wary of becoming a prisoner of one grouping, he made it clear he would always consider the claims of opposition politicians to office. Keen to keep the support of the tax-granting Commons, he looked to work with those who could control that assembly, and so made it clear that winning parliamentary votes and elections -- rather than plot or rebellion -- would be the chief routes to power. One of the most remarkable features of late Stuart England and Wales was the rapid return to political stability after the disasters of the seventeenth century. William's handling of the political nation must be part of any explanation of this. 
Of course William had failures. Louis XIV was still a substantial threat when he died. The Dutch king had become unpopular in the British realms. His policies had perhaps worsened relations between England and the other Stuart kingdoms. He never secured his desired toleration of faiths in all the places he ruled, and especially he had to betray the Irish Catholics to maintain control of the Dublin parliament. Yet in many other ways his contribution to British life was outstanding. For preserving the island nations from French domination, for strengthening their parliamentary traditions, for promoting freedom to worship, for establishing the fiscal-military infrastructure which would make the state a world power, and for encouraging peaceful politics, William deserves a far higher reputation than he has gained. 


@@@@@


doc= 29451


William IV (1765-1837), king of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and king of Hanover, was born on 21 August 1765 at Buckingham House, London, the third child and third son among the fifteen children of George III (1738-1820) and his queen, Charlotte Sophia of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (1744-1818). On 20 September he was baptized as William Henry. Of his younger siblings six were boys, two of whom died in early childhood, and six girls ['see 'George III, daughters of (act. 1766-1857)]. 
Prince William was brought up at Richmond and Kew. His education from 1772 was superintended by Major-General Bude, a Swiss from the Hanoverian army, and Dr James Majendie. At thirteen he was sent into the Royal Navy, chiefly to prevent him from falling under the influence of his eldest brother, George, who was already annoying and opposing his father in the customary Hanoverian fashion. He joined a 98-gun ship, the 'Prince George', as a midshipman on 15 June 1779, and saw action within a year. After spending nearly two years in Hanover (1783-5) to complete his education he went back to sea. On 17 June 1785 he was promoted lieutenant and in April 1786 he obtained the command of a 28-gun frigate. At twenty-two he was described as being 'about 5 foot 7 or 8 inches high' with a 'good complexion and fair hair' ('Dyott's Diary', 1.36). Although fulsome praise of him by Nelson and others should be largely discounted, he had developed into a competent naval officer of undoubted courage and a likeable young man of a boisterous kind. But as a king's son he was under peculiar difficulties in learning how to work well with others, and a foolish quarrel with his first lieutenant soon soured him with regard to his profession and showed his incapacity for high naval command. 
William's romantic inclinations and strong sexual appetites were also liable to cause difficulties. In Hanover he started by courting a rich merchant's daughter, and was soon sighing for such of 'the pretty girls of Westminster... as would not clap or pox me every time I fucked' (Ziegler, 51). When at Halifax, Nova Scotia, in 1788, commanding the frigate 'Andromeda', he fathered a son (William Henry Courtney) and was said by a friend who was serving in the same station to be 'perfectly acquainted with every house of a certain description in the town' ('Dyott's Diary', 1.37). Late that year George III became mentally incapacitated and William's eldest brother called him home. Soon after his father had recovered he was gazetted as duke of Clarence and of St Andrews, and earl of Munster in the peerage of Ireland: this marked the end of his naval career. To all appearances his chances of regularity in either official employment or personal life were small. He could accept nothing but a high post, and he had neither the capacity nor the degree of the king's favour needed to secure that. His matrimonial options amounted to foreign royalties who were not Roman Catholics. Even apart from the restrictions imposed by the 'Royal Marriages Act' of 1772, a wife from the British aristocracy would bring with her unacceptable political implications. He was in debt, and the House of Commons would be disinclined to make him a large marriage grant. 
None the less Clarence was lucky enough to gain twenty years of domestic stability and happiness. His partner from late in 1791, Dorothy Bland (or Phillips), was known, and is remembered, as Mrs Dorothy Jordan (1761-1816) -- Mr Jordan was wholly fictitious. Bubbling with vitality, and radiating happiness, she remained for years, tragic roles apart, the most successful actress on the English stage. Until 1797 the couple shared Clarence Lodge, Roehampton. In that year the duke was made ranger of Bushy Park, and Bushy House, Teddington (now incorporated in the buildings of the National Physical Laboratory), became his home. Between 1794 and 1807 Dorothy Jordan bore him five sons and five daughters while continuing to act in London and the provinces. Despite insinuations in cartoons and the press (coarsened by the fact that 'jordan' was the popular term for a chamber-pot) that, so far from Clarence keeping her, she kept him, he made her regular payments. She was generous with her money and had to provide for earlier children by two other men. On occasion, however, she saved him from financial disaster. In October 1797 he reported to his banker, Thomas Coutts: 'Mrs Jordan is getting both fame and money: to her I owe very much' (Patterson, 1.83). At that time his debts, though less substantial than those of his elder brothers, exceeded $46,000. 
The connection could hardly be permanent. By the end of 1810 George III's descent into senile dementia brought Clarence the prospect of a rich wife in the benevolent climate of his eldest brother's regency. He had moved nearer to the throne: no one but his two elder brothers and his niece Princess Charlotte stood between him and the succession, and the princess was ineligible for the crown of Hanover under the Salic law. Neither Dorothy Jordan's physical allure nor her earning power were what they had been. A deed of separation was drawn up on 23 December 1811 (a day before Clarence became an admiral of the fleet) and she left Bushy a month later. The financial provision represented as much as the ducal finances would stand; but this was not enough for someone in debt, and depredations by two of her sons-in-law increased her embarrassments. In 1815 she fled to France to escape her creditors, and she died there, aged fifty-four, a year later. When William came to the throne in 1830, he gave what may seem evidence of an uneasy conscience by commissioning from Chantrey the statue of Dorothy Jordan with two of their children which is now in Buckingham Palace. 
The rich wife did not materialize until, in 1817, Princess Charlotte's death in childbirth made Clarence's marriage essential. A bride was hurriedly found for him in Princess Adelaide of Saxe-Meiningen (1792-1849). She met him on her arrival in England on 4 July 1818 and they were married seven days later. 
Adelaide improved Clarence's manners and finances, but failed to produce an heir. Her first child lived for no more than a few hours, and her second, also a daughter, for only three months. There were also miscarriages. The royal pair were in Germany for the first year of their marriage, and made further long stays on the continent in 1822, 1825, and 1826. The first journey was made for economy and to escape importunate creditors; but their finances improved steadily. In 1818 Clarence refused the offer of an increase of $6000 in his annual grant, thinking it niggardly; but two years later, obliged to stay in England for his wife's health and thus in pressing need, he realized that this was the most which the Commons could be persuaded to provide and reversed his refusal. Back-dated by three years, the increase was not one to despise. 
Queen Caroline's trial in 1820 exposed Clarence to a brief period of unpopularity. As a prominent champion of his brother's cause, he was alleged to have written to the captain whose ship had conveyed Caroline from England in 1814 that she and her husband would both be pleased if she were to be seduced during the voyage. Her lawyers' offer to prove the existence of the letter was ruled out of order, and Denman was reduced to pointing to the duke with the words 'Come forth, thou slanderer' (Arnould, 175-6). The radical 'Black Dwarf' reminded 'Admiral Tarry Breeks' that the prince who had abandoned Dorothy Jordan was not convincing as a champion of sexual morality (Ziegler, 129). 
By the middle of 1826 it was clear that, while Clarence would not found a dynasty, he would probably become king. George IV's health had deteriorated and the duke of York was plainly dying. When the latter succumbed in January 1827, Clarence was said to have punctuated the funeral by remarking to the duke of Sussex: 'We shall be treated 'now', brother Augustus, very differently from what we have been' (Gore, 234). He had been given the sinecure post of general of marines, at $4000 a year, some years earlier. On becoming heir presumptive he received an addition of $3000 a year, and his wife an annual jointure of $6000. After a decade of Adelaide's management, topped by these new provisions, Clarence was able to reduce his debts to a few thousands. In terms of money values at the end of the twentieth century the couple's joint income had risen to some $2 million a year. 
In April 1827 Clarence became lord high admiral at the invitation of the incoming prime minister, George Canning. Viscount Melville, Liverpool's first lord of the Admiralty, was one of the ministers who had refused to take office under Canning. The revival of the lord high admiral's post, last occupied early in the previous century, was a neat dodge to circumvent this refusal while conciliating the heir to the throne. The duke's patent restricted him, while in London, to acting only with the knowledge and approval of the high admiral's council: at sea he would need their endorsement of his orders unless accompanied by a council member. Their senior member, Sir George Cockburn, had even less intention of relaxing these restrictions than the duke had of obeying them. On 20 October 1827, by which time Goderich had succeeded to the premiership following Canning's death, Admiral Sir Edward Codrington, interpreting his orders with great freedom, sank the Turkish fleet in the Bay of Navarino. The enthusiastic praise which he received from the lord high admiral had not been preceded by consultations with the latter's council, and it did not reflect the government's policy. In January 1828, after Wellington had succeeded Goderich as prime minister, the speech from the throne referred to Navarino as an 'untoward event' ('Hansard 2', 18, 1828, 3), and Codrington was recalled and dismissed. 
More serious trouble followed in July 1828. William's council objected to the terms of reference which he had given to his commission on naval gunnery, and when he disregarded their objections they secured the cabinet's support. The lord high admiral then demanded Cockburn's dismissal. Wellington could not allow this, if only because he knew that it would have brought the resignation of other council members. He therefore sought the king's support, and George IV wrote to his brother, 'You must give way' (Ziegler, 138). An attempt at a truce soon failed. On 31 July the lord high admiral hoisted his flag at Plymouth in a small squadron which was due for manoeuvres, and sailed off into the blue. He was at sea for ten days, with no one knowing where he had gone. He was near to breakdown; and Wellington, despite the king's last-minute doubts, enforced his resignation late in August. It was a sad episode for the navy because some at least of William's reforms were much needed. He commissioned its first steam vessel, and he was right to be concerned at the state of naval gunnery. His way of learning the essential lesson that he must always act constitutionally was a painful one, but if this aspect of his education had been deferred until he reached the throne the results would have been far more serious. He bore no grudge against either Cockburn or the duke. In 1829, when the latter by a remarkable volte-face pushed Catholic emancipation through parliament, Clarence proved his fair-mindedness, his liberalism, and his dislike of his ultra-tory brother the duke of Cumberland, by giving the measure strong support. 
William was woken at Bushy at 6 a.m. on 26 June 1830 and told that he was king. He succeeded an infirm recluse and could hardly fail to be popular. He shared the xenophobia of his poorer subjects, and at once replaced George IV's French cooks and German band with indigenous, if less skilful, performers. His wish to spread happiness round him was genuine. By his instructions the East Terrace at Windsor and the 'private drives through the park' were opened to the public ('Greville Memoirs', 2.26); and on his birthday he gave a banquet to 3000 of the town's poorer inhabitants. He could afford to entertain on a large scale without over-burdening the civil list because, having no taste for grandeur, he reduced George IV's lavish establishment. The stud was halved and the royal yachts reduced from five to two. 150 of George IV's birds and animals were given to the Zoological Society. In London William authorized the demolition of the royal mews to clear part of what is now Trafalgar Square and had a public passage opened between Waterloo Place and St James's Park. He was too undignified to win great respect from the governing class. His frequent speeches were almost always unwanted and often embarrassing. The peculiar shape of his head proved useful in June 1832, when a stone was thrown at Ascot and the padding in his hat saved him from injury; but his cephalic resemblance to a pineapple or coconut engendered more laughter than awe; and his incessant, and unavailing, efforts to satisfy his illegitimate sons' demands for honour and emolument did not enhance the crown's standing. Even among the governing class, however, he started with a large measure of approval. Greville, to whom the new king's 'centrist' or 'old whig' political views were not obnoxious, noted on 18 July 1830: 'Altogether he seems a kind-hearted, well-meaning, not stupid, burlesque, bustling old fellow, and if he doesn't go mad may make a very decent King, but he exhibits oddities' (ibid., 2.6). 
William's strong sense of fair play made him determined to avoid even the appearance of intrigue against his ministers. On 28 June Lord Ellenborough, who was one of them, noted a royal remark to a friend about 'the late King's error in not frankly supporting his government' (Ellenborough, 2.287). The new king, Princess Lieven reported on 6 October, 'acts upon the principle that [his] duty is to support the [Prime] Minister until Parliament by its vote determines that the Minister no longer possesses the confidence of the nation. For this reason he will do nothing to upset him, but he will be at no pains to pick him up when he falls. ('Letters of Dorothea', 254)' These observers were not mistaken; but they had failed to take into account two of the factors which were to differentiate this reign from the last. First, William was far more energetic than George IV had been. His capacity to interfere with his ministers' doings greatly exceeded his predecessor's. Second, it was not clear that a very active king would behave quite in the way predicted should he be faced with a constitutional issue which he thought would affect the position of the monarchy. William combined an old-fashioned distrust of party with fears of radical republicanism, and saw the king's role as being that of a conciliator. He hankered after a government in which the best men would serve together irrespective of party to safeguard the established order. He never understood either the rivalries and resentments of political leaders or their need to retain a reputation for consistency. Of the complicated currents of political life outside parliament he knew nothing: to him the leaders of popular movements were simply agitators. 
Within months of his accession this naive but well-meaning monarch was plunged into the long crisis which culminated in the passage of the 1832 'Reform Act'. Wellington's government, which had been weakened in the general election caused by the death of George IV, was defeated in the Commons in November 1830, and was succeeded by an administration pledged to parliamentary reform under Earl Grey. The new cabinet, which comprised nine members of the Lords, an earl's eldest son, an Irish viscount, a baronet, and a wealthy Scottish commoner, did not look like a gang of revolutionaries. Their early relations with the king were cordial. Royal influence was used freely to secure a seat at Windsor for the Irish secretary, and the civil list was treated with care, despite expectations of governmental economy. On 4 February William agreed, 'without a wry face' (Ziegler, 177), to a bill abolishing the worst rotten boroughs, reducing others to a single member, and providing every constituency with at least a minimum of resident voters. Although this was drastic by the standards of the time, the king's fears concerned, not an extensive reform measure in itself, but what might need to be done to put it on the statute book. He dreaded the election which would follow its rejection by the Commons because of the disorder which that might engender, especially in Ireland. The prospect of the Lords rejecting a bill which the Commons had accepted he thought still more alarming. On both counts Grey was more reassuring than the situation warranted. 'If what we shall have to propose shall obtain His Majesty's sanction', he told Sir Herbert Taylor, the king's secretary, on 13 January, 'I should have little fear of carrying it through Parliament.' This reassurance was repeated more than once during the weeks which followed ('Reform Act', ed. Grey, 1.52, 92, 118, 154). Yet, in the event, securing the bill's passage through the Commons entailed a general election, while the Lords rejected it until threatened with a creation of peers. Unwittingly, William had been misled. 
A few days before the second-reading debate in the Commons was due to start, a blunder by Grey revealed that the king was refusing a dissolution in case of the government's defeat. This came near to wrecking their chances, since the fear of an election represented the best chance of preventing one. Only the dexterity of their whips secured them a second-reading majority of one in a vote of 603 (23 March 1831). When they were defeated by eight at the start of the committee proceedings, William, realizing that no other government could be formed, agreed to dissolve. Annoyed by obstructive opposition tactics, and taking a Lords motion against dissolving as an infringement of his prerogative, he became eager to prorogue parliament with the utmost speed. He was, he told Grey, 'always at single anchor' (Broughton, 4.108); and, when warned that the horses' manes for the royal coach took five hours to plait, he is said to have threatened to go to Westminster in a hackney coach, if necessary. 
These proceedings gave William a brief period of great popularity. The honest old tar was held to have thwarted the borough owners' selfish trickery. The more intellectual voters were reminded that 'the richest, the oldest, the noblest families in the country, headed by the King himself' supported the government and the bill: the less intellectual were exhorted to 'vote for the two Bills' (Brock, 198, 201). The popular image bore little relation to the fact. The course of the election alarmed the king by revealing what seemed to him a dangerous increase in popular influence. As it began he had written to Grey urging that, while 'the principle of the bill' could not be abandoned, it should be 'remodelled' ('Reform Act', ed. Grey, 1.244); but although the government, having won a great majority, produced modifications to their measure, these were not enough to satisfy the king, or, indeed, to win over the more moderate tory peers. To remodel the bill, which had aroused such enthusiasm outside parliament, was politically impossible. 'It is', as Viscount Melbourne later told Taylor, 'a very dangerous way of dealing with a nation to attempt to retract that which you have once offered to concede' ('Lord Melbourne's Papers', 135). None of this altered the king's support for his government. He had promptly removed three members of his household when they voted against the second reading, and in May he made Grey a supernumerary knight of the Garter. Being totally indifferent to ceremonial, he had wanted to avoid a coronation. The fatigue of one was no light matter for a 65-year-old who was no longer robust, and he regarded the rituals of 1821 as having been preposterously over-elaborate and expensive. When obliged to sanction a ceremony shorn of the Westminster Hall banquet, he allowed his ministers the largest number of coronation peerages that the precedent of 1821 could be employed to cover. 
Despite gaining fifteen votes from the coronation (8 September 1831), the government was defeated by forty-one on the Lords' second reading a month later. Lord John Russell told the Birmingham Political Union, to the king's annoyance, that the opposition peers' stand was no more than 'the whisper of a faction' (Walpole, 'Russell', 1.172), and the Commons gave the government's modified bill a two-to-one majority. The problem of the upper house remained, however, and in January 1832 Grey asked for an immediate creation of ten or twelve peers, with permission to apply for another batch if the first failed to bring the tory peers to heel. The king, realizing it to be no more possible than in the previous April for any other government to be formed, agreed to a creation, but objected to this procedure. Knowing that some of the bishops and peers had agreed to reverse their votes, and assuming from a remark by Grey that a creation of twenty-one would be sufficient, he favoured making that number 'at once' ('Reform Act', ed. Grey, 2.78). The cabinet then explained that they did not yet know how many creations would be needed; and on 15 January 1832 William undertook to create, at the appropriate time, enough peers 'to secure the success of the Bill' (ibid., 2.102, 113). As that phrase was left undefined, and subject to the king's interpretation, it would be very difficult to bring the undertaking into effect for anything except a second-reading defeat. Moreover, William stipulated that (except for three new peerages already agreed) the creation must not add permanently to the Lords: it was to be confined to peers' eldest sons and collateral heirs. 'Earl Grey still anxiously cherishes the hope', he told the king the next day, 'that [the creations needed] may not exceed, or, at all events, not greatly exceed, the number [twenty-one] before mentioned to your Majesty' (ibid., 2.120). As the premier had told his colleagues some weeks earlier that a creation might turn some of their supporters against them, and there were already indications in the press that even the threat of one was doing so, this was an imprudent statement. 
During the next few months a group of moderate tory peers, led by the earl of Harrowby and Lord Wharncliffe, and nicknamed the Waverers, who had voted against the bill in October, collected a majority for the second reading on condition of there being no creation. They aimed not merely to prevent one, but, as far as possible, to have the bill amended in the Lords' committee; and they made clear that, if any peers were created, all their fellow converts, not to mention a number of government supporters, would oppose the bill at every stage. The king reported all their contacts with him to Grey and supported their efforts openly. 
The ministers had become disillusioned. The more moderate of them had gone forward, once they had known how much opposition their bill would arouse, only because withdrawing it, or whittling it down, would have been ruinous for them and perilous for the country. 'Damn Reform', Grey said to a colleague on 9 February, 'I wish I had never touched it' (Broughton, 4.174). Four days later he told Taylor that if, during the committee stage, the government were unable to make the concessions demanded by Harrowby and Wharncliffe, and the Waverers voted with the opposition, the cabinet would have to ask for a creation of fifty or more. The king's attitude to his ministers now became less cordial. Earl Howe, who had been the queen's chamberlain until ousted for his vote against the second reading, was still corresponding with Adelaide; and, apart from opposition voices in William's ear, he could not entirely repress his resentment that the reassurances given him had all proved unreliable. He refused to commit himself about the committee stage, or even to allow an immediate creation in the increasingly unlikely event of a second-reading defeat. 
On 14 April 1832 the bill was given a second reading in the Lords by 184 votes to 175. The opposition leaders, judging their followers to be too divided for detailed committee work, adopted tactics similar to those used a year earlier by their colleagues in the Commons: they sponsored a wrecking amendment under the guise of an adjustment in procedure. Lord Lyndhurst, who was clever but irresponsible, saw in this move a chance to oust the government, and through his trickery the opposition achieved a majority of thirty-five (7 May). The cabinet, who had been taken by surprise, decided to resign unless the king sanctioned an immediate and large creation. They expected his refusal, and acceptance of their resignations, which duly arrived on 9 May. It was no longer certain that the opposition leaders would be unable to form a government: immediately after the Lords' vote Ellenborough had declared their readiness to support an extensive reform; but William had misjudged both the politicians' reactions and the intensity of the popular reform movement. Mass meetings were held; a run was threatened on the Bank of England; and on 15 May he was obliged to ask Grey to resume the premier's duties. He added a request for conciliatory modifications to the bill. Grey replied at once that the events of the last few days had made modification impossible. On 18 May he and Brougham secured the written consent of their royal 'master' to a creation, unlimited as to numbers, the necessity for which would be judged by the cabinet, and not by the king. The news of this persuaded most of the opposition peers to withdraw. No creation of peers was needed, and the bill, virtually unamended, received the royal assent by commission on 7 June 1832. 
Throughout his reign William IV regarded foreign affairs as the king's particular province, and paid great attention to them. He distrusted foreigners, the French most of all, and was particularly suspicious of what he saw as revolutionary or radical regimes. Trying to export British liberal ideas he regarded as a mistake. Most of his countrymen in all classes shared the first of these views at least, so that his expression of them may have helped Palmerston, who was foreign secretary for all except the first few months of his reign, and on whom, despite many disagreements, he conferred the grand cross of the Bath in June 1832. William's comments were occasionally shrewd: he wrote in 1833 that good relations with Egypt were particularly important to Britain, since it had been 'shown lately that communications by canal and by steam vessels might be established from Cairo to Suez and the Red Sea' (Ziegler, 234). It is difficult, however, to identify any case in which his advice had more than a very slight effect in moulding the policy adopted. 
William also placed great importance on the king's duty to defend the established church. In June 1833 he wrote on his own responsibility to the archbishop of Canterbury, urging the bishops not to undermine the government by outright opposition to the 'Irish Church Bill'; but when in the following year some ministers treated that measure as a step towards something more, he took fright. Early in May 1834 Lord John Russell declared his support for diverting some of the established church's revenues in Ireland to lay purposes. This drove Stanley and three other cabinet moderates to resign three weeks later, and in July Grey went too on an Irish coercion question. The king instructed Lord Melbourne to discover whether Wellington and Peel would be willing to serve in a coalition; and, when they refused, he suppressed his doubts and allowed Melbourne to reconstruct the whig government. 
In November 1834 Earl Spencer's death removed Althorp as leader of the Commons. When Melbourne, making no secret of this blow's severity, proposed Russell as leader, William dismissed the government. After brief 'caretaking' by Wellington, Peel became prime minister and parliament was dissolved. The king's move, though not unconstitutional, proved unwise, and no repetition of it has ever been attempted in the United Kingdom. The dismissal of the premier was easily ridiculed: in Edward Lytton Bulwer's pamphlet William is depicted as asking Melbourne: 'How can I support reforming ministers, when Lord Spencer has ceased to be?' (Bulwer, 21). Although the whigs had been losing support, and the Conservatives gained in the election, Peel was left in a minority and in April 1835 he had to resign. The days when the king had been able to give someone a majority by making him prime minister were no more than a memory. Melbourne, summoned again, made stringent conditions. From the existing royal household members who were in either Lords or Commons he required 'a firm, unequivocal support' for the government; and, in the event of vacancies, no one was to be selected 'whose principles and opinions [were] adverse to' it ('Lord Melbourne's Papers', 270-71). More contentious was the claim that, as a majority of both the old and the new House of Commons had expressed support for lay appropriation of the Irish church's surplus revenues, the government would have to be pledged to that measure. Despite doubts about his duty under the coronation oath William had to agree to this pledge too, and Melbourne was reinstalled, with Russell as leader of the Commons. 
William's relations with a government which he had distrusted from the start, and had been forced to take back, could hardly be easy; and his control of his temper, always precarious, was being eroded by increasing ill health. Impotent to rid himself of the cabinet, he subjected its members to continual pinpricks. In his eyes they had crowned their offences by allying with Irish agitators in order to regain office. Their Canadian policy was also a recurrent cause of royal criticisms and complaints. In July 1835, after William had voiced these at a council meeting, Greville recorded: 'This... does more to degrade the monarchy than anything which has ever occurred: to exhibit the King publicly as a cypher, and something worse than a cypher, as an unsuccessful competitor in a political squabble, is to take from the crown all... dignity. ('Greville Memoirs', 3.223)' William saw as little as possible of his ministers, and made a point of ignoring the whig speaker, whose election to the post in February 1835 had been the first sign that Peel's administration was doomed. In 1836 Melbourne wrote to Russell: 'To have two or three great points to fight would be nothing; but to be fretted by opposition upon every little matter is intolerable' (Walpole, 'Russell', 1.269). 
The cabinet were not the only people who distressed the king or incurred his reproaches. Despite all his efforts, his eldest son (created earl of Munster in June 1831) remained unreconciled with him to the end. Once, when King Leopold of Belgium called for water at dinner, William expostulated: 'I never allow anybody to drink water at my table' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.311). A far greater and more enduring irritant was the conduct of Leopold's sister the duchess of Kent, who hoped, all too obviously, that Princess Victoria would succeed to the throne while still a minor and subject to her mother's regency. She declined to come to court with Victoria in case they might encounter one of the royal bastards, and took her instead on semi-royal progresses of a particularly tactless kind. William did not turn the other cheek; but until a late stage of the quarrel he was generally agreed to be less at fault than his sister-in-law. In August 1836, however, when the duchess had ignored the queen's birthday and appropriated a suite of rooms at Kensington against his express instruction, he insulted her publicly before some hundred of his guests. He trusted, he announced in his speech, that he would be spared 'for nine months longer' since the duchess was 'incompetent to act with propriety' as regent (ibid., 3.309). The princess burst into tears; and the two parties, soon realizing that they had gone too far, patched up an uneasy truce. 
The king's wish was granted. In April 1837 his annual attack of asthma was exceptionally severe, and by 20 May he had declined into an illness which was soon recognized to be mortal. His liver and spleen were enlarged, his lungs turgid with blood, and his heart valves ossified. Princess Victoria reached her eighteenth birthday, and thus her majority, on 24 May; and the king, who was dying, as Disraeli wrote, 'like an old lion' ('Beaconsfield's Letters', 113), even survived to see the anniversary of Waterloo on 18 June. He received the sacrament on that day from the archbishop of Canterbury. Adelaide, who was nursing him devotedly, had not been to bed for more than ten days: when she broke down as the blessing was given, he showed more concern for her than he had ever revealed over his own suffering. The next day Victoria wrote, despite the scene at the dinner, that her uncle had always been 'personally kind' to her ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1st ser., 1.73). 
William IV died at Windsor Castle very early on the morning of 20 June 1837. His last words are said to have been 'the church, the church' (O. Chadwick, 'The Victorian Church', 1987, 1.158). Greville judged the prime minister's eulogy to be 'very effective because... natural and hearty' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.377): among all British monarchs, Melbourne had said, the late king stood out as the one 'of the most strict integrity' ('Hansard 3', 38, 1837, 1548). William was buried on 8 July in the vault at St George's Chapel, Windsor, after a funeral which seemed to Greville 'a wretched mockery' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.382). The queen dowager, to whom he had been devoted, died on 2 December 1849, aged fifty-seven. Her pious and systematic philanthropy, extending over nearly twenty years, had helped to set the monarchy on its modern course. 
Constitutional doctrine seldom keeps up with the march of events. During William IV's reign most of those concerned with politics would have agreed with him that the ''equilibrium' of the three estates... it is... essential to preserve in their just and proper bearings relatively upon each other' ('Reform Act', ed. Grey, 1.100). Like every other observer, William had noticed the increasing power of the House of Commons during the twenty years before the introduction of the 'Reform Bill'. He inferred that this imposed a special duty on the sovereign of ensuring that his position, and that of the House of Lords, did not suffer further erosion. According to the constitutional notions of the time, his was a reasonable inference, and his determination to preserve what he saw as Britain's 'mixed form of government' was not thought unconstitutional (ibid.). His convictions did not, however, correspond to the political realities of the 1830s. 
These considerations were obscured during Victoria's long reign. In 1860 A. J. Maley wrote in his 'Recollections' that William IV had been 'peculiarly fitted to supply the British Empire with a monarch' since he had shown 'no capacity for public business, and little inclination to interfere in the conduct of it' (Maley, 1.5). Spencer Walpole took the opposite line in the third volume of his 'History', published in 1886. He explained such episodes as William's dismissals of his government in May 1832 and November 1834 in terms of the 'hereditary taint' which affected George III's sons. 'Eccentric rather than insane', he wrote, William 'had the obstinacy which distinguishes insanity' (Walpole, 'History', 3.387). This was written nearly forty years after Prince Albert had begun to remove the monarchy from political conflicts, and more than ten since Bagehot had defined the sovereign's rights 'vis-a-vis' the cabinet as delimited to being consulted and giving encouragement or warnings. Like other late Victorians, Walpole was not biased in favour of a king who had been surrounded by his bastard children; and as a convert to Gladstonian Liberalism he revered the authors of the 1832 'Reform Act'. He had little access to the private papers in which Grey, Melbourne, and Palmerston looked back ruefully at what they had done in 1831 and 1832. 
William IV was inexperienced in public affairs and less intelligent than the politicians with whom he dealt; but if political obstinacy is defined as persistence in policies which are outdated or unrealistic, he was hardly more obstinate than the whig leaders who assured him repeatedly that the 'Reform Bill' could be enacted without risk of a general election or a 'permanent' addition to the Lords. Leading tory peers who supposed initially that no extensive reform would be needed, and ended by gambling that their version of the bill would be accepted without dangerous disturbance, were scarcely forward-looking realists; and it would be hard to find a policy more obstinately pursued than Russell's in 1834, when he disrupted the government for a lay appropriation project which lacked substantial support. The political outcomes of William's reign were fortunate in their results, not from his ministers in their invariable wisdom having neutralized his obstinacy, but because most of Britain's parliamentary class were experienced and sensible. 


@@@@@


doc= 29452


William I (c.1142-1214), king of Scots, was the second of the three sons of Henry, earl of Northumberland (d. 1152), and his wife, Ada de Warenne (d. 1178). 
Nothing is known of William's childhood except some unusually early public appearances. One charter was issued in his name before 1150 and soon after his father's death, on 12 or 13 June 1153, his grandfather King David I ('r'. 1124-53) invested him as earl of Northumberland. He held this dignity until his brother King Malcolm IV ('r'. 1153-65) surrendered the northern counties of England to Henry II of England at Chester in June or July 1157. William was given lands in Tynedale worth $10 per annum which he held until his death, but he neither forgot nor forgave the loss of his earldom. The thread of his diplomatic relations with the kings of England is a series of obstinate attempts to regain it, despite increasingly clear indications that they were not prepared to let him have it. 
After 1157 Malcolm IV provided for William in Scotland and he regularly witnessed his brother's charters. He was on the Toulouse expedition of 1159 and probably was knighted then. In 1163 he again saw the hard face of Henry II's lordship when the three brothers went to Woodstock, Malcolm IV did homage, and the youngest, David (d. 1219), was left as a hostage. A later tradition that William was governor of Scotland in Malcolm IV's closing years is not true; but he had seen his brother's rule at close quarters and was without doubt ready for responsibility when Malcolm died on 9 December 1165. 
William was inaugurated as king of Scots on 24 December 1165 at Scone, the traditional place; the rites probably had more ecclesiastical content than at the inauguration of David I in 1124. He inherited a peaceful kingdom. His brother's steward, constable, and chancellor continued in office. His itinerary in his early years shows him in the settled parts of the realm. The style of government may have changed, however; new names appear as witnesses of royal charters and William was a young man in rude health and with a mind of his own. He consulted others, but there is less apparent reliance on major gatherings of magnates such as marked Malcolm IV's rule. 
William soon confirmed Malcolm IV's last bequest to Dunfermline Abbey; thereafter he showed little benevolent interest in his family's monastic foundations, except to confirm gifts and make occasional new ones. In 1166 he went to Normandy to see Henry II. His business is unknown; he could have been asking for Northumberland or taking an interest in Brittany, where his sister Margaret was the wife of Count Conan and where Henry II was then winning control of William's niece, Conan's heir. The public view of the king of Scots was that he took part creditably in tournaments. He was at Fougeres and Mont-St Michel in August or September 1166, and it was reported that he and Henry II parted on bad terms. 
In 1168 William is said to have been in touch with King Louis VII of France, offering friendship and help in the latter's disputes with Henry II. This contact, if genuine, bore fruit in the 1170s. Before that, William and his brother David attended Henry II's council at Windsor on 5 April 1170. Henry II was preparing for the coronation of his eldest son, Henry, 'the young king'. The brothers probably remained in the south; they were at Windsor again on 31 May and at London on 14 June when young Henry was crowned as king of England. William and David then did homage to him. 
A later chronicler's statement that William now asked for Northumberland is credible, although there is no contemporary evidence that he did. But young Henry knew the mind of the king of Scots. In March 1173 he rebelled and fled to Louis VII with his brothers Geoffrey and Richard. In return for help against his father he promised the northern counties of England to William, and the earldom of Huntingdon with Cambridgeshire to David. William consulted his barons in the summer of 1173. It was decided to ask Henry II to restore Northumberland and, if that failed, to renounce homage. Henry II refused. The Scots again considered; the king wished to fight; some nobles counselled against it. Louis VII and Count Philippe of Flanders now promised that mercenaries would be landed in England; the offers of lands were renewed. William decided for war. He had joined an anti-Plantagenet alliance, foreshadowing later Scottish policy of friendship with France against England. 
About 20 August 1173 the Scottish host moved from its muster at Caddonlea to the castle of Wark on Tweed. The castellan was granted a truce. The bishop of Durham, Hugh du Puiset, would not fight. The Scots moved to Alnwick, Warkworth, and Newcastle, destroying the countryside but unable to take the castles. From Newcastle the host moved west to Carlisle. That castle could not be taken either, and on receiving news of a relief force in the field the Scots returned to Roxburgh. The English force, under the justiciar Ranulf de Glanville, burnt Berwick. Before it turned south to deal with an invasion from Flanders a truce was agreed, until 13 January 1174, and later extended, on payment of 300 marks by the bishop of Durham to the king of Scots, to 24 March 1174. 
After Easter 1174, while William's brother David revived a campaign in the English midlands, the Scots, with Flemish mercenaries, set siege to Wark and ravaged to the Northumberland coast. An attempt to fire the castle failed and the siege was abandoned. The Scots moved to Carlisle, but again were no more successful there. Appleby and Brough castles surrendered. Moving east the Scots were resisted when they besieged Prudhoe Castle (near Newcastle), and news of an approaching English army then moved them north to Alnwick. Here the Scottish forces were partly dispersed in raiding parties when, on 13 July 1174, they received a surprise attack. King William's horse was killed and he was trapped underneath it. He surrendered to Ranulf de Glanville and was taken as a prisoner to Newcastle; on 24 July he appeared before Henry II at Northampton and was soon taken to Normandy to be imprisoned at Caen and later at Falaise. 
The effect on William needs no imagination. He had sought war; he had led from the front throughout and had been in the thick of the action; but he had openly failed. His men rallied round to salvage what they could. Richard, bishop of St Andrews, and Richard, bishop of Dunkeld, both former royal chaplains, and Geoffrey (II), abbot of Dunfermline, crossed to Normandy; several laymen also went to cheer up the king; terms for peace and the king's release were negotiated. There had been a generous pacification between Henry II and his rebellious sons, but the Scots had to accept special terms. On 1 December 1174, by the convention of Falaise (confirmed at Valognes on the 8th), the king of Scots became the liege man of Henry II for Scotland and for all his other lands; he, his brother David, and a group of Scottish clerics granted that 'the church of Scotland shall henceforward owe such subjection to the church of England as it should do' (Stones, 2); the castles of Roxburgh, Berwick, Jedburgh, Edinburgh, and Stirling were to be put at the disposal of Henry II and the king of Scots was to assign revenues for their keeping; the harbouring of felons from one country in the other was forbidden and the Scots were to deliver over twenty named noble hostages. It was a comprehensive loss of sovereignty, a political settlement matching military disaster. 
William left Normandy on 11 December 1174. He was probably detained in England until the castles had been handed over, and he returned to Scotland in February 1175. Then, like Malcolm IV on his return in 1160, he had to deal with an internal revolt. Galloway had been quiet since 1160 under Uhtred, son of Fergus, but on news of the king's removal to Normandy a revolt broke out and Uhtred was murdered by his brother Gilbert on 22 September 1174. Gilbert then asked to become directly subject to Henry II; this may have been as much a personal as a political request, since they were first cousins, but it was not immediately accepted. Something had to be done about Galloway, but Gilbert's proposal and William's position under the convention of Falaise made immediate independent action impossible. 
At York on 10 August 1175 King William, his brother David, and leading Scottish clerics and nobles confirmed the convention by swearing fealty to Henry II; the clerics added an oath that they would make the same subjection to the church of England as their predecessors had customarily made and which they ought to make. William offered his helmet, lance, and saddle on the altar of York Minster, a ceremony of submission with ecclesiastical as well as lay significance. Henry II then gave William permission to deal with Galloway. A Scottish force went there and secured a reconciliation. Whether on his own initiative, or under instructions, in the following year, 1176, King William attended Henry II at Feckenham in Worcestershire on 9 October, bringing with him Gilbert of Galloway, who sought Henry's peace, gave his son Duncan as a hostage, and offered to pay 1000 marks of silver for friendship. The terms were accepted; Duncan was handed over; during the next few years some of the money was paid; and peace again fell temporarily over Galloway. 
In and after 1175 other effects of the convention of Falaise had to be endured: English garrisons were in post at Roxburgh, Berwick, and Edinburgh; Jedburgh and Stirling castles may have been occupied briefly, or perhaps not at all; William was issuing charters at Stirling soon after 1175; lands and rents were transferred for the upkeep of the surrendered castles. As for the church, Henry II followed up the York meeting with a council at Northampton in January 1176, summoning King William and his bishops; he there required the Scottish church to make its obedience to the church of England. The Scottish bishops claimed that their predecessors had never made any such submission; Jocelin, bishop of Glasgow, demonstrated a special exemption for his see. The council broke up when the archbishops of Canterbury and York quarrelled over which of them should receive the Scottish submission. Scottish ambassadors were sent to Pope Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81) who, in the bull 'Super anxietatibus' of 30 July 1176, suspended York's jurisdiction pending an examination of the matter. A legate, Cardinal Vivian, arrived in Scotland, possibly in August 1176, visited Ireland and England, returned to Scotland, and on 1 August 1177 held a council at Holyrood. He seems to have made an examination of many matters and aroused anger by his fiscal exactions. No formal record of the council survives, and so it is not known if the legate considered any claims from York about jurisdiction. The king was not at hand. Before the council convened he had gone south, summoned by Henry II to meet him at Winchester on 1 July 1177 for military service in Normandy. 
King William probably did not cross the channel because the expedition was postponed. It is evident, however, that while the Scottish bishops had been negotiating with some success to undermine the convention of Falaise, the king himself was still firmly bound to Henry II's lordship. It is probably no accident that he now turned to his one major monastic foundation, a house of Tironensian canons (a daughter of Kelso Abbey) at Arbroath. Some earlier gifts may have been made before the formal act of foundation in the autumn of 1178. It was perhaps as much a political as a religious gesture; the dedication to St Thomas Becket honoured another victim of Henry II. And on the day that William had been taken at Alnwick, Henry II was completing twenty four hours of penance for the murder of Becket. Such a coincidence no doubt had significance for the founder. The abbey was well endowed, but there is no sign of an early start of work on the buildings. There was another round of grants by the king and others in the 1190s; the community was active by 'c'.1200, and enough of the church had been built for the king to be buried there in 1214. Its large-scale ruins suggest a design to rival or surpass Dunfermline Abbey and the buildings at St Andrews, and so to be a fitting centre for a new saint as well as for a royal tomb. Any pleasure the king may have taken in his new foundation was soon disturbed, however, by ten difficult years of an ecclesiastical dispute about the bishop of St Andrews, a major revolt in Ross and Moray, and further trouble in Galloway. 
Bishop Richard of St Andrews died in May 1178. Ignoring the king, the local clerics swiftly elected John the Scot, a member of a family based near St Andrews and a nephew of Bishop Matthew of Aberdeen. The king then forced the election of his chaplain, Hugh, who was consecrated before the end of 1178. Over the next ten years Hugh witnessed royal charters and acted as bishop. John appealed to the pope. Alexander III had shown in 'Super anxietatibus' that he was not prepared to let a layman, Henry II, decide a question of ecclesiastical authority; he now supported the canonically elected John, and opposed King William. A legate, Alexius, held a council at Holyrood on 15 June 1180, formally deposed Hugh, and consecrated John. Royal pressure then forced John and his kindred to leave Scotland; they took their case to Henry II in Normandy. Excommunicated by the legate, Hugh took his case to the papal court. 
William and his brother David, visiting Henry II in Normandy in 1181 to discuss the dispute, were persuaded to allow the bishop of Aberdeen to return to Scotland. Further agreement was not then possible; later in 1181 William, his constable Richard de Moreville, and other courtiers were excommunicated by the pope's instructions by Roger, archbishop of York, and the kingdom placed under interdict. But Alexander III's death in August 1181, followed, to the great joy of the king of Scots, by that of Archbishop Roger in November that year, gave an opening for reconsideration. Early in 1182 an embassy led by Bishop Jocelin of Glasgow persuaded Pope Lucius III ('r'. 1181-5) to lift the interdict and excommunication; in an extraordinary gesture of friendship King William was presented with the golden rose customarily given in Lent by the pope to the ruler of the territory where he was in residence. Bishop Hugh then returned from Rome with a legate; during three days of discussions with the king in June 1182 it was proposed that Hugh and John might move to other sees, but the king stood by his bishop. A year later, by a compromise, John became bishop of Dunkeld and was to be paid 40 marks a year by Hugh, who remained at St Andrews. That arrangement lasted from 1183 until 1186, when John reopened the case, on the ground that royal promises had not been kept. Papal letters of 16 January 1188 deposed Hugh and ordered that John was to be installed at St Andrews. This was not done, and Hugh died on 8 August 1188 near Rome, having had personal absolution from the pope. 
The dispute was now over. The winner was the persistent king. He had upheld what he believed to be the powers he had inherited from David I and Malcolm IV; in the latter's reign he had seen two royal candidates become bishop of St Andrews in quick succession. His grip on appointments remained firm. The next bishop of St Andrews, Roger, had briefly been the king's chancellor and was also his kinsman; Bishop John of Dunkeld consented to the appointment, but Roger was not consecrated until 1198. Florence, bishop-elect of Glasgow in 1202-7, was the king's nephew. With few exceptions (one was a Douglas and two were monks), up to 1214 vacant bishoprics went to royal servants, and there were allegations of simony over the appointment of Walter, a royal chaplain, as bishop of Glasgow in 1208. 
In 1179 William had to deal with the first of a series of revolts, which continued into the reign of his son, Alexander II ('r'. 1214-49), by the Macheth and Macwilliam families. Malcolm Macheth had apparently tried to win the earldom of Ross in the reign of David I and had been given it by Malcolm IV. After his death in 1168 no successor earl of Ross was appointed. The Macheths were supported by the Macwilliams, descended from King Duncan II and his son William fitz Duncan, said to have been earl of Moray. No earl of Moray had been appointed after William, and increasing evidence for burghs, castles, and knights in the region shows that the Scottish king was strengthening his grip there. Faced with such changes some local lords, especially in Ross, seem to have preferred to support a potential royal line descended from Duncan II. In 1179 the king and his brother led an army to deal with unrest in Ross. Two castles (mottes) were built at Redcastle and Dunskeath, and measures were agreed to strengthen the defences of Inverness. Now, probably, William confirmed David's possession of the earldom of Lennox and the lordship of Garioch; both had strategic importance and the grant of the latter, a compact estate controlling the roads to Moray and Ross, clearly shows the trust placed by the king in his brother. For the moment all these precautions were enough. But in April 1181 the king and David were in Normandy and William did not return to Scotland until at least August. Donald Ban Macwilliam, a son of William fitz Duncan, took advantage of his absence and led a full-scale revolt in Moray and Ross. 
This was a serious blow. A later statement by a chronicler that Donald Macwilliam controlled the earldoms of Ross and Moray for some considerable time seems to be well founded. The king is not known to have issued charters in Moray between probably 1179 and 1187, and there was no bishop of Moray for nearly two and a half years (from 17 September 1184 to 1 March 1187). A royal servant, Gillecolm, the marischal, surrendered the castle of Auldearn and went over to the rebels. In November 1186 an outlaw, Aed, son of Donald Macheth, with his (unnamed) nephew and fifty-eight followers, got as far south as Coupar Angus, where they were trapped and killed in the church. 
By now the king was engaged on two fronts. Gilbert of Galloway had made little real effort since 1179 to pay the money he owed to Henry II. In 1184 William, whose lands had been ravaged by the Galwegians, tried to bring him under control. News of the return of Henry II to England led to a truce, and the royal army was sent home. In the late summer William was with Henry II. A decision for action in the following year can be inferred, but on 1 January 1185 Gilbert died. His nephew Roland (Lachlan), son of the Uhtred murdered in 1174, invaded Galloway with the help of King William, and probably also the tacit agreement of Henry II, and on 4 July 1185 defeated the main force of Gilbert's followers. A surviving ringleader, one Gillecolm, was killed on 30 September 1185. In July 1186, at Carlisle, Roland was presented by King William before Henry II and made peace. After this, possibly as late as 'c'.1190, King William granted Roland the lordship of Galloway; Duncan, Gilbert's son, was made lord of Carrick. Thereafter Roland kept Galloway at peace and was loyal to William until his death in 1200. His son and successor, Alan, continued this policy and no more is heard of rebels in Galloway until after Alan's death in 1234. 
With the south-west quiet by the end of the campaigning season in 1186, the Scottish king could turn again to the north. In 1187 he led a large army as far as Inverness, whose citizens dissuaded him from taking part in the fighting. Roland of Galloway, with a picked force, brought the rebels to battle on 31 July at 'Mam Garvia' (unidentified, but probably on the north side of the Beauly Firth). Donald Macwilliam and, it is said, 500 of his men were killed and Donald's head was sent to the king. 
The rebellions may have prompted King William, or Henry II, to reflect that the succession in Scotland in the early 1180s was not settled. William was still unmarried and had no legitimate heir except his brother David. Not that he was childless; unlike Malcolm IV, William was not chaste. In 1183 his illegitimate daughter Isabella was married to Robert de Brus ['see under 'Brus, Robert (II) de], heir to the lordship of Annandale; in 1184 another daughter, Ada, was married to Earl Patrick of Dunbar. William's illegitimate son Robert of London (died 'c'.1226), endowed from the royal lands, began to appear regularly in public in the early 1180s. 
Henry II, as King William's lord, had a duty in such matters. In 1184, perhaps in July or August, William attended Henry II's court to discuss a request he had made to marry Henry's granddaughter Matilda of Saxony, daughter of Duke Henry the Lion. This proposal was referred to the pope, who forbade it on grounds of consanguinity. In 1185, on the death of Earl Simon (III) de Senlis, Henry II set aside possible claims from the earl's relations and restored the earldom of Huntingdon to King William, who promptly granted it to his brother David. Thereafter Earl David's career was spent more in England and Normandy than in Scotland, but his social position and expectations, reinforced in 1190 by marriage to a sister of Ranulf, earl of Chester, were now more like those of a royal heir. 
In May 1186, in a council at Woodstock, Henry II proposed that King William should marry Ermengarde (d. 1233), daughter of Richard, vicomte de Beaumont, who was the son of an illegitimate daughter of Henry I of England. Her royal blood was thus somewhat undernourished, and the first Scottish reaction was unfavourable. The king consulted his advisers and at last agreed. His reluctance is understandable; a union with Matilda of Saxony would have been more fitting for his royal dignity and in addition Ermengarde was possibly very young. The marriage took place at Woodstock on 5 September 1186; Henry II paid for the four days of festivities and returned Edinburgh Castle as part of the bride's tocher (or dower); the king of Scots was to provide $100 of rents and forty knights feus in Scotland. 
In 1187, when a crusading movement developed in Europe, Henry II and Philippe II of France ('r'. 1180-1223) proposed a ten per cent tax on moveables and rents -- the Saladin tithe. In February 1188 Bishop Hugh of Durham was sent to press the Scots for their contribution. King William used the opening to offer 4000 marks to recover Roxburgh and Berwick castles; Henry II may have agreed to this so long as the tithe was also paid. A meeting of Scottish magnates refused to pay the tithe, and so the matter was dropped. But the issue of the castles soon came back. Henry II died on 6 July 1189; his successor, Richard I, was determined to go on crusade. King William went south in November, met Richard at Canterbury, and did homage for his lands in England. To raise money for the crusade, Richard then abandoned his lordship of Scotland. Under the quitclaim of Canterbury (5 December 1189) King William was released from the homage and submission given to Henry II, Roxburgh and Berwick castles were returned, and the relationship of the kingdoms was to be as in the days of Malcolm IV. The Scots paid 10,000 marks and, in what seems to be an innovation, a tax (aid) was taken for the purpose. Scotland was independent again, at a price. 
Another benefit soon appeared. On 13 March 1192 Pope Celestine III ('r'. 1191-8) issued the bull 'Cum universi', decreeing that the Scottish church was a 'special daughter' of the apostolic see and subject to it without any intermediary. The earlier claims of York to superiority were thus firmly denied. If the king had then taken stock he would have had some reason to be content. He had had, it is true, to accept a wife not of his own choice or rank, and he still had no legitimate son to succeed him. But he had exploited a situation in England to recover political independence. Galloway, Moray, and Ross were quiet. Despite the St Andrews dispute he had retained control over senior appointments in the church in Scotland, whose existence as a separate body had now been formally recognized by the pope (and was to be confirmed by reissues of 'Cum universi', perhaps in 1200 and then in 1218). 
Northumberland, however, was still beyond William's reach. In 1189 King Richard sold a life-interest in the earldom to Bishop Hugh of Durham. William then tried to build up local support there. In 1191 his illegitimate daughter Isabella, now a widow, was married to Robert de Ros, lord of Wark. In 1193 another illegitimate daughter, Margaret, was married to Eustace de Vescy, lord of Alnwick. Two lords in the northern part of the earldom were now bound to the king of Scots by marriage, and three years earlier Duncan, earl of Fife, had gained control of the lordship of Mitford by buying the wardship of the heir. But friendly relations with King Richard continued, and in 1193 William volunteered 2000 marks towards his ransom. 
After Richard returned to England in early March 1194 the two kings soon met. On 5 April, in Nottinghamshire, William formally sought two favours. The first, granted on 17 April (but not put into effect until the reign of King John), was for an honourable escort and daily subsistence allowances when visiting the English court. This purported to be the revival of an old custom. The second was for the earldom of Northumberland, the lordships of Cumberland and Westmorland, and cheekily, since the Scots had not held it since the 1140s, the earldom of Lancaster, as of right enjoyed by his predecessors. After taking counsel, King Richard's reply, on 10 or 11 April was, not surprisingly, negative. On 17 April, at Richard's solemn crown-wearing at Winchester, William carried one of the three swords of state before the king. Two days later the bishop of Durham surrendered the earldom of Northumberland. William offered 15,000 marks for it. Richard offered the earldom without the castles; this was rejected. On 21 April William tried again and got the same answer; Richard held out hopes of granting the castles after his return from Normandy, but he never came back to England after May 1194, and William had failed again. 
Bishop Hugh of Durham, despite the surrender, continued to control the earldom. His death on 3 March 1195 could not be exploited because of a succession crisis in Scotland. Probably in April or May 1195 King William lay gravely ill at Clackmannan. By one account his eldest legitimate daughter, Margaret, was recognized by the Scots magnates as his heir. By another, there was a proposal that she should be married to Otto, duke of Saxony (brother of the Matilda whom William had sought to marry), who would succeed. A group of Scottish magnates led by the earl of Dunbar claimed that this was contrary to the custom of the kingdom, so long as the king had a brother or nephew who could succeed. But the king recovered and the crisis passed. In 1196 a modified proposal was put forward by the English court but rejected by King William because the queen was pregnant and he hoped for a son. The queen did not provide one then, but two years later, on 24 August 1198, the future King Alexander II arrived. He was the first surviving legitimate son born to a reigning king of Scots for some seventy years and, not surprisingly, a contemporary recorded that 'many rejoiced at his birth' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.349). 
Between the succession crisis and Alexander's birth the peace of the country was broken again. In 1196 there was a battle near Inverness between the royal forces and a certain Roderick (or Ruaridh; perhaps a descendant of Somerled of Argyll and the eponym of the late thirteenth-century MacRuaridhs) and Thorfinn, son of Earl Harald Maddadson of Orkney and Caithness. The causes are not clear, but the earl's second (bigamous) wife, Hvarflod, was a daughter of Malcolm Macheth; she might have been claiming the earldom of Ross or pursuing a feud after the death of her nephew Aed Macheth at Coupar Angus in 1186. William spent part of 1196 and 1197 in Moray, and in the autumn of 1197 Earl Harald surrendered at Nairn. He was imprisoned at Roxburgh and released when Thorfinn surrendered and took his place. King William encouraged a rival earl, Harald Ungi, and when the latter was killed in 1198 he then called on the king of the Hebrides and Man, Ragnvald, son of Godfrey, for help. But Ragnvald was unable to hold Caithness. A dispute between Earl Harald and Bishop John of Caithness led to the serious injury of the latter, and so another royal effort was required. 
Preparations for an expedition were made in the autumn of 1201. An early step may have been the blinding and emasculation of Thorfinn, who died later in prison. Perhaps expecting the worst, or just conscious of his age, the king had the Scottish magnates swear fealty to Alexander on 12 October 1201 at Musselburgh. The winter expedition achieved nothing and another was prepared for the spring of 1202. But Earl Harald, under the safe conduct of Bishop Roger of St Andrews, came to Perth, submitted, and on payment of 2000 pounds of silver was allowed to retain Caithness. He was at peace until he died in 1206, when his sons David and John jointly inherited the earldom. 
When John became king of England in 1199 he already had a reputation for untrustworthiness. King William is said to have agreed with William de Longchamp, left to look after England when King Richard was crusading, to recognize Arthur of Brittany (Richard's nephew and William's great-nephew) as Richard's heir. Relations between William and John might therefore have got off to a bad start. At first, all was formally correct. King William soon asked for the northern counties. The two kings met in 1200 at Lincoln and on 21 November William did homage to John; the latter asked for the discussion about the northern counties to be deferred until Whitsun 1201. In May 1201, about to go to Normandy, he sought another postponement. He returned in December 1203; there was further contact in 1204 and, at last, meetings between the kings at York on 9-12 February 1206 and 26-28 May 1207. There is little record of the business. It is known that William's tenure in Tynedale was recognized, and in 1206 King John granted Arbroath Abbey trading privileges in England. A draft agreement ('conventio') between the kings was discussed, but there are also signs of suspicion on the part of William, along with protestations from King John that he was acting in good faith. A proposal for a further meeting in October 1207 was not taken up. By now, it must be assumed, William's earlier requests had been rebuffed and relations were tense. 
After the death of Bishop Philip of Durham in April 1208, King John took control of the vacant see. He was in the north of England in August 1208; orders were probably then given for the building of a castle at Tweedmouth. This was a direct threat to Scottish security and the trade of Berwick. King William was sufficiently angered to send men across the river to destroy the work. Perhaps as a result of his earlier rebuffs he may also have been negotiating at this time for a French marriage alliance. Whatever the reasons, there was a major crisis in 1209. 
In April that year the king of Scots was ill at Traquair. He was well enough to meet John, not on friendly terms, at Bolton, near Alnwick, later in the month. There was another hostile conference at Norham on 23-26 April, when both sides had an army at their back and demands, including the surrender of castles, were made on the Scots. After a council at Stirling in May 1209 the Scottish reply produced a threatening rejoinder. Ambassadors shuttled; again, both sides collected their armies. In the last week of July and the first week of August there was another confrontation at Norham. For the Scots, the strain must have been intense. The king, now an old man, had been in poor health for some years, to judge by how often his doctors appear in his presence. His heir was ten years old and not yet ready to rule. The English army, which included forces sent by the Welsh princes and mercenaries from overseas, was large enough to produce a Scottish capitulation. 
By the treaty of Norham of 7 August 1209 the Scots agreed to pay 15,000 marks for peace, and they surrendered hostages, including the king's two eldest legitimate daughters, Margaret and Isabella, with promises of marriage to sons of King John. The castle at Tweedmouth was to be dismantled, but a further $4000 was to be paid by the Scots as 'compensation' for its earlier destruction. About now, it seems, Alexander did homage to John, probably for lands in England. The king's daughters and the other Scots hostages were handed over at Carlisle on 16 August 1209 and the money due under the treaty was to be paid in stages on and after 30 November. A council called to meet at Perth towards the end of September (no doubt to discuss the payments) was washed out by a serious flood in the burgh. The king, Alexander, Earl David, and some magnates escaped in a small boat. The council was adjourned to Stirling. By 1211 most of the money due had been paid; the rest may have been pardoned on condition that the hostages remained in England -- as they did. The quitclaim of Canterbury had not been explicitly cancelled and no Scottish castles had been surrendered, but King William was now as effectively under King John's lordship as he had ever been under Henry II's. 
In 1210 a likely consequence of King John's visit to Ireland was the expulsion of Guthred Macwilliam, now the head of his kin, who invaded Ross early in February 1211 at the invitation, it is said, of some of the local lords and with Irish help. King William could do little at first; he was seriously ill for some two months at Kintore between Christmas 1210 and 24 February 1211. But he recovered and sent an army into the field. The mottes at Dunskeath and Redcastle were refortified. The king was in Moray from about the end of June until the autumn of 1211. Hoping no doubt to repeat the success at 'Mam Garvia' in 1187, a picked force was organized to deal with Guthred. The rebels were scattered and many were killed, but Guthred escaped. By mid-October the king had moved to Forfar; Malcolm, earl of Fife, left in charge in Moray, could not prevent Guthred from capturing and firing one of the castles in Ross. The king was enraged but could not retaliate because the weather was too severe for a winter campaign. 
The rising was clearly beyond William's immediate powers, and the Scots probably then sought help from King John. There were discussions at Durham in February 1212; King William was not there but Queen Ermengarde mediated actively. It was agreed that Alexander should be married to a daughter of King John and that he should be knighted; the latter ceremony took place at Clerkenwell on 4 March 1212. The king of England had again shown how much he wished to control Scotland. The kingdom of the Scots was still intact, but Alexander and his sisters were now intended to marry Plantagenets, and the girls and the other hostages from 1209 were still in England. Alexander returned from London, probably with mercenaries provided by John, and set out for Ross about midsummer 1212, his father intending to follow him. However, William spent three days at the end of June in the north of England with John, and in the event neither he nor Alexander was needed in the north of Scotland. Guthred had been betrayed and taken in chains to Moray and then to Kincardine, where it was made known that the king did not wish to see him; he was then beheaded. That was the last Macwilliam rising during the reign, though the family was not finally crushed until the late 1220s. 
In January or February 1213 both kings were again near the border but did not meet. Efforts to persuade Alexander to meet John were resisted. King William was probably now permanently ill; for the rest of 1213 he remained in the lowlands, and was still able to conduct some business, including, in December, an important judgment of the succession to the earldom of Menteith. The early months of 1214 were spent similarly. Then, in the spring or early summer, David, joint earl of Caithness, died. The king, no doubt mindful that the new earl, John, had Macheth blood, made one last effort and travelled to Moray; he was at Elgin on 17 August. He agreed a peace with the earl and received his (unnamed) daughter as a hostage. He then returned by easy stages to Stirling, where, having commended Alexander to his bishops and magnates as his heir, and settled his other affairs, he died on 4 December 1214. He was probably seventy-two years old and had reigned for almost exactly forty-nine years. Alexander was inaugurated as king of Scots on 6 December and his father was buried at Arbroath on the 10th. 
In the fourteenth century John Fordun called King William 'the lion of justice'. William 'the harsh', said an Irish annalist nearer to the reign, and the regular execution of rebels and the treatment of the king's opponents in the St Andrews election dispute bear that out. The king was very conscious of his royal majesty and dignity and when they were slighted his anger was probably as awe-inspiring as that of Henry II. It is surely no accident that most of the major revolts of his reign broke out when he was abroad or ill. William 'the active' would be as apt a nickname. He never relaxed his grip of business except when seriously ill; he enjoyed tournaments and hunting, and even late in life was ready to go into the field with his troops. His six known illegitimate children (a daughter, Aufrica, and a son, Henry Galithly, as well as the four already named) might make William 'the saint' seem far fetched, yet an Icelandic annalist called him 'the holy', and at York in 1206 he is said to have cured a sick child by touch. Stories of his devotion and saintly qualities circulated very soon after his death. 
But it is 'the lion' which has endured, and with good reason. From early in the reign, when he defined and probably curtailed the judicial powers originally granted by David I to the Brus lords of Annandale, to nearly the end of his life, he can be found in his court, presiding, listening, and deciding. Judgments are recorded in royal 'acta'. From time to time he promulgated 'assizes', that is, statements of the law. Some dealt with special problems, like the tracking of thieves in Galloway or improving the efficacy of local and baronial courts. Others, dealing with theft, or with the harbouring of criminals, appear to have been drawn up with knowledge of such English measures as the assize of Clarendon of 1166 and the 1195 proclamation for keeping the peace. The king's justiciars, all lay aristocrats, appeared in unbroken succession. The Celtic 'judex' still had a place in court and as a witness to decisions, yet the way was also open, especially by the use of papal judges-delegate in ecclesiastical cases from the mid-1170s, for the influences of canon law to come to Scotland, and soon after 1200 advice was being sought from Pope Innocent III on doubtful points. 
Other institutions of the king's government were also growing. His chapel (writing office) increasingly had its own specialized staff, producing documents of consistent quality; through it the king's rule had become literate, precise, and controlled, and in ways no different from other north European realms. New burghs were founded. Some -- Nairn, Dumfries, and Ayr -- began life as frontier posts; Clackmannan and Forfar appeared within royal estates; Dundee was a trading settlement. With a burgh there usually came a sheriff, and by 1214 they, too, were more widespread than in 1165, having appeared in Moray, Nairn and Inverness (and probably Aberdeen), and to the south-west in Ayr (and probably Dumfries). The sheriffs looked after the king's interests but were also expected to help the church, for instance by enforcing payment of teinds (tithe). There are the first traces of sheriff courts. 
The king's revenues, paid largely in kind but increasingly in money, were collected locally. There was a 'camera' (financial centre), with its own staff and records, probably based soon after 1175 at Stirling. An annual audit, no doubt with sessions of an exchequer, can be detected in the 1180s. The king could take tolls on merchandise and had powers to tax. An assembly at Musselburgh in, probably, 1190 agreed on the sums to be raised to pay for the quitclaim of Canterbury, and by the end of the reign it was probably usual for councils of magnates to be called to give advice on and agree to such 'aids'. 
Holding land by knight-service had become a normal tenure and by 1214 it can be seen to have spread north of the Tay and into Moray. But the Celtic 'common army' obligations for the rest of the population continued and local levies probably made up most of the forces which the king called out for both internal and external campaigns; known use of mercenaries is rare. 
The king's justiciars, sheriffs, and chamberlains were usually laymen (though Archibald, abbot of Dunfermline, had some financial duties in the early 1190s) and almost all were members of the new immigrant aristocracy which had come into being in the reigns of David I and Malcolm IV alongside the survivors of the Celtic earls. Early members of this group (Moreville, Brus, Lindsay, Stewart) were joined by other baronial families (Hay, Barclay, Seton, Comyn). Major magnates such as the earls of Fife and Dunbar, the Stewards (later Stewarts), and the Bruses, had their own followings of knightly families, usually descendants of men who had made their way to Scotland before 1165 and who were now entrenching themselves, for example by intermarriage, by taking names from their lands (Polloc, Moray, Hume), and by using places in the church for sons or younger brothers. They had come to stay. 
The gradual crystallization of the 'ecclesia Scoticana' and its formally recognized direct relationship with the pope is another sign of a kingdom being extended and consolidated. Scottish clerics had attended the church councils at Tours in 1163 and at the Lateran (Rome) in 1179, and there had been many direct contacts with Alexander III and his successors. Such activity, and the issue of 'Cum universi', showed that the church in Scotland was a national body, established on normal contemporary European lines. Vacant bishoprics were usually filled quickly; a hierarchy of lesser dignitaries is apparent within each diocese; more university graduates were promoted as the reign progressed. The extent of the king's control over 'his' church would not have aroused comment in, say, Capetian France. But the practice of appointing many former royal servants as bishops, however much it may have helped to consolidate the institution, and to produce a more widely spread network of loyal supporters, probably did little for spiritual standards; no twelfth-century Scottish cleric was canonized and only one, the Cistercian Waldef of Melrose, was venerated. 
After 1190 lowland Scotland was usually peaceful. The revolts against the king must have caused considerable destruction, especially in Moray and further north and west, but elsewhere there was a thriving economy. The population was probably growing; some burghs, Perth and Dundee in particular, were expanding quickly. Agriculture, especially sheep and cattle rearing, was also expanding and by 'c'.1200 at the latest Scotland was exporting basic products such as wool and hides in quantity to Flanders and trading by sea with England. By the middle of the reign there was greater use of money in town and country in most of lowland Scotland. At different times mints were at work at Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh, and Perth, and the major recoinage in 1195, which made Scottish pennies equal in value to English sterlings, guaranteed their wider acceptance in European trade. Wealth from wool sales probably went into major new building at the monastic houses founded before 1165, and there was much church building, exemplified by new cathedrals (St Andrews and Glasgow), burgh churches (Aberdeen, Dundee, and Crail), and parish kirks (Symington in Ayrshire, Leuchars, and Duddingston). 
When King William died, Alexander II's immediate prospects were not promising: his father had not recovered the northern counties of England; his sisters were not yet married, and they and other Scottish hostages were still in English hands; King John's lordship was still effective; the Macheths and Macwilliams were still active. By 1221 many of these problems had disappeared. But even in 1214 the reality was that after all the defeats, disappointments, and rebellions of the reign, no castles and territory inherited from Malcolm IV had been lost, royal rule was more firmly established over more of the land, and the line of David I was still on the throne. A French speaker, surrounded by a French-speaking court (William is not known to have been conversant with Gaelic or English), the king 'of Scots', as he consistently styled himself, nevertheless embodied his people and his realm. Scotland, in the language of most of its people, in its king-making ritual, in its territorial divisions, in its ways of raising armies, and in some legal matters, still strongly showed its Celtic roots. It was not quite like any of the other kingdoms of northern Europe, and yet in its royal house, in the major institutions of government, in its church, and in its main economic and trading links, it was undeniably one of them. King William's tenacity and obstinacy had successfully continued the task begun by his grandfather David I of forging a new kingdom of the Scots, and, through the dynastic, ecclesiastical, and economic links created or strengthened during his reign, of bringing it more fully into the main streams of European life. 


@@@@@


doc= 29453


William (1103-1120), prince, the only son of Henry I and his first wife, Matilda of Scotland, was born in 1103, probably in the third quarter of the year or earlier; Pope Paschal II sent congratulations on his birth on 23 November. For the first time since 1066 the reigning king had a single legitimate son. William's short life was governed by his father's natural wish to assure his obvious heir's undisputed succession to both England and Normandy and if possible to add to those lands the county of Maine, coveted by the counts of Anjou and the dukes of Normandy since before the Norman conquest of England. But Henry I's ambitions inevitably troubled the French king, Louis VI, who in his turn promoted the cause of Henry's nephew, William Clito, son of his dispossessed eldest brother, Robert, who was a little older than his cousin the AEtheling. 
According to William of Malmesbury, the AEtheling was trained for the succession with fond hope and immense care. Otuel or Othuer Fitzearl, bastard son of Hugh, earl of Chester, was appointed tutor to William and his bastard brothers, in one of whom, Robert, earl of Gloucester, Otuel is said to have instilled a love of letters. Otuel was made by the king castellan of the Tower of London, a likely scene of part of William's upbringing. High hopes were vested in the young William as the offspring of a marriage which restored the line of Cerdic to the throne through his mother, and a prophecy by Edward the Confessor on his deathbed was said to have foreseen William as the happy outcome. Oddly only one chronicler, Orderic Vitalis, who was but half English, gave to William -- as many as seven times -- the English princely title of AEtheling (Adelinus, later Adelingus), and said that all regarded him as the lawful heir. William was, after all, great-nephew of Edgar AEtheling and great-grandson of Edward AEtheling (the Exile); but the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' called him simply 'the king's son', whereas William's wholly Norman cousin was merely called Clito (from the Latin 'inclitus'); however, Orderic's usage has even led some modern historians to call the AEtheling William Adelin. 
In 1113, when William was ten, he began to attest royal documents and became the instrument of his father's diplomacy: in February, near Alencon, he was betrothed to Matilda, the young daughter of Foulques (V), count of Anjou and Maine. Two years after the betrothal began the process of assuring the Anglo-Norman succession: in 1115 William received the homage and fealty of the barons of Normandy, and in March 1116, in his father's presence, he received the homage and fealty of the magnates of England. Following the death of his mother on 1 May 1118 William is deemed to have acted as regent while his father was in Normandy, though the precepts issued in his name cannot be precisely dated. However, in December 1118 Henry suffered a serious setback when his troops were defeated by the Angevins in a battle at Alencon. The significance of this defeat has been little appreciated because Henry soon recovered. He bribed Foulques of Anjou into deserting the Capetians and agreeing to the marriage of William and Matilda, which took place at Lisieux in June 1119; Foulques settled the county of Maine on them as their marriage gift, and also Anjou should he die on his crusade. War against Louis VI followed. William was with his father on 20 August 1119 at the battle of Bremule, and after Henry's victory returned the captured palfrey of his cousin William Clito, whose claims lay behind all the discord, perhaps in imitation of his father's return to Louis of the latter's war-horse and archives. In November 1119 William was able to add experience of diplomacy to that of warfare: his father took William with him for his meeting near Gisors with Pope Calixtus II, to whom the AEtheling was second cousin once removed. 
In the middle of 1119 William's status may have reached its peak: in an interpolated charter issued at Rouen he witnessed as 'dei gratia rex designatus' ('Reg. RAN', 2, no. 1204), though only the Anglo-Norman Eadmer speaks of a formal sanction for this designation. In 1120 William did homage to Louis VI for the duchy of Normandy itself. This was the obvious and later the usual means of overcoming the reluctance of a king to do homage to another king of whom he held a fief. Thus in a piecemeal fashion William's succession to Normandy, Maine, and England was assured; but when Henry embarked for England with his son from Barfleur on 25 November 1120, all the king's achievements were overthrown by one of the greatest and most frequently recounted personal tragedies of English history. Henry sailed first, having turned down the offer of a new ship -- the 'White Ship' -- from Thomas Fitzstephen; the AEtheling and his retinue (reminiscent of the youthful entourage once enjoyed by his uncle Robert Curthose) followed in the new vessel. But the inebriated crew and passengers were in no fit condition for a night voyage, and the ship was rowed onto a rock (still identifiable) outside the harbour of Barfleur. The AEtheling was put into a small boat and would have escaped had he not turned back on hearing an appeal for help from his bastard sister, whereupon the boat was overloaded by others seeking safety, and sank. There was only one survivor, and few bodies were recovered; Otuel Fitzearl, and many others of high birth, drowned with the prince. 
William was just over seventeen when he died. He had no children with Matilda (who had crossed to England with King Henry and after some delay was returned to her father, later becoming first a nun and then abbess of Fontevrault), and Henry's plans were in ruins. According to Gervase of Canterbury the prince and his companions were swollen with pride and love of lust and luxury; and there are dark and unprovable hints that he would have been a harsh ruler of his English subjects. The recorded incidents of his short life may suggest that he had strong family affections -- or a love, eventually fatal to himself, of the grand gesture. William had received some training for the kingship which he was never to exercise, but perhaps by using the word ''adolescentulus'' to describe him, Malmesbury was casting doubt on his potential. 


@@@@@


doc= 29454


William, Prince, duke of Gloucester (1689-1700), was born on 24 July 1689 at Hampton Court, Middlesex, the third child and eldest son of Anne (1665-1714), later queen of Great Britain and Ireland, and her husband, George, prince of Denmark and duke of Cumberland (1653-1708). On the day of his baptism, 27 July 1689, he was declared duke of Gloucester by his uncle William III, although the creation was never formalized; the report of his baptism in the 'London Gazette' states that he was named William, but he is called in other sources William Henry. The birth of a healthy child to Anne was presented as an endorsement by providence of the revolution of 1688, which now had its protestant heir to counterbalance the Catholic James Francis Edward, infant son of the exiled James II and thus also Gloucester's uncle. 
Anne's two daughters had died in 1687 and she had also endured four other unsuccessful pregnancies before Gloucester was born. Consequently when he was seized with convulsions in September 1689 few expected him to live. However, he rallied, following treatment with bark by John Radcliffe. He was well enough to be moved from Whitehall to Kensington for convalescence, first to Craven House and then in 1690 to Campden House, which became his residence until 1698, with Barbara Berkeley, 'nee' Villiers, Viscountess Fitzhardinge, as his governess. He remained physically frail, and during his first few years suffered from repeated attacks of malarial fever. He had difficulty walking until he was five and for a long time was unable to rise without assistance if he fell. This affliction was blamed by some on the over-protective attitude of his lady attendants and by others on the size of his head, which his attendant Jenkin Lewis thought 'was occasioned by the issue in his pole, that had been kept running' since his illness as a baby, 'which made it difficult to fit his head with a peruke' (Lewis, 12). Some commentators have seen this condition as evidence of hydrocephalus, although this is not certain. His frailty did not prevent him from being presented in the press and to the political world as the eventual heir of his aunt and uncle; Mary II's regular visits and present-giving were widely reported. After Mary's death in 1694 Gloucester moved closer to the throne, and the cultivation of his public identity became more important. His sixth birthday, on 24 July 1695, was the first court festival following Mary's death, occasioning Henry Purcell's last royal ode. He was appointed KG on 9 January 1696 and was installed in person at Windsor on 25 July. 
Brought up in an outpost of a court preoccupied by war, it was not surprising that Gloucester became obsessed with military matters. He paid close attention to his uncle's campaigns during the Nine Years' War, and from about 1693 he was entertained by a group of boys from Kensington who dressed and paraded as soldiers at Campden House. Their numbers grew from twenty-two to over ninety within a couple of years, and included the sons of court families. Gloucester's 'army' became an accepted part of court ceremonial during his lifetime, particularly on royal birthdays and protestant festivals such as the anniversary of the birth of Elizabeth I. 
By 1696 Gloucester seems to have enjoyed generally good health. Lewis noted that he 'began to be more wary in what he said; and would not talk openly, as he was accustomed to do, but now and then would out with shrewd, comical expressions' (Lewis, 95), although he was still 'careless at meals' and had to be fed by his nurse Mrs Atkinson, suggesting continuing co-ordination problems. In December 1697, however, William III awarded $20,000 from the civil list towards Gloucester's household, and in June 1698 John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, was appointed his governor and Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, his preceptor. Apart from Burnet the household mainly consisted of supporters of Princess Anne, but William seems to have intended to use the settlement to bind Anne and her son as far as possible to his foreign and domestic agenda. 
Gloucester was now settled in St James's Palace and gradually took a larger role in public life. In March 1699 he attended the trial for murder of Charles Mohun, fourth Baron Mohun, and Edward Rich, sixth earl of Warwick, with his uncle and parents. From June foreign diplomats were required to have audiences with him. In July 1700 his status was further enhanced when he was given Mary II's apartments in Kensington Palace, more closely associating him with William. 
On 27 July 1700, three days after his eleventh birthday was celebrated at Windsor, Gloucester fell ill with suspected smallpox. He died there on 30 July 1700 and, after lying in state in a chamber in Westminster Hall, was buried on 9 August in the Henry VII chapel, Westminster Abbey. His death was a shock; though it has become conventional to characterize Gloucester as permanently disabled he seems to have been a vigorous boy -- Burnet wrote that in the two years that he was Gloucester's preceptor 'he had made an amazing progress in his lessons' (Loftie, 11) -- and by 1700 it had been long expected that he would reach adulthood. A succession crisis ensued, which led to the passing in England of the 'Act of Settlement' in 1701, settling the throne on the Electress Sophia of Hanover and her protestant heirs. Jenkin Lewis had written a memoir of his service with Gloucester, following his resignation in 1697, giving unrivalled details of Gloucester's upbringing and the jockeying for position around him within the household. This was found among the manuscripts of Bernard Gates, master of the children of the Chapel Royal, by Philip Hayes, who edited it for publication in 1789. Another edition, edited by William John Loftie, appeared in 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 29455


William Augustus, Prince, duke of Cumberland (1721-1765), army officer, was born at Leicester House, London, on 15 April 1721, the second surviving son of George, prince of Wales, the future George II, and his wife, Caroline. The eldest son, Frederick, was still abroad in Hanover, estranged from his parents. Honours were showered on the infant William. At the age of four he was made a companion knight of the Bath, the first royal prince to be so elevated in the recently revived order. The following year, 1726, saw him ennobled as duke of Cumberland, marquess of Berkhampstead, earl of Kennington, Viscount Trematon, and baron of Alderney. At the coronation of his parents in 1727 the young duke walked at the head of the knights of the Bath. If anything, the arrival of his elder brother in England in 1728 led their parents, now king and queen of Great Britain, to be even more indulgent towards the younger son, to demonstrate their favouritism for him and their loathing of Frederick. In 1730 Cumberland was made knight of the Garter. The same year he apparently began to attend Westminster School, though his name is not included on the school lists and he continued to be educated also by his private tutor Jenkin Thomas Philipps. If the flattery of courtiers is to be believed he was a precocious pupil. Viscount Perceval recorded in his diary on 31 January 1731 that Cumberland was chided by his mother for not fasting the day before, the anniversary of the execution of Charles I. 'She asked him if he thought it was right in the people to have done it, to which he replied he could not tell what was his crime till he read his history' ('Egmont Diary', 1.16). 
In 1731 Cumberland was provided with his own establishment, with rooms set aside for him in all royal residences and an allowance of $6000 a year. Stephen Poyntz was appointed as the governor and steward of his household. There were even indications that George II wished to separate the electorate of Hanover from the kingdom of Great Britain, by arranging for Cumberland to succeed as elector while his brother succeeded to the British crown. If this was the case, then it revived in amended form a proposal made by George II and Caroline when prince and princess of Wales, that Cumberland should succeed to Great Britain while Frederick would inherit the electorate. The scheme had faltered on the insistence of George I that it could only go ahead with Frederick's approval. According to Lord Hervey, Frederick was not averse to surrendering the electorate to his brother provided he received financial compensation, but Caroline would not hear of it and the project died with her. When she was on her deathbed in 1737 she urged Cumberland to 'show your gratitude to me in your behaviour to the King; be a support to your father and double your attention to make up for the disappointment and vexation he must receive from your profligate brother' (Hervey, 3.895). 
When he reached eighteen Cumberland's allowance was increased to $12,000 a year and he was given the use of a hunting lodge in Windsor Lodge. He was to prove a devotee of the chase and of the turf. It seems that he also began to sow his wild oats at this time, his name being associated with an actress, who was complimented on being his mistress. He even challenged Hugh Fortescue, fourteenth Baron Clinton, a rival for her favours, to a duel. Though he was to have many mistresses, he never married. The duke narrowly escaped matrimony in 1742 when George II chose Princess Louise of Denmark for his bride. Cumberland allegedly sought the advice of the former prime minister Sir Robert Walpole, now retired as earl of Orford. Orford got Cumberland off the hook by appealing to the king's avaricious nature, advising him to agree on condition that he received an ample establishment, assuring him that this would end the proposal. He followed this advice and the match was dropped. 
In 1740 Cumberland received a commission from his father as colonel of the Coldstream regiment of foot guards. He had, however, indicated a preference for the navy, which had been nurtured by his tutor Sir Jacob Acworth, who had arranged for the young prince to witness launchings at naval dockyards. When he requested permission to go to sea as a volunteer the king consented. He therefore went to Portsmouth and boarded HMS 'Victory', the flagship of Admiral Sir John Norris. The ship was unfortunately rammed by another, the 'Lion', which was to play a less demeaning role in 1745 when it intercepted the ships taking Charles Edward Stuart to Scotland. Cumberland was obliged to transfer to another ship, and then, understandably, decided to abandon his naval career and return to London. When Frederick II of Prussia was told that the duke joined the navy 'to see some action' he replied dismissively: 'What? does anyone expect to see action from an English fleet?' ('Egmont Diary', 3.163). While this was an insult to the naval feats Admiral Edward Vernon was performing at the time, it was not an unfitting comment on Cumberland's. 
The duke wisely decided to resume his military career and in 1742 became a major-general. The following year he accompanied his father to the continent and saw action at the battle of Dettingen. It was a baptism of fire. Cumberland was shot below the knee by grapeshot and had to be carried off the field. The wound took months to heal and he never fully recovered his gait. It seems that the difficulties he experienced walking, so that he always preferred to be on horseback thereafter, led him to put on the weight which was to cause him to become obese and eventually hastened his death. Before he was wounded he had made himself conspicuous by his courage, 'riding about animating the men with great bravery and resolution' ('Frankland-Russell-Astley MSS', 253). It was generally agreed that he had conducted himself well in his first campaign. Afterwards while he was recuperating an observer noted his 'openness of temper and careless air, which is quite 'a la militaire'' ('Hastings MSS', 3.39). He was now thoroughly attuned to a military life. 
Cumberland did not see action in 1744, though he was put in charge of defending London at the time of a threatened invasion from France on behalf of James Francis Edward Stuart, the Old Pretender. Instead of serving with the forces abroad he spent the summer in England, conducting an affair with Ann Montagu. Despite the continuing tensions between his brother and his father, Cumberland seems to have been able to get on well with both. Frederick commissioned a painting by Wootton of the duke on horseback, and they went to a cricket match together. At the start of the 1745 campaign the king made him commander-in-chief of the forces abroad, with the title captain-general, last held by John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough. Sir Everard Fawkener, a cosmopolitan figure who knew Voltaire, became his personal secretary, while Major Robert Napier dealt with his military correspondence. 
Cumberland left England in April 1745 and proceeded via The Hague to Brussels. There he learned that the French commander, Marshal Saxe, was besieging Tournai. The allied commanders determined to relieve the siege by forcing a pitched battle 4 miles east of Tournai at Fontenoy. They thought that they had numerical superiority, with about 43,000 men under their command and estimated that Saxe had far fewer at his disposal. In fact they underestimated the numbers in the French army, which were about 47,000. Cumberland advanced on the right, with the Dutch under Waldeck on the left. At first the duke ordered Brigadier Ingoldsby to attack a redoubt, and when the order was not executed himself went forward to engage the enemy. His troops marched straight into withering fire which thinned their ranks remorselessly, and yet they still advanced under his command until he saw that further progress was hopeless, and ordered a retreat. The infantry then withdrew in perfect order, leaving 1500 of their comrades dead, and many more wounded, on the battlefield. Cumberland thus learned the hard way how devastating sustained firing from cannon and musket could be, and was to apply the lesson to the Jacobite army at the battle of Culloden. At the time he blamed the Dutch for the defeat of the allied army. In a letter he wrote to his sister Anne (1709-1759), the wife of the prince of Orange, he commended the behaviour of the Dutch infantry, 'but blames much that of their cavalry' ('Hastings MSS', 3.50). His own conduct was commended. 'He rallied the troops when broken and made a stand which saved the army from being entirely cut to pieces' (Richard Lyttelton to his father, quoted Whitworth, 50). After his victory Saxe swept all before him in the Netherlands, taking Tournai, Ghent, Oudenarde and, on 12 August, Ostend. It was in this dire situation, when Cumberland despaired of saving what was left of the Austrian Netherlands and feared for the security of the Dutch republic, that news reached him that the Pretender's son, Charles Edward Stuart, had landed in Scotland. 
When Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, raised his standard at Glenfinnan on 19 August 1745, before perhaps 1000 supporters, the duke of Cumberland had about 34,000 British troops under his command on the continent. There was an inevitable outcry that most if not all of these should be recalled immediately to Britain to deal with the rising. Cumberland, however, was initially reluctant to jeopardize the campaign by detaching forces from his already overstretched army to deal with rebels, and hoped that these would be dealt with by the available forces on the spot. In Scotland there were at most 3850 men under Sir John Cope, most of them in Edinburgh or Stirling, though some were scattered in barracks throughout the country. There were also about 6000 soldiers in England, again most of them in London but the rest scattered. The lords justices, who governed Britain in the absence of George II, who was in Hanover, ordered Cope to march towards the enemy and 'endeavour to attack and suppress them at once' (Cumberland papers, 4/136). They also called upon the 6000 men whom the Dutch had undertaken by treaty to supply in such emergencies. Fearing a French invasion they recalled the British garrison at Ostend to England. The duke was uneasy at this request and asked his father, who was on his way back to London, whether it was necessary. He himself was confident that Cope would 'put a stop immediately to this affair' (Cumberland papers, 4/201). Cope, however, did not do so. On the contrary his attempt to intercept and defeat the rebels in the highlands proved a disastrous failure. Far from forcing them to engage him in a battle which he set out convinced he could win, their strength and his weakness obliged him to avoid them by diverting his army to Inverness, leaving the way clear for Charles Edward to march down through Scotland to Edinburgh. 
On hearing that Edinburgh was in the hands of the Young Pretender the cabinet immediately ordered Cumberland to send ten battalions under Sir John Ligonier back to England. The king, who when he was on the continent had shared his son's concern not to weaken his forces, now that he had returned to London agreed with his ministers. When he received his instructions Cumberland was downcast. 'I am heartily sorry for the occasion of this great detachment from our army', he wrote to the duke of Newcastle. 'I hope that Great Britain is not to be conquered by 3,000 rabble' (TNA: PRO, SP 36/68, fol. 153). In fact at the head of 2500 men Charles Edward routed a similar number under Cope at Prestonpans on 21 September. At least 300 royal troops were killed, and some 1500 were taken prisoner. The remainder, including Cope, fled south as fast as they could go. 
Cope's defeat at Prestonpans jolted the English out of the complacency most of them had displayed towards the rising. There were cries now for all British troops on the continent to be recalled. The cabinet did not go so far, but ordered Cumberland to send six battalions of foot and nine squadrons of dragoons from Flanders, and to be ready to join them if necessary. He was eager to do so now, writing that 'it would be the last mortification to me when so much is at stake at home, and brought to the decision of arms, to be out of the way of doing my duty' (Cumberland papers, 6/30). George II gave his permission and Cumberland arrived in England on 19 October. Meanwhile the king had sent General George Wade north to command 10,000 men to intercept the Young Pretender when he left Scotland. By 3 November Wade had got as far as Morpeth, where he learned that the rebels had left Edinburgh and were heading south. He therefore fell back on Newcastle, expecting to engage them there. Instead by a feint they made their way to Carlisle. Wade marched along the Tyne valley to intercept them but got bogged down in a snowstorm at Hexham. The Young Pretender had given him the slip and was heading towards the heart of England. 
Sir John Ligonier was ordered to advance troops under his command in the south to the River Mersey. He got as far as Lichfield when he fell ill and was unable to continue. The king replaced him on 21 November by putting Cumberland in command of the army. This appointment immediately boosted the morale of the soldiers who 'leaped and skipped about like wild things that the Duke was to command them' (F. Eld to J. Eld, 23 Nov 1745, Staffs. RO, D/798/3/1/1). When Cumberland arrived at Lichfield on 27 November the rebels were already at Preston. He took stock of the situation facing him in his new command. His infantry was in a line from Tamworth to Stafford, while the cavalry was between Lichfield and Newcastle under Lyme. As there were still some forces 'en route' to join him he decided to stay put until they arrived, and asked Wade to send his cavalry forward to harass the enemy. Seeing that Wade had moved only 40 miles south of Newcastle, the duke was being unduly optimistic in thinking that they could trap the rebels in a pincer movement between their two armies. By the time Wade reached Ripon on 30 November the Young Pretender was at Manchester. The following day the rebels arrived in Macclesfield. They kept Cumberland guessing whether they were heading towards Derby or Wales. Persuaded by Lord George Murray's moving to Congleton that they were probably trying to link up with Welsh Jacobites he advanced his army to Stone, where he expected to confront them. Instead Charles Edward marched to Derby, arriving there on 4 December. 
Cumberland realized early on 3 December that he had been misled, and would have made immediately for Derby, but his troops were not in a condition for the forced march that would be required to reach it in time. He therefore decided to move them to Northampton where he was convinced he could intercept the bulk of the Jacobite forces, though he did warn Newcastle to guard the approaches to London at Finchley just in case some of them got ahead of him. In the event the march to Finchley, which Hogarth depicted, was an unnecessary precaution, for on 6 December the Jacobites made the fateful decision to return to Scotland. It was a wise decision in view of the military situation. They had at most 5000 men in their ranks. Against this Cumberland had at least 9000 men in his army. There were over 4000 regular troops at or near Finchley, while Wade led over 6000 cavalry and infantry at Wetherby. For the rebels to have gone on further towards London would have been suicidal. If they could get back to Scotland, however, there was still some hope of keeping the rebellion alive. 
As soon as he knew that they were retreating Cumberland sent an express to Wade to march across into Lancashire in order to block their retreat, stressing that if he could not get there before them 'these villains may escape back unpunished to our eternal shame' (Cumberland papers, 7/325). Wade, however, was as slow-moving as ever and by 10 December had got only as far as Wakefield, where he learned that the Jacobite army had reached Manchester the day before, so he called off the pursuit and went back to Newcastle. Meanwhile Cumberland was in hot pursuit with all his cavalry and 1000 volunteers from his infantry who rode on horses provided by local people. By 9 December they were at Lichfield, having covered 30 miles that day. Even so, the rebels were retreating so fast that the duke despaired of catching up with them, though he was determined 'to pursue with this flying corps till I shall lose every glimpse of hopes of a possibility of overtaking them' (Cumberland papers, 7/369). 
By 11 December he had reached Macclesfield. Stragglers from the Jacobite army who were picked up he sent to gaol, explaining to the duke of Newcastle that 'they have so many of our prisoners in their hands I did not care to put them to death. But', he added, 'I have encouraged the country people to do it as they may fall in their way' (Cumberland papers, 8/6). These grim words show how 'the martial boy', as he was called at the outset of the campaign, was hardening into 'the Butcher'. He continued the pursuit to within a few miles of Lancaster and was hoping to overtake his enemy when orders reached him on 15 December from the king to return immediately to London. The government had learned that a French invasion was imminent and wanted the duke's forces ready to resist it. Cumberland was mortified, informing Newcastle that 'it was the greatest disappointment that ever befel me' (Cumberland papers, 8/50). Next day, however, he received an express that the orders had been countermanded to allow him to renew the pursuit. An eyewitness reported that on receiving it he 'jumped around the room for joy and declared that he would follow them to the furthest part of Scotland' ('Fitzherbert MSS', 176). 
Although he felt that the delay had ruined any chance of overtaking the rebels, he did catch up with their rearguard on 18 December at Clifton just south of Penrith. There was fought the last engagement between two armies on English soil. Some cavalrymen were dismounted to fight about 1000 rebels who had lined the hedges leading to the village in order to cover their army's retreat. Both sides claimed victory, and each with justice. The Jacobites had held off the pursuit of their main force. On the other hand Cumberland had flushed them out of Clifton, which he described as 'one of the strongest posts I ever saw' (Cumberland papers, 8/110). He reached Carlisle on 21 December, where the rebels had left a garrison of about 400 men. It took him ten days to reduce them to surrender. When they capitulated on 30 December Cumberland wrote: 'now we may have the happiness to say that this part of the kingdom is clear of all the rebels' (Cumberland papers, 8/161). 
After the capture of Carlisle Cumberland returned to London to be on hand in case a French invasion was launched in favour of the Jacobites. Meanwhile the rebel army reached Falkirk and proceeded to engage the forces there under General Henry Hawley. To the astonishment and dismay of the British government they more than held their own. It was clear that Hawley was completely discredited by the outcome of the battle fought on 17 January 1746 and had to be replaced. The king chose his son and sent him to Edinburgh, where he arrived on 30 January. There he held court in Holyrood, to emphasize the re-establishment of the rule of George II in the very place where the Young Pretender had stayed just three months earlier. After addressing the civic dignitaries he addressed the army he had come to lead, assuring them that they would find it easy 'to crush the insolence of a set of thieves and plunderers who have learned from their fathers to disturb every government they have lived under' ('An Address to the Army'). He left for Stirling the next day, taking with him enough troops 'to drive them off the face of the earth, if they will do their duty, which we must expect' (Cumberland papers, 8/28). On his way he learned that the rebels had abandoned the siege of Stirling and were heading for Inverness, which they took from the earl of Loudoun on 17 February. 
Cumberland's initial reaction to their retreat northwards was to assume that the rebellion was over and that he had little more than a mopping-up operation to conduct, albeit one which involved the summary execution of rebels and the devastation of their estates. When he communicated to Newcastle his view that the rebels were no longer a threat, the duke was able to use it to engineer the Pelhamite coup in the cabinet in which they finally ousted the king's favourite, John Carteret, second Earl Granville, from his counsels and established their own supremacy in the ministry. Cumberland, though he identified himself with the Pelhams and 'the Old Whig cause', was concerned that this ministerial instability would play into the hands of the Jacobites (BL, Add. MS 32706, fol. 157). He was therefore relieved when the situation stabilized, and expressed the wish to Newcastle that there would be 'no more of these dangerous shakes of Government' (ibid., fol. 233). He publicly demonstrated his endorsement of the outcome at his dinner table on 17 February, according to his aide-de-camp Joseph Yorke, when 'he made us all drink a bumper to our old friends and no more changes' (BL, Add. MS 32706, fol. 191). 
The fall of Inverness to Charles Edward's troops, however, changed the situation overnight. Cumberland again had a war on his hands. He therefore established his headquarters at Aberdeen where he remained from his arrival on 27 February until 8 April. He had to wait that long until severe winter weather abated and the crossing of the River Spey by his army became possible. While there he drafted a proclamation threatening the rebels with 'military execution' if they did not surrender to him. This phrase was disliked by the lord justice clerk, Andrew Fletcher, who preferred 'the utmost rigour of the law' (Cumberland papers, 12/75). Cumberland wrote for clarification to the duke of Newcastle, asking advice from the king on that matter. Newcastle's reply was a masterpiece of passing the buck. Cumberland could do 'whatever is necessary for suppressing this unnatural rebellion' but should not 'give any just cause of complaint to a country so ill disposed to the king' (BL, Add. MS 32706, fol. 325). Cumberland took this to give him carte blanche to continue his scorched earth policy. 'Don't imagine that threatening military execution and many other things are pleasing to me', he replied to Newcastle. 'But nothing will go down without in this part of the world' (BL, Add. MS 32707, fol. 13). During the weeks in Aberdeen Cumberland's forces were trained to adapt to the fighting techniques of the Jacobite army. The troops led by Cope at Prestonpans and Hawley at Falkirk had been demoralized by the rebel infantry's use of shields and broadswords to hack their way through riflemen. Cumberland's infantrymen practised pointing their bayonets to the right rather than straight ahead, in order to stab the unshielded side of their opponent. 
On 8 April the duke's army at last marched out of Aberdeen and proceeded by way of Old Meldrum and Banff to Cullen, where they were joined by the forces of William Anne Keppel, second earl of Albemarle, from Strathbogie. They then proceeded to cross the Spey, meeting little resistance from the enemy. By 14 April they were at Nairn, where Cumberland received intelligence that Charles Edward's army at Inverness was preparing to fight a battle with his. On 15 April the Jacobites attempted to surprise the duke's men in a night attack on their camp at Balblair. The 15th was actually Cumberland's twenty-fifth birthday, and they expected that his soldiers would celebrate it until their guard was seriously relaxed. They took so long in crossing the moor from Culloden House, where they were encamped, however, that dawn broke before they could make their attack, removing the element of surprise. They retreated tired and dejected to await Cumberland's march to Drummossie Moor. Even if they had succeeded in their attempt they would have found that their opponents were not sleeping off a drunken birthday party in their tents, but were preparing to march to meet them. Between 4 and 5 o'clock on 16 April the whole army was mobilized and on the march to Culloden. When they got there they saw the enemy, about 5000 in all, lined up to meet them, and formed ranks about 500 yards from them. Cumberland addressed his 9000 troops, urging them to stand their ground and to 'parry the enemy in the manner you have been directed' ('GM', 1st ser., 16, 1746, 271). He then sent forward his aide-de-camp, George Keppel, Viscount Bury, to discover the intentions of the enemy. As Bury advanced a cannon ball whistled over his head. The battle of Culloden had begun. 
Cumberland's artillery replied to the rebels, who withstood a murderous fire for between fifteen and thirty minutes before charging. When they charged they ran into grapeshot which 'made open lanes quite through them, the men dropping down by wholesale' (M. Hughes, 'A Plain Narrative or Journal of the Late Rebellion', 1746, 41). The rebels charged Cumberland's right wing, where he himself was positioned, three times, running up to within 100 yards of his front line before retreating. The two armies came to closer grips on the duke's left, even though the Jacobites were raked by gunfire from their flank as well as from the front. The two front lines engaged in hand-to-hand fighting, where the bayonet proved superior to the broadsword, so that losses in the Jacobite ranks far outweighed those among the Hanoverian troops. The rebels retreated, to be pursued by the dragoons who inflicted a dreadful slaughter not only on the field of battle but all the way down from the moor to Inverness. Possibly as many as 2000 men were hacked to death as they fled from Culloden. Drummossie Moor was turned into a killing field that day. In all the Jacobites sustained some 3600 casualties. Since their wounded were left untended, dying of their wounds, or were dispatched by their victors, these were nearly all fatalities. The barbarity of the Hanoverians was inspired by stories of the inhumanity of their enemies when the boot was on the other foot, particularly at Prestonpans, where the carnage was attributed to their refusal to offer quarter to the wounded. 
The day after the battle, however, Cumberland issued 'orders of the day' which gave a new excuse for savagery. The men who were sent out to track down Jacobites were told to 'take notice that the public orders of the rebels yesterday was to give us no quarters' (NA Scot., GD1/322/1). This claim has been denied by historians sympathetic to Jacobitism, some even accusing the duke of having forged orders allegedly issued by Lord George Murray 'to give no quarters to the Elector's troops on any account whatsoever' (Cumberland papers, 13/405). Certainly no genuine orders of Murray's issued before the battle contain this phrase. However, the night attack which occurred prior to it could have succeeded only if no quarter was given to the duke's men. The attackers were heavily outnumbered and the only chance of success was to murder their enemies in their tents. Moreover Cumberland could not have got away with a complete fabrication without the connivance of the whole high command of his army. There is no need to posit a conspiracy for a policy on which the victors were virtually all agreed anyway. They were utterly convinced that the rebels must be extirpated to prevent another rebellion breaking out. Cumberland had already gone beyond the strict limits of the law in pursuit of what he saw as his duty. He believed in 'military execution' and thought that lenity after the 1715 rebellion had kept treason alive. The ministers in Whitehall had tipped him the wink that no questions would be asked about the means he employed to achieve this goal. Indeed few people were moved to inquire closely into the slaughter of enemies who were widely regarded as being subhuman. On the contrary reaction to the news of the duke's victory was to praise him to the skies as the conquering hero. Addresses flowed in from all parts of the realm and the empire congratulating him on his feat. There were, however, some who did question his humanity. A newspaper printed before the end of May a report that when he returned to London he was to be made a freeman of the Butchers' Company. On 1 August Horace Walpole retailed a more celebrated version of the story in a letter, claiming that when 'it was lately proposed in the City to present him with the freedom of some company, one of the aldermen said aloud, 'Then let it be of the Butchers'!' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.288). Within weeks of the action at Culloden, Cumberland had been dubbed with the title by which he was for ever to be known, 'the Butcher'. 
Cumberland remained in Scotland until July 'to pursue and hunt out these vermin amongst their lurking holes' (Cumberland papers, 14/234). Among the 'vermin' was the Young Pretender, who had fled from the battlefield. He was successful in eluding the duke's search parties and eventually returned to the continent. His more humble supporters were less fortunate, as Cumberland visited a reign of terror upon them. Rebels still in arms were summarily shot. Their houses and effects were destroyed. Nor did some of the officers employed in this business distinguish too nicely between men who had been 'out' and other Scots suspected of disaffection. Towards the end of May Cumberland moved from Inverness to Fort Augustus and then to Fort William, to show the highlanders 'that it is as much in his Majesty's power to march his forces into that country which they have hitherto boasted as inaccessible as into any other part of his dominions' (Cumberland papers, 18/396). Having shown the flag in the highlands, and visited misery on the inhabitants, the duke left Scotland at the end of July, arriving in London on the 25th. He received a hero's welcome. Parliament had already voted thanks for the victory at Culloden and passed an act granting him and his heir $25,000 a year over and above his civil list grant. Now a thanksgiving service was held in St Paul's Cathedral at which was played the first performance of Handel's 'The Conquering Hero', composed specially for his Highness. 
Cumberland was content to rest on his laurels for the continental campaign of 1746. The defeat of forces under Sir John Ligonier at Roucoux near Liege in October, however, made him decide to return to active service. He went to The Hague to co-ordinate forces for the next campaign in 1747, and after briefly returning to London in January was back on the continent in February. His first aim was to recover Antwerp, but he found the Dutch too preoccupied with an internal upheaval which restored the stadholderate to co-operate in the enterprise. The new stadholder was his brother-in-law, William IV, prince of Orange. Cumberland then undertook to defend Maastricht from Marshal Saxe, confronting him at the battle of Laffeldt on 2 July NS. His army of 90,000 was outnumbered by Saxe's army of 125,000. After five hours of fierce fighting he was forced to admit defeat and ordered his men to retreat. During the engagement Ligonier was taken prisoner and Cumberland himself narrowly averted the same fate. His defeat was no disgrace. George Townshend observed that 'the action was long and severe; many respectable officers were brought out severely wounded, to the great concern of H. R. H. who stood the whole action under a heavy fire from the enemy's artillery until the troops were obliged to abandon it' (Townshend MSS, National Army Museum Library, quoted Whitworth, 120). After the battle the French besieged Bergen-op-Zoom. The prince of Orange wanted the allies to go to its relief but Cumberland preferred to defend Maastricht. This caused tension between the brothers-in-law, which was not reduced when Bergen-op-Zoom fell in September, the last action of the campaign. 
The following April Saxe besieged Maastricht. Cumberland was unable to raise the siege, though the signing of peace preliminaries at the end of the month brought hostilities to an end. The duke visited Hanover that summer, and returned to England in September before rejoining the army in the Netherlands until peace was finally signed at Aix-la-Chapelle in October. 
When he returned to England Cumberland spent most of his time in Windsor Forest, of which he had been made ranger in 1746. He lived mainly at the Ranger's Lodge, now known by his name. As ranger he employed hundreds of demobilized soldiers to construct the lake which became known as Virginia Water, and to plant trees, many of which still survive. If this was to show sympathy to former comrades-in-arms he showed none towards the common people. On the contrary, he exploited the rangership just as ruthlessly as the whigs who had suppressed unwelcome hunters in the royal forests during the 1720s. Cumberland attempted to revive the swanimote courts which they had used to enforce the forest laws far more rigorously than had their predecessors. He even prevented people from entering the Great Park to collect firewood, though this was an immemorial custom, on the grounds that it disturbed the game. Horace Walpole, in an attack on the duke made in 'The Remembrancer' for 14 October 1749, claimed that as ranger 'he disobliged the whole country'. Walpole also objected to his 'very tyrannic behaviour to the army', while Earl Waldegrave remarked that 'even the Army had been taught to complain of the unnecessary strictness of his discipline; that they were treated rather like Germans than English Men' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 155). These remarks were inspired by Cumberland's sponsoring of changes in the 'Army Act' in 1749 making it more draconian. Thus refusal to obey orders was made a capital offence. 
Cumberland's contributions to debates in the Upper House in 1749, of which he had been a member since 1742, announced his intervention in British politics. He attached himself to the connection of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, secretary of state, and John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, first lord of the Admiralty, in opposition to the duke of Newcastle's old corps on the one hand and his brother Frederick's reversionary interest on the other. This left him exposed to attacks from both. One of the first things which Frederick proposed to do when he became king was to dismiss his brother from all his commands. A direct onslaught on the duke from the prince of Wales's camp was launched early in 1751 by John Perceval, second earl of Egmont, in an anonymous broadside entitled 'Constitutional Queries'. This asserted that Cumberland's appetite for military rule had been whetted by his experiences in Scotland, where, it was claimed, the army had usurped a dominion over law. The very first query asked: 'Whether this capital may not be beset with troops, under such orders and commands, as may render the power of King, Lords and Commons precarious, and subject our liberties, property and laws once more to a military regulation.' The phrase 'once more' linked Cumberland to Cromwell in the collective memory. It was little more than the usual opposition suspicion of a standing army in peacetime which went back to the seventeenth century, and echoed charges which had been made about the duke of Marlborough at the end of the previous war. But Frederick as the elder brother made rather more of it. Another query asked: 'Whether, if a 'younger' son of the Crown should ever be invested with absolute power over such an army; and at the same time by a factious connection, make himself master of the fleet, our lives and fortunes might not be dependent on his will and pleasure; and the 'right of succession' have no other security, than his want of ambition.' On 22 January 1751 both houses of parliament ordered the broadside to be burnt by the hangman in Palace Yard, while the king issued a proclamation offering a reward of $500 for the discovery of the author. 
The rivalry between the two brothers was cut short by the sudden death of Frederick in March. On hearing of it Cumberland was alleged to have said, 'It is a great blow to this country, but I hope it will recover it in time.' The crowds in the streets of London were heard to lament, 'Oh that it was but his brother!' and in the City, 'Oh that it was but the Butcher!' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.55). Frederick's death left his twelve-year-old son, the future George III, as heir to the throne. Since the king was sixty-seven it seemed inevitable that there would have to be a regency when he died. The question of who was to be regent, Cumberland or Frederick's widow Augusta, was to embroil the duke even more firmly in the politics of the reign. Frederick's friends wanted his widow to be sole regent. According to their leader, Egmont: 'the Duke of Cumberland and his party were labouring all they could 'either to prevent any thoughts of such an appointment at all -- or to leave it to the King to do as he pleased by Will -- or to have a Regency of the great officers of State, and some other persons among which was the' 'Duke of Cumberland' -- who being Commander of the Army, with his creatures would overbalance the council of the rest, and in case of a demise would immediately have the whole power. (Newman, 200)' The king was in favour of his son being regent. The Pelhams, however, were insistent that Cumberland's unpopularity made it dangerous to make him regent, and urged that the princess should have the title, with a council of regency to advise her. The elder Pitt expressed the view in parliament that to make Cumberland sole regent was dangerous not because of his reputation but because of his ambition to wear the crown! The duke's supporters, who included Henry Fox in the Commons as well as the Bedford connection in the Lords, wanted him to have a chief part in the regency, though they accepted that there would have to be a place for Princess Augusta. Unfortunately she was as estranged from Cumberland as her husband had been, and did not wish him to be on the council of regency. Although the act of parliament which set up the arrangements for a regency did give him the first seat on the council, he was mortally offended. He was even more outraged shortly afterwards when he was visited by Prince George to whom he showed a sword. According to Horace Walpole, 'the young Prince turned pale, and trembled, and thought his uncle was going to murder him. The Duke was extremely shocked, and complained to the Princess of the impressions that had been instilled into the child against him' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.72). As Earl Waldegrave commented: 'that he had ever the most distant Design of a more criminal Nature, that he meant anything hurtful to his Nephew, or dangerous to the Public, the Insinuation was base and villainous' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 156). 
In June 1751 the duke of Bedford resigned as secretary of state; explaining his resignation to George II he said that he and Sandwich were opposed by the Pelhams 'solely from their attachment to his son the Duke' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 128). Once again Henry Pelham and his brother the duke of Newcastle had outmanoeuvred their ministerial opponents. Cumberland decided 'not to give the Pelhams so fair an opportunity of mischief as by setting up the standard of opposition during his father's life' (ibid., 165). He did, however, oppose the ministers behind the scenes, for instance furnishing the duke of Bedford with information to use with deadly effect in a debate in the House of Lords on 17 March 1752 on a bill designed to create a colony of foreign protestants on forfeited Jacobite estates in Scotland. He was also so close to Henry Fox that when the latter opposed Lord Hardwicke's 'Marriage Bill' in 1753, Hardwicke alluded to their association in a speech accusing Fox of favouring force over law, which the duke took as an allusion to himself. 
In 1754, when news reached England that Colonel George Washington had been defeated by the French in a skirmish near Fort Duquesne, Cumberland's advice was sought in the cabinet as to how to react. He advised sending regular troops which, despite his father's fears that this might provoke war with France in Europe, was agreed. General Braddock was sent to avenge the defeat. Unfortunately his army was routed the following July and he himself was killed. This was the greatest blow to the prestige of British arms in North America before the American War of Independence. At the time that Braddock's defeat was known in England, George II was in Hanover, and Cumberland was one of the lords justices governing the kingdom in the king's absence. He was made to feel personally responsible for the fiasco, especially when the French published his orders to Braddock, claiming that they revealed Britain's hostile intentions towards them. His own reaction was to advise declaring war on France immediately, but open hostilities in Europe were delayed until the French took Minorca in 1756. Its capture led the duke to exclaim: 'We are undone! Sea and land are cowards! I am ashamed of my profession!' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.158). Admiral Byng was held responsible for the loss of Minorca, was tried by a court martial, and sentenced to death. The sentence divided the country between those who felt it was deserved and those who considered it to be too severe. Cumberland was included in the former camp by Horace Walpole and in the latter by Richard Rigby, an MP in the Bedford connection. If Rigby was right, then it was a rare example of the duke's clemency. 
Rigby was probably better informed than Walpole, for at that time the struggle for power between Henry Fox and William Pitt was polarizing the rival interests of Cumberland, which included the Bedford connection, and the dowager princess of Wales. Fox became paymaster-general of the forces through the duke's influence in the spring of 1757, just before he left England to take up his command. Over the summer, however, Pitt did a deal with the duke of Newcastle and formed a ministry which did not favour Cumberland's continental strategy. 
The opening stages of the Seven Years' War were disastrous in both America and Europe. Cumberland sent John Campbell, fourth earl of Loudoun, to North America, but he failed to take Cape Breton while the French commander, Montcalm, took Fort William Henry. In Europe the French, allied with Austria, Russia, and Sweden, advanced against their enemy the king of Prussia. In April 1757 Cumberland was dispatched to the continent to aid the Prussians. Frederick the Great wanted him to advance from Bielefeld, where some 45,000 men under his command were encamped, towards Wesel. But that would expose the electorate of Hanover to the risk of a French invasion, and the move was disallowed by the Hanoverian ministers. Instead the duke found himself attacked by the French at Hastenbeck. Though he put up a valiant fight in the battle fought there on 24 July he was defeated, and Hanover was exposed to French occupation. To save his electorate the king sent his son plenipotentiary powers to treat with the French, on the basis that Hanover would remain neutral and offer no more assistance to Prussia. When George discovered that the idea of a separate peace was not likely to be accepted by his enemies, while his ally Frederick felt betrayed, under pressure from his ministers he tried to countermand his instructions, and on 16 September ordered Cumberland to assist the Prussians after all. Unfortunately the change of advice arrived too late, for the duke had signed a convention with the French at Kloster-Zeven on 8 September. Since this was virtually a capitulation George II repudiated it and dismissed Cumberland, who returned home in disgrace. His reception in London on 11 October was very different from that which he had received as the victor of Culloden twelve years earlier, when honours and rewards had been showered on him. Now the king told him 'that he had ruined his country and his army, and had hurt, or lost, his own reputation'. Cumberland forthwith resigned all his military commissions. He never commanded again. There was a rumour at the time of an invasion scare in 1759 that he would be asked to resume command, but he ridiculed it, saying that he did not believe 'that the command will be offered to me, but when no wise man would accept it, and no honest man would refuse it' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 82). On 21 August 1760 he suffered a stroke. Although he recovered his powers of speech this would have incapacitated him from any military activity even if he had still been in command. 
Shortly afterwards George II died. Cumberland was the chief mourner at the funeral. His father's will left him $180,000 which he gave to his sisters. His nephew now came to the throne. Although there had been friction between the two when George III was prince, as king he was reconciled with his uncle, who stood in as father of the bride when he married Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz on 8 September 1761. Indeed the duke's advice was once again sought on military matters. Thus the decision to send the earl of Albemarle (formerly his aide-de-camp at Culloden, Bury) to the West Indies in 1762 was very much his, and when the expedition took Cuba he was overjoyed. 
Politically, however, Cumberland was on bad terms with the earl of Bute, and when his former friends Bedford, Fox, and Sandwich threw in their lot with the favourite the duke fell back on the old corps whigs whom they had replaced. 'Whenever the vermin the court is now full of be swept away', he wrote to the duke of Devonshire, 'we may see you there again at the head of our real friends' (Whitworth, 28). Although he frowned on a formed opposition Cumberland was not averse to voting against the ministry, for instance over the issue of parliamentary privilege raised by the Wilkes case. His coolness towards the Grenville ministry paid dividends when George III also cooled towards it and sought the duke's advice on the formation of a new administration. He advised George to make Charles Watson-Wentworth, second marquess of Rockingham, his chief minister. Although the government which replaced Grenville became known as the Rockingham administration it could justifiably have been called the Cumberland ministry. Cabinet meetings were held at Cumberland Lodge and at his house in Upper Grosvenor Street. It was while attending a meeting in his London residence on 31 October 1765 that he collapsed and died. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 9 November. 
Cumberland's death at the age of forty-four left a strange legacy. On the one hand he was vilified as the Butcher, and there is a legend that he was also known as Stinking Billy in Scotland, in retaliation against those of his admirers in England who adopted the flower Sweet William as his emblem. Yet when the Sons of Liberty in South Carolina drank forty-five healths in honour of John Wilkes, one of the toasts was 'to the duke of Cumberland'. To those who raised their glasses he was a 'friend of America', having presided over the appointment of Lord Rockingham's ministry, which had repealed the 'Stamp Act'. Whether he would have remained friendly to the colonists had he lived, or would have advocated their suppression as rebels, though hypothetical, is a question worth pondering. As 'the martial boy' he would undoubtedly have urged 'military execution'. But Cumberland had come a long way since then, and was acquiring a political maturity working with the old corps which could well have led him to advocate conciliatory measures. 


@@@@@


doc= 29456


William Henry, Prince, first duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh (1743-1805), was born on 14 November 1743 at Leicester House, London, the fifth child and third son of Frederick Lewis, prince of Wales (1707-1751), and his wife, Augusta (1719-1772), daughter of Friedrich II, duke of Saxe-Gotha. He was educated by tutors, mainly at Kew, and was taught several ancient and modern languages as well as history and geography. 
As he approached maturity William Henry gradually accumulated the dignities appropriate to his status. On 22 September 1762 he was installed as a knight of the Garter at Windsor, the first installation at Windsor in which the new knights appeared in person in over thirty years. In 1763 he succeeded his aunt Amelia as ranger of Hampton Court park. On 19 November 1764 he was created duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh in the British peerage, and earl of Connaught in the Irish. Following the precedent set by his older brother Edward Augustus, duke of York, he made a provincial tour in summer 1765, travelling across southern England between Kent and Cornwall but using Southampton as his base. A similar tour the next summer took him to Guernsey and surreptitiously to Paris in August, but he left when his incognito was exposed. 
In January 1765 his sister Augusta, hereditary princess of Brunswick, had written that 'William is very much like by the ladies' (RA GEO Add. 21/8/2), but unlike his younger brother Henry Frederick he seems to have avoided amatory scrapes and instead seemed to share the sobriety of George III. However, at the end of 1764 Gloucester began the ardent courtship of Maria Waldegrave, 'nee' Walpole [
Maria grew up with her sisters and brothers at her father's houses at Englefield Green, Surrey, and in London; they were treated by their father's family as if they were legitimate. Their aunt Jane Clement was brought from co. Durham to help with their upbringing. Maria's siblings were Laura (1734-1813), who married Frederick Keppel, bishop of Exeter; Edward (1737-1771), a lieutenant-colonel in the army; and Charlotte (1738-1789), who married Lionel Tollemache, fifth earl of Dysart. Their father lived as retired a life as possible, and their uncle Horace Walpole took it upon himself to arrange their introductions into society and their marriages. On 15 May 1759, at her father's house in Pall Mall, Maria married James Waldegrave, second Earl Waldegrave (1715-1763), a prominent courtier who had been a lord of the bedchamber to George II and governor to the future George III. Horace Walpole regarded her as a great beauty and saw her as a rival to Maria, countess of Coventry; he was pleased to report in June 1759 that Lady Coventry 'has made a friendship with my charming niece, to disguise her jealousy of the new Countess's beauty' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.237). Although Maria was twenty-one years younger than her husband, the marriage was successful and the couple had three daughters: Elizabeth Laura (1760-1816), Charlotte Maria (1761-1808), and Anna Horatia (1762-1801). They lived at Waldegrave's estate at Navestock, Essex, until Waldegrave died of smallpox in his London house in Albemarle Street on 8 April 1763. Maria was left a jointure of $1000 per annum and the care of her three daughters; at the time of Waldegrave's death she believed that she was pregnant with his fourth child, who might have been a son, but in August she conceded that this was not the case, recognized her brother-in-law as third Earl Waldegrave, and surrendered to him her husband's signet ring, and with it control over the Waldegrave estates in Essex and Somerset. 
'As she is so young', Horace Walpole told Sir Horace Mann, 'she may find as great a match and a younger lover' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 22.128) and Maria, who took a house near her uncle in Twickenham, exceeded his expectations. Gloucester and Maria were secretly married at Gloucester's house in Pall Mall on 6 September 1766 by her chaplain, Dr Morton. There were no witnesses. Over the subsequent few years Maria claimed as many royal privileges as she could, accompanying Gloucester at social occasions and dressing her servants in approximations of the royal livery. In 1768 Gloucester bought her a house at St Leonard's Hill, near Windsor, and near his own house at Cranborne Lodge which he had acquired on becoming ranger of Cranborne Chase. The attitude of George III to the relationship was ambivalent; he disliked his brother marrying a subject, but was unhappy with his having a mistress. In 1768 the king awarded Maria a pension of $5000 per annum from the Irish revenues, but George regarded her as bad for both Gloucester's conduct and health and arranged a series of continental tours for him beginning in 1769. During these journeys Gloucester acted as an informal diplomatic representative, renewing or establishing personal connections between the British royal family and other European monarchies, including that of Empress Maria Theresa and her son Joseph II, whom he met in Vienna in September 1770. In September 1771 Gloucester visited the British possessions of Gibraltar and Minorca before arriving in Genoa. There, by chance, he met the Pretender, Charles Edward Stuart. A few weeks afterwards Gloucester became seriously ill, with physical symptoms similar to those later suffered by George III. It was during his recovery that he learned of the marriage of his brother Henry Frederick, duke of Cumberland, to Mrs Anne Horton. 
Gloucester told George III that the duke of Cumberland's behaviour was 'inexcusable, and weak beyond measure' (20 Dec 1771, RA GEO 54329). He returned from Italy in May 1772, following spectacular receptions from Ferdinand IV of Naples and Pope Clement XIV. The disclosure of the Cumberlands' marriage increased the pressure on Gloucester and Maria. She revealed the wedding to her father on 19 May 1772 and when in late summer Gloucester learned that his wife was pregnant, he informed George III by letter on 13 September. George III immediately ordered that an inquiry be made into the validity of the marriage, the duchess's chaplain having since died. Gloucester successfully ensured that the inquiry was held before the birth of the child to forestall any danger that it could be considered illegitimate. It took place on 23 May 1773, six days before the duchess gave birth to a daughter, Sophia Matilda. Although George III showed more sympathy towards Gloucester than he did towards Cumberland, the duke, duchess, and their children were barred from the royal presence and Gloucester's diplomatic excursions were ended. A struggle to maintain the trappings of royal status and a growing family on his existing financial settlement of $29,000 followed. George III refused to ask parliament to provide for the duke of Gloucester's family, as he would not yet ask for a settlement for his own. Following the birth and death of another daughter, Caroline Augusta Maria ('b'. 24 June 1774, died 14 March 1775), and the return of Gloucester's medical complaint, the family left for the continent. Their son William Frederick was born at Rome in January 1776. A further health crisis while Gloucester was travelling back from Italy via Trent in 1777 helped repair the breach between himself and George III. The Gloucesters returned home in October 1777 and legislation the following April included a financial settlement for Gloucester's children as well as for the king's. The Gloucesters could once more live in Britain, allowing Maria to supervise her daughters as they reached marriageable age. They were much sought after as brides and were the subjects of a famous painting by Reynolds. Lady Laura married her cousin John, Viscount Chewton, afterwards fourth Earl Waldegrave, in 1782, and was given away by Gloucester; Lady Maria married George Henry Fitzroy, earl of Euston, afterwards fourth duke of Grafton, in 1784; and Lady Anna Horatia married Hugh Seymour Conway, later Lord Hugh Seymour in 1786. 
Gloucester now attempted to take up an active military career but George III was unwilling to have his still-disgraced brother in arms during the American war. The king consented to Gloucester's request that he join the Prussian army as a volunteer but this diplomatically sensitive move was rejected by Frederick the Great, ostensibly on grounds of cost. In July 1779 he obtained a copy of French invasion plans which he forwarded to the king; finally his offer of service during the Gordon riots was appreciated and in June 1780 the king received him for the first time in eight years. 
Gloucester henceforward spent his time attending to the affairs of his regiment, the 1st foot guards, on which George III was usually careful to consult him. He regularly attended the anniversary service and dinner held at the end of every March by the London Hospital, of which he had been president since 1767; the hospital advertised his presence on invitations, keen to exploit a dutiful royal patron. In December 1780 he wintered for the first time in Weymouth, a resort which he would recommend to George III after the king's illness of 1788-9. In the early 1780s he began a sexual relationship with his wife's lady-in-waiting, 
Gloucester endeavoured to remain on good terms with his nephews as they reached maturity as well as with George III. In 1796, with the king's support, he negotiated between George, prince of Wales, and Caroline, princess of Wales, in an attempt to save their marriage, with no success. This may have been because he had never enjoyed the confidence of his nephews in the same way as his brother Henry Frederick. He was also more timid than the situation may have demanded. His health remained poor and he died on 25 August 1805 at his home, Gloucester House, Upper Grosvenor Street. At Gloucester's request plans for a public funeral were abandoned by George III and he was buried on 4 September 1805 at St George's Chapel, Windsor. His widow moved to Oxford Lodge, Brompton Road, and died there on 22 August 1807; she was buried at St George's Chapel, Windsor, on 31 August 1807. Lady Almeria Carpenter survived until 5 October 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 29457


William Frederick, Prince, second duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh (1776-1834), was the only son of William Henry, first duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh (1743-1805), a younger brother of George III, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Walpole, formerly Countess Waldegrave ['see 'Maria, duchess of Gloucester and Edinburgh (bap. 1736, d. 1807), 'under' William Henry, first duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh (1743-1805)]. He was born at the Teodoli Palace, Rome, on 15 January 1776, where his parents were living to avoid the wrath of George III at their marriage. Prince William of Gloucester (as he was known until he succeeded his father as duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh in 1805) attended Trinity College, Cambridge, receiving the degrees of MA in 1790 and LLD in 1796. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1797, and chancellor of the University of Cambridge in 1811. This plethora of academic distinctions contrasts with his renowned lack of intelligence: his most widely used nickname was Silly Billy. 
Prince William entered the army with a captain's commission and the rank of colonel in 1789, at the age of thirteen, and he was frequently and rapidly promoted: he was a major-general at twenty, and made lieutenant-general in 1799, general in 1808, and field marshal in 1816. An enthusiastic and brave, if not terribly professional, soldier, he served with his regiments in the European wars of the turn of the century. 
Gloucester sought the hand of Princess Charlotte, the only child of the prince of Wales; failing in this suit, he married her aunt, his first cousin, Princess Mary (1776-1857) ['see under 'George III, daughters of (act. 1766-1857)], on 22 July 1816. They had no children. A religious and charitable man, Gloucester was also priggish and extremely pompous, placing undue importance on his royal status. His rather comical appearance made him the butt of cartoonists, to whom he was known as Slice of Gloucester and Cheese. He took little part in politics, but was an earnest advocate of the abolition of slavery both in parliament and as president of the African Institution. During the regency he acted with the opposition, supporting the duke of Sussex against the prince of Wales, and later supported Queen Caroline during the parliamentary proceedings against her. He supported Catholic emancipation, but voted against the 'Reform Act' of 1832, urging William IV to reject it. Gloucester died at his home, Bagshot Park, Surrey, on 30 November 1834, and was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 29458


William (d. 1075), bishop of London, is likely, to judge by his name, to have originated in Flanders, northern France, or Lotharingia. By 1051 he was one of Edward the Confessor's chaplains, and may have entered Edward's service before 1050, since he occurs as king's priest in the witness lists of three diplomata which, though suspect, may well have made use of a genuine witness list of the year 1050. When Edward promoted Robert of Jumieges from the see of London to the archbishopric of Canterbury, he sought at first to replace Robert with Spearhafoc, abbot of Abingdon, but Robert refused to consecrate Spearhafoc, claiming papal support for his stance. Instead, in the autumn of 1051, Edward gave the see of London to his chaplain William, who was then consecrated by Robert. The extent to which the latter was involved in William's appointment is unknown, but William certainly found himself attached to Robert's faction in 1052 when Robert's opponent, the rebellious Earl Godwine, and his party returned from exile. Late in that year he joined the flight overseas of Robert and Bishop Ulf of Dorchester. William was clearly less distasteful to Godwine and his faction than the other two prelates and he was allowed to return -- by the early months of 1053, if Edward the Confessor's 'Moulsham writ' for Westminster is genuine. 
Between 1053 and 1055 William witnessed the transaction by which the church of Stow in Lincolnshire was re-endowed. He travelled to Flanders in 1060, when in mid-May he is to be found in the company of the count of Flanders and the bishop of Terwaan (Therouanne). He assisted at the consecration of Lanfranc on 29 August 1070 and attended the Whitsunday council at Windsor in 1072 and the Council of London in 1075. These two councils fixed the position of London within the hierarchy of dioceses in the province of Canterbury as second only to Canterbury. As bishop of London, William succeeded in augmenting the church's estates after 1066, when William I allowed him to win back Layer, Southminster, and Warley in Essex and to buy Thorley in Hertfordshire. It is likely also that William was the bishop of London who purchased the numerous small manors in Essex which are listed under a separate heading in the 'Domesday' returns (the 'feudum' of the bishop of London as opposed to the 'terra' or long-established lands of the bishop). Already by 1066 there was a fairly clear division between the lands held by the chapter, some of which were subdivided into separate holdings for some of the canons, and the lands held by the bishop, and William, if not himself responsible for this system, must at least have encouraged its perpetuation. No charters issued by him survive. He died in 1075, but the precise date is not recorded, nor is his place of burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 29459


Chester, William of (fl. 1093x1109), Benedictine monk and supposed poet, was a monk of St Werburgh, Chester, to whom Anselm, while he was archbishop of Canterbury, addressed a letter, acknowledging receipt from William of poems ('carmina') in his praise. Anselm, noting biblical warnings about praising a man during his lifetime, reminded William that they ought to strive to be judged good by God, the only true arbiter of a man's merits. 
It has been suggested that included among William's poems were two that survive in three twelfth-century manuscripts: Lambeth Palace Library, MS 59, 1; Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 2478; and Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 135. In addition to the poems, these books contain collections of letters by Anselm written while he was archbishop (1093-1109). The style of the poems is sufficiently similar to indicate a common author for both, but it seems likely that they were written at Canterbury rather than Chester. The first, in praise of Anselm, is addressed to the archbishop himself. The second, a eulogy written very soon after Anselm's death, speaks warmly of Canterbury. The oldest manuscript, that in Lambeth Palace Library, was written at Christ Church, Canterbury, in the early twelfth century. It has therefore been suggested that the author of the poems was not William but a Canterbury monk, possibly the scribe Thidericus. No other poems are either firmly or loosely attributable to the William of Chester to whom Anselm wrote. 


@@@@@


doc= 29460


William (d. 1133?), archbishop of Tyre, was described by his successor, the historian William of Tyre, as 'an Englishman of good character' ('Willelmi Tyrensis archiepiscopi chronicon', 1.616). Nothing is known about his origins, but he should almost certainly be identified with the William who is mentioned in documents from 1112 as a canon of the Holy Sepulchre, Jerusalem, a community that adopted the rule of the Augustinian canons in 1114. When the patriarch of Jerusalem, Arnulf de Chocques, was deposed in 1115, William formed part of the delegation that accompanied him to Rome and persuaded Pope Paschal II to reinstate him. At some time after 2 May 1125 William succeeded Gerard as prior of the Holy Sepulchre. At that time the archbishopric of Tyre was vacant, for the first Latin archbishop, Odo, had died before the crusaders captured the city in 1124. The ecclesiastical province of Tyre extended from Tortosa in north Syria to Acre, and the Latin patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem both claimed jurisdiction over it. In the early months of 1128 William was appointed archbishop at an assembly presided over by King Baudouin II and consecrated by the Patriarch Warmund of Jerusalem. 
Immediately after this, William and Bishop Roger of Ramla were sent to Rome to secure the support of Honorius II for the projected marriage of Baudouin II's daughter and heir, Melisende, to Foulques (V), count of Anjou. As an Englishman William was particularly well suited to conduct these negotiations, because Foulques's departure for Jerusalem led to the succession of his son Geoffrey as count of Anjou, and to Geoffrey's marriage on 17 June 1128 to Matilda, daughter of Henry I of England. William remained in attendance on the pope throughout the summer of 1128, seeking to clarify the ecclesiastical allegiance of the province of Tyre. He received a pallium from the pope (he was the first archbishop in the crusader states to do so), which displeased the Patriarch Warmund because this placed Tyre directly under the protection of the Roman see. 
In the autumn William returned to the Latin kingdom accompanied by a legate, Cardinal Gilles of Tusculum, who tried vainly to enforce the pope's ruling that the entire province of Tyre should form part of the patriarchate of Jerusalem, for the patriarch of Antioch refused to relinquish jurisdiction over the sees of Tortosa, Tripoli, and Jubail. During his brief episcopate William organized that part of his province situated in the kingdom of Jerusalem: by 1133 he had appointed a Latin bishop in Sidon, and probably one in Acre as well, and had consecrated as bishop of Beirut Baudouin, who had been bishop-elect of that see since 1112. 
William died probably towards the end of 1133 and was almost certainly buried in Tyre. He was succeeded by Fulcher d'Angouleme, who held the see for twelve years before becoming patriarch of Jerusalem on 25 January 1146. 


@@@@@


doc= 29461


Malmesbury, William of (b. c.1090, d. in or after 1142), historian, man of letters, and Benedictine monk, spent his whole life from boyhood as a monk of his order's ancient foundation at Malmesbury. 
Almost all that is known of William of Malmesbury derives from his own writings; even the dates of his birth and death are not easily determined. In his commentary on 'Lamentations', written soon after 1135, William describes himself as 'quadrigenarius'. If this means 'in my forties' rather than 'forty', it would allow him to have been born as early as the late 1080s, to have witnessed and remembered a local 'miracle' which occurred before 1096, and to be of sufficiently mature years when he attracted royal recognition and began to write his major historical works, between 1100 and 1118. He was still alive late in 1142, when his 'Historia novella' terminates. Earlier he had said that he intended to chronicle contemporary history as long as life remained to him, and this statement, and the work's abrupt ending, suggest that it was broken off by his death. Although he nowhere says so, he was clearly brought up not far from Malmesbury. 'The blood of two races' -- Norman and English -- was mingled in William, and that is all he has to say of his parentage and family. His father may have been the Norman partner and was certainly a man of means. William says that his father encouraged his youthful studies, meaning perhaps that he financed private tuition for his son in the first instance. 
Whether William studied later on at Malmesbury or another religious house, he does not say. Malmesbury seems unlikely, since William is dismissive of learning there before the abbacy of 
At Malmesbury, Godfrey was a vigorous reformer of monastic life and learning: he adorned the church as much as limited resources would permit, and laid the foundations of a library; William describes how the monks, scarcely able to stammer their way through texts in the vernacular, now became competent in Latin. The monastery's reputation grew throughout England, and miracles occurred at its shrine of St Aldhelm. Godfrey died about 1106. William describes him as a man of courteous manners and temperate life, whose abbacy was sullied only by his stripping the treasures of the monastery to pay the tax imposed by William Rufus on the occasion of the mortgage of Normandy by Duke Robert. Tanner supposed Godfrey to have been the author of a chronicle in British Library, Cotton MS Vespasian D.iv (fifteenth century), but this is nothing other than part of the annals of Alfred of Beverley ('fl'. 1143), itself almost entirely based on the 'Historia regum Britanniae' of Geoffrey of Monmouth (died 1155). The name Godfridus de Malvesbery in the manuscript is presumably that of an owner, not of the writer. 
William was a monk at Malmesbury under Godfrey, and assisted the abbot in building up its library. He gives a valuable outline of his own course of studies: 'I studied many kinds of literature, though in different degrees. To logic, the armourer of speech, I no more than lent an ear. Physic, which cures the sick body, I went deeper into. As for ethics, I explored parts in depth, revering its high status as a subject inherently accessible to the student and able to form good character; in particular I studied history, which adds flavour to moral instruction by imparting a pleasurable knowledge of past events, spurring the reader by the accumulation of examples to follow the good and shun the bad. (Malmesbury, 'De gestis regum', 2, prologue)' This is the programme ascribed to Plato by St Augustine, standard in the West until superseded by the fourfold 'Aristotelian' scheme in the twelfth century. It was therefore rather old-fashioned by William's time. One area within it, logic, had indeed become western Europe's new intellectual obsession, but even that was not one of William's major interests; he was not being overly modest in describing his acquaintance with it as passing. 
Like Bede (died 735), his great hero and exemplar, William had no career to speak of. He entered Malmesbury Abbey perhaps as a child, certainly no more than a teenager, and there spent the rest of his life. By the 1120s he was cantor (precentor), in charge of the liturgy as well as effectively librarian. Further promotion he apparently shunned; in 1140 he was offered and refused the abbacy: 'Unless self-love deceives me', he wrote soon after, 'I have proved myself a man of ingenuous mind, in that I gave place to a comrade in the matter of the abbot's office, which I might easily have obtained for myself, more than once' (Leland, 'De rebus Britannicis', 3.272). He represented his abbey at councils held at Winchester in 1139 and 1141, and that is the sum total of his known public activity. As far as is known, only one person outside the abbey wrote about William during his lifetime: Robert of Cricklade (died 1174), canon of Cirencester, who praises him as a writer of devotional works. 
It is not for his uneventful life, then, that William is remembered, but for his scholarship. Of the genesis of his historical writing he himself says: 'After I had spent a good deal of my own money on getting together a library of foreign historians, I proceeded in my leisure moments to inquire if anything could be discovered concerning England worth the attention of posterity. Not content with ancient works, I began to get the itch to write myself, not to show off my more or less non-existent erudition but in order to bring forcibly into the light things lost in the rubbish-heap of the past. Feeling an aversion to fleeting opinion, I collected chronicles from far and wide -- almost, I confess, to no purpose: for when I had gone through them all I remained ignorant, not finding anything to read before I ceased to feel the urge to read it. (Malmesbury, 'De gestis regum', 2, prologue)' This suggests that he was self-motivated, but there was more to it than that. Some time before her death in 1118 Queen Matilda visited Malmesbury, and while there asked for a written account of the connection between the English royal family and the abbey's founder St Aldhelm (died 709/10). This was the genesis of what was to be William's most popular and influential work, the 'Gesta regum Anglorum', a full-scale history of England from the death of Bede in 735 until his own day. He says that some of it was written before the queen's death; thereafter he put it aside until the urging of friends caused him to begin again. It was completed 'c'.1125-6, but until at least 1134 William continued to revise it spasmodically, mainly to improve it stylistically, with one notable exception. Shortly after the last date he produced a version that incorporated substantial portions from another of his historical works written in the meantime, 'De antiquitate Glastonie ecclesie'. This work of local history had been commissioned by the monastic community there, and presumably the version of the 'Gesta regum' that included so much of it was specially designed for the same audience. But almost simultaneously William produced what he may have seen as the 'final' version of the 'Gesta regum' for a wider audience, with the Glastonbury material pruned back again, and some revisions of judgement in the direction of greater prudence and moderation. 
Queen Matilda may have encouraged William to embark on such an ambitious project because he was already active as a historian, engaged on his earliest known work, a remarkable version of the 'Liber pontificalis', the history of the popes, which was finished soon after 1119. 
Throughout the decade 'c'.1125-35 William was astonishingly prolific as a historian, especially considering how little time was available to a Benedictine monk for such activity. The 'Gesta regum' was mainly concerned with secular political history, but as it neared completion William began work on a companion piece of similar scale, the 'Gesta pontificum Anglorum', a church history of England. This too was finished 'c'.1125 and revised at intervals over the next decade. As if this were not enough, William visited Glastonbury soon after 1129, and there wrote first the lives of its local saints, Patrick, Dunstan, Indract, and Benignus, and then his famous historical monograph, the 'De antiquitate Glastonie ecclesie'. The honesty about the abbey's claims to great antiquity displayed in this work did not satisfy the local monks, and it survives today only in a heavily revised form. Some time between 'c'.1125 and 1142 William wrote the life of St Wulfstan for the monks of Worcester. 
All this historical activity must have necessitated some relaxation of the Benedictine rule. There was not merely the time and labour of writing. William had to conduct research, to read and transcribe books and documents at religious houses up and down the country. He was probably at Canterbury (both Christ Church and St Augustine's), Glastonbury, and Worcester more than once; otherwise he records visits to St Frideswide's, Oxford, Thorney, St Ives, Bury St Edmunds, Rochester, Sherborne, Crowland, Hereford, York, Carlisle, Shaftesbury, Bath, Wareham, Corfe, Gloucester, Bangor, Coventry, Winchester, Milton Abbas, and perhaps Tavistock. There is a strong possibility that he crossed the channel into Normandy. William is reticent about his circle of acquaintance, but his travels and historical activity must have brought him friendships, and some can be inferred: Eadmer (died 'c'.1126) and Alexander, monks of Canterbury and disciples of St Anselm (died 1109), John, monk and chronicler at Worcester (died 'c'.1140), and Nicholas, the prior there, Walcher, prior of Malvern (died 1135), interested in astronomy, Faricius, abbot of Abingdon (died 1117), formerly a monk of Malmesbury and biographer of its patron St Aldhelm. 
It seems inconceivable that William did not hold conversations with the other great contemporary historian Orderic Vitalis (died 1142), monk of St Evroult, either in Normandy or England; there is too much overlap of content and interest between their historical writings to be coincidental. As to the powers in the land, it has already been observed that Queen Matilda started William on his way as a historian; he eventually sent copies of the 'Gesta regum' to her brother David, king of Scots, and to her daughter, the Empress Matilda. But the work itself bore a much more personal dedication to Robert, earl of Gloucester (died 1147), bastard son of Henry I. William had access to Henry's private zoo at Woodstock, which suggests that he knew the king himself, although he does not acknowledge any particular relationship. Two great ecclesiastics, Henry de Blois (died 1171), simultaneously bishop of Winchester and abbot of Glastonbury, and Roger, bishop of Salisbury and abbot of Malmesbury itself (died 1139), complete what is known of William's circle of acquaintance. 
After this long period of immersion in historical writing William's conscience seems to have troubled him. He says as much in the prologue to his commentary on 'Lamentations', and about this time he produced a series of works more obviously relevant to the needs and aspirations of a monastic community, his own as well as others. Apart from the commentary itself he wrote a set of miracles of the Virgin and made digests of basic texts to make them more accessible to less gifted monks: the works of St Gregory ('Defloratio Gregorii') and the liturgical writing of Amalarius of Metz ('Abbreviatio Amalarii'). But he could not stay away from history for long. About 1140 he began the 'Historia novella', a continuation of the 'Gesta regum' from 1135. Yet he never adequately covered the decade of English history from 'c'.1125 to 'c'.1135. In the prologue to the 'Historia novella' (Malmesbury, 'Historia novella', 1) he speaks of 'three little books of chronicles', now lost, which perhaps filled the gap. 
Already it will be evident that William's original writings shade off into compilations, and these in turn merge into florilegia and 'collected' editions of works by a single author or on a particular theme. It is here that William's astonishing reading and learning are shown, and the mechanics of how he stocked his abbey library revealed. His own hand has been recognized in a handful of books, including the autograph of his 'Gesta pontificum'. He seems to have cajoled many of his fellow monks into copying whole books or sections of them, and a few of these survive. Most noteworthy is his knowledge of the Latin classics. Classical and late antique authors account for a quarter of the approximately 400 works by 200 authors which William is known to have read. He compiled a florilegium of such texts, the 'Polyhistor', and all his original writings show how steeped he was in classical literature, especially the poetry of Virgil and Lucan. His love of ancient literature, his scholarship, and the sensitivity that he felt about this preference (as with his historical writing), are all illustrated by the famous preface to his collected edition of Cicero's works: 'This first book of [Cicero's] 'Academics' is not to be found in England, nor the second in which Catulus is introduced disputing on behalf of the Academics, as one can tell from much that is written in the two books below... the third and fourth of the 'Academics'... And Cicero says at the start of his second book 'De Divinatione' that he had written a book in which he introduced Hortensius exhorting the study of philosophy; and in the same place he says that he had written six books 'De republica'. Now because I have not found these books in England, I William of Malmesbury, according to my usual custom have inserted here whatever of their matter and intention I could find in the works of the blessed Augustine. And I take the opportunity to note that no-one should blame me for reading and copying as many books of the pagans as I do. Certainly whoever reads them because he avoids or despises the holy Scriptures sins gravely and deserves punishment... But he who reads them so that he may express himself elegantly and eloquently in writings to the glory of God and His saints... I do not believe that he sins in any way just because he enjoys the pagans' books. (Thomson, 51-2)' 

William's importance, then, is twofold: as England's greatest national and local historian since Bede, and as the most learned European of his day. For the period of English history before his own lifetime, it is true that for the most part he had access to written sources still available now. With some notable exceptions, for instance the reign of AEthelstan, he adds only incidentally to this information. Such information and interpretation as is unique to him has to be sifted critically; some of it is legitimate interpretation, some shows the exercise of a lively imagination; some is based upon popular opinion, which itself may or may not be securely based. As he approaches his own time he becomes progressively more independent of other material, and more of a primary source in his own right. But for all periods he sets an example of intelligent and imaginative judgement, of elegant expression and lucid planning, which are the hallmarks of the great historian. 
The influence of his writing varies astonishingly from work to work. Most of what he wrote, especially the hagiography, was too sober and sceptical to be widely popular, and survives only in single or few copies. The notable exception is 'De miraculis beatae virginis Mariae', which became the basis for more extensive miracle collections made both in England and on the continent. Of his major works the 'Gesta pontificum' enjoyed modest popularity in England over the next century; but it was the 'Gesta regum' which was far and away his most influential work over the longest time. Already within his lifetime copies spread throughout southern England, and it was known in Normandy, Flanders, and France. By the end of the century it was being used by chroniclers on both sides of the channel, and continued to be so, increasingly in competition with Geoffrey of Monmouth, until the end of the middle ages. This was partly because he included so much continental history in it, and because of his irresistibly attractive stories of marvels such as 'The Witch of Berkeley' and 'The Two Clerks of Nantes'. William believed that one of the duties of the historian was to entertain by means of such stories, and many of his became detached from the main work and enjoyed a life of their own. But in the end it is as a historian of England that William will be best remembered and his works laid under contribution. 
William's works were numerous, but some have been lost and others remain unprinted. His importance in the historiography of his age justifies a list: 1 'De gestis regum Anglorum', ed. W. Stubbs, 2 vols., Rolls Series, 90 (1887-9); new edn with translation and commentary by R. A. B. Mynors, R. M. Thomson, and M. Winterbottom, 2 vols., OMT (1998-9). 2 'De gestis pontificum Anglorum', ed. N. E. S. A. Hamilton, Rolls Series, 52 (1870). 3 'Historia novella', ed. and trans. K. Potter, 'Nelson Medieval Texts' (1955); new edn with translation and commentary by E. King, OMT (1998). 4 'De antiquitate Glastonie ecclesie', ed. and trans. J. Scott as 'The Early History of Glastonbury' (1981). 5 'Vita Dunstani', in 'Memorials of St Dunstan', ed. W. Stubbs, Rolls Series, 63 (1874), 250-324. 6 'Vita Indracti', previously unprinted and largely lost; see M. Lapidge, 'The cult of St Indract at Glastonbury', 'Ireland in Early Mediaeval Europe', ed. D. Whitelock, R. McKitterick, and D. Dumville (1982), 194-6; and John of Glastonbury, 'The Chronicle of Glastonbury Abbey', ed. J. P. Carley (1985), pp. xl-xli, 101-5. 7 'Vita Benigni', previously unprinted and largely lost; see John of Glastonbury, ed. Carley, pp. xxxviii, 69-71, 161-3. 8 'Vita Patricii', previously unprinted and largely lost; see C. Slover, 'William of Malmesbury's 'Life of St Patrick'', 'Modern Philology', 24 (1926-7), 268-83; and John of Glastonbury, ed. Carley, pp. xxxvii, 58-70. 9 'Vita Wulfstani', ed. R. Darlington, CS, 3rd ser., 11 (1928). 5-9: New editions and translations by M. Winterbottom and R. M. Thomson, in William of Malmesbury, 'Saints' Lives: Lives of SS. Wulfstan, Dunstan, Patrick, Benignus and Indract', OMT (forthcoming). 10 'Liber pontificalis', as found in CUL, MS Kk.4.6, and BL, Harley MS 633, partly ed. W. Levison, 'Aus englischen Bibliotheken II', 'Neues Archiv fur Altere Deutsche Geschichtskunde', 35 (1910), 333-431. 11 'De miraculis beatae virginis Mariae', ed. P. N. Carter, 'An edition of William of Malmesbury's treatise on the miracles of the Virgin', 2 vols., DPhil diss., University of Oxford, 1959; 'El libro 'De laudibus et miraculis sanctae Mariae' de Guillermo de Malmesbury', ed. J. M. Canal (1968). 12 'Abbreviatio Amalarii', unprinted; see R. Pfaff, 'The 'Abbreviatio Amalarii' of William of Malmesbury', 'Recherches de Theologie Ancienne et Medievale', 48 (1981), 128-71. 13 'Defloratio Gregorii', unprinted; see D. H. Farmer, 'William of Malmesbury's commentary on Lamentations', 'Studia Monastica', 4 (1962), 283-311. 14 'Commentary on Lamentations', unprinted; see Farmer, 293-300. 15 'Polyhistor deflorationum', ed. H. Testroet Ouellette (Binghamton, 1982). 16 'Epistola ad Petrum de Iohanne Scoto', in 'De gestis regum Anglorum', ed. Stubbs, vol. 1, pp. cxliii-cxlvi. 17 'Three little books of chronicles', mentioned in the prologue to 'Historia novella', lost. 18 'Itinerarium Iohannis abbatis' -- a description of the journey of John, abbot of Malmesbury, to Rome in 1140 -- seen by John Leland at Malmesbury, now lost; see J. Leland, 'Commentarii de scriptoribus Britannicis', ed. A. Hall, 2 vols. (1709), 2.195-6. 19 John Leland also saw at Malmesbury Abbey a copy of a work allegedly by William which he described as 'libri quindecim de serie quattuor euangelistarum uario carminis genere', now lost (ibid.). R. M. Thomson, 'William of Malmesbury' (1987), collects together the writer's earlier essays on the subject, and cites earlier literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 29462


William (1132/3-1144), supposed victim of ritual murder, known as the 'saint and martyr of Norwich', was supposedly the first victim of ritual murder by Jews to occur in England, and indeed in Europe. The accusation levelled against the Jews, the so-called 'blood libel', grew out of a popular superstition that they preyed on children, especially at the time of passover. The curious and highly questionable tale of William's supposed murder at the hands of Norwich Jews was, even in its own time, doubted by citizens and ecclesiastics alike, yet it survived, to become the source and model for popular myths, miracle stories, and further blood libel accusations aimed at the Jews. Two other cases involving the blood libel in England also resulted in the alleged victims being acclaimed as martyrs and saints: at Bury St Edmunds in 1181 a young boy named Robert was said to have been tortured and crucified by the Jews, and miracles were subsequently associated with his body, and there was also the case of Little St Hugh of Lincoln in 1255. 
The earliest account of William's life, supposed murder, and sanctification is that of Thomas of Monmouth. Thomas became a monk of the cathedral priory of Norwich shortly before 1150, and played a significant part in the development of the cult associated with the dead boy, through his authorship of the life, and through his becoming sacristan of William's shrine. Thomas began his life and miracles of St William of Norwich at almost the same time that he took up residence as a monk in Norwich, and completed it in 1172-3, some time after the events surrounding William's strange demise had occurred, and after the cult of the dead boy had had time to take root. 
William was said to have been born on 2 February in either 1132 or 1133, in the village of Haveringland, 8 miles north-west of Norwich, and was the son of Wenstan, a prosperous farmer, and Elviva, daughter of a married priest. His mother was widowed by the time that William was twelve. He appears to have been given some basic education by his mother, before being apprenticed at the age of eight to Wulward, a Norwich skinner, with whom William lived during the term of his apprenticeship. Apparently Wulward's trade brought him into frequent contact with the Jewish community of Norwich, and so young William may also have had dealings with Wulward's Jewish clients, and made friends with Jewish children. William's uncle, Godwin Sturt, who may have held a benefice in Norwich, disliked the relationship that he witnessed between his nephew and the Norwich Jews, and forbade William to have anything to do with them. 
The recorded story of William's disappearance and death begins at this point. Shortly after Godwin forbade William to have any contact with Jews, an unknown man, describing himself as the head cook in the kitchens of William, archdeacon of Norwich, came to call at William's mother's house on the Monday before Easter (20 March) 1144. The stranger explained that he wanted to offer the young William a place in service as a kitchen boy, under his direction. Elviva was sceptical about the offer, but when the man offered her money as proof of his sincerity, she was convinced, and gave her permission for her son to leave Wulward and to move on to service in the archdeacon's kitchens. After her approval of William's new indenture, it is recorded that the boy, accompanied by the unnamed stranger, stopped at Godwin's house in Norwich, and told William's aunt Liviva (Godwin's wife and Elviva's sister) about his new place of employment. Apparently Liviva became suspicious, and after the pair left, sent her daughter to follow them and find out where they were going. Thomas of Monmouth reports that the two were last seen entering a Jew's house in Norwich, and that William was found dead three days later, wearing only a coat and shoes. 
William's body was buried without ceremony on Easter Monday (27 March), though subsequent legend records that his uncle Godwin and brother Robert identified his body on Easter Tuesday. Two days later, Godwin came before the bishops and clergy of Norwich, and charged the Jewish community of Norwich with the murder of his nephew, committed in connection with a ritual sacrifice. He then exhorted the clergy of Norwich to punish the Jews for the deed, even urging the elimination of the Jewish community in Norwich itself. William's body was removed from its original burial place in Thorpe Wood, and successively moved from tomb to tomb within the chapter house in Norwich, before its final enshrinement in 1154 on the north side of the rood screen. Here, an altar built over his tomb became a place of pilgrimage. 
The detailed story of William's alleged ritual murder at the hands of Jews may have come to Thomas of Monmouth, years later, from a man named Theobald, a converted Jew of Cambridge. Theobald is quoted in Thomas's account as asserting that, at the time of William's supposed murder, he was 'at Cambridge, a Jew among Jews ['cum judeis judeus'], and the commission of the crime was no secret to me' (Monmouth, 94). Because of the enormous falsity of the accusation, scholars have often wondered whether Theobald was real, or merely a literary construct (Jacobs, 'St William of Norwich', 752), devised by Thomas of Monmouth 'as a proof of the truth and credibility of the matter... which we have heard from Theobald, who was once a Jew, and afterwards a monk' (Monmouth, 94). Bishop Everard of Norwich seems to have disbelieved the accusation that William was murdered by the Jews from the outset, immediately after the body had been found and buried, and the citizens, secular clergy, and monks of Norwich could not agree whether the accusation was true or not. Moreover, the secular authority, namely the sheriff of Norfolk, was adamantly opposed to the wild accusations made against the Jews, forbade them to respond to a summons to the diocesan synod, and even took them into Norwich Castle for protection against an angry mob. 
In spite of the lack of real evidence, the story was preserved, augmented, and used as a case for the sanctification of the dead William as a martyr, largely through the efforts of William Turbe, the prior of Norwich Cathedral, who had believed from the first that the Jews of Norwich had murdered the boy. He worked actively to persuade others of his belief that the story was true, and came into a better position to promote the cult of the boy martyr when he was elected bishop in 1146. Many of the miracles ascribed to the cult are described in the 'Life', and though interest declined after 1151, there were still a number of pilgrims coming regularly to William's shrine when Thomas of Monmouth was writing. Later, however, the cult enjoyed little success, and from the late thirteenth century offerings rarely amounted to more than $1 per annum. 
The graphic ritual details of William's 'murder' in Thomas of Monmouth's account, constructed well after the event, are all drawn from one highly unreliable source, namely Theobald of Cambridge, who was neither present in Norwich, nor a witness when William's body was discovered. Theobald told Thomas that the incident was no secret among Jews, though he offered no proof of this, other than his claim to have been a Jew before his conversion to Christianity. All of the other reported 'evidence' in the inquiry into William's death is hearsay, and the details of events between the boy's disappearance and the discovery of his dead body, hung on a tree near Norwich, were undoubtedly invented to discredit the Jews. Among those whom Thomas of Monmouth interviewed about William's disappearance and death was a Christian woman, who acted as servant to the Jewish man who owned the house where William was allegedly taken, and who described seeing the boy tied to a post inside the house. Whether these accounts of William's death, and of the wounds inflicted upon his body, are derived from Theobald's accusations is not certain, though they are similar to Theobald's reported description of a mock crucifixion ritual -- that is, a fictitious passover rite, and as such a complete invention. Thomas of Monmouth claims that he was shown two nail holes in the very post that the maid described, and that these corresponded with the wounds on young William's corpse (which, however, Thomas did not himself see). Thomas then describes, no less circumstantially, and, presumably, no more reliably, how the Jews left the body in the house until Good Friday, when they sneaked out of Norwich with the corpse and hung it upon a tree in Mousehold Wood, where it was discovered, clothed only in jacket and shoes, and with a gag in the mouth, on Easter evening, and how many of the citizens of Norwich came to see it. 
At the time of William's death it was already a common superstition that Jews stole children, in order to crucify them as a mockery of the death of Christ. However, this blood libel accusation was only one way in which a child's mysterious death could be used for particular advantage: the ritual murder claim could be used to extort money from Jews, or by clergy (such as Godwin) who desired that relations between Jews and Gentiles should be kept to a bare minimum, or less. Or, as has been suggested by several historians, including the editors of Thomas of Monmouth's account, perhaps people guilty of committing crimes could divert suspicion from themselves by blaming the Jews. In telling the tale of William of Norwich, was Theobald (if he existed at all) really making a confession of guilt when he related this story of non-existent Jewish ritual practices? Was it 'beyond the bounds of possibility that he did the deed himself?' (Stokes, 126) 


@@@@@


doc= 29463


Conches, William de (c.1085-c.1154), grammarian and commentator on classical texts, derived from Conches in south-east Normandy. The most important source for his life is the 'Metalogicon' of John of Salisbury, who studied under William between 1138 and 1141. John says that William followed Bernard of Chartres's old-fashioned method of teaching, which centred on the careful exposition of ancient texts; the implication is that he was probably Bernard's pupil. The question of where William taught is much debated. John's account makes it clear that it cannot have been on the Mont-Ste Genevieve. Paris itself is a probable location, because John seems to have studied with other masters at the same time, and only in Paris would this have been possible. However, in spite of the arguments put forward by Southern, some historians think that when John says that he left the Mont-Ste Genevieve to be taught by William, he cannot have meant just that he went into Paris, of which the Mont was a suburb, and they point to allusions in William's writings that suggest that he was a teacher at Chartres. John also says that eventually William gave up his teaching, because students preferred quicker and more fashionable methods of instruction. Instead he formed a connection with the court of Geoffrey the Handsome, duke of Normandy from 1144 to 1149. Not only is William's 'Dragmaticon' presented in the form of a dialogue with the duke, but he also gave tuition to the duke's sons. In the 'Dragmaticon' William says that he had taught others for twenty years or more, which would put the beginning of his teaching to 'c'.1120, or perhaps slightly later. In 1979 Southern argued for an earlier date, but this seems impossible, since William was still teaching publicly when John of Salisbury studied with him. Alberic of Trois-Fontaines, chronicling the death of King Stephen in 1154, says that 'in his time' William had great celebrity -- a comment that suggests that William died shortly before or after 1154. 
The writings of William de Conches reflect his three linked interests in grammar, ancient texts, and natural science. His strictly grammatical work took the form of a commentary on Priscian's 'Institutiones grammaticae', the standard text for advanced grammatical work in the middle ages. It exists in two recensions, one covering books 1-16, the other the whole work (1st recension: Florence, Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, MS San Marco 310; 2nd recension: Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 15130). According to William himself, the first recension was written in his youth (probably 'c'.1120-25), the second in old age (probably late 1140s to 1150s). William was able to draw on the eleventh-century 'Glosule' to Priscian, but he greatly modified and extended their analysis in the direction of providing a universal grammar. 
Expounding ancient texts was part of a grammarian's work. William de Conches interested himself especially in the few ancient and late antique Platonic and Neoplatonic texts then available. He commented on Boethius's 'De consolatione philosophiae', on Macrobius's commentary on Cicero's 'Somnium Scipionis', and on Plato's 'Timaeus' in Calcidius's translation ('Glossae super Platonem', ed. E. Jeauneau, 1965). There is also mention by William of a commentary he intended to write on Martianus Capella's 'De nuptiis Mercurii et Philologiae'; a manuscript at Florence (Biblioteca Nazionale, MS Conv. soppr. I, 1, 28) probably contains material based on it. William's commentaries are remarkable for the extent to which they treat Platonic texts as sources where the Christian scholar, by unravelling metaphorical language, can discover important truths. 
William's work as a commentator was closely linked to his interest in natural science, since Macrobius's commentary on the 'Somnium Scipionis' and the 'Timaeus' were both rich in scientific discussion. In the 'Philosophia mundi' (ed. G. Maurach, 1980), William begins by briefly considering God before talking about the elements, the stars, the seas, and the earth, and then human beings -- how they are conceived, their senses, and their souls. It is a plan which, very roughly, might have been suggested by the 'Timaeus' itself. The 'Philosophia' exists in two recensions, in one of which some of the more daring points are put in more guarded language. In the 'Dragmaticon' (printed as 'Dialogus de substantiis... a Vuilhelmo Anoponymo philosopho' by G. Gratarolus, Strasbourg, 1567; repr. 1967), William treats the same topics in dialogue form, sometimes developing his earlier ideas and abandoning former certainties for a more complex and tentative approach. Besides ancient texts such as the 'Timaeus', Macrobius, and Seneca's 'Quaestiones naturales', other material translated from the Arabic influenced William's scientific speculations, especially, in his discussion of the elements, Constantine the African's 'Pantegni'. 
From internal cross-references, the order of William's compositions must have been: commentary on Boethius, commentary on Macrobius, 'Philosophia', commentary on Priscian (1st version) -- almost certainly all before 1130; commentary on 'Timaeus', 'Dragmaticon' (1144-9), commentary on Priscian (2nd version). In the course of his career William became increasingly reluctant to propose ideas that might be considered heterodox. For instance, he gradually moved from asserting the identity between Plato's 'world soul' and the Holy Spirit, as he did in his commentary on Boethius, to proposing the identification as a possible view, and finally to omitting it entirely in the 'Dragmaticon'. Indeed, in his preface to that work, William explicitly renounces a number of the more daring theological ideas put forward in the 'Philosophia mundi'. He may have been influenced by a letter written to Bernard of Clairvaux by Guillaume de St Thierry about 1141, attacking William's orthodoxy and describing his errors as worse than Peter Abelard's. But Bernard, who had conducted a vigorous campaign against Abelard at Guillaume de St Thierry's prompting, was not this time incited into action -- perhaps because William de Conches showed himself willing to abandon his contentious positions. 
A florilegium of ancient ethical texts, the 'Moralium dogma philosophorum' (ed. J. Holmberg, 1929), has often been attributed to William, but almost certainly wrongly. Historians have been misled into thinking there is positive evidence for the attribution by additions made by the early thirteenth-century reviser of the treatise, Bartolomeo da Recanati. Moreover, it is very unlikely that the 'Moralium dogma' was written before the late 1150s, by which time William was almost certainly dead. 


@@@@@


doc= 29464


Wycombe, William of (fl. c.1127-c.1148), prior of Llanthony and hagiographer, was probably, as his name suggests, a native of Buckinghamshire. From an early age he was acquainted with Robert de Bethune (died 1148), whose chaplain he had become by about 1127, while Robert was still prior of the Augustinian house of Llanthony in the lordship of Monmouth, Gwent. Probably William was also a canon at Llanthony, and he certainly had become one by 1132. Even after Robert became bishop of Hereford in 1131, William remained closely associated with him, and seems to have spent periods of time in his household, since he witnesses several of his charters. William became prior of Llanthony in 1137 on the death of the previous prior, Robert de Braci, Robert de Bethune's successor; by this time the canons had been driven from Wales by the Welsh uprising of 1135, and had been provided with a new home, at Llanthony Secunda just outside Gloucester, through the assistance of Robert de Bethune and Miles of Gloucester (died 1143). William's last dated occurrence as prior is 16 July 1147; soon after this he was deposed by his fellow canons, angered by his strict discipline, with the encouragement of Llanthony's patron, Roger, earl of Hereford (died 1155), who had been displeased by a piece of writing by William, now lost, criticizing his father, Miles. William had been deposed before Robert de Bethune's departure for Rheims in March 1148, since he occurs without title in a charter of Robert issued between 1143 and 1148, while his successor Clement became prior in or before 1148. He moved to a cell of Llanthony at Frome where he spent the rest of his life. It was evidently here that he wrote his 'Life of Robert de Bethune', a hagiography presenting Robert as an ideal regular canon and pastor, which none the less failed to achieve Robert's canonization. One version was dedicated to Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester (died 1171), and another, only very slightly different, to Reginald, prior of Wenlock, who died in the mid-1150s. The date of William's own death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 29465


William of Ypres, styled count of Flanders (d. 1164/5), soldier, was the illegitimate son of Philippe de Lo, the younger son of Robert (I), count of Flanders (died 1093), and brother of Count Robert (II) (died 1111). Although the episode of his involvement in English affairs between 'c'.1137 and 1154, when he was a leading supporter and military commander of King Stephen, and acted as the effective governor of Kent, is distinct both from his earlier career in Flanders, and from his retirement there from 'c'.1154-5 until his death, that involvement is only explicable in relation to his Flemish origins, and against the more general background of close Anglo-Flemish relations after 1066. 
William's date and precise place of birth are unknown. His father Philippe's estates lay around Lo, north of Ypres, and Philippe attested charters as count of Ypres. He is not known to have married and there is no doubt that William was considered illegitimate. Among contemporary chroniclers, Suger calls him William the Bastard (Suger, 248-9); Galbert of Bruges quotes a letter of Louis VI dismissing him as 'illegitimate, born of a noble father and an ignoble mother who continued to card wool as long as she lived' (Galbert, 187); and the St Bertin chronicle, not a hostile source, says he was Philippe's son by a concubine. The name of William's mother is unknown. His birth has been placed 'c'.1090, but that is only a conjecture, and dates later in the 1090s are equally plausible. Chronicles mention William's marriage by 1119 to a niece of Clemence of Burgundy, the wife of Robert (II) of Flanders, but give no further information. Two brothers of William are mentioned in passing: Theobald Sorel, referred to by Galbert of Bruges in 1127, and Reenger who witnessed a charter with William in 1139-40. Leliosa, whom William called his kinswoman in a charter of 1162, was the daughter of Theobald d' Aire, possibly Theobald Sorel. No children of William himself are documented. 
William did not inherit his father's comital title, appearing in a charter of 1118 just as 'William son of Count Philippe'. But when his cousin Baudouin (VII), count of Flanders, died without issue in 1119, William was the only surviving grandson of Robert (I) in a male line, and there was a movement to install him as count, led by Clemence of Burgundy and her second husband Godfrey, duke of Brabant. Baudouin had nominated another cousin, Charles, the son of Robert (I)'s daughter Adela and Cnut IV, king of Denmark, as his successor, and Charles soon defeated the challenge to his rule. In this episode William may have been a figurehead manipulated by others, especially given his link by marriage to Clemence. He survived the crisis, and assumed a prominent position under the new count as effective count of Ypres and its regions, like his father. A much greater upheaval followed the death of Count Charles the Good. Charles was murdered while at prayer in Bruges on 2 March 1127 by members of the Erembald clan, a large family of knights and officials who feared the loss of their power at the count's hands. William at once demanded that men under his control swear allegiance to him as count, and occupied much of western Flanders. Of the two vivid contemporary chronicle accounts, Galbert of Bruges says that he acted 'on the advice of the murderers' (Galbert, 133-4), and that he claimed falsely to have the support of Henry I of England; Gautier de Therouanne states more neutrally that he wished to secure order. As the Erembalds and their enemies fought in Bruges, William severed any links he may have had with the murderers, and by 20 March had executed one of their leaders who fell into his hands. 
But William's bid for power failed, partly because of the intervention of Louis VI of France, who came to Arras to nominate his own candidate, William Clito, son of Duke Robert of Normandy and descendant of the Flemish ruling house through his grandmother Matilda, sister of Robert (I) and wife of William the Conqueror. Clito garnered the support of many Flemish nobles by the end of March, and the towns of Bruges and Ghent also received him, in return for enhanced privileges. By April 26 he was strong enough to attack Ypres, the townsmen admitted him, and his rival was captured. The fortunes of William of Ypres reached their nadir in September, when he was brought to Bruges as a captive, while an inquest was conducted to identify those involved in the murder of Count Charles. Perhaps William's condemnation was seriously considered, but if so he escaped implication, and was released in return for an oath of loyalty to Clito in March 1128. Clito had alienated many of his initial supporters and faced opposition from a new claimant, Thierry d'Alsace, son of Gertrude, another of Robert (I)'s daughters. In July 1128 Clito was killed at the siege of Aalst, there was another shift of allegiances, and Thierry was confirmed as count. William of Ypres then launched a final revolt in the Ypres region about 1130, though the course of events is obscure and his motives are unknown. It is only clear that he failed and was eventually forced into exile by 'c'.1133-5. 
Studies of the early career of William of Ypres have generally portrayed him as a ruthless opportunist, abandoning his distasteful Erembald allies only when they were doomed to defeat. Yet William's initial reaction of consolidating his own power base as disorder spread was not unreasonable, and his changed attitude to the murderers must have followed very quickly on his receiving fuller information of their deeds in Bruges. His bid for the succession would always have been opposed, however he pursued it, not least by Louis VI who must have regarded him as a potential ally of Henry I of England. William certainly had a substantial political following in 1127: Galbert concedes that he led 300 knights, and that many of Count Charles's household had joined him. This must be seen as a tribute to his lordship and capacity to build up support, not just his ambivalent family inheritance. Some of these men must have followed him into exile, though few names are known. The ultimate failure of William's political ambitions in Flanders by 1135 does not therefore prove that he was especially unprincipled or that he lacked ability. 
It is generally assumed that William of Ypres followed Stephen, count of Boulogne to England soon after the latter seized the throne in December 1135 and was active there in early 1136. However, there is no unambiguous evidence for this, and it can only be said that by 1137 William was in a prominent position within Stephen's following, when he led a force of Flemings as part of the army with which the king opposed Count Geoffrey of Anjou in Normandy. It is at least possible that William and his men first joined Stephen at this time. Orderic and other chroniclers say that William was anxious to give battle, but some Norman barons resented the Flemings' influence with the king, and a violent quarrel broke out which forced Stephen to abandon his campaign. Stephen did not hesitate to employ William in Normandy again, sending him to restore order there with Waleran, count of Meulan, in May 1138. However, Earl Robert of Gloucester's alliance with the Angevins made it hard for Stephen's followers to recover lost ground, and William returned to England by June 1139, but probably in 1138. Chronicles mention his involvement in some of the most crucial events of Stephen's reign, notably the arrest of the bishops in 1139 and the battle of Lincoln at which Stephen was captured in February 1141. Along with most of the king's baronial supporters William fled at Lincoln, but this may have been no more than realism, as Henry 'of Huntingdon' suggests. It left William free to play a key role in the subsequent recovery, rallying forces in Kent with Stephen's queen, Matilda, and eventually defeating the Angevin army besieging Winchester in September 1141. The capture there of Robert of Gloucester, who was confined in Rochester Castle under William's custody, afforded the means of freeing Stephen by an exchange of prisoners which took place in November. The king then spent Christmas at Canterbury. 
William's role as the leading royal agent in Kent was also crucial to his political importance. It probably began a little later than is usually supposed, in 1138-9 rather than 1136. The local though later chronicler Gervase of Canterbury couples the settlement of William and his Flemish troops with the empress's invasion of England, to which it may have been a reaction. William was also well placed to maintain links with Stephen's county of Boulogne, where he witnessed a charter of Queen Matilda 'c'.1142-7. Flemish trade and finance must have been important to Stephen's war effort as well as Flemish mercenaries. Gervase condemned the Flemings in Kent as 'like wolves' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 2.73) and Archbishop Theobald described William in a letter to Pope Adrian IV of 1156-7 as 'that notorious tyrant and persecutor of our church' ('Letters of John of Salisbury', 1.37). These were convenient glosses to put on events after the change of regime in 1154. Contemporary sources reveal a more complex picture of collaboration at local level, including William's attempt to arrange peace between Stephen and Theobald in 1148. William also founded a Cistercian house at Boxley 'c'.1146 and made other grants to churches. Chroniclers describe him as having 'all Kent committed to his custody' and 'possessing the county' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 1.121; 2.73). Though he never assumed the comital title, perhaps for fear of offending Count Thierry of Flanders, William exercised powers like those of the more active earls created by Stephen in other counties 'c'.1138-40. 
Under Stephen, William witnessed about fifty-five genuine royal charters, of which none can be earlier than 1138, further evidence of when his role in English government really expanded, and none need be later than 1148. The evidence suggests that William was not in close attendance on the king, but divided his time between Kent, the royal court, and independent commissions, military or otherwise. He was not a military professional in any exclusive sense; as in Kent, his activities ranged much more widely. Nor is it clear that he was 'a man of violence' as he has been described. Local chronicles accused him of threatening St Albans and taking money for the king from Abingdon in 1143, while William of Malmesbury singled out his burning of Wherwell nunnery in 1141. Few modern historians would regard this record as outside the normal practice of twelfth-century warfare, all the more so as Wherwell was fortified by the empress's men before it was attacked. 
After 1148 the patterns of power in England settled into a stalemate and William's role may have became more localized, or declined in importance, as the charter attestations suggest. Some later sources say that he went blind, though even if these reports are true the date and circumstances remain elusive. By the time Stephen conceded the English royal succession to Count Henry of Anjou in 1153, William's position in England was clearly under threat. His power base in Kent, though impressive, was insecure, founded on the custody of towns and royal demesne rather than land in fee. With many other Flemings he left England soon after Henry II's accession, though there is no real evidence of forced expulsions. The new king did not cancel William's revenues from Kent until Easter 1157; they amounted to $440 on the pipe roll of 1156, the only surviving full year record to indicate the scale of the resources available to him during Stephen's reign. Since by 1154 William had mended his relations with Thierry of Flanders, he was able to retire to at least part of his paternal inheritance at Lo. He had the resources to give major assistance for the rebuilding of the abbey of St Bertin after a fire in 1152. His last known charter can be dated to 1162, and as the chronicle of the counts of Flanders says that he lived for about ten years after leaving England, his death can be placed in 1164 or 1165. He was buried at St Peter's Abbey in Lo, which his father had founded in 1093. 


@@@@@


doc= 29466


William (c.1095-1174), bishop of Norwich, was by Norwich tradition a Norman by birth. The name Turbe or Turba, under which he is sometimes found, probably derives from the nickname 'turbo' (whirlwind) rather than any place name. He probably entered Norwich Cathedral priory as an oblate and was educated at the cathedral school, and certainly Bishop Herbert de Losinga (died 1119) took a keen interest in his development. He occurs in Bishop Everard's episcopate probably as sub-prior, and certainly between 1136 and 1145 as prior. As such, he was an enthusiastic advocate of the embryonic cult of the boy martyr William, allegedly ritually murdered by Norwich Jews in 1144, and successfully silenced all doubts and bore down all opposition to it. 
After the resignation of Everard in 1145, when despite the opposition of the sheriff the monks were for once able to conduct a genuinely free election, William was the natural choice of the convent as their bishop. He was consecrated either in 1146 or early 1147. He was brought to King Stephen's attention by two impassioned speeches in defence of one of his tenants accused of murdering a Norwich Jew, and in 1148 the king appointed him one of three bishops delegated to represent the whole English episcopate at the papal Council of Rheims. He was seldom, however, at Stephen's court, but was present at the council in 1153 that culminated in the treaty of Winchester, which foreshadowed the succession of Henry II. Although he was thereafter present at most great councils and at great ecclesiastical occasions, he appears remarkably infrequently as a witness of Henry's royal charters, and there are indications of tension. He opposed the scutage of 1156, and he refused to recognize the increased assessment for the knight-service of his lordship in 1166. 
In 1163, with the other English bishops, William attended Pope Alexander III's Council of Tours. In the conflict between the king and Archbishop Thomas Becket that broke that year he was not one of the major participants, but he was inevitably and frequently involved. Some accounts state that at the councils of Clarendon and Northampton he urged the archbishop to submit because of fear of the king's hostility to him personally. In the following years he appears initially to have stood with Bishop Gilbert Foliot of London (died 1187) against Becket, and John of Salisbury urged him, probably in 1168, towards a change of heart. In 1169, however, he was the first to announce publicly Becket's excommunication of Foliot for his failure to act decisively as papal judge-delegate against the earl of Norfolk for his aggression against the canons of Pentney, and subsequently he announced dramatically at Norwich the excommunication of the earl himself, thus courting royal fury; prudently, he retired to the cloister to live among his monks. However, the earl had been brought to submission before Becket's return from exile, and in the last month of the archbishop's life there was friendly correspondence between him and Bishop William over the aftermath of the Pentney affair. 
Although he is not known to have had legal training, William played a part in the expansion of the papal judicial system that is characteristic of the second half of the twelfth century. In 1156 John of Salisbury wrote to Pope Adrian IV ('r'. 1154-9) of the hostility that the bishop had incurred by fulfilling papal mandates, and ten years later William himself in a letter expressed the fullest confidence in the sovereign authority of the papacy. He was among papal judges-delegate commissioned in 1157 to adjudicate between Archbishop Theobald (died 1161) and the abbot of St Augustine's, Canterbury, in 1162 was delegated to hear the claim of St Albans Abbey to exemption from the bishop of Lincoln, and in the mid-1160s to investigate the state of the Gilbertine houses of the southern province, in the aftermath of the revolt of the lay brothers against Gilbert of Sempringham. These were all 'causes celebres', in which the crown as well as the papacy became involved. William also, however, communicated with Pope Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81) on problems of more general import that he encountered either as diocesan or judge-delegate, such as the commutation of crusaders' vows, hereditary succession to benefices, frustratory appeals to delay judgment in church courts, and the forging of papal letters. His contribution to the development of the canon law in England is not to be compared with that of some of his younger contemporaries, but it is nevertheless not insignificant. 
At his own cathedral church William continued to foster the cult of 'little' St William. In 1150 he ordered the translation of the body to the chapter house, in 1151 to the interior of the church, and finally in 1154, at a great ceremony, to the chapel of the Holy Martyrs. He commissioned the composition by Thomas of Monmouth of an account of the life and miracles of St William, and finally in 1168 dedicated a chapel in Thorpe Wood, where the body had originally been discovered. There can be no doubt that the bishop believed in the veracity and validity of this highly dubious cult, and certainly the shrine continued to attract some pilgrims and donations in the late middle ages. 
Bishop William issued general confirmations for the monks of Norwich and made some modest additions to their endowment. When the cathedral was badly damaged by fire in 1171, he is reported to have sat at the door collecting alms, and he certainly set himself urgently to its repair. There is evidence of tension towards the end of his episcopate, as he attempted to impose reform through the agency of a new prior who was assaulted by a faction of the monks, two of whom fled and were excommunicated by the bishop. He was, however, remembered there with affection, perhaps magnified because of the continual conflict between the convent and his successor, John of Oxford (died 1200). 
The evidence for Bishop William's governance of his diocese is provided mainly by some one hundred surviving written 'acta'. It appears that he was not always, and certainly initially, well served by his subordinates. With two of his archdeacons, Walkelin (who appears as an engaging but totally unreformed rogue) and Baldwin of Boulogne, he came into open conflict, while a third, Roger, was very suspect in progressive ecclesiastical circles. By the end of his episcopate, however, he had promoted trained clerks from his own 'familia', in which for the first time 'magistri' trained in the cathedral schools were prominent. Although a monastic bishop, William participated fully in the professionalization of ecclesiastical administration that is characteristic of his age. 
In the early years of Henry II's reign William, like other bishops, was active in the restoration of ecclesiastical rights and properties, the loss of which the complainants invariably attributed to the lack of governance under Stephen. Battle Abbey and St Benet of Hulme were major beneficiaries of his intervention. Although a Benedictine himself, he fostered the newer orders, encouraging William d'Aubigny (died 1176) to found an Augustinian house at Old Buckenham, and witnessing Ranulf Glanville's foundation charter for Butley. He appears to have been particularly solicitous of the welfare of nuns. Work was begun in the second year of his episcopate on a new nunnery at Norwich, female religious were admitted to share the common life of the monks of Blackborough, and he persuaded Abbot Hugh of Bury St Edmunds to grant a new site at Thetford to the nuns of Ling. 
Under Bishop William there began in Norwich diocese the process, common to the whole of England, whereby the revenues of parish churches were appropriated to the use of monastic houses, which often already held rights of patronage. The bishop granted, for example, six churches in this way to St Benet's, and seven to Castle Acre Priory. By the end of his episcopate he was making provision in such churches for the appointment of vicars receiving a specified portion of the revenue and exercising responsibility for the cure of souls. Although increasing episcopal control over the appointment of incumbents is indicated by the survival, earlier than in most other dioceses, of letters of institution to benefices, Bishop William does not appear to have been as determined as some contemporary diocesans to eliminate all trace of hereditary succession to churches; there are several instances where he quite openly condoned the admission of a son to his father's living, as long as he was suitable. He appears, in other words, to have been conservative, although eager to improve the pastoral ministry, and confident that this could best be done by transferring parish churches to monastic control. He had been prepared to utilize both royal and papal authority to achieve these ends, but cannot be firmly labelled either a 'royalist' or a 'papalist' bishop. 
William died in January 1174, and was buried in Norwich Cathedral. He was commemorated by his monks on 16 January. An interesting reflection on his career and record is that he had received words of praise from both Thomas Becket and Gilbert Foliot. 


@@@@@


doc= 29467


St Albans, William of (fl. c.1178), Benedictine monk and hagiographer, wrote a Latin prose 'Passio S. Albani' at the request of Simon, from 1167 to 1188 abbot of St Albans, where William was a monk. Since the original version of the 'Passio' does not mention the invention of Amphibalus in 1178, the probable date of its composition is between 1167 and 1178. In his work William made use of the writings of Bede and Geoffrey of Monmouth, but he claimed also to have translated from an Anglo-Saxon account of the martyrdom, dating from 590. The three earliest copies of his 'Passio' are Oxford, Magdalen College, MS 53, and BL, Cotton MSS Faustina B.iv and Nero C.vii. William's 'Passio' was the source of most of the medieval lives of saints Alban and Amphibalus, including those of Ralph of St Albans and Matthew Paris. He has been identified with William Martell the sacrist, who unsuccessfully challenged Warin for the abbacy of St Albans on the death of Abbot Simon, but there is no firm basis for this identification. 


@@@@@


doc= 29468


William of Crowland (d. 1179), abbot of Ramsey. Ramsey was a thriving community and doubtless produced several literary Williams: another of this name wrote a prose treatise on the 'Song of Songs'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29469


Peterborough, William of (fl. c.1190), Benedictine monk and theologian, was a native of Peterborough and a monk of Ramsey Abbey. He was a prolific author of works of popular theology, of which the following are known from the bibliographers Henry Kirkestede, John Leland, and John Bale: 'Distinctiones theologiae'; 'Sermones notabiles', in two volumes; 'Homeliae in cantica'; 'Euphrastica'; 'Opus partium'; and 'Interpretaciones vocabulorum s. scripturae'. The title of the first of these works indicates a use of the scholastic method, and his own title 'magister' confirms that he had studied in the schools. The only work that survives is 'Euphrastica', an explanation of difficult passages in the scriptures. 100 problems are taken, starting with the 'Old Testament' and working through to the 'New Testament'. They include: 'whether the impossible is possible to God, or not' (no. 31); 'how it was that one evangelist said 'before the cock crows you will denounce me thrice', while another said '... twice'' (no. 60); and 'where Christ was in the forty days after his Passion' (no. 80). The work secures William's place among a group of monastic writers who 'wrote elaborate and lengthy commentaries on the 'Bible' that contain little that is original' (Hunt, 27). 


@@@@@


doc= 29470


Newburgh, William of (b. 1135/6, d. in or after 1198), Augustinian canon and historian, belonged to a family that may have originated in Bridlington or an area nearby, according to statements in his 'Historia rerum Anglicarum'. He was educated from boyhood in the Augustinian priory of Newburgh, and spent most if not all of his life as a member of that community. The evidence of his chronicle suggests that he died in or soon after 1198. Apart from the 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', which was his major work, William wrote a number of sermons which are found together with his history, and a commentary on the 'Song of Songs' begun before 1196, which he interpreted as a hymn in praise of the Virgin Mary. An attempt has been made to identify him with a certain William, canon of Newburgh, whose name appears in a charter of the period. Between 1160 and 1165 this William married Emma de Peri, an heiress of considerable lands, and subsequently retired to Newburgh as a canon between 1182 and 1183. The identification seems unlikely, for there is nothing in the 'Historia rerum Anglicarum' to suggest experience of the world outside the cloister. Despite his own accomplishments William came from a house with no tradition of historical writing. He was encouraged in his historical work by Ernald, abbot of Rievaulx (died 1199), while his commentary on the 'Song of Songs' was written at the request of another Cistercian, Roger, abbot of Byland (died 'c'.1199). William's Cistercian contacts were important and were to prove a significant influence upon his writing. 
The 'Historia rerum Anglicarum' itself seems to have been composed in a comparatively short period between 1196 and 1198. The work has the appearance of being an early draft which was never revised. The history is divided into five books, and each book into a number of chapters, an indication of William's attempt to structure his narrative, and give it some kind of literary form. After a brief prologue in which he looks back with approval to the work of Gildas and Bede, his first book covers the period from 1066 to 1154. The second book deals with the reign of Henry II from Henry's accession in 1154 to 1174. The third book takes the history from 1175 to Henry's death in 1189, while the final two books cover more limited periods, concluding in 1194 and 1198 respectively. The history is of particular value for its account of the reign of Henry II, and especially for the early years of that reign, which are not well covered by other sources. As the narrative breaks off suddenly in May 1198, it seems likely that William died while still working on this section of his history. 
William of Newburgh is a writer whose reputation has remained consistently high among modern readers. Like Ailred (died 1167), with whose writings he was almost certainly acquainted, William wrote in a good, clear Latin style. He knew something of Latin literature, quoting from Virgil and Horace, and was acquainted with the work of the early church fathers such as Augustine and Gregory. It is, however, the broad range of his narrative, and the critical qualities that he exhibits, that distinguish his work. Although William appears to have spent the whole of his life at Newburgh, he put together a narrative which extended over much of Christendom, and which, as regards England, included an account of the major political events of the century in which he lived. William's interest in northern events is also evident. His chronicle is an important source of information on the Cistercian settlement in the north, the northern archbishops, and the attack on the Jews in York in 1190. In writing his history William used only a few identifiable sources. Among those accounts that can be identified are the chronicles of Symeon of Durham and Henry of Huntingdon (or perhaps their likely source, the Durham compilation known as the 'Historia Anglorum post obitum Bedae'), which he used for the opening part of his work, the Anglo-Norman poem of Jordan Fantosme, which was used for the events of the 1170s, and the 'Itinerarium regis Ricardi' of Richard of Devizes, which was a source for the third crusade. A lost biography of Richard I, by the king's chaplain, Anselm, may have been a source for William's account of the king's captivity. Apart from these writings much of his information came from contemporaries. Although he rarely names them, he is careful to indicate whether or not his informants were eyewitnesses of a particular event. Thus he says that his account of the Council of Rheims in 1148, and of Raymond of Antioch on the second crusade, came from people who were there. An eyewitness provided him with information on events in London in 1196. Elsewhere he says that an abbot, an archdeacon, or a monk, related some particular piece of information to him. It seems likely that several of these informants came from William's contacts within the Augustinian order, as well as from neighbouring Cistercian houses which through their founders had close links with the Anglo-Norman aristocracy. 
As his work indicates, William possessed historical ability of a high order. Apart from the range of his narrative, and the care with which he indicated his sources, the quality of his writing is also evident in his treatment of some of the major controversies of the twelfth century. His independence of judgement is clearly seen in his account of the quarrel between Henry II and Thomas Becket, in which he considered neither party to be free from blame, criticizing Henry for the manner in which he dealt with the matter of criminous clerks, and Becket for his obstinacy in resisting the king's decree. He wrote from a similar viewpoint when describing the 'pointless conflict' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 'Historia', 444) between Canterbury and York. His well-informed, well-balanced, and realistic account of the massacre of the Jews at York in 1190 made no attempt to conceal the atrocities that were committed nor his own condemnation of these acts. Nowhere is William's critical judgement seen to better advantage than in his treatment of Geoffrey of Monmouth's history. William was not misled by Geoffrey's story. In the opening to his work he denounced what he termed its 'impudent fabrications' ('impudentia mentitur'; Newburgh, 'Historia', 18), and argued that Bede would have mentioned Arthur if that ruler had existed. He pointed out errors in Geoffrey's account, including the presence of kingdoms and archbishops unknown to history. If William displayed a certain partiality in denouncing Geoffrey's work while accepting other fictions, he revealed, at least with regard to Geoffrey's history, a soundness of judgement that was not always found among his successors in the field of historical writing. None the less, despite William's criticism, Geoffrey's history 'swept away opposition with the ruthless force of a great epic' (Kendrick, 7). As William himself divined, the appeal of Geoffrey's history lay not in its truth, but in the fact that it provided the British with a noble and romantic past. 
Remarkable as the 'Historia rerum Anglicarum' was as a piece of historical writing, William's work inevitably reflected the intellectual milieu in which it was written. Twelfth-century chroniclers lacked the techniques available to a modern historian: William made some errors of fact, and his chronology was not always accurate. Thus he was six years in arrears in his date for the Council of Oxford of 1166, on which he provides the fullest surviving account. He did, however, attempt to construct as reliable a narrative as possible, and his use of documents, including the texts of papal letters, illustrates his appreciation of the value of such sources. Like Bede he had an interest in the miraculous. In particular he wrote at length about the miracles and marvels that he claimed had been seen in twelfth-century England. Some of his best stories concern the raising of the dead, and have their parallels in Icelandic literature. Among such ghost stories was one given on the authority of Stephen, archdeacon of Buckingham, concerning a dead man who forced his unwelcome attentions upon the living until finally a letter from the saintly Bishop Hugh of Lincoln (died 1200), placed upon the dead man's body, ensured a satisfactory end to these activities. 
As his association with Abbot Ernald indicates, William's history was from the start intended for an audience wider than that of his own community. The 'Historia rerum Anglicarum' survives in nine copies. One copy (BL, Stowe MS 62) belonged to Newburgh Priory, and may have been written in William's own's lifetime. Not surprisingly his work was especially popular among the Cistercians. Although no surviving manuscript can be assigned to Rievaulx, it is certain that a copy of his work would have been found there, and also at Byland. Copies of his history were in the possession of the Cistercian houses of Rufford and Buildwas, while the Cistercian annals of Stanley in Wiltshire follow an incomplete text of William's work. The 'Historia rerum Anglicarum' was also known within the Augustinian order. The Augustinian abbey of Osney in Oxfordshire owned a thirteenth-century copy, and at the end of that century Walter of Guisborough, an Augustinian canon, used William's account as a main source for his own chronicle. Members of other orders were familiar with the work. In the fourteenth century both the Anonimalle chronicle in its opening section, and Nicholas Trevet in his annals utilized William's account. Judged by the standards of its day the 'Historia rerum Anglicarum' was a remarkable achievement and the forerunner of what was to become an important tradition of chronicle writing by Augustinian canons in the north of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 29471


Montibus, William de (d. 1213), theologian, was born in Wigford, a suburb of Lincoln. There is evidence of a de Montibus family in Wigford in cartularies of the thirteenth century. The surname under which he was once known -- 'of Leicester' -- seems to have been first applied to William, erroneously, by John Bale, who confused William with one of his students, Richard Wetheringsett of Leicester, who quotes William copiously in his very popular 'summa', 'Qui bene presunt' (Goering, 153). As a youth William was raised in the household of Gilbert of Sempringham (died 1189). He travelled to Paris, perhaps in the 1160s, where he studied theology under Peter Comestor and other masters, and then opened his own school of theology on Mont-Ste Genevieve, just outside the walls of Paris. Gerald of Wales and Alexander Neckam both knew him there. William was one of a number of famous theologians at Paris during the last part of the twelfth century whose teachings were characterized by their interest in practical, pastoral theology and in the training of clergy for exercising the care of souls. In the 1180s William was invited back to England by Bishop Hugh of Lincoln (died 1200). He spent the last thirty years of his life at the head of the cathedral school in Lincoln, which was, during William's time, among the most famous in England. He served as chancellor of the cathedral from at least 1194 until his death in 1213. 
Gerald of Wales asserts that he was first called William de Monte because of his school on Mont-Ste Genevieve, and that he came to be called William de Montibus when he began teaching on the second 'mount', in the cathedral close at Lincoln. William de Montibus was perhaps the most famous theologian of his day in England. He composed four encyclopaedic 'summae' to aid students in his school. One is an introduction to theology entitled 'Numerale' (Goering, 230-35), wherein William discusses basic theological topics arranged according to the numbers from one to twelve (One God, Two testaments... Twelve articles of faith). Three of his 'summae' make use of the new experiments in alphabetical organization. His 'Distinctiones theologice' (ibid., 265-7) collects theological and scriptural terms and distinguishes their usages. His 'Proverbia' (ibid., 338) organizes more than 5000 Latin proverbs and quotations under 281 alphabetically ordered subject headings. One of his latest and most ambitious works is the 'Versarius' (ibid., 397-8), in which nearly 4400 lines of verse, many of them composed and commented upon by the author himself, are presented under some 900 alphabetically ordered headings. One of William's poems, known by its first words, 'Peniteas cito peccator', circulated independently as a guide to hearing and making confessions; it became one of the most popular didactic poems in Europe in the following centuries, and was printed, along with William's gloss, at least fifty-one times between 1485 and 1520. His other writings include several treatises on penance, a guide to theological tropes and scriptural interpretation, a commentary on the 'Psalms', theological questions on the seven sacraments, and a verse summation of the sacraments, several collections of sermons, and a number of pastoral letters addressed to the nuns of the Gilbertine order. 
William de Montibus died in Scotland in April 1213, while England was under papal interdict, and his body was transferred to Lincoln Cathedral for reburial in 1214 after the interdict was lifted. Matthew of Rievaulx composed four sets of memorial verses in William's honour, comparing him favourably with Augustine and Gregory the Great. Alexander Neckam praised William in his 'Laus sapientie divine' as a 'steadfast mountain and a pillar of the faith, who gave himself wholly to the study of theology' ('Alexandri Neckam', 460). 


@@@@@


doc= 29472


Ramsey, William of (fl. 1219), Benedictine monk and poet, may have been born at Ramsey, Huntingdonshire, and belonged to the community at Crowland Abbey in Lincolnshire. Modern scholarship has deprived him of most of the works attributed to him by the antiquaries. John Bale, building on John Leland's list, credited him with the following: verse lives of saints Guthlac, Edmund, and Birinus (all by Henry d'Avranches); excerpts from pagan philosophers, addressed to a friend Guthlac (in fact, William of Malmesbury's 'Polyhistor'); 'De vita et moribus philosophorum' (by Walter Burley); and commentaries on Bede's 'De temporibus' and Isidore's 'Computus' (both by Byrhtferth of Ramsey). Consequently J. C. Russell proclaimed him a 'literary ghost' (J. C. Russell, 'Dictionary of Thirteenth-Century Writers', 1936, 198-9), but a case can be made for two other verse works. 
Leland and Bale credited him with lives of Earl Waltheof in verse and prose: a verse epitaph of Waltheof, printed by Michel, written after the translation of 1219, is signed internally 'William', and the other associated works in the Douai manuscript (Douai, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 852) may be his. Further, Bale attributed to him prose and verse lives of St Neot. The prose lives are too early for William, but the verse life could be his. Admittedly, the marginal ascription to William in the one extant manuscript (Magd. Oxf., MS Lat. 53) is in Bale's own hand, and Bale was notoriously speculative; nevertheless, the 'Acta sanctorum' volume on St Neot independently cites William as testimony for the presence of Neot's relics at Ramsey. The extant text of the poem is incomplete (675 lines of elegiac couplets); it is based on the 'Vita secunda' (a second prose life) and, when retranscribed from the manuscript, is seen to be more grammatical and fluent than its editor supposed. 
Bale confused the poet with 


@@@@@


doc= 29473


Adgar (fl. 1150x1200), Anglo-Norman translator, was baptized Adgar but reveals that he was more commonly known as William; Trouvere (roughly meaning 'poet') is a later and inauthentic epithet. As the author of the first vernacular rendering of the miracles of the Virgin Mary, he is sometimes identified with a William who was chaplain and perpetual vicar of St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, London (1162-1200), who held his living from St Paul's Cathedral (he does not appear to have been a canon). His collection of forty-nine miracles of the Virgin, entitled 'Gracial' (found in BL, Egerton MS 612, BL, Add. MS 38664, and a fragment, Dulwich College, MS 22), was written for a friend called Gregory and dedicated to one Maud, 'dame Mahaut', most likely the abbess of Barking ('c'.1175-95) who was a natural daughter of Henry II. The collection seems to exist in a number of redactions which stem from Adgar himself. The whole surviving text runs to 8786 lines of octosyllables. The source, which Adgar allegedly found in the book cupboard ('almarie') at St Paul's, seems to have been provided by a canon of the cathedral (1148-62) called Alberic ('mestre Albri'), who compiled a collection of miracles from William of Malmesbury, Anselm, abbot of Bury, and Prior Dominic of Evesham. Adgar's vernacular compilation, from the second half of the twelfth century, was revised in the thirteenth century by Everard of Gateley, a monk of Bury. 


@@@@@


doc= 29474


Ste Mere-Eglise, William de (d. 1224), administrator and bishop of London, took his name from the Norman ducal manor of Ste Mere-Eglise, where he and his mother had a royal pension in 1195. His family -- which may have been connected to that of William de Revieres (or Vernon), fifth earl of Devon (died 1217) -- was important to him: he bought marriages in England for four kinswomen; he provided for two nephews there; and in the chapter of St Paul's he made three men of his name canons of St Paul's. Presumably he had a clerical but not a university education, since he is never addressed as master. But at some time before 1182 he had won admission to the service of Henry II, and by 1183 he was being styled 'clerk of the chamber'. During Henry's last years he became one of the king's most trusted servants, even attesting royal writs. His power attracted gifts of land and ecclesiastical livings, including the prebend of Haydour-cum-Walton in Lincoln Cathedral. The king also rewarded him with the wealthy deanery of the collegiate church of Mortain. 
William remained with Henry up until his death on 6 July 1189, but two months later he had followed Richard I to England. He soon obtained from the new king prebends in the cathedrals of York and London, as well as the prestigious deanery of St Martin's-le-Grand in London. During the ensuing months William was often at court, and seems to have taken up duties in the chamber again. He was supposed to have taken the cross, but accompanied Richard on his crusade only as far as Vezelay. They parted on 4 July 1190, and for nearly three years William's whereabouts are unknown. He is next to be found visiting the captive king in Germany in late March 1193. Hubert Walter, bishop of Salisbury, was also there on his way home from the crusade, and they returned to England together, William carrying Richard's letters nominating Hubert to the archbishopric of Canterbury. When Hubert had been elected, he returned the favour by making William archdeacon of Wiltshire, thus giving him a prebend in Salisbury Cathedral. 
In one of Richard's letters William is called 'protonotary', but any connection he had with the chancery must have been brief, since he was soon involved in the raising of the king's enormous ransom. In that connection he made two or three more trips to Germany and accompanied Richard back to England in March 1194. He was in Richard's company almost constantly while the king was in England, including his solemn crown-wearing at Winchester. But when Richard went to France in May, William stayed in England, a very important figure in the government of Hubert Walter, now chief justiciar. For two and a half years William was keeper of the king's escheats in southern England, and during that same time he acted as one of the two justices of the Jews. In the great eyre of 1194 he led one of the circuits, and in the justiciar's court at Westminster he sat once in 1194, occasionally in 1195, and regularly in 1196, though rarely thereafter. William's principal sphere of activity was the exchequer, where he became a highly respected figure. In reward for his service Richard nominated him to the bishopric of London, ordering the election to take place at the royal court in Normandy on 7 December 1198. On 23 May 1199 William made his profession of obedience to Archbishop Hubert Walter and was consecrated in St Katherine's Chapel, Westminster, in the presence of thirteen other bishops. 
By then King Richard was dead, and William's first major act as bishop was to participate in the coronation of King John on 27 May 1199. And until June 1208 William's talents were much used by John: he was one of the king's special counsellors; he was sent on diplomatic missions to Germany in 1204 and to Scotland in 1205; he served in the exchequer regularly; he authorized royal writs and assessed royal charters for confirmation; and he often witnessed the king's charters. Many royal gifts, both for himself and his church, showed how high he stood in the king's regard. At the same time, William was also active in the affairs of the church. He obtained a papal confirmation of the deanship of the province of Canterbury for the bishops of London, and three times in the illness or absence of the archbishop William consecrated bishops. He attended a provincial council held by Hubert Walter at Westminster on 19 September 1200. Newly elected abbots of Westminster sought William's blessing in 1200 and in 1213 (the latter while he was in exile in France). He appears to have conducted diocesan business himself, for no episcopal official is known for him. His relations with his canons were good, even with Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London, who presented William with his treatise 'De amicitia Christiana'. William was also the recipient of several papal mandates to act as judge-delegate, indicating the pope's confidence in his abilities and integrity. 
The death of Hubert Walter in 1205 precipitated a great struggle between King John and Pope Innocent III ('r'. 1198-1216), and William was placed squarely in the middle of it when the pope ordered him, along with the bishops of Ely and Worcester, either to obtain John's acceptance of Stephen Langton as archbishop of Canterbury or to impose an interdict upon the kingdom. After pleading with John for nearly eight months, the three bishops reluctantly proclaimed the interdict on 24 March 1208 and then fled the country. They were to remain in exile for five years, though they were invited back to England to negotiate with the king or the chief justiciar in the summer of 1208 for eight weeks, and twice again in 1209 for shorter periods. But the negotiations came to nothing, and the pope ordered them to excommunicate the king. When that also did not move John, in 1212 William and Eustace of Ely travelled to Rome with Stephen Langton to persuade the pope to authorize the king of France to invade England. This threat did bring John to heel, and the exiles were able to return to England on 16 July 1213. 
After John failed to reconquer his continental possessions in 1214, he returned to find England seething with conspiracies against his rule. Hoping to protect himself with the privileges of a crusader, he took the cross on 4 March 1215 at the hands of the bishop of London in his cathedral. When, in June, John was forced to come to terms at Runnymede, William is represented, along with others, as advising the king to grant the great charter of liberties to his people. William was one of eight bishops at Oxford a month later when John met the barons' representatives to implement 'Magna Carta'. But thereafter William is conspicuous by his absence from all accounts of the baronial war and the French invasion. He may have attended the Fourth Lateran Council; on 29 September 1215 he was in France in the company of two prelates who are known to have gone to Rome. But he appears to have been in his diocese in October 1216 and April 1217; he may have taken up residence in Coggeshall Abbey, where some of his horses were commandeered by royalist troops. William did not attend the first coronation of Henry III nor his first great council at Gloucester in November 1216. But when peace had been made and another charter of liberties was issued on 6 November 1217, it was by the counsel and in the cathedral of the bishop of London. On or about that same date he was present at the reopening of the exchequer, and a year later he was one of the great council present at the inauguration of the new royal seal. 
For another three years William served Henry III as he had served his grandfather, uncle, and father. He witnessed a royal document as late as 25 April 1220, and on 5 October he was asked to go to Llywelyn of Wales. But soon afterwards William obtained from the pope permission to resign his bishopric because of his great age. This he did on 25 or 26 January 1221, but retained his episcopal dignity and $100 of the revenues of the see for his maintenance. The custody of Colchester Castle, awarded to him in 1218, he also kept until at least December 1223. But at some point he took the habit of an Augustinian canon at the abbey of St Osyth on the east coast of Essex. There he built a chapel for his burial place, and he established a chantry for his soul, as he also did at St Paul's. He died at St Osyth's in 1224, probably on 27 March, and was buried there the following day. Many years earlier William had been denounced by Gerald of Wales as a mere follower of the court and a familiar of the king, but at his death he was remembered as a man of a great name and not a little authority, as one who had suffered great tribulation for the liberty of the church, and as an example of humility in his resignation of his see. 


@@@@@


doc= 29475


William the Clerk (fl. c.1200-c.1240), poet, presents himself at the end of the 'Roman de Fergus', a work that parodies characteristic features of several of Chretien de Troyes's romances, especially the 'Conte du graal', and the first and second continuations. Fergus is a 'vilain' ('villein') whose social ascent is charted with ironic humour. The story is given a realistic Scottish setting, though the two manuscripts of the work suggest a provenance for the author in north-east France. It was thought by some that the work was composed for a Scottish patron, Alan of Galloway (died 1234) in celebration of his marriage in 1209, for he was a great-grandson of the historical Fergus, lord of Galloway, who had died an Augustinian canon of Holyrood Abbey in 1161. Cogent objections to this view were raised by Schmolke-Hasselmann, who proposed that 'Fergus' was commissioned by Dervorguilla of Galloway and her husband (from 'c'.1223) John de Balliol (died 1269), whose claim to the Scottish throne ultimately derived from Fergus Mor mac Eirc (died 501) and who was anxious to promote the claim of his son, Hugh de Balliol. 'Fergus' might then be placed in the period 1237-41. D. D. R. Owen's careful study of the Scottish setting leads him inescapably to the view that the author, William, must have been familiar with the leading figures, affairs, and social life of William the Lion's Scotland. He has proposed as 'a strong possibility' that the author is to be identified with William Malveisin, of French stock, who probably arrived in Scotland (perhaps from England) in the 1180s to serve William I as royal clerk. His subsequent career took in the positions of king's chaplain, archdeacon of Lothian (by 1193), royal chancellor (1199-1202), bishop of Glasgow (1200-02) and bishop of St Andrews (from 1202 until his death in 1238). 'Fergus' must be dated after 1200. Owen has also found convincing historical prototypes for some of the romance's characters, notably Somerled, lord of the Isles (died 1164), for the hero's father, Soumillet, and Galiena, wife of Philip de Mowbray, for the heroine, Galiene. Another possible candidate for authorship of 'Fergus' is William del Bois, a clerk in William the Lion's chapel as early as 1193 and royal chancellor from 1210 to 1226. There is a thirteenth-century Dutch translation ('Ferguut') of William's romance. 
Quite different is the Norman clerk called 


@@@@@


doc= 29476


Forz, William de, count of Aumale (1191x6-1241), magnate, raised one of the most serious threats to the stability of England during the minority of Henry III. 
His title and lands in England and Normandy were inherited through his mother, Hawisa, countess of Aumale (d. 1213/14), a royal ward who married first William de Mandeville, earl of Essex (died 1189); second, in 1190, Forz's father, William de Forz 
(or Fors; died 1195)
, a Poitevin naval commander who accompanied Richard I on crusade; and finally the Fleming Baldwin de Bethune (died 1212). The surname Forz (used on the seals of both father and son) was derived from one of two places named Fors in Poitou. He is sometimes called 'earl of Albemarle', but incorrectly: he did not hold an English earldom, but, like his mother, took his title from Aumale, a small 'comte' in north-eastern Normandy. 
Nothing is known of William de Forz as a young man. After his mother's death in 1214 he came to England (perhaps from Poitou) under safe conduct, to speak with the king about his inheritance; his journey was the result of petitions by Robert de Ros (died 1227). In September or October 1214 John gave back to William de Forz all the lands in England of his mother's inheritance, with the proviso that he should have no receipts or profits until he had married Aveline, daughter of Richard de Montfichet of Stansted, Essex. The young man was first addressed as count of Aumale in royal charters of November 1214. His English lands consisted principally of the honours of Holderness and Skipton in the East and West Ridings of Yorkshire, Cockermouth in Cumberland, lands in Lincolnshire around Barrow-on-Humber in the north and Castle Bytham in the south, and a number of manors elsewhere. The Norman 'comte' was lost to the French before he inherited; he had some Poitevin lands and a connection with the Ile d'Oleron. 
William de Forz arrived in England amid the ferment of northern discontent leading to 'Magna Carta' and civil war. He may have been influenced in his political choice by Robert de Ros (a leading northern baron), Richard de Montfichet his brother-in-law, and Fulk d'Oyry (steward for the counts and countesses of Aumale for many years), all of whom opposed King John. The count joined the rebel barons in time to become one of the committee of twenty-five executors of 'Magna Carta', to which he was the second witness in June 1215 ['see also 'Enforcers of Magna Carta]. He rapidly changed sides, however, and by August was with the king, attesting charters and being granted rebel lands. He was also admitted, at the king's command, to Scarborough Castle. When, in December 1215, King John set off on a punitive expedition to the north, Forz accompanied him; and he gained many lands in this and the following year from the dispossessed, together with the castles of Rockingham, Sauvey, and Bytham. Although William de Forz deserted John briefly in June 1216, he returned to royal service by the autumn. At the beginning of Henry III's minority Forz was an active supporter of the young king. He sealed the reissue of 'Magna Carta' in 1216 (and was to do so again in 1225). During 1217 he was sent a stream of royal orders concerning the confiscation and restoration of lands. He was present throughout the main events of the war between the king's party and Prince Louis. 
After the war successive government attempts were made to reclaim from William de Forz the additional possessions he had acquired: prisoners, hostages, lands and manors seized unlawfully (including the Edenham manor of Gilbert de Gant, the royal castles of Rockingham and Sauvey, and the castle of Bytham, Lincolnshire, whose ownership was in dispute). These moves, especially in relation to the castles, were resisted by the count, and he compounded his disobedience by taking part in a forbidden tournament at Brackley. During 1218 his daughter's intended marriage to the son of William (I) Longespee, earl of Salisbury, was broken off; the earl wrote to the justiciar Hubert de Burgh (died 1243) disowning any acquaintance with Forz's plans. On 30 November 1219 the sheriffs of six midland and northern counties received letters listing the count's offences and warning the men of the shires not to aid him in any way. In spite of this he managed to keep the castles until May 1220, when Rockingham and Sauvey, threatened with siege, surrendered to the king in person. Bytham, however, he retained. In the south-western corner of Lincolnshire, it had been in the possession of the counts of Aumale since their arrival in England in the eleventh century, and there had been a castle there since at least 1141. It was part of, and probably the 'caput' of, the Aumales' southern Lincolnshire demesne, but nevertheless it had been alienated to the Coleville family by William de Mandeville, earl of Essex, the first husband of Hawisa, the Aumale heir, who was William de Forz's mother. The count was granted Castle Bytham in time of war in 1215, and although in 1217 William de Coleville regained the lands outside the castle gate by legal process, the count continued to refuse him the castle and attempted for many years to overthrow the decision of council and court. 
In addition to the trouble over Castle Bytham, in 1220 William de Forz was baulked in his proposed appointment as seneschal of Poitou and Gascony. He was passed over a second time at the Christmas council of 1220, and, without seeking the king's permission, he left the court at Oxford during the night to raise rebellion in Lincolnshire. The Worcester annalist gives a number of reasons for the rebellion, and modern historians have suggested others, including the government's general resumption of former royal demesne; the central problem seems, however, to have been Bytham, and Forz's brief rebellion was known to contemporaries as 'the war of Bytham'. 
Forz unsuccessfully attacked the castles of Newark, Sleaford, and Kimbolton, but was successful in taking Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, in January 1221. He was excommunicated by the papal legate Pandulf (for the second time) and the council ordered the assembly of an army at Northampton. Forz, meanwhile, garrisoned Fotheringhay and Bytham, and from there issued letters of protection to the mayors of the cities of England, as if he were king. The royal army, collecting a number of siege engines, master carpenters, and miners, threatened his midland castles, and at the end of January 1221 he went north, where most of his estates lay, and ultimately claimed sanctuary in Fountains Abbey, Yorkshire. The desperate journey to the north, including the abandonment of foundered horses, and even some of his conversation with his wife, was recorded by a government spy who rode with Forz. The government was lenient to him: although Castle Bytham was razed and its site returned to Coleville, Forz and his men were pardoned. This leniency, was, as Wendover wrote, a bad example to others. Forz was, however, in company with other barons of England, charged with scutage on his knights' fees for the campaign of Bytham against himself. He made one further attempt through the courts, in 1236, to regain Castle Bytham, but failed. 
William de Forz was at odds with the government again in 1223, in a group who made an armed demonstration against the Tower of London, demanding the removal of Hubert de Burgh. In 1224 his loyalty was suspected in the campaign against Falkes de Breaute (died 1226). His actions at this time may have been driven by his dislike of Hubert de Burgh, and also by his association with 'foreigners' -- other Poitevins, as opposed to the Anglo-Normans. After Breaute's defeat, however, Forz played a more statesmanlike role in government. He received lands and favours and was sent abroad on diplomatic and military missions. In 1227 he went to Antwerp to treat with the envoys of the emperor. He went to Poitou in 1230 with the king, and then to Brittany where the barons, who were supposed to be on campaign, amused themselves 'as though they were at a Christmas party' (Powicke, 183). He attended the colloquium in 1237 to deal with Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, prince of Gwynedd (died 1240); and in the same year was made custodian of the lands of the late earl of Chester (to which Forz's son had a claim). His last political involvement was in 1241, when he was twice summoned to Gregory IX's projected council against the emperor, Frederick II. 
During the autumn of 1239 Forz's wife, Aveline, died, and she was buried at Thornton Abbey, Lincolnshire. In the spring of 1241 Forz set out for Jerusalem; after being unable to eat for eight days, he died on the voyage, at the end of March 1241. His place of burial is unknown. He was succeeded by his son William de Forz (d. 1260). Forz continued his family's patronage of existing religious houses, but did not make any new foundations. Almost all of his surviving charters were confirmations of earlier gifts by his predecessors or his tenants. 
Forz was a man of mercurial temperament, who, in years of conflicting loyalties, changed sides more quickly than most. Both contemporaries and modern historians remark upon his turbulence, lack of resolution, and impulsiveness. The rapidity with which he was pardoned his successive offences suggests that he had some genuine grievances, perhaps connected with the threats to his inheritance posed by both King John and the regents for Henry III. In addition to the penalties he incurred through his inconstancy, he, or his officers, were incompetent administrators; free of family debt on inheritance, by 1226 he owed money to Jewish financiers and he was heavily indebted to the exchequer by 1231 -- these debts he left to his son. Of his many recorded lawsuits he lost all save one (which ended in a fine), and most were lost by carelessness or recalcitrance, as neither Forz nor his attorney came to court, so that the cases went by default. 
William de Forz's seal depicts him on horseback, in armour and brandishing a sword; the counterseal shows his shield of arms, a cross patonce vair, both giving his surname and title as 'De Forz Comitis Albemarlie'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29477


Drogheda, William of (1200x10?-1245), civil and canon lawyer, has no known association with the Irish town of Drogheda. He made provisions -- in a charter which survives in the Queen's College, Oxford, charter 287, sealed with his seal -- for his parents (and himself) to be buried in the priory church at Monk Sherborne, Hampshire. His presentation to the living of Grafton Underwood, Northamptonshire, his only certain benefice, was by the Norman priory at St Fromund which, like Monk Sherborne, was dependent on the abbey of St Vigor, Cerisy, in Normandy. His connections, therefore, are likely to be with Hampshire, and Drogheda may be a local place name in that county. He may not have been priested until he received the Northamptonshire living in 1242-3. A dispensation to hold an additional benefice was granted to him in 1245, and this may have been Petham in Kent, if a model case in his book is to be believed. 
Drogheda's career was associated with Oxford. His mastership apparently postdates Trinity 1237; his regency is mentioned in 1239. There is no evidence that he ever studied at the great Bolognese law school. Drogheda's particular claim to fame is as an Oxford teacher of the late 1230s, who produced a successful law book at a time when legal studies were in a state of transition. This work, the 'Summa aurea', served as a handy manual for both student and practitioner. Only one book of the projected six which are promised in the preface (and were to include one on marriage) has survived. It has been edited by L. Wahrmund (1914) and since then only two further manuscripts have been discovered: Bruges, Stadsbibliotheek, MS 355, and Worcester Cathedral, Dean and Chapter MS 74 (incomplete). Drogheda knew and cited the works of the two civilians, Azo and Roffredus of Benevento. Azo's 'Summe' of the first nine books of the 'Code' and of the 'Digest' was in circulation in 1211 and Roffredus's 'Libelli de iure civili' after 1235. He also knew and used Gregory IX's 'Decretals' of 1234 and he cites the canons of the legate Otto in the Council of London of 1237. The 'Summa aurea' is likely to date from 1237, though it may have been in use in various stages of completion before that date. Included in Gregory IX's 'Decretals', and so more widely circulated by them, was the bull of Honorius III of 1219 banning the study of the civil law by the clergy. It was the particular importance, therefore, of Drogheda's treatise that following the prohibition it retained and passed on the civilian knowledge which was needed by practitioners in the English canon-law courts. It is a procedural textbook, built on examples, possibly based on actual cases and their documents, and giving advice on how to win cases. There is little doubt that it influenced two generations of Oxford students. 
Drogheda himself was an accomplished advocate and proctor: Matthew Paris informs us that William of Montpellier gave up his claim to the bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield on hearing of the death of his advocate, William of Drogheda. The great Bolognese doctor of the fourteenth century, Giovanni d'Andreae, gave Drogheda's work a posthumous fame by adding it to a list of notable civilian treatises which had originally been compiled by the French canonist William Durandus (died 1296). Drogheda's work, in spite of its local examples, had already found its way abroad, and the manuscript was certainly copied in the thirteenth century in France and in Italy, and perhaps also in the empire and the Low Countries. His career was brought to an untimely end when he was murdered by his servant in 1245. The house in Oxford which he gave to the prior and convent at Monk Sherborne was supposedly on the site of 33 High Street, which is still called Drawda Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 29478


Durham, William of (d. 1249), theologian and university benefactor, may have been born at Sedgefield, co. Durham. Nothing otherwise is known of his origins or early life, until he is recorded as a regent master in theology at Paris, at a date between 1220 and 1223. To Matthew Paris, Durham was a famous master, a tribute amply accounted for by the range and sophistication of the questions attributed to him in Douai, Bibliotheque de la Ville, MS 434; these suggest that he also wrote a commentary on Peter Lombard's 'Sentences'. Durham was still at Paris in 1229, when, with other English masters, he was forced to leave when the university was dispersed by the secular authorities. But if he returned to England, he soon left again, to become archdeacon of Caux in Normandy, and also to hold the living of Laise, which carried with it a stall in Rouen Cathedral. His position in the diocese came to be such that on 30 March 1236 a majority of the canons elected him archbishop. But the minority appealed against the election to the pope, on grounds that included William's holding the archdeaconry in plurality with Laise, and Durham, perhaps feeling the force of this objection, had by 12 August 1236 declined to accept election. 
Instead Durham returned to England, probably to his native county, where in the previous year Bishop Richard Poor had made him a life grant of the episcopal manors of Wearmouth and Ryhope and the town of Sunderland, within which the rectory of Wearmouth was almost certainly comprehended. For this he was to pay a yearly rent of 40 marks. He may well have been intending to settle in the north-east, since in 1237 and 1238 he was given timber by the crown to make beams for the house he was building at Wearmouth. But letters of protection he received in November 1244 may indicate that he was about to go overseas, perhaps to Rome, since he was at some time appointed a papal chaplain. He certainly went abroad in 1248, when he mounted a successful defence at the curia at Lyons of his rights in Wearmouth, which had been challenged by Poor's successor, Bishop Nicholas of Farnham. He set off back to England via Normandy, but died at Rouen between 25 March and 11 May 1249. 
Matthew Paris remarked upon Durham's wealth, and alleged that he was greedy to add to it. Be that as it may, Durham became a notable posthumous benefactor to Oxford University. He is not in fact known to have studied at Oxford, though his being owed $20 by Studley Priory, Warwickshire, in 1243 shows that he had contacts with the English midlands. But in his will he bequeathed 310 marks ($206 13's'. 4died) to the university, directing that the money be invested in rents which should provide for ten or more masters studying theology. Two halls were bought, one in 1253 and the other in 1255, and further purchases followed, but when about 1280 a committee of masters was appointed to investigate the uses to which Durham's bequest had been put, it was found that much of the money had either been diverted to the university's own purposes or lent to outsiders, and that the properties acquired as Durham had instructed were bringing in only some $12 per annum. The attempt to implement Durham's bequest which resulted from these inquiries effectively amounted to the foundation of a new college, albeit a very small one, of just four fellows; it was supported by the rents already acquired, and by further purchases paid for with such money from the bequest as could be recovered. Additional statutes were issued in 1292, and these, together with a gradual improvement in its financial position, helped to secure the position of what was to become known as University College. 


@@@@@


doc= 29479


York, William of (d. 1256), justice, and bishop of Salisbury, apparently came from the East Riding of Yorkshire, though nothing is known of his parentage or early life. He may have begun his official career as a chancery clerk, perhaps under the patronage of Ralph de Neville, since, according to Matthew Paris, Henry III said of him in 1253 that he had once been a scribbler of royal writs, and some personal letters he wrote to Neville in 1226-8, when the latter was chancellor, show Neville to have been his patron. More certainly, he served as a clerk of the bench from 1219, and probably from 1217; he may have been appointed by the chancellor for service in the bench, since he does not appear to have been the personal clerk of any of the justices. In the latter part of his period as a bench clerk one of his colleagues was his fellow East Riding man, Roger of Thirkleby, and another was William of Raleigh. 
After gaining legal knowledge through his work as a clerk, York served from 1225 onwards as a commissioner of assize and special business in vacations, and in 1227-8 was three times an eyre justice in the north. Some interesting and informative letters he wrote to Ralph de Neville at that time have survived. He first sat as a justice of the bench in 1231, shortly after he had ceased to serve as a clerk, and in 1234 became the most senior justice regularly sitting there after Robert of Lexinton, remaining in that appointment until the end of 1241, when he became senior justice in the court 'coram rege' upon the death of Stephen of Segrave. He served on only six eyres as a junior justice, in 1227-8 and 1232, while between 1234 and 1244 he served as chief justice on thirty-four eyres, from which six plea rolls survive which are probably his. His clerk, until 1246 and from perhaps as early as 1230, was Roger of Whitchester. During the king's absence in Gascony in 1242-3 he played an important role in government, so much so that he was incorrectly believed by the annalist of Dunstable Priory to have been one of the regents. 
York held a number of church appointments, the first known being the royal living of King's Ripton in Huntingdonshire, which he held by 1220, and which he managed to pass on to two of his proteges successively. He held several livings in Yorkshire, the most senior of which was the provostship of Beverley, and others in Lancashire, Northumberland, and Cambridgeshire. He also acquired canonries at York, St Paul's, London, and Wells. By the time of his promotion to the court 'coram rege' it has been estimated that he held ecclesiastical appointments to a gross value of about $800, according to valuations derived from the 1291 taxation of benefices by the pope, Nicholas IV. He eventually acquired lay interests, mostly leases or wardships, in several counties outside his native Yorkshire, including Surrey, Essex, Nottinghamshire, and Northamptonshire, as well as houses in London and York. As a cleric he had no direct heir, but before his death he conveyed his own estates in Eske, near Beverley, and Norton, near Malton, to his brother Sir Nicholas of York. 
On 8 December 1246 York was elected bishop of Salisbury, and on receiving his temporalities in 1247 resigned as a justice, concentrating on his work as a bishop, although he still took part in judicial business at the greater sessions of the king's council, where he is known to have been involved in judgments against Dunstable Priory and the abbey of St Albans, and continued to witness royal charters when the king was at Winchester or in his own diocese; in 1251 he was brought out of judicial retirement to head an eyre for London. As bishop he was served as his personal official by Nicholas of York, perhaps a nephew, and was much concerned with the completion of the new cathedral at Salisbury, work which was probably assisted by his influence at court. He did not live to see its consecration. He died on 31 January 1256 and was buried in the choir of the cathedral. Matthew Paris's obituary of him was rather uncharitable, since he had given judgment against Matthew's abbey of St Albans. Nevertheless, Paris described him as 'most skilled in the laws of the kingdom' (Paris, 4.587), and his opinion was cited three times in the 'De legibus' (formerly attributed to Bracton). He undoubtedly had great influence on the development of law and its administration, although all that Paris mentions is that he became unpopular through reinventing suit of court. He may well have been concerned in the extension and development of the articles of the eyre, and with the movement away from the issue of assize commissions to four, mainly local, justices to a single justice of one of the central courts, a move towards professionalization of justice in the localities. 


@@@@@


doc= 29480


Forz, William de, count of Aumale (b. before 1216, d. 1260), magnate, was the son of William de Forz, count of Aumale (d. 1241), and his wife, Aveline, daughter of Richard de Montfichet of Stansted, Essex. His title of count of Aumale was derived from the 'comte' of Aumale in Normandy; the family name evolved from Forz to Fortibus, but both forms are found. He was born before 17 December 1216, when his father gave the king his eldest son, William, as a hostage; he was probably one of the little boys who had been sent with their mother to Devizes Castle some months earlier. Nothing is known of his early life until his marriage, before 1234, to Christiana, one of the daughters of Alan of Galloway and his wife Margaret, the eldest sister of John the Scot, later earl of Chester. Christiana de Forz became in 1235 coheir of her father's lands in Galloway, and in 1237 coheir to her mother's interest in the earldom of Chester. 
Neither the Galloway lands nor the Chester inheritance, however, were to be retained by the Forz family. When Christiana died in 1246 without surviving children, her Galloway lands returned to her surviving sister, Dervorguilla, wife of John de Balliol (died 1269). On the death of the earl of Chester without male heirs in 1237, William de Forz claimed that Chester was, as a palatinate, impartible, and that he should by right of his wife, the senior coheir, be both earl of Chester and the holder of all the lands of the earldom. The court allowed Forz the title, but decided that the lands of the honour should be divided. The king, however, persuaded the coheirs and their husbands to give up their claims, in exchange for lands elsewhere. William and Christiana de Forz finally quitclaimed their rights to the earldom in October 1241, in return for an insignificant amount of property elsewhere. William de Forz's father died in March 1241 and the king had taken the son's homage by 18 September 1241, when the escheator was ordered to give William de Forz, son of William de Forz, all lands, tenements, and castles that he held in chief, that is, honours based on the castles of Cockermouth, Cumberland, Skipton in Craven, and Skipsea in Holderness, both in Yorkshire. In 1242 and 1245 William de Forz, count of Aumale, accompanied Henry III on his campaigns in Poitou and Wales. After Christiana's death in 1246, in 1248 or 1249 the count married again. Isabella de Forz (1237-1293), his second wife, was another great heiress, born Isabella de Revieres, the daughter of the earl of Devon. 
His northern property and his Scottish connections through his first wife made William de Forz a useful mediator with the Scots, and in 1231 when the king of England and the king of Scots made a treaty at York, he was one of the pledges for the Scottish king. He was appointed justice of the forest for Cumberland in 1251, and was sent on an embassy to Scotland in 1255; in the same year he was appointed sheriff of Cumberland and keeper of Carlisle Castle, offices he held until his death. In 1257 he was called to the army of Wales but paid scutage instead, because he was ill. The count of Aumale took a prominent part in the events of 1258, being appointed one of the king's counsellors under the provisions of Oxford. He was one of the escorts chosen to ensure that the Lusignan brothers left England safely. In March 1259 he was a member of Gloucester's reactionary party, and was one of those who made a pact with the Lord Edward. He went to France with the king in the autumn, was at Paris from December 1259 to January 1260, and at St Omer with the king in February. Later in the year he was again in France, on legal business, and died there on 23 May 1260, at Amiens. His body was buried in Thornton Abbey, Lincolnshire, at the feet of his mother, and his heart was buried at Meaux Abbey, Yorkshire, in the presbytery next to his daughter. With his second wife William de Forz had numerous children, but only one, Aveline, lived into adult life, to marry Henry III's younger son Edmund, earl of Lancaster; she died without any children in 1274. 
As a great landowner William de Forz, the last count of Aumale, was inevitably involved in government and diplomacy, yet his personality is shadowy and as an individual he remains the least interesting of his line. 


@@@@@


doc= 29481


Valence, William de, earl of Pembroke (d. 1296), magnate, was the fourth or fifth son of Isabella of Angouleme, widow of King John, and her second husband, whom she married in 1220, Hugues (X) de Lusignan, count of La Marche. He was born probably at Valence, a hamlet of Couhe (Vienne), some 20 miles south of Poitiers: the date is unknown, but F. R. Lewis has argued for the period 1227-31, when Isabella was, astonishingly, aged over forty. His childhood, otherwise obscure, witnessed the near ruination of the powerful Lusignans in 1241-2 in a rebellion against the Capetians supported by Henry III. After its failure his parents went into retirement, and partitioned their lands between their sons in 1242, assigning Valence the castellanies of Montignac, Bellac, Rancon, and Champagnac; but he had still not reached his majority in June 1246. 
In the summer of 1247 the Lusignans accepted Henry III's invitation to visit England. Valence and his brother Aymer de Lusignan (d. 1260) and sister Alice and a few adherents settled at court, whereas two elder brothers, Guy and Geoffroi, and others, returned home with pensions. Henry hoped thereby to cultivate clients among the Poitevin nobility, to advance his interests against the Capetians, and to protect Gascony. There is some truth, however, in the chroniclers' assertion that Valence really owed his advancement to Henry's affection and plans to create a strengthened royal family in England. Henry arranged his marriage on 13 August 1247 to Joan (died 1307), daughter of Warin de Munchensi (d. 1255), who, thanks to her brother's recent death, was a coheir to $703 p.a. of the Marshal estate; thus Valence became in the right of his wife lord of Wexford, and lord of Pembroke and Goodrich castles. Probably as part of the marriage contract, Henry granted him in 1247 Hertford Castle at pleasure (for life from 1249) and a double money fee: 500 marks p.a. for life, with an additional $500 p.a., the latter eventually to be replaced by lands held in fee. There were a handful of other lucrative perquisites which enabled him to purchase the west-country Pont de l'Arche estate in 1252 and the Northumbrian Bertram lands in the 1260s. Consequently, on 22 August 1248, during his first return to Poitou, Valence ceded Montignac to his brother Geoffroi. 
Although Valence was almost constantly at court for the next ten years in England, Matthew Paris's account of his influence, much coloured by later events, is not entirely supported by the records. At first he was often unruly, probably because the king was too slow to replace his money fee with lands. Henry ceremoniously knighted him at Westminster on 13 October 1247. Until 1249 he was active in tournaments, for which the king temporarily confiscated his estates in October 1249. These tournaments won him the earliest English knights for his retinue, together with powerful friends, such as his brother-in-law John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1304), and Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester (died 1262). Valence took the cross with Henry III on 6 March 1250 at the Great Hall at Westminster, but in November 1251 the king closed all ports to prevent his going on crusade independently to rescue Louis IX. Although this may have been one of his attempts to extract more grants from Henry, Valence did make some preparations for crusade, leasing assets and securing papal promises of 2200 marks (part of which was paid by the mid-1250s). By early 1252 Henry had replaced Valence's money-fee of 500 marks p.a. with large wardships, such as that of Fitzjohn of Warkworth, Northumberland (held until 1268), and had begun to find him additional manors. 
In 1252 the importance of the Lusignans was greatly increased for a while by the outbreak of rebellion in Gascony, which they were instrumental in crushing. In January Valence joined the royal council, arbitrating in Henry's dispute with Simon de Montfort (died 1265) over the lieutenancy of Gascony. The Lusignans now began to quarrel arrogantly with magnates, confident that the king would not punish them. In October 1252 Valence raided the lands of the bishop of Ely at Hatfield, and at the end of the year he joined his brother Aymer, bishop-elect of Winchester, in the notorious raid on the palaces of Boniface of Savoy, the archbishop of Canterbury. From this point onwards, if Matthew Paris and others are to be believed, the court was divided by struggles between the Lusignans and the queen's family, the Savoyards. Valence retained the friendship of the earl of Gloucester whose heir, Gilbert de Clare (died 1295), married his niece Alice, in January 1253, and shortly after that they went on an unsuccessful tournamenting expedition to France. By October 1253 Valence joined Henry III in Gascony where the Lusignans raised a large force of over 100 Poitevin knights for the campaign. Valence helped to settle the border areas of Bergerac and Gensac and to arbitrate in the dispute between Simon de Montfort and Gaston de Bearn over Bigorre. Characteristically, he tried further to pressurize Henry for lands, but obtained only the promise of a large wardship. During the winter of 1254 he accompanied Henry back to England via Paris and in 1255 was rewarded with the wardship for a year of his rich kinsman, William de Munchensi (d. 1287). 
From 1255 to 1257 Valence remained high in the king's affections, but the records do not show him active in formulating policy; he was excluded by older rivals, especially Savoyards. In September 1255 he went north with the king and took a small part in negotiations concerning the minority of Alexander III, king of Scots. In the following month, at Windsor, he merely witnessed the king's acceptance of the 'Sicilian business'; this is often mistaken as evidence that he proposed it. Even in January 1256 Henry ordered Valence to be consulted over Gascony only 'if expedient'. Only over the acceptance of the crown of Germany, by Richard, earl of Cornwall, at Christmas 1256 is it possible that Valence much influenced events. 
The war with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd of Wales which broke out in 1256, however, suddenly made Valence indispensable in his own right as a marcher lord. Many of his estates were threatened. From the spring of 1257 his men of Pembroke under Roger of Leyburn were fighting against the Welsh at Carmarthen but he remained at court, witnessing on 10 April an ordinance on household economies and, no doubt, taking the councillors' oath of about that date reported in the Burton annals. In August he joined the king's ineffectual campaign at Deganwy where, according to John of Wallingford, he quarrelled with Humphrey (IV) de Bohun, earl of Hereford. When in April 1258 the truce with Llywelyn ended and the Welsh of Cemais raided Pembroke itself, Valence demanded revenge in parliament and accused Simon de Montfort and the earl of Gloucester of treachery. This helped precipitate the 'sworn conspiracy' of these two earls and five other magnates -- all courtiers -- on 12 April, which brought about the baronial reform movement and the Lusignans' eventual downfall. 
Valence's rivals at court were afraid of the Lusignans' growing hold over the king and his heir. After Richard of Cornwall's departure for Germany in April 1257 Henry III increasingly turned to them for advice and financial assistance. Valence lent Henry 1100 marks in November 1257 and shortly afterwards, according to Matthew Paris, mortgaged Stamford and Grantham from the Lord Edward. An alliance then arose between Valence and Edward, whose lands were also threatened by the Welsh. Such developments, if unchecked, promised to give the Lusignans an indefinite monopoly on power. Their many enemies were enraged. Old quarrels again came to the surface. Litigants high and low had been denied justice against them, especially thanks to the king's order of about November 1256 (noted by Matthew Paris) forbidding any writ to be filed in chancery against them or other favourites. Their feud with the queen's family has been noted. Valence himself had sparred over rights in Pembrokeshire and Ireland with the earl of Hereford and his son. In 1257 his officials clashed with Simon de Montfort, provoking another confrontation in parliament in May. These disputes were complicated by their being rivals for land-grants from the king, where Henry favoured Valence. Valence also gained at the expense of other claimants on royal patronage, such as stewards of the household. His friendship with Edward even drove him apart from the earl of Gloucester, Edward's rival on the march. Thus, by 1258, although rising royal favourites, Valence and his brothers were politically isolated at court. Peter of Savoy and Montfort now advocated peace negotiations with Louis IX, undercutting the Lusignans' position. Thanks to the harshness of their estate officials, particularly Valence's notorious steward, William de Bussay, the Lusignans were accorded little sympathy in provincial society either. Indeed, they may even have been thought responsible for advising Henry's harsh rule of the localities, in order to raise money for the recent Welsh war. The Lusignans had become a major part of the general grievances accumulating against Henry III's personal rule. 
The reform movement begun in April 1258, designed to win the king the support of the 'community of the realm', was deftly exploited by Valence's enemies. Although he and his brothers swore to support it, and were even nominated by the king onto the committee of twenty-four to draw up reforms, they soon fell foul of the new regime. Valence continued to frustrate Montfort's patronage claims and when, at the great Oxford parliament of June 1258, it was mooted to resume all alienations made from the crown, he refused his consent, only, according to Paris, to meet Montfort's riposte 'either you give up your castles or you lose your head' (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.697-8). The Lusignans and their supporters, the Lord Edward and John de Warenne, fled at the end of the month to Bishop Aymer's castle at Winchester; however, they were easily forced to capitulate on 5 July and, after Valence refused the option to remain in custody until reforms were complete, they chose exile, sailing on 14 July. Valence accepted a pension of 3000 marks and the council placed his lands under some of his men, the revenues deposited at the New Temple, a remarkable arrangement that permitted his return; but the council later confiscated 1500 marks from his account. 
Valence and his brothers reached Boulogne, where they eluded an ambush from Henry de Montfort bent on avenging his father. Despite the opposition of Louis IX's wife, the sister of the queen of England, the Lusignans were allowed passage to Poitou; Louis may have believed their expulsion indicated that the peace treaty under negotiation between himself and Henry III would now go ahead. Valence's wife, displeased by the council's financial arrangements for her, was allowed to join him in exile in December. Meanwhile, efforts were made to prevent his smuggling money out of the country and, indeed, his steward, William de Bussay, was apprehended in November 1258 when he attempted to return. In the following months Bussay and a handful of Valence's bailiffs were tried and imprisoned for their oppressions. 
Valence at first attempted to consolidate his interests in Poitou, but soon became involved in plots for his return. On 2 March 1259 he purchased property in Limoges, and then reacquired Montignac from his brother, for he styled himself 'Lord of Pembroke and Montignac', in a remission of rights granted to Charroux Abbey on 7 and 14 October (Monsabert, 246-8). By December he was at Paris where he met secretly with Simon de Montfort who had quarrelled with the baronial regime. Here, allegedly at the king's instigation, they settled their private differences and prepared for Valence's return with the support of Montfort's new ally, the Lord Edward. Their plans were foiled by the failure of Edward's rising in the spring of 1260, but this alliance held firm. From August to October 1260 Valence was ordered by Edward to defend Lourdes and Tarbes in Bigorre for Montfort against Esquivat de Chabanais; and in the truce with Chabanais at Tarbes on 2 October he represented Montfort. On 27 November he met Edward at Paris, probably again to discuss returning, but Aymer de Lusignan's death on 4 December at Paris forced another postponement. 
Valence returned thanks to Henry III's overthrow of the provisions of Oxford in 1261. The king could, even in February, appoint Valence's retainer Geoffrey de Gascelin constable of Hertford. However, Valence's loyalties were at first unclear, because on 27 March the king attempted to prevent him landing with the Lord Edward, then still in opposition. When he did return with Edward at about Easter (24 April) it was possibly 'by assent of the barons [who opposed Henry's recovery of power]' ('Liber de antiquis legibus', 49), and because he swore at Dover his oath to the provisions of Oxford and to answer those who had complaint against him ('Flores historiarum', 2.466). Valence may have flirted with opposition to secure himself the best terms from his Savoyard rivals at court. But the king, none the less, easily detached him from Edward and Montfort, receiving him at Rochester on 30 April to peace with restoration of all lands. 
For the remainder of 1261 Valence concentrated on repairing his estates. In 1262 he was more frequently at court, but, thanks to the Savoyards, his influence was much reduced. He was unable to secure his henchmen pardons or, until 10 July, to get the king to compensate him for his exile; he was still awaiting full payment in March 1263. In July 1262 he accompanied Henry III to France and with Henry of Almain, the king's nephew, attempted unsuccessfully to reconcile the king to the new earl of Gloucester, Gilbert de Clare. Valence left the king in August, perhaps in anger, for although Henry III ordered him to return to him in France on 14 October, he was still in London on 11 November. Henry III only detached him from Clare by a grant of part of the latter's lands on 10 December, increased in July 1263 to $500, with promise of a further $500 in September. Thus, Valence did not support Clare and Almain's uprising with Simon de Montfort in 1263 and, indeed, Clare long resented this betrayal. 
For the remainder of the barons' wars Valence remained loyal to the king. In February 1263 he represented Henry at Paris to secure concessions made by Louis IX; he probably proceeded to Poitou to receive on Henry's behalf the homage of the vicomte de Turenne and others. In October he accompanied Henry for the Boulogne conference before the French king, at about the same time receiving the Cressy wardship. During the fighting against Montfortians in 1264 he was frequently in the Lord Edward's force, for example at the battle of Northampton on 5 April, in revenge for which the Londoners attacked his property and stole his money deposited at the Temple. At the battle of Lewes on 14 May he fought on the right wing in Edward's squadron with John de Warenne, but made his escape with Warenne and Geoffroi de Lusignan to Pevensey Castle and the continent. His lands were forfeit, Pembroke going to the rebel earl of Gloucester and Goodrich to Humphrey (V) de Bohun (known as the younger). Valence returned a year later, landing in Pembroke in May 1265 with John de Warenne, a number of Lusignans, and a substantial force; this fanned a general marcher revolt against Simon de Montfort. Edward escaped from captivity and with Valence surprised Simon de Montfort the younger at Kenilworth and defeated Montfort himself at Evesham on 4 August 1265. Valence joined the siege of the remaining Montfortians at Kenilworth and in May 1266, with John de Warenne, punished rebels at Bury St Edmunds. He was well rewarded with the lands of Montfortians, for example Humphrey de Bohun junior, Roger Bertram, and William de Munchensi. He played no part in drawing up the dictum of Kenilworth and, indeed, seems to have opposed it, his harshness driving Munchensi into further rebellion. Valence clashed repeatedly with the renegade earl of Gloucester when they seized rebels' lands. In 1269 Valence, John de Warenne, and Henry of Almain conspired against the rebel Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby, and secured his lands for Edmund, earl of Lancaster. In 1267-8 Henry III finally replaced Valence's money-fee of $500 p.a. with lands, mainly in East Anglia. 
From 1264 Valence revived his friendship with the Lord Edward. On 24 June 1268 at the parliament at Northampton he took the cross with Edward, John de Warenne, and Henry of Almain, promising under one of the earliest known military contracts to recruit nineteen knights for 2000 marks. In July 1268 he again visited Pembroke and was in Ireland, probably for the first time, in the spring of 1270, taking custody of Maurice Fitzgerald's heir whose wardship he and his daughter, Agnes, purchased from his fellow crusader, Thomas de Clare. On 20 August following he sailed for the Holy Land with Edward ['see also 'Lord Edward's crusade]. His movements there are not known, but he acquired a cross with a foot of gold and emeralds (which his daughter-in-law was later to bequeath to Westminster Abbey). Following the attempt on Edward's life at Acre he was one of the executors of the prince's will, made on 18 June 1272, but he left the crusade early, in August, perhaps through fear for his estates at the hands of his old enemy, the earl of Gloucester. He returned independently to London on 11 January 1273, ahead of Edward, now king. On 7 June he was hunting illegally with his retinue in Hampshire. 
Valence held many commands in Gascony and Wales under Edward I. On 3 September 1273 he received for Edward the fealty of the citizens of Limoges. He remained in Gascony with the king, but was reported illegally hunting in Hampshire on 29 November. He returned to Limoges in July 1274 to honour Edward's promise to defend the citizens, appointing a seneschal and besieging the vicomtesse de Limoges's castle at Aixe. On 19 August he attended Edward's coronation at Westminster. On 4 September he was again hunting illegally with his retinue in Hampshire. In February 1275 he represented Edward at the Paris 'parlement' at Candlemas, receiving Gaston de Bearn's challenge to do single combat with Edward. Valence returned by May and Edward duly granted him the constableship of Cilgerran Castle and the wardship of the heirs of Roger de Somery, on condition that he paid some of the king's debts. 
Valence played an active part in the campaign of 1277 against Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. With Prince Edmund he led a second army which marched up the coast from Pembroke and reached Aberystwyth by 25 July, where they laid the foundations of the new castle. They drove Llywelyn north into Snowdonia. Valence returned to Pembroke on 3 October, but by 27 December he was at Marwell, Hampshire. 
After a quiet year spent mainly at court Valence was in June 1279 sent to receive the Agenais, ceded to Edward I under the peace of Amiens. He entered Agen on 8 August and two days later installed Jean de Grailly as seneschal. After an embassy to the king of Castile in November, in January 1280 he returned to Agen where he laid the foundations of Tournon and the 'bastide' of Valence d'Agen. He returned to London by 6 June and remained in England for the next two years. 
Valence fought in the final struggle against Llywelyn; in July 1282 the king appointed him to replace the earl of Gloucester as commander in west Wales, and rewarded him with the wardship for a year of his son-in-law, John Hastings, lord of Abergavenny. Valence's son, William the younger, had been killed by the Welsh on 16 June in an ambush near Llandeilo. After mustering another force at Carmarthen on 6 December against Llywelyn's last sortie, he crushed a further rebellion in Cardiganshire in January. He left Aberystwyth in April with over 1000 men and captured Prince Dafydd's last stronghold, Castell y Bere, in a ten-day siege. From September to Christmas 1284 he accompanied Edward I on his triumphal tour of Wales. It is notable, however, that Edward did not reward his loyalty with increased lands or liberties on the march; indeed, in 1285, despite Valence's personal remonstration at Aberystwyth, Edward ordered royal justices into Pembrokeshire to hear appeals by the earl of Hereford and the burgesses of Haverfordwest against Valence, a significant royal intrusion into marcher liberties. 
From September 1286 to June 1289 Valence accompanied Edward to Gascony; he fell ill with fever at Saintes in November 1286. In September 1289 he helped negotiate at Salisbury the proposed marriage between Prince Edward and Margaret, the Maid of Norway. From January to March 1291 he was appointed to adjudicate in the feud on the Welsh march between the earls of Gloucester and Hereford; however, he and other marchers, fearing further royal assaults on their liberties, intervened to prevent Edward I carrying out the sentence. In the following August he assisted the king in the preliminary hearings of the Scottish succession at Berwick. On 10 December, at Westminster Abbey, he witnessed Edward's grant of the heart of Henry III to the nuns of Fontevraud for reburial. On 5 February 1292, at Westminster, the king appointed him one of the five to regulate tournaments under the laws of arms. In the summer he returned with the king to Norham, declaring that the Scottish succession should be decided according to English law, which favoured John de Balliol. In October, at Berwick, he was one of those marchers who granted Edward a fifteenth, provided that it would not constitute a precedent. In October 1294 the king sent him, with Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, to hold south Wales against the revolt of Madog ap Llywelyn. 
In January 1296 Valence, accompanied by his son Aymer de Valence (d. 1324), headed an embassy to Cambrai in a fruitless attempt to negotiate between Edward I and Philippe IV of France. Despite old age, he may have been involved in a skirmish, for he returned to England wounded and was met at Dover by a litter sent by his wife. He died at his manor of Brabourne in Kent on 16 May. John Leland's account that he was slain by the French at Bayonne on 13 June must, therefore, be incorrect. Valence was buried near Henry III at Westminster Abbey in the chapel of St Edmund and St Thomas the Martyr where his monument, an expensive piece of foreign workmanship, remains -- a canopied stone altar-tomb bearing his effigy in wood covered with copper gilt, in full armour with heraldry and inscription, decorated in Limoges enamel. Valence was survived by his wife, Joan, who retained the title of countess of Pembroke, Pembroke and Goodrich castles, and Wexford until her death in September 1307. They had three sons: John, who died in childhood in January 1277, buried in the chapel of Edward the Confessor, Westminster Abbey, where his grave-slab survives; William the younger, who was killed by the Welsh on 16 June 1282, and who may be buried at Dorchester Abbey, Oxfordshire; and Aymer, born 1270x75, who succeeded in 1296 as lord of Montignac and in 1307 as earl of Pembroke. There were also four daughters: Isabel (died 1305), who married in 1275 John Hastings (died 1313); Margaret, who died in childhood on 24 March 1276 and was buried with John de Valence at Westminster Abbey; Agnes (died 1310), who married first, in 1266, Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1268), second Hugh de Balliol (died 1271), and third Jean d'Avesnes (died 1283); and Joan, who married John Comyn, lord of Badenoch (died 1306). 
Valence was never created an earl by Henry III or Edward I. On his seal, and in most of his charters, he merely styled himself 'lord of Pembroke'. His wife, in fact, only inherited part of the Marshal earldom of Pembroke. However, control of the Pembrokeshire county court may have led to his assumption of the title of earl in documents by the late 1280s, and in the 1290s Edward I occasionally accepted it, even summoning him to parliament as earl in 1295, a unique example of informal elevation, perhaps an inexpensive reward for Valence's loyalty. His relationship with the king was always one of dependence as much as kinship. His scattered estates, a half held by marriage, were worth some $1500 p.a., relatively modest for an 'earl'; his income needed royal grants, such as wardships, to increase it by an average of $1000 p.a., which prevented him from pursuing an independent political line or developing a large retinue. Thus, his benefactions were modest: mainly to Pembroke Priory and the foundation of a hospital at Tenby. His disputes with the Clares and Bohuns arose from their being fellow Marshal coheirs whose claims much reduced the extent of Pembroke. Valence pursued another vendetta against the Munchensis, culminating in his unsuccessful attempt in 1289 to have William de Munchensi's surviving daughter, Dionysia, bastardized; he was almost certainly supported by his wife, who hated the descendants of her father Warin de Munchensi's second marriage, who deprived her of the family inheritance. But Valence's poor reputation has been much exaggerated: in 1270, for example, he refused to be dishonest and break open a private letter (Shirley, 2.345). He inspired the lasting affection of his wife and his brother-in-law, John de Warenne, one of his executors. Vilified as an 'alien' in the reign of Henry III, his interests were, in fact, overwhelmingly English, justifying the Dunstable annalist's epitaph of 'satis fidelis regno Anglie' ('sufficiently faithful to the kingdom of England'; 'Ann. Mon.', 3.400). 


@@@@@


doc= 29482


Ware, William of (fl. 1290-1305), Franciscan friar and theologian, was born at Ware in Hertfordshire. He entered the Franciscan order as a child oblate, according to the testimony of William Woodford, writing less than a century later. Almost certainly William of Ware studied at Oxford and lectured on the 'Sentences' there, but he is not listed among the Oxford masters and so he probably never incepted as a master of theology there. There is some evidence, but no certainty, that he also taught at Paris, perhaps lecturing there too on the 'Sentences'. He was known as the Doctor Fundatus and less commonly the Doctor Praeclarus or the Doctor Profundus. 
Only one work can reliably be attributed to him, a commentary on the 'Sentences' which survives in many manuscripts: only small parts have been edited, by the Franciscans of Quaracchi (1904), and by A. Daniels (1909, 1913), P. Muscat (1927), J.- M. Bissen (1927), and L. Hodl (1990). William does not try to discuss every distinction, but concentrates on the topics he finds most important, devoting over 100 'quaestiones' to book 1 and just 129 to the remaining three books. Among the theologians whose views William discusses are Henri de Gand, Godefroi de Fontaines, Giles of Rome, and Richard of Middleton -- a choice that indicates 1290-1305 as the time of composition. Since there exist three, or perhaps even four, recensions of the work, its composition and revision may well have been spread over these years. 
Traditionally William of Ware has been considered the master of Duns Scotus. This view can be supported by some early evidence: in his treatise on the immaculate conception ('c'.1373) the Franciscan Thomas Rossy refers to William as the 'magister Scoti', as does Bartolomeo da Pisa in his 'De conformitate vitae beati Francisci ad vitam domini Jesu' of the late 1380s. Perhaps 'magister' here is not meant in the strict sense, since William does not seem ever to have become a master. Certainly, there is little doubt that William influenced Scotus, who definitely refers to his views on the nature of theology. Other aspects of his theology, which develops the Franciscan tradition in the context of the debates of the 1290s, are also close to Scotus. Most strikingly, both in discussing the attributes of God and elsewhere, he invokes a type of distinction which neither involves a real difference nor is merely a matter of the understanding. This is very close to Scotus's formal distinction, although William does not clearly give it this label. 


@@@@@


doc= 29483


Wheatley, William (fl. 1305-1317), schoolmaster and author, first appears about 1305, when he was authorized by the dean and chapter of York Minster to receive holy orders. He seems to have been related to four men with the same surname, two of whom were clergy and two staff of the king's wardrobe. William was ordained acolyte in 1305 by the bishop of Paris, perhaps having gone to that city to study, and was presented by John Droxford, keeper of the wardrobe, to be rector of Sulham, Berkshire, in 1305. In April 1306 he was described as a subdeacon and granted permission to be ordained deacon; in the following September he was licensed to study at Oxford or another English university for three years. By 1309 he had been appointed master of the grammar school of Stamford, Lincolnshire, resigning Sulham, and was promoted by 1316 to be master of the cathedral grammar school at Lincoln; both appointments belonged to the chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral. As it was usual for Lincoln schoolmasters to be masters of arts, Wheatley is likely to have graduated at this level while at Oxford. In 1317 Master William Wheatley was admitted as rector of Yatesbury, Wiltshire, on the resignation of Hugh Wheatley. William was then described as an acolyte, which conflicts with his earlier designation as subdeacon, and his tenure of the rectory is not fully dated; it is not known when he died, but the next known rector was admitted in 1331. 
Wheatley was the author of commentaries on Boethius' 'De consolatione philosophiae' and on the pseudo-Boethian 'De disciplina scholarium'. The latter was written at Stamford in 1309, while the former (dedicated to Henry Mamesfeld, dean of Lincoln, among others) probably dates from his time at Lincoln. The great English famine of 1315-17 prompted him to write two other short works: a tractate 'De signis prognosticis future sterilitatis' ('On the signs foretelling future sterility'), and two hymns in honour of St Hugh of Lincoln for an entertainment on Christmas day 1316. Wheatley declared that he wrote the hymns in a year of great dearth and mortality among men and animals, 'intending to comfort himself and others in their misery'. These works, with a letter to Roger Martival, bishop of Salisbury, are preserved in Oxford, New College, MS 264; there are two other extant manuscripts of 'De consolatione' and three (a further three are lost) of 'De disciplina'. A further commentary, 'De questionibus Cratonis', survives in BL, Arundel MS 52. 


@@@@@


doc= 29484


Ludlington, William (d. c.1310x12), Carmelite friar, probably joined the order in Stamford; his name may have derived from nearby Lyddington. He had completed his studies at Oxford and incepted as a doctor of theology when, in 1301, he was elected provincial. A few years before, the general chapter of the order had ordered the separation of the Irish and Scottish houses into a separate province; however, Ludlington, supported by many other senior Carmelites, led so fierce a resistance to this move that the prior-general, Gerardo da Bologna, was forced to appoint two commissaries, William Newenham and William Pagany, to resolve matters. Ludlington and his supporters refused to accept their commission, in spite of a chancery warrant issued on 21 January 1303 by Edward I at Gerardo's request. Finally the prior-general appealed to Pope Benedict XI ('r'. 1303-4), whose delegate, Cardinal Gentilis Montefiore, sent two German Carmelite provincials to preside over the English provincial chapter in London on 28 August 1305. At this chapter Ludlington was deposed and he and his supporters punished, Ludlington himself being sent to Paris to 'fast and study the holy scriptures' (Bale, BL, Harley MS 3838, fol. 27'v'). After completing this penance he was appointed provincial of the Holy Land and Cyprus, an honorary position by this time, and retired to Stamford. He died at the Carmelite house, Stamford, 'c'.1310-12 and was buried there. Bale notes five works by him, of which only one, on 'St Matthew's gospel', survives in Oxford, New College, MS 47. The other four, which lack incipits, consist of a book of 'determinationes', a collection of sermons, lectures on theology, and a defence against the decision of the general chapter. 


@@@@@


doc= 29485


Coventry, William (fl. c.1340/1360), Carmelite friar and historian, must have been a lay brother of the order, since if he was lame, as the name Claudius indicates, he could not have been ordained. Three of Coventry's historical works, written either 'c'.1340 or 'c'.1360, survive in the form of fifteenth- and sixteenth-century transcripts (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Laud misc. 722, Selden supra 72). All are concerned with the fortunes of his order. The 'Chronica brevis' is annalistic in form and largely reproduces information well known from other Carmelite sources. The 'De duplici fuga' and the 'De adventu Carmelitarum in Angliam' are alternative versions of chapters in the 'Speculum' of the French Carmelite Jean de Cheminot (1337), dealing with the dispersal of the order in the West. William Coventry's main contribution to the historiography of the order was to establish that the settlement of the Carmelites in England predated that in France. According to John Bale (died 1563), who transcribed these works from a fifteenth-century manuscript, he wrote a total of ten books. 


@@@@@


doc= 29486


Williams, Anna (1706-1783), poet and companion of Samuel Johnson, was born at Rosemarket, Pembrokeshire, the daughter of Zachariah Williams (1668x73-1755), medical practitioner and scientific experimenter, and his wife, Martha. Dr Williams provided his daughter with a good and wide-ranging education in the arts and sciences, including French and Italian. In 1726 or 1727 she moved to London with her father, where she helped him while he worked on his experiments to prove longitude by means of magnetism. Her sight was failing in the 1740s, but she was able to work at sewing and to publish in 1746 a translation from the French of a life of the emperor Julian. 
From 1745 Anna's father, a resident at the Charterhouse since 1729, became bedridden. She accompanied him as his only helper, living at the hospital until 1748, when his eviction led to a plea for assistance from Dr Johnson. Johnson had taken an interest in Williams's experiments, and assisted him with publishing his theory of longitude. Anna became a companion to Mrs Johnson shortly before her death. At this time Johnson arranged for her to have an operation on her cataracts by Samuel Sharp; this proving unsuccessful, she became a member of his household. From that date she lived with Johnson in his various residences, except for the period from 1759 to 1765, when Johnson left his house in Gough Square and moved into the Inner Temple; then Anna took lodgings in Bolt Court, Fleet Street. It was at these lodgings that Johnson drank tea with her 'every night... before he went home, however late it might be, and she always sat up for him' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.421) and where in August 1763 Boswell proudly made good his 'title to be a privileged man' by being 'carried by him in the evening to drink tea with Miss Williams' (ibid., 463). 
In 1765 Williams again took up a place in Johnson's household at 7 Johnson's Court, Fleet Street, moving with him in March 1776 to 8 Bolt Court, where she lived until her death. She had a ground-floor apartment in both houses, from which she supervised the household management and expenses. 
Johnson was always assiduous in helping Williams to extend her small income. She had annual gifts of money from acquaintances, including Lady Philipps of Picton Castle, an old family friend. Johnson arranged for David Garrick to give a benefit performance of Aaron Hill's 'Merope' at Drury Lane theatre on 22 January 1756 'for a gentlewoman deprived of her sight' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 1.83) which is said to have raised $200. In 1774 he helped her application to Hetherington's charity at Christ's Hospital; this failed because Welsh applicants were ineligible. In 1766 her 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' was published as a handsome quarto by Thomas Davies. Johnson contributed a preface and several prose and verse pieces. The work had been first advertised in 1750, and there were waspish claims from Anna's friends that Johnson had not exerted himself in its production, but the publication was moderately successful, and earned the author about $100. A previous publishing project in 1754 -- a dictionary of philosophical terms probably inspired by Johnson's own lexicography -- came to nothing, but was supported by Johnson who wrote to Richardson the printer that 'she understands chimistry and many other arts' (ibid., 1.54). 
As a writer Williams had craft but not genius. 'Miscellanies' is a collection of disparate pieces, verse, prose, and dramatic fragments. Her own verse is capable and clearly influenced by Pope: '
For me, contented with a humble state 

'Twas ne'er my care, or fortune, to be great. 

' She writes effective if conventional occasional verses, a typical example being 'On the Death of Sir Erasmus Philipps, Unfortunately Drowned in the River Avon'. 
Williams was regularly present when Johnson entertained at home, and accompanied him on visits, and if he dined at a tavern he sent a dish home for her. Her personality has been well described by many in the Johnson circle. All agree on her peevishness, intelligence, and well-stocked mind. 'She had a variety of literature, and expressed herself well, but her peculiar value was the intimacy in which she had long lived with Johnson, by which she was well acquainted with his habits, and knew how to lead him on to talk. (Boswell, 'Life', 1.463)' Johnson was not above playfulness towards her: Frances Reynolds records that he would 'whirl her about on the steps' when visiting ('Johnsonian Miscellanies', 2.273). 
As Williams grew old and frail her peevishness and intolerance towards the other members of the household increased, though Johnson's care for her was constant. He composed a prayer for her in her last illness, and after her death on 6 September 1783, he wrote: 'Her curiosity was universal, her knowledge was very extensive, and she sustained forty years of misery with steady fortitude. Thirty years and more she has been my companion, and her death has left me very desolate' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 3.74). 


@@@@@


doc= 29487


Charles Williams (1796-1866), a Congregational minister, and his wife, Mary Smeeton. The father was successively pastor at Newark-on-Trent and Salisbury (1833-5), before going to London, where he was for twelve years editor to the Religious Tract Society. Besides editing many of the society's periodicals, he wrote some seventy-five publications, including 'The Seven Ages of England, or its Advancement in Art, Literature and Science' (1836) and 'Dogs and their Ways' (1863). He subsequently lived at Sibbertoft, Northamptonshire; he died in Fisherton, Wiltshire, on 16 June 1866. Frederick Williams was educated at University College, London, and entered New College in 1850 to train for the ministry. In 1857 he was called to the new Congregational church at Claughton, Birkenhead, but stayed here only until 1859 when he went to live with his father at Sibbertoft. In 1861 the Congregational Institute was founded in Nottingham to train youths of sparse academic attainments and older men for the ministry. Its first principal was John Brown Paton, who chose Williams to be his colleague. The two were an ideal partnership, though in times of Paton's illness and the college's running into financial straits it was Williams whose personality -- generous, affable, and yet businesslike -- guided the institute into calmer waters. In Nottingham itself Williams made many strong friendships, was widely respected as a Gladstonian Liberal, and was well-known on the streets of the city, for which he wrote a popular guide, 'Nottingham Past and Present' (1878). His tract 'The Way to the Cross' (1857), had a wide circulation, and his 'Wonders of the Heavens' (1862) and 'The Story of the Two Thousand' (1862) were widely acclaimed. For many years he edited 'The Christian's Penny Magazine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29488


Williams, Sir Charles Hanbury (1708-1759), writer and diplomatist, was born on 8 December 1708 in London, the fourth of the six sons who survived infancy of John Hanbury (1664?-1734), landowner, and his second wife, Bridget (died 1741), daughter of Sir Edward Ayscough of South Kelsey and Stallingborough, Lincolnshire. His father, known as Major Hanbury, of Pontypool, Monmouthshire, had inherited his family's ironmines and foundries in Wales. 
Charles Hanbury took the surname Williams upon reaching his majority in 1729 in anticipation of his father's settling Charles Williams's estate upon him. Charles Williams (1634-1720) of Caerleon, Monmouthshire, one of John Hanbury's oldest friends, fled from Wales after killing his cousin in a duel, settled in Smyrna, and there amassed a large fortune. In friendship and gratitude for Hanbury's negotiating his return, Williams left the bulk of his estate to Hanbury with instructions to invest the inheritance in estates in south Wales or Monmouthshire and to select the recipients, all of whom, with the exception of John Hanbury, would take the surname Williams. Hanbury purchased Coldbrook Park and other estates and land in Monmouthshire; he also invested in mortgages and securities. On Charles's marriage in 1732, his father made over Coldbrook to him; the rest of the estate went to him before his father's death. 
In October 1716 Charles Hanbury began attending a boarding-school in Chelsea. In 1720 he entered Eton College. By May 1724 he had left Eton when he set out on a grand tour with his tutor, Captain Sewell; he returned to England in 1726. By 1731 he had become a popular figure among the wits in London and was considered a model for young men of St James's. 
On 1 July 1732 at St James's Church, Piccadilly, Williams married Lady Frances Coningsby (1709-1781), youngest daughter of Thomas Coningsby, first earl of Coningsby (1657-1729), and his second wife, Frances (1674-1715), daughter of Richard, first earl of Ranelagh and his second wife, Frances, daughter of Francis, fifth Lord Willoughby, of Parham. At her father's death in 1729, Lady Frances received a generous inheritance and then, following the death of her older sister Margaret in 1761, the remainder of his estate including Hampton Court in Herefordshire. 
Williams and Lady Frances probably knew one another several years before their marriage since their families shared the same circle of friends. Their first child, Frances, was born on 4 March 1735. Their second daughter, Charlotte, was born on 8 July 1738. The marriage from the beginning was troubled. Williams spent time away from home and was unfaithful. After he became a member of the Society of Dilettanti in 1736, the marriage may have deteriorated further. By September 1742 it had come to an end. 
From June to November 1742 Williams stayed in Bath while being treated for syphilis, the worst case his doctor had ever seen. In late August Lady Frances, who had remained at their home in London, discovered that she too had an advanced case of syphilis, Williams never having revealed to her why he was in Bath nor having indicated to her what the symptoms she complained of might indicate. Lady Frances, having left their house on Albemarle Street to undergo treatment in the City, refused to return to Williams's home and even to see him again, insisting that their agreement of settlement be drawn up by third parties. Following her treatment -- by that time the gossip of London -- Lady Frances went to the home of her aunt, Lady Kildare (1664/5-1758), widow of John, eighteenth earl of Kildare. Although opposed to a separation, Williams accepted his wife's demand and her request to bring up their two daughters. Williams paid an allowance for the maintenance of his daughters and returned to Lady Frances what she brought to their marriage. 
Williams remained close to his daughters. In their correspondence, both daughters and father expressed great affection for each other and Williams shared with Fanny his love of music, especially opera. In 1749 he accepted Lady Essex's proposal for a marriage between Fanny and her son William-Anne Holles Capel, Lord Essex. Until their eventual marriage on 1 August 1754 after Lord Essex returned from his extended grand tour, Williams worked to assure the union of these two young people through the long unofficial engagement. 
Upon his father's death Williams was nominated to succeed Hanbury as MP for Monmouthshire. He was elected on 6 March 1735. Unlike his father, Williams supported Robert Walpole and became a member of Walpole's circle. In autumn 1737, while visiting Houghton, he met Henry Fox, who became his closest friend, confidant, and adviser. About this time he also met Thomas Winnington. The three associated themselves with the 'good Whigs', or old corps, who remained loyal to Walpole and who then transferred their loyalty to Henry Pelham. The 'bad Whigs', or new whigs, according to Williams, abandoned Walpole, worked for his downfall, and then betrayed their old allies to join the opposition, or old corps, for power and position. 
In late November 1737 Williams was appointed paymaster of marines. In 1741 he was again returned to parliament unopposed from Monmouthshire. Through his marriage Williams also gained influence in Herefordshire, where the earl of Coningsby had been a strong whig, and in 1741 he became 'custos rotulorum' of Herefordshire. On 9 July 1741 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Herefordshire. In 1744 he was elected the high steward of the corporation of Leominster for life. 
Although when he first entered parliament he seemed ambitious for distinction, Williams's career in parliament was undistinguished. He remained faithful to Walpole, his friend Henry Fox, and the whigs, even voting for support of Hanoverian troops in 1743 when in reality he opposed them, but he contributed little to the party's voice in the House of Commons, delivering only four speeches. Following Walpole's resignation in 1742, Williams became increasingly disillusioned with politics. His relationship with Henry Pelham was uncomfortable and worsened when in May 1744 Williams helped facilitate the clandestine marriage of Henry Fox and Caroline Lennox, eldest child of the second duke of Richmond, a friend and political ally of Pelham. Williams, who had long wanted to become a knight of the Bath and who had been nominated by the king in May, was told the king might revoke the nomination. Richmond, however, though angered by his daughter's elopement, would not block Williams's honour. On 20 October 1744 the installation finally took place. 
In June 1745 after Pelham failed to appoint Williams's candidate as receiver for Herefordshire, Williams spoke of quitting politics, and in July 1745 resigned as lord lieutenant of Herefordshire. Also in 1745 a committee of the House of Commons was appointed to investigate the way the marine forces were paid. It discovered that two deputies whom Williams had personally appointed had put money out for interest for themselves rather than placing it in the bank as they had assured Williams they had. Neither deputy implicated Williams, but the inquiry, which lasted through spring 1746, embarrassed Williams. 
In the midst of the investigation, Thomas Winnington died suddenly in April 1746, to Williams's great distress. Furthermore, a poem he wrote but had never intended to publish, 'An Ode to Fox, on the Marriage of the Duchess of Manchester', brought him trouble and deepened his distress. The duchess of Manchester, widowed in 1739, married in 1743 Edward Hussey, an Irishman, but the marriage was kept secret until summer 1746. The ode, while not uncomplimentary to the duchess, contained a stanza which was seen as a slur on the Irish. Williams -- upset, partly because he had always supported the interests of Ireland -- left London for Monmouthshire to avoid unpleasant confrontations with Hussey and his allies. When he accepted a diplomatic position later that year, many accused him of cowardice. This charge, however, seems unfounded since Williams had applied to be private secretary to Lord Harrington, the newly appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland, a position which would have taken him to Ireland for several months a year. Not surprisingly, Harrington did not appoint Williams. Meanwhile Fox exerted his influence to secure Williams the diplomatic post. On 5 December 1746 Williams resigned as paymaster of the marines, and before Christmas kissed the king's hand as minister to Saxony at Dresden. Williams, having been granted permission to delay his departure in order to put his affairs in order, left England in April 1747. 
Before leaving the country Williams and his brother Capel agreed to exchange seats in parliament. Thus Capel stood for Monmouthshire and Williams for Leominster. Because Williams was in Dresden during the election in the summer of 1747, Capel managed his brother's campaign. Capel won. Williams lost. Williams blamed his brother for his loss; Capel blamed the opposition of the Coningsby family. Two years later when home on leave Williams visited Leominster in preparation for the next election. In 1754, on leave in England, he campaigned in Leominster and on 17 April 1754 was returned unopposed to parliament. 
Williams spoke little in parliament, but he advanced his party's cause as a writer of satire. By 1740 he had become a prolific satiric poet, first attacking members of the whig opposition, singling out George Lyttelton, Bubb Dodington, and the duke of Argyll. Williams portrays them as hypocrites, for while they accuse the Walpole government of corruption, they, indeed, commit the very acts they criticize: accept places, hand out pocket boroughs to their dependants, and win seats through corruption as Argyll did in Scotland in the general election of 1741. Following Walpole's resignation in 1742, Williams directed his attacks upon the new whigs and, advised by Fox, began a systematic campaign to discredit them, averaging one work a month between February 1742 and December 1743 when Henry Pelham became first lord of the Treasury. Hurling at them the same accusations they had made against the supporters of Walpole, often using the same language they had used, he presents them as corrupt, seekers of power, driven by personal ambition rather than love of country, subservient to their leaders, and betrayers of their former allies. By 1743 Williams had become a celebrity because of his poetry. In that year he was elected a member of White's Club. 
In spring 1742 Williams began his assault upon William Pulteney, later Lord Bath, and satirized him more persistently and more virulently than any other individual, attacking him in nineteen poems between then and December 1744. He presents Pulteney as responsible for Walpole's resignation: '
he made a great monarch change hands: 

He spake -- and the minister fell. 
('The statesman', 'Works', 1.151)' By moving from opposition leader to government supporter, Pulteney revealed not only his political instability but also his self-interest: '
False to his country, falser to his friends, 

And true to nothing but his private ends. 
('Peter and My Lord Quidam', ibid., 1.50)' Williams wrote some panegyric verse but little in comparison to his satires. When Henry Pelham became first lord of the Treasury, he wrote 'An Ode to Henry Pelham' in his praise. In 'An Epistle to Fox' he praises Lord Orford, and in 'An Ode to the Right Honourable Stephen Poyntz, Esq.', both poems dated 1745, he lauds Poyntz, who as governor of the duke of Cumberland had inculcated in the young prince love of country and values of loyalty. Williams valued these last two poems above his other work. Although so many of his poems were political, Williams vowed in 1743: 'My Muse is no Prostitute' (BL, Add. MS 51390, fol. 116'v'), and there is no evidence to show that he received favours or benefits for his work, although Lady Mary Wortley Montagu believed that 'His servile ambition has gain'd him two yards of red Riband' ('Complete Letters', 3.131). 
Besides political satire and panegyric, Williams wrote much miscellaneous verse: songs, love poems, complimentary verses, and imitations of Horace, Virgil, and Ovid. Much of his poetry was judged obscene, even by his contemporaries, and his reputation has reflected that judgement. Many poems, however, were not meant to be published but rather to be sung among drinking companions or read aloud to friends to gain the reputation of a wit. Influenced by Pope, whose early poetry especially he admired, Williams had neither the conciseness nor the subtlety of Pope. Most prolific between February 1742 and August 1743, his production of political poetry diminished as his disillusionment with the Pelhams increased, and he wrote little such poetry after December 1744. Because he took great interest in the Jacobite rising of 1745, he wrote some satires against the tories. He continued to write poems frequently during his first two years abroad, but after 1749 wrote few poems. An essay published on 13 September 1753 in 'The World' (no. 37) has been identified by Horace Walpole as his. After he went to Russia in 1755 he wrote little. Although he informed Fox on 28 September 1756 that he was inspired to write an ode to his daughter Charlotte against poetesses, probably the only poem he wrote during the last years of his life was to his daughter Lady Essex, 'Fanny Against Flattery'. 
Establishing the 'oeuvre' of Charles Hanbury Williams is difficult. Because many of his poems remained anonymous, a necessity particularly after he began attacking the new whigs, attribution has presented problems. Williams never kept a record of the poems he had written, nor did he keep copies of poems he sent to Fox for criticism. Furthermore, many of his poems were never published, and as his fame grew, other works were increasingly attributed to him. The corpus attributed to him in Edward Jeffery's edition of his 'Works', published in four volumes in 1822, is unreliable. Horace Walpole, who annotated his copy of 'A collection of poems, principally consisting of the most celebrated pieces of Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, knight of the Bath' (1763), now in the British Library, has been central in identifying Williams's poems. Not until Tone Dagny Sundt Urstad's 1987 dissertation on the works of Williams has an accurate bibliography of his writing been established, her study both adding to and subtracting from the canon. 
As a diplomat from 1747 to 1757 Williams saw both France and Prussia as threats to the long-term peace of Europe and his main object in the courts in which he served was to curb the power of France, to frustrate the intrigues of the French and Prussians in Saxony and Poland, and to strengthen the bonds between Britain, Saxony, Poland, and Russia. He also endeavoured to secure votes for his king's choice of the archduke as king of the Romans. He took his duties seriously and worked hard. In well-written, thoughtful letters and memoranda, he conveyed information, analysed situations, and made recommendations to Chesterfield, Newcastle, and Holdernesse. Unfortunately, he often did not receive intelligence from England and was sometimes left for months without instructions. 
Arriving in Dresden in late May 1747, Williams was welcomed by Frederick Augustus II, elector of Saxony, who was also Augustus III, king of Poland, a position he had attained through the support of Russia and Austria. Although Williams was popular with the king and his court, he found Dresden cold, dull, and expensive, and thus early in 1748 asked to be moved. Again Fox intervened on his behalf, and the king agreed to send him to Turin. However, Williams's replacement was reassigned, so he remained in Dresden until he was assigned unwillingly to Berlin in 1749. 
After a prolonged leave to England beginning in September 1749 followed by visits to The Hague and Hanover, Williams arrived in Berlin in July 1750 with Henry Digby, Henry Fox's nephew, as his secretary. His reception was not cordial. Frederick mistrusted Williams just as Williams mistrusted Frederick. After being in Berlin for only three weeks, Sir Charles received orders to start for Warsaw for the meeting of the Polish diet. The diet, however, was over the day Williams arrived, having adjourned before the first order of business, the election of a marshal, had been accomplished. While in Warsaw, Williams received the king of Poland's word that he would not renew a treaty with France and was given a picture of the king set in diamonds in a gold snuffbox. Once Williams returned to Berlin, Frederick circulated stories to discredit him, instructed inhabitants to ignore him, and complained of Williams through his minister in London. After attending court on 10 November 1750, Williams wrote: 'The French Minister was with the King an Hour this Morning before His Majesty came out and when the King of Prussia appeared he took Care to speak to every Foreign Minister at this Levy except myself' ('Journal begun at Berlin July 1750', 218). In January 1751 Williams was recalled but without any criticism from the king and was reassigned to Dresden. While in Berlin, Sir Charles met Voltaire and also young Count Stanislas Augustus Poniatowski, the future king of Poland, whose mother belonged to the powerful Czartoryski family. 
In Dresden by March, Williams worked out a subsidy treaty with Britain, the Netherlands, and the king of Poland. When the treaty was placed before parliament on 16 January 1752, it was carried by 236 votes to 54. In August Williams made his second trip to Poland where the diet was meeting in Grodno. The diet, as usual, was chaotic and unprofitable, ending shortly after opening in late October. By early December Williams was back in Dresden. In February 1753 he received orders from Newcastle to go to Vienna to speak more plainly to the Austrian government than the ambassador, Robert Keith, had done. He spoke to Maria Theresa in such plain, perhaps even blunt, language that he angered her and, as a result, accomplished nothing and may even have weakened the Anglo-Austrian alliance. 
After a second extended leave in England in 1753-4, Williams returned to Dresden on 27 August 1754, and one week later travelled for a third time to Warsaw where the king of Poland received him coldly, a signal that he was now under the influence of the French. At the same time that Williams was trying to counter the efforts of the French, he also feared a civil war in Poland over succession, for two noble families vied for domination of Poland: the Potockis, favoured by the French, and the Czartoryskis, favoured by the Russians. Sir Charles supported the Czartoryski faction, and this support pleased Russia. In March 1755 he received news he had been appointed ambassador to the Russian court. He took his young friend Poniatowski with him as secretary. 
Williams's first task as ambassador was to complete the difficult task of working out a subsidy treaty with Russia for keeping troops on the border in case Prussia invaded Hanover. Fox guided the treaty through parliament. The paper containing the ratification of the subsidy treaty arrived in Russia in early December 1755, and following innumerable delays was signed on 12 February 1756. Within a few days of the signing Williams learned that Britain and Prussia had signed the convention of Westminster on 16 January 1756. Had Tsarina Elizabeth had such knowledge she would not have signed the subsidy treaty. 
The tsarina disliked Prussia, favoured France (although relations between Russia and France had broken off in 1747), and was allied with Austria. After Frederick attacked Austrian Silesia through Saxony in 1756, France rapidly increased her influence and re-established diplomatic relations with Russia. Williams failed to persuade Elizabeth to mediate in the conflict, and on 31 December 1756 Elizabeth signed accession to the peace of Versailles between France and Austria. Williams's position was difficult: by showing any favour to Prussia, now Britain's ally, he offended Elizabeth. For the first time Williams was looked upon with favour by Frederick, since Sir Charles had acted on his behalf and had provided Frederick with reliable information about Russian troop preparation. 
While Williams was received coolly at court, he was welcomed by the 'Young Court' of Grand Duke Peter and his wife Grand Duchess Catherine, both of whom favoured Prussia and Britain. From the beginning Catherine liked Williams and confided in him; his secretary Poniatowski became her lover. In August 1756 the secret, almost daily, correspondence between Catherine and Sir Charles began and continued until early January 1757, the time during which Poniatowski was away from Russia. Sir Charles provided her with intelligence, warned her of the dangers within Russia, and advised her on her best course of action. This correspondence was first published in Moscow in 1909; an English translation of the 157 letters appeared in 1928. 
While Williams was on diplomatic service he suffered severe and chronic illnesses and depression. In Russia his physical condition worsened, and he displayed some irrational behaviour. In December 1756 and again in January 1757 he requested permission to come home but then stayed on, partly because Frederick did not want him to leave. The volatile political situation in Russia increasingly isolated him and made him less effective. In July 1757 he received permission to leave. On 8 October 1757 he began his difficult and troubled journey home. After briefing his replacement, Robert Keith, in Hamburg, he arrived in England after the middle of February 1758. 
In Hamburg Williams showed signs of being deranged; by the time he reached London he was hallucinating, making extravagant claims, and acting violently, no doubt the result of tertiary syphilis. With the aid of Fox, the family confined him and placed him under the care of Dr William Battie. By the end of April 1758 he had recovered sufficiently to move to Monmouthshire, where both his daughters visited him during the summer. When he returned to London in early December, his behaviour was more extravagant and violent than it had been earlier in the year. Again Lord and Lady Essex called upon Fox to aid them and again Williams was put under restraints. On 28 May 1759 a commission acting in a writ 'de lunatico inquirendo' found him a lunatic and placed his property in the custody of his brother Capel. He remained under the care of Dr John Munro, and died in London, at Lord Bolingbroke's house, Chelsea, on 2 November 1759, never knowing that his beloved daughter Frances had died of a fever on 19 July shortly after giving birth to a daughter or that his daughter Charlotte had married Robert Boyle Walsingham, fifth son of the first earl of Shannon, on 17 July. On 10 November 1759 Charles Hanbury Williams was 'interred with great Pomp' in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey ('Public Advertiser', 10 Nov 1759). 
Williams's portraits indicate he was a good-looking man of medium height, slim as a young man but heavier in his later years. When young he rejected religion, but when older he recommended John Tillotson and his beliefs to young Lord Essex. He maintained strong friendships and had particularly good rapport with young men, witness his friendships with Poniatowski, Digby, Philip Stanhope, and Lord Essex. Horace Walpole acclaimed the wit of his poetry, called him 'most generous', but found him overbearing in conversation. Walpole concluded that 'he had innumerable enemies, all the women, for he had poxed his wife, all the Tories for he was a steady Whig, all fools, for he was a bitter satirist, and many sensible people, for he was immoderately vain' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 30.312). 


@@@@@


doc= 29489


Williams, Charles James Blasius (1805-1889), physician, was born on 3 February 1805 at Hungerford Almshouse, Heytesbury, Wiltshire, the eighth of the nine children of the Revd David Williams (1751-1836), warden of the almshouse and curate of Heytesbury church, and his wife, Catherine (died 1820), daughter of a Chepstow surgeon, also named Williams. Under his father, an experienced tutor, Williams was educated at home until he entered Edinburgh University in 1820 to study medicine. He obtained his MD in 1824 by thesis, based on his paper 'On the blood and its changes by respiration and secretion', which he had read at the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh in 1823. The same year he presented a paper on low combustion at the Royal Society, and lectured on the subject at the Royal Institution, where, encouraged by Michael Faraday to experiment further, he later demonstrated the combustibility of various materials. In 1834 he read another paper on the topic at the British Association meeting. 
Williams attended Sir Charles Bell's lectures in London; then in 1825 went to Paris, where he took drawing lessons as well as pursuing his medical studies. His tutors included Laennec, Gay-Lussac, and Andral, and he also became acquainted with the physiologist Majendie. He gained experience at La Charite and other hospitals, and from Laennec learned a method of auscultation using the stethoscope: a technique which would eventually lead to a greater knowledge of heart and lung disease. His important work on auscultation, 'A Rational Exposition of the Physical Signs of the Disease of the Lungs and Pleura' (1828), reached four editions. Williams returned to England in 1827 and then acted as a personal physician accompanying patients abroad. In 1830 he married Harriett Williams, daughter of James Jenkins of Chepstow, and a maternal cousin. They raised five sons and three daughters. A fourth daughter was stillborn. At about the time of his marriage Williams established his own practice in Half Moon Street, London, attended several dispensaries, and had a practice at St George's Hospital, where he became a governor. 
Williams, who was small, confident, and industrious, could be frank and sometimes disputatious with colleagues. From about 1831 he and James Hope started investigating the sounds of the heart, but differences arose between them which were not satisfactorily resolved. Nevertheless some reports of Williams's findings were presented to the British Association in 1835-7. For two consecutive years (1836-7) he lectured on chest diseases at the Kinnerton Street Anatomical School, and in 1839 was appointed professor of the principles and practice of medicine at University College and physician to University College Hospital. Considered a skilled diagnostician, his lectures were well attended. In addition he was consulting physician to the Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest (Brompton), of which he was a joint founder with Sir Philip Rose. 
As the combined posts at University College were arduous, Williams's health gradually suffered and in 1849 he resigned to concentrate on his growing private practice, which moved in 1850 from Holles Street to Upper Brook Street. In 1852 he was summoned to attend the duke of Wellington at Walmer Castle, but arrived too late to assist. He was involved in a notable libel case in 1869-70 with the duke and duchess of Somerset over the death of their son, but was duly exonerated and received a suitable apology. In 1874 he was appointed physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria, but retired from practice the following year and moved to his villa in Cannes, although he often returned to England in the summer. 
Williams was active in many societies, and was president of both the Harveian and Westminster medical societies early in his career. In 1835 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1840 fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London, where he became Goulstonian lecturer in 1841, censor 1846-7, and Lumleian lecturer in 1862. The constitutions of these two societies were not wholly to his liking and he was not fully at ease with his fellowships. Liberal in attitude he tried to achieve change but failed to remove the restrictions that both societies maintained. He was the first (1846) president of the Pathological Society and in 1858 became the first president of the New Sydenham Society, which specialized in medical translation and publishing. In 1867 he helped to found the Clinical Society, and at the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, where he had been elected a fellow in 1840, he served as president in 1873-5. 
Williams was an accomplished writer. He contributed several articles on chest diseases for the 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine' (1833-5). His articles on respiratory disease were published in 'The Library of Medicine' (1840), and he also produced a standard medical work, 'Principles of Medicine' (1843), which was very well received and advanced the profession's knowledge of pathology. It reached several editions and was also translated. 'Pulmonary Consumption' (written jointly with his son Dr Charles Theodore Williams) appeared in 1871, and he also wrote his own 'Memoirs of Life and Work' (1884) and contributed articles to various scientific and medical journals; one in the 'London Journal of Medicine' (1849) extolled the value of cod-liver oil, reporting a marked improvement in the condition of tuberculous patients who received it. Williams was not the first, however, to discover the efficacy of this product. 
In retirement Williams developed his interest in astronomy to study sunspots in relation to weather changes, and also studied the scriptures; but his health was never robust, and after catching a cold which turned to pneumonia he died at his home, the Villa du Rocher, Cannes, on 24 March 1889. He was buried in Cannes on 27 March. He was survived by his widow and six of their children. 


