@@@@@


doc= 29490


Williams, Sir Charles James Watkin (1828-1884), judge, was born in Llansannan on 23 September 1828, the eldest son of Peter Williams, rector of Llansannan, Denbighshire (afterwards of Llangar, Merioneth), and his wife, Lydia Sophia, the daughter of James Price of Plas-yn-Llysfaen, Denbighshire. After leaving Ruthin grammar school he studied medicine under J. E. Erichsen at University College Hospital, where he won the gold medal for comparative anatomy, and acted for a time as house surgeon. He became the lifelong friend of Sir Henry Thompson and Sir John Russell Reynolds. But he soon resolved to abandon medicine for law. He spent a few terms at St Mary Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated on 1 May 1851, but he did not enjoy it and never graduated. Also in 1851 he entered the Middle Temple, and read in the chambers of Horatio Lloyd, a well-known special pleader. When called to the bar three years later, he practised in the same branch of the profession, publishing 'An Essay on the Philosophy of Evidence' (1855), which included discussion of clairvoyance, as well as a book on civil actions (1857), which established his reputation and brought him a large practice, and continued in use as the standard textbook for students at the inns of court until the passing of the 'Judicature Acts' in the later nineteenth century. In 1859 Williams was named 'tubman' of the court of exchequer. He worked first on the home circuit, and afterwards on the south-eastern. Known for clarity of statement rather than any rhetorical technique he none the less displayed a dry sense of humour in court. Williams was made a QC in 1873 and made a speciality of financial and mercantile cases. In 'Thomas v. R.', Williams vindicated the title of the subject to sue the crown for unliquidated damages resulting from breach of contract. 
Williams was twice married: his first wife, Henrietta, the daughter of William Henry Carey and niece of Vice-Chancellor Malins, died in 1864; in the following year he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Lord Justice Robert Lush. 
Williams was Liberal MP for the Denbigh boroughs from November 1868 until 1880, when he was elected for Caernarvonshire. As early as 1854 he had published a pamphlet on the 'Law of Church Rates', and, though himself a churchman, he moved a resolution in the House of Commons on 24 May 1870 in favour of the disestablishment of the church in Wales. The motion was successfully opposed by Gladstone. In 1875 Williams served as a member of Sir Henry James's committee on foreign loans. When Gladstone returned to office in 1880, Williams was offered but declined the post of judge-advocate-general. In November of the same year, on the promotion of Sir Robert Lush to a lord-justiceship, Williams, his son-in-law, was appointed to the vacant puisne judgeship, though he had recently made a public declaration that he would never accept such an office. His judgment in the important case of privilege of counsel ('Munster v. Lamb'), when he nonsuited the plaintiff, was upheld by the superior courts. To the council of judges Williams submitted a paper advocating the abolition of distinctions between the Common Pleas and Exchequer divisions, but the retention of the chiefships. He publicly repudiated their decisions announced in November 1881, declaring that nothing less than an act of parliament should ever induce him to deprive a prisoner of the right of making a statement to a jury of facts not given in evidence. In 'nisi prius' business his knowledge and quickness of apprehension were invaluable, but his judgments in complicated cases of law were sometimes diffuse and loosely reasoned. 
In 1884 Williams was knighted. In July of the same year he came with Mr Justice Lopes to Nottingham assizes. Lopes took the unprecedented step of reading the royal proclamation against vice and immorality. On the night of 17 July 1884 Williams died at Nottingham of heart failure 'in disreputable circumstances'. Despite being hushed up the incident became common knowledge in Nottingham and for years afterwards ribald 'mourning cards' were circulated. The scandal was still spoken of as late as the 1940s. Williams was survived by his second wife and several children, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 22 July 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 29491


Williams, Daniel (c.1643-1716), Presbyterian minister and benefactor, was born at Wrexham, Denbighshire, but the identity of his father is unknown. His mother was probably a daughter of Hugh Davies of Wrexham, grandfather of Stephen Davies (died 1739), minister at Banbury, whom Williams in his will called 'cousin', and made a residuary legatee. 
Where Williams was educated is obscure, although he himself wrote that 'from five years old [I] have had no Employment besides my Studies', and that 'before nineteen I was regularly admitted a preacher' (Williams, 'Defence of 'Gospel Truth'', preface). It is likely that his education for the ministry was curtailed by the Restoration and his decision not to conform. Evans records that Williams had 'some Disadvantages in his Education at first setting out' (Evans, 34). He then 'preach'd for a few Years occasionally in several Parts of England', but finding 'the Times here so frowning on a Protestant Dissenter' (ibid., 35), about 1664, while on a visit to Lady Wilbraham of Weston, near Shifnal, Shropshire, he accepted an invitation to be chaplain to the countess of Meath in Ireland. While in her service he preached regularly to a joint Presbyterian-Independent congregation at Drogheda until he was called by the congregation at Wood Street, Dublin, in 1667 as colleague to Samuel Marsden, a moderate Independent. 
In 1675, by a licence of 16 October, Williams married Elizabeth (1635/6-1698), widow of Thomas Juxon of East Sheen, Surrey, daughter of Sir Robert Meredith of Green Hills, Kildare, and sister to Alice, countess of Mountrath. She had been 'Brought home to God in Her Younger Years by Means of a Sermon' by Edward Baynes, minister of the Winetavern meeting, Dublin, from 1668 (Calamy, 'Funeral Sermon', 73). They had no children. One extraordinary event of Williams's ministry, in 1678, the exorcism by prayer of a violent knocking which had terrorized a young woman, was recorded by Richard Baxter, to whom Williams communicated the account, in 'The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits' (1691). Williams had an important role in contributing 'much to the restauration of Peace' among the Scottish Presbyterians in Dublin 'and somewhat to the Union there' among the dissenting congregations (Williams, 'Defence of 'Gospel Truth'', preface). Between 1682 and 1687 he was assisted by Gilbert Rule, in exile from persecution in Scotland, from whom he acquired his admiration for the presbyterian system and Scottish universities. The following year Joseph Boyse joined them and for some years the Wood Street congregation was served by three ministers. 
On the outbreak of the troubles of 1687 Rule returned to Scotland and Williams, who had been a fierce opponent of Catholicism, believing his life to be in danger, withdrew to London in September, where he arrived at a critical juncture. He quickly gained an influential place amongst dissenters. He became friendly with two of the leading ministers, John Howe (who had served as chaplain to Viscount Massareene in Ireland between 1670 and 1676) and Richard Baxter. Shortly after his arrival Williams was invited twice (20 November 1687 and 9 January 1688) to preach before the lord mayor, Sir John Shorter, an Independent. Both sermons were published. He was present at a meeting at John Howe's house on 23 May 1688 when efforts were made to solicit an address of thanks from the dissenters for James II's declaration of indulgence. According to tradition Williams urged his fellow ministers to refuse, for 'it were better for them to be reduc'd to their former Hardships, than declare for Measures destructive of the Liberties of their Country' (Evans, 43), thus avoiding the threat of an open breach with the Church of England. 
Efforts were made by the Wood Street congregation to persuade Williams to return to Dublin, but on 1 May 1688 Boyse wrote to Thomas Emlyn that 'Mr Williams, whose return was expected, has, after long keeping us in suspence, determined to fix in London' ('Works', 1.x). By September 1690 Boyse had concluded that, though 'some are not willing to despair', Williams 'will never return to settle here, where he can neither make the same figure nor meet with half the encouragement he does in London' (ibid., xiv-xv). On 9 May 1688 Williams received a call to succeed John Collins as minister of the Congregational church in Paved Alley, Lime Street, London, which prompted a protest by twenty-six members of the church. Although Williams 'hath often declared that he is for particular organized Churches' and promised that he would 'not alter the practice of this Church' (Browne to Bosworth, 27 June 1688, DWL, MS 24.67 (2)), the majority concluded that 'we think a Presbyterian minister an unsuitable officer to a Congregationall People' (Bosworth to Browne, 29 June 1688, ibid. (4)), though they hoped he would assist them with an occasional sermon. In December 1688 John Oakes died, and the following year Williams succeeded him as minister of Hand Alley, Bishopsgate, where he remained until his death. 
Initial enthusiasm following the 'Toleration Act' of 1689 led to the ambitious Happy Union, involving a formal accommodation between Presbyterians and Congregationalists in the hope of submerging their doctrinal differences. Williams was one of the committee. He was also one of the original managers of the Common Fund, founded in June 1690 to support provincial dissent, and the only one who was not an ejected minister. Within months the union had ruptured, aggravated by the aggressive independency of Richard Davis, minister of the Independent church at Rothwell, Northamptonshire. Attempts by the Presbyterian members of the United Ministers in London, led by Williams, to discipline Davis were opposed by the Congregational ministers, who in protest withdrew from the union. Doctrinal differences had also been inflamed by the re-publication of Tobias Crisp's sermons, 'Christ Alone Exalted', by his son in 1690 after a lapse of over forty years, which were condemned as Antinomian by Baxter. Williams was closely associated with Baxter during the last years of his life and supplied for him at the Tuesday merchants' lecture, at Pinner's Hall. Following Baxter's death in December 1691 Williams and Thomas Woodcock were rival candidates for the lectureship. The votes were equal and Williams was elected by lot. Jeremiah White later declared that, though he had supported Woodcock, 'yet he thought providence had clearly determined the matter, and that Mr Williams was a man of the best natural parts of any man in England' ('Some account', xii-xiii). Williams also continued Baxter's opposition to high Calvinism. 
Williams took up the Crisp controversy and in May 1692 published his 'Gospel Truth Stated' 'reducing the Controversy into the Compass of a few Heads, and distinctly stating Truth and Error under each of them' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 973). It was, in Calamy's opinion, 'Much carp'd at, but never distinctly answer'd' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. d. 90, fol. 11'r'). But with its testimonial signed by sixteen Presbyterian ministers the book was quickly identified by the Congregationalists as a declaration against their party. Its publication was the signal for 'Great Heats about Doctrinal Matters among the Dissenters' (ibid., fol. 13'r'). Isaac Chauncy attacked Williams's opinions in 'Neonomianism Unmaskt' (1692, 1693), to which Williams replied with 'A Defence of 'Gospel Truth'' (1693). At the beginning of 1694 Nathaniel Mather, a former colleague in Dublin and the successful candidate at Lime Street in 1688, preached two sermons on justification at the Pinner's Hall lecture attacking Williams's arguments as 'semi-Socinian'. They were later published as the 'Righteousness of God through Faith' (1694). Williams replied at his merchants' lecture, subsequently published as 'Man Made Righteous by Christ's Obedience' (1694). The breach was completed when Williams's dismissal from the lectureship was contrived by a meeting packed with small subscribers in August 1694, and the other Presbyterian ministers withdrew to establish a rival lecture at Salters' Hall which met the same day and hour. 
Williams was then accused of immorality. At his request a committee of the United Ministers met at Little St Helen's meeting, Bishopsgate, hearing evidence for eight weeks on Williams's conduct from boyhood. On 8 April 1695 the general body of ministers found Williams 'intirely clear and innocent' (Williams, 'Gospel Truth Stated', 302). Grateful to Edmund Calamy for his assistance in obtaining an important witness, Williams made him his assistant at Hand Alley. With the failure of this attack Williams was charged with Socinianism and other heresies by Stephen Lobb. When Lobb used Bishop Stillingfleet as an authority against him Williams appealed to the bishop who replied firmly in Williams's favour. Dr Jonathan Edwards of Jesus College, Oxford, who had also been used against Williams, likewise took his side. Williams's last publication in the controversy was 'An End to Discord' (1699), written at the request of Lobb to put a halt to the disputes between the Presbyterians and the orthodox Congregationalists. Besides his controversial works he published funeral sermons for Samuel Annesley (1697), John Woodhouse (1701), John Quick (1706), Thomas Doolittle (1707), and Matthew Henry (1714), thanksgiving sermons for the protestant deliverance from the 1641 Irish rebellion (1690) and for the union with Scotland (1707), which he strongly supported, and two more substantial works on religious faith, the 'Vanity of Childhood and Youth' (1691) and a 'Letter to the Author of a Discourse of Free-Thinking' (1713), which maintained the eternity of hell. 
Williams's first wife died on 10 June 1698, aged sixty-two, through grief at the death of her sister Alice, dowager countess of Mountrath. Williams then married, on 2 January 1701, Jane (died 1740), elder daughter of George Guill, a Huguenot refugee merchant, and widow of Francis Barkstead, with whom she had had a son, Francis, and daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, but there were no children with Williams. Her sister, Susanna, married Joseph Stennett, the Seventh Day Baptist minister. By both his marriages Williams acquired considerable property which he used sparingly that 'he might be more useful to others both in his Life and after his Death' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 970). Indeed 'he exercis'd a Frugality as to his own Person, possibly to an Excess' (Evans, 44). 
Although Williams never sought prominence as a public man he was consulted by William III for his knowledge of Irish affairs. He seemed to Sir Charles Wolseley 'to talk like a privy counsellor' ('Some account', xxvi). Williams used his influence on behalf of dissenters in Scotland and the American colonies as well as England and Ireland. He told Boyse in February 1699 that he had spoken with 'the K[ing']s right hand who hath undertaken the affair' about a minister in Galloway (BL, Add. MS 4276, fol. 223'r'). Besides assisting in individual cases he made strenuous though unsuccessful efforts to prevent the imposition of the Irish sacramental test in 1704. He also represented English dissent. He led the joint address in March 1702 of the 'Three Denominations' on the accession of Anne; the first occasion that the Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists had acted together. More important, he kept an active correspondence with Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, from at least 1701, maintaining a careful response to his overtures, especially efforts to detach dissenters from their whig political allies. In 1710 he received an offer from the earl of Oxford of $1000 to be distributed among dissenting ministers as royal bounty. Distrusting Oxford he declined the offer. Yet all his political influence could not prevent the passing of the 'Occasional Conformity Act' (1711) or the 'Schism Act' (1714). He became particularly apprehensive about the state of affairs at the end of Anne's reign, expressing freely to Oxford his concerns about the protestant succession. In 1709 he reluctantly accepted an honorary doctorate of divinity from Edinburgh and Glasgow universities. 
In May 1711 Williams was dangerously ill, prompting a day of prayer at his meeting-house by the leading London ministers. On his recovery in June he drew up his will, and, his health rapidly declining, he left most of the work in the ministry to John Evans, his assistant since 1704. The particularly unflattering description of Williams by John Fox as 'the greatest bundle of pride, affectation, and ill manners I had ever met with' (Fox, 194), belongs to this period of ill health. His last public act was shortly after the accession of George I when, on 28 September 1714, he again led the loyal address to the throne by the 'Three Denominations'. 
Williams died, possibly from an asthma attack, at his house in Hoxton, London, on 26 January 1716 and was buried in a vault at Bunhill Fields, London. He devoted the bulk of his estate (estimated at $50,000) to charitable uses. Besides provision for his widow, numerous legacies, bequests to the poor in various places, endowments for Presbyterian meetings at Wrexham and Burnham, Essex, for St Thomas's Hospital, for the universities of Glasgow and Harvard, and for mission societies in Scotland and New England, he established a trust for 2000 years for religious and educational purposes, though 'his trustees met with great difficulties in pursuing his designs' (Calamy, 'Historical Account', 2.344). Williams's sister and heir-at-law, Mrs Elizabeth Roberts, who was entitled to all property that he had not legally devised, questioned the legality of some parts of the will but at length was satisfied with an annuity of $60 for designated charitable purposes in Wales. The provisions Williams made in his will for establishing the library which bears his name were modest, and the opening of the library in Red Cross Street in 1729 was largely due to the efforts of his trustees. For over a century it served as 'the headquarters of London dissent' ('DNB'). The collections were greatly enlarged over the years with many important gifts, and Williams's original benefaction of about 7600 books forms only a small part of the modern library. After several moves, the trustees acquired University Hall in Gordon Square, London, where the library opened in 1890. 
Williams's extraordinary influence among dissenters after the revolution was remarkable both for the speed with which it was achieved and the height that it attained. His great wealth acquired with his first marriage and consolidated by his second was undoubtedly important, but 'his large Acquaintance and diffusive Influence, gave him Advantages for Usefulness beyond many of his Brethren' (Evans, 35). If his lack of formal theological training encouraged much of the suspicion concerning his orthodoxy, his ability in a controversy to 'immediately fasten upon the main hinge on which the thing turned' together with his 'penetrating judgment' and close application gave him success in the Crispian controversy ('Some account', xxiii-xxiv). 


@@@@@


doc= 29492


Williams, Sir David (1550-1613), judge, was born on St David's day (1 March) 1550. He is described on his tomb, by his own request, as 'Natus ex progenie Adam [Howell Ychan] et Oweni Gethin', which was doubtless an attempt to gloss over his more humble immediate origins as a younger son of Gwilym ap John Vaughan, yeoman, of Blaen Newydd, Ystradfellte, Brecknockshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Rhys Griffith Melyn. He preferred to tell friends that he was 'of the same house as the lord Williams of Thame' ('Liber famelicus', 30). He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1568, and called to the bar in 1576, after which he seems to have practised chiefly in south Wales, where he acquired the priory of St John in Brecon and, in 1600, a house at Gwernyfed near Hay-on-Wye. Williams became a justice of the peace for Brecknockshire about 1577, and from 1581 until 1604 he was both recorder of Brecon and attorney-general for south Wales in the great sessions. He represented the Brecon boroughs in four parliaments from 1584 to 1598. In 1589 the earl of Pembroke put forward his name as not unworthy to be a lawyer member of the council in the marches, though in fact he was never added to the council. 
Williams became a bencher of the Middle Temple in 1590, and in Lent 1591 delivered a reading on the 'Statutes of Wills', a version of which survives. A mere three years later, in Easter term 1594, he was made a serjeant-at-law, the patrons at his creation being the earls of Warwick and Worcester and Lord Howard of Effingham. His principal real patron is thought to have been Lord Burghley, but he had been chosen by a more senior serjeant. Williams was the junior of the call, and as serjeant-elect he delivered a double reading in the Middle Temple, this time on the jointure provisions of the 'Statute of Uses'. He was thereafter active as counsel in Westminster Hall, and was soon under consideration for the bench. Burghley considered him for a vacancy in the exchequer in 1598, despite his 'small living', and in 1599 Sir Robert Cecil proposed his appointment to the common pleas. The preferments were opposed by Dean Goodman of Westminster, who needed Williams's continued services as counsel. 
Williams was knighted on 23 July 1603, and on 4 February 1604 was appointed a fifth or additional puisne justice of the king's bench. In 1610 he was removed from the Oxford circuit for covertly opposing the council in the marches, and for allowing recusants to swear a modified oath of allegiance. At the following Cambridge assizes he ruled that 'it was not meet to keep poor prisoners in the gaol for small matters or felonies from one assizes to another', and instructed the magistrates to try petty larceny and 'small felonies' at the quarter sessions (Dalton, 39). He did not live quite long enough to serve under the chief justiceship of Coke, whose policies (according to Archbishop Abbott in 1612) he utterly disliked, but died of a fever on 22 January 1613 at Kingston House, Kingston Bagpuize, Berkshire. His entrails were buried at Kingston, but in accordance with his will his body was removed to St John's Chapel (now the cathedral), Brecon, which was part of the priory that he owned. His effigy in judge's robes, alongside that of his first wife Margaret, still remains at Brecon, once part of an elaborate canopied monument which has been destroyed. The present Latin inscription is an incomplete modern copy of that prescribed in his last will. 
Margaret, to whom Williams was married by 1586, was one of the daughters of John Games of Aberbran, Brecknockshire. They had nine sons and two daughters, but only four of the sons survived. Williams was survived by his second wife, Dorothy (died 1629), daughter and coheir of Oliver Wellesbourne of East Hanney, Berkshire, and widow of John Latton of Kingston Bagpuize, whom he married in 1597. She brought him estates in Berkshire and Oxfordshire, including Kingston House, where he died, which was said to have been the home of Empress Matilda. He also had a house called Ham Court in Oxfordshire, leased from the earl of Shrewsbury. There were two children by this marriage. Williams died 'a man of great living and personall wealthe' ('Liber famelicus', 30). His extensive Welsh estates were inherited by his eldest son, Sir Henry Williams MP (died 1636), father of the first baronet. He left a number of charitable bequests, including poor relief and endowed sermons in Glasbury, St John's, Ystradfellte, and Aberllynfi churches. Among his legacies was 'a greate guylte standinge cupp with a cover' left to Lord Chancellor Ellesmere in token of his love and affection, $20 to the society of Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, and eight gilt cups to the vicars-choral of Hereford. The hangings from Kingston, and a third of his plate, were left to his son Thomas as heirlooms to the house of Cockthorpe, Oxfordshire. His best robes were left to Mr Justice Warburton, whom he called 'a good and kynde brother' (judge), under a mutual agreement 'that the survivor of us twayne shoulde have the others best scarlet robes'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29493


William, Dafydd (c.1720-1794), Welsh-language hymn writer, was born in the parish of Llanedi, Carmarthenshire. He moved during his early years to Llandeilo Tal-y-bont, Glamorgan, going on in 1774 to Basaleg, Monmouthshire, and finally in 1777 to Llanbedr-y-fro (Peterston-super-Ely) in the Vale of Glamorgan. He was a Methodist exhorter for some time and a teacher in the circulating schools in Carmarthenshire, Glamorgan, and Montgomeryshire. He had already turned to the Baptists before arriving in Llanbedr-y-fro and was baptized there on 29 June 1777, becoming one of the founders of the Croes-y-parc Baptist cause in the area and keeping school in Trewiting. Tradition has it that he married a petulant, nagging wife who insisted on keeping an inn and that this was the reason why he left the Methodists. He was not ordained by the Baptists but preached widely. 
Dafydd William was a prolific writer and issued at least thirty-five works during his lifetime. His hymn collections usually contained some ten or a dozen hymns. His first publication was 'Golwg y ffyddloniaid ar degwch a gogoniant Iesu Grist' (1760), a long poem together with three hymns. Then came 'Gorfoledd ym mhebyll Seion' ('c'.1762), with three more parts appearing in 1777-8 (these were collected and republished in more substantial volumes in 1782 and 1786); 'Diferion o ffynnon iechydwriaeth' (1772, 1777); 'Joy in the Tents of Zeion' (1779), English translations of twenty-two hymns; 'Telynau i blant yr addewid' (1782); 'Gwin i'r diffygiol o'r winwydden orau' ('c'.1785-6); 'Hymnau priod-ferch y brenin Alpha' ('c'.1787); 'Myfyrdod pererin' ('c'.1788); and 'Yr udgorn arian' (1789). In addition he published numerous elegies and evangelical poems. 
Dafydd William died in Holton, Barry, on 5 November 1794, leaving a son, Israel, and was buried at Croes-y-parc, Glamorgan. 
Several of Dafydd William's hymns remain popular. He made full and effective thematic use of familiar images such as the believer's spiritual war, his pilgrimage through the metaphorical desert or stormy seas aided by the greatest of captains at the helm, and the divine design for sinners' deliverance. More than any of his contemporaries he sang joyfully of the very act of singing his praise for the 'omnipotence of love'. Perhaps his most famous verse is that beginning 'Yn y dyfroedd mawr a'r tonnau' ('In the waves and mighty waters'), said to have been constantly sung by fourteen colliers trapped for a week in a flooded mine in Cymer, the Rhondda valley, in April 1877, saving them from despair and madness. Nine were rescued alive. 


@@@@@


doc= 29494


Williams, David (1738-1816), political and religious theorist and founder of the Literary Fund, the son of William David (died 1752), was born at Waunwaelod, near Watford, on the north slope of Caerphilly Mountain in the parish of Eglwysilan, Glamorgan, south Wales, and baptized there on 9 December 1738. His father invested his money in a shop supplying tools to mining works, but the venture ultimately failed. Three of his brothers 'just entering into life died of a consumption, the malady of the family' (Williams, 14); two sisters survived into adult life. He was educated locally in the school of the Revd Lewis Rogers and that of his namesake, the Revd David Williams of Pwll-y-pant, minister of Watford Independent Chapel. On his deathbed in May 1752, his father exacted a promise from his fourteen-year-old son that he would attend the dissenting academy at Carmarthen. Despite Williams's avowed 'indisposition to the dissenting ministry' (ibid.), he honoured his promise, and, in December 1753, assisted by a grant from the Presbyterian Fund, was taken to Carmarthen by the Revd David Williams, who had himself attended Carmarthen Academy. The academy at this time had a reputation for theological heterodoxy, and in 1757 the congregational board withdrew its financial support. 
After four years of study at Carmarthen, Williams left in 1758 to become minister at the Presbyterian chapel in Rook Lane, Frome, Somerset, on an annual salary of $45. He was well liked by his congregation, and remained there until 1762, when he moved to the Mint chapel in Exeter. The death of his father had left his mother and sisters in some financial distress, and Williams declares that it was this which induced him to move to Exeter and kept him 'from making an advantageous marriage' (Williams, 14). It was at Exeter that he commenced his programme of reforming public worship, persuading his Arian congregation to adopt a liturgy modelled on the non-sectarian liturgy in use since 1763 at the Octagon Chapel, Liverpool. At Exeter, however, his reputation was tarnished by various imputations of imprudent conduct; as he himself records: 'I spent nineteen parts in twenty of my time among women. This seduced me into the paths of pleasure, which the eye of censure soon observed, and which soon led me... out of the narrow enclosures of my profession' (ibid., 15). Such rumours were to resurface in a series of letters by a female correspondent signing herself Sappho that appeared in the 'St James's Chronicle' in 1777. In 1769 Williams left Exeter for London, establishing himself in Frith Street, Soho, probably as a private tutor. In 1770 or early 1771 he became the minister of the small Presbyterian congregation at Southwood Lane in Highgate; he claims that by the time he left, the congregation had much increased. At Highgate he also engaged in the regular tutoring of pupils. In 1771 he published (anonymously) his first work, 'The Philosopher', in which, in the form of a dialogue between a philosopher (clearly Williams's mouthpiece), a courtier, a whig, a Presbyterian minister and an Anglican clergyman, he discusses the corruption of the political and religious 'status quo', enjoining doctrinal freedom and the need for a form of public worship based on a fundamental moral deism. The work was well received, and attracted the favourable notice of the Cambridge liberal John Jebb. His second work published during his time at Highgate (again anonymously), 'A Letter to David Garrick' (1772), reflects his interest in the theatre; Williams reproaches Garrick for his treatment of the actor Henry Mossop and offers a criticism of Garrick's acting and of his stranglehold on the profession. Williams left Highgate in the late spring or summer of 1773; he was not to return to the ministry. Despite the fact that he later cited financial reasons for leaving the ministry, it is clear that formal Christianity was something he no longer felt able to square with his conscience. 
Following the warm reception of 'The Philosopher', Williams was encouraged to frame a simplified Christian liturgy. Thus in 1771 or 1772 he composed what appeared in 1774 as his 'Liturgy on the Principles of the Christian Religion', closely modelled on the Octagon Chapel liturgy. But in the light of the far more theologically bold position he adopted in 'Essays on Public Worship' (1773), this liturgy had been superseded before it appeared. In the 'Essays', written against the background of the debate surrounding the dissenting petitions submitted to parliament in 1772 seeking the abolition of subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', Williams criticizes the hypocrisy and intolerance of the dissenters as well as that of the established church, stressing that unconditional philosophical liberty should be the dissenters' goal and advocating a universal form of public worship purged of sectarian doctrines and based on simple morality. The 'Essays', which were seen as coming very close to overt deism, made him notorious -- 'I was educated among the Saints; and I now live, thank God, among Sinners' (p. 24) -- and he was deserted 'not only by the negociators for a reformed plan of worship, but by almost every friend and acquaintance he had in the world' (Morris, 7). On 16 December 1773 Williams married Mary Emilia Moore (died 1774), 'a person without the slightest fortune, solely for love' (Wendeborn, 3.371), and opened a school for young boys in Lawrence Street, Chelsea. 
It was the 'Essays' that led to a friendship in 1773 with Benjamin Franklin, who is said by Thomas Morris to have nicknamed Williams Priest of Nature. At their first meeting, attended also by Thomas Bentley, who had been instrumental in establishing the Octagon Chapel in Liverpool, they 'commenced a club over a neck of veal and potatoes at the Old Slaughter Coffee House, which soon amounted to thirteen and was never permitted to exceed that number' (Williams, 16). So was founded the deist Club of Thirteen or Wednesdays Club, which probably met twice a month, either at Old Slaughter's, or at The Swan on Westminster Bridge; Franklin's rooms in Craven Street were also used. Williams was asked to compose a sample liturgy, which was repeatedly revised -- a project that resulted in 1776 in the publication and use at Williams's Margaret Street Chapel of his 'Liturgy on the Universal Principles of Religion and Morality'. It was in the context of the Club of Thirteen also, at Easter 1773, that Williams first broached the idea of the Literary Fund, which was to prove his lasting achievement. The idea was greeted with sympathy, but it was resolved that the project be postponed. This was the occasion of Franklin's famous remark to Williams:''I see you will not give up a noble idea. I do not say you will not succeed, but it must be by much anxiety and trouble, and I hope the anvil will not wear out the hammer'' (Williams, 43). 
In 1774 Williams published his first signed work, his 'Treatise on Education', in which he discusses the educational theories of Locke, Milton, Rousseau, and Helvetius. It was written at a time when his wife was expecting their first child, and in it Williams insists that the ideal school should function 'as much like well-regulated families as possible' ('Treatise on Education', 24). Together with his 'Lectures on Education' (1789), the 'Treatise' appears to reflect the practical pedagogic techniques used in his Lawrence Street school, which took about a dozen students and where the fees were high ($100 per annum). Intensely aware of the impracticality of the education he himself had received, and as an educational theorist and admirer of Comenius, Williams stressed the need for a teaching method based on activity and experiment, on things rather than words, and deprecated mechanical rote-learning. Corporal punishment was made subordinate to the judgement of a pupils' court in which Williams appeared as a member but never as a judge. The final section of the 'Treatise', 'History of Philo and Amelia', outlines his conception of an ideal, solitary upbringing akin to that of Rousseau's 'Emile'. From 1777 he increasingly concerned himself as a teacher with the instruction of older students of 'defective education'. Defending himself against charges of impiety in his sermons at Highgate, Williams also published in 1774 sixteen sermons under the title 'Sermons, Chiefly upon Religious Hypocrisy' (2 vols.), comprising 'all the sermons which I have ever known to offend, and to bring me the imputation of infidelity' ('Sermons', 1.v). In their attack on the hypocrisy, puritanism, and doctrinal wrangling of dissent, and in their insistence on Christianity as a system of morality strictly equatable with the religion of Nature, however, one can see why they might have given offence. 
A daughter, baptized Emilia, was born in Lawrence Street on 9 December 1774; Williams's wife died on 20 December and her death signalled the closure of the Lawrence Street academy in 1775. The fate of the daughter remains a mystery, and one must assume that she died in infancy. Wendeborn claims that in his grief Williams went to Derbyshire 'in order to indulge his melancholy thoughts' (Wendeborn, 3.371) but Morien 
(Owen Morgan; 1836?-1921)
, presumes that he 'sought consolation among his early associations at Caerphilly' (Morien, 'Western Mail', 27 May 1890, p. 2). From mid-summer 1775 to late 1776 he resided in Park Street, Grosvenor Square. It seems that a few years after the death of his wife, a lasting attachment developed between Williams and Frances Martyn, wife of the Revd Thomas Martyn, curate of St Anne's, Soho; she was to live with Williams until her death in 1812. 
On Easter Sunday, 7 April 1776, Williams opened a chapel in Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, and read from the 'Liturgy on the Universal Principles of Religion and Morality', the collaborative production of members of the Club of Thirteen. He later noted that at the beginning of the war against America, 'a spirit of discord pervading the country affected the little society formed at Dr. Franklin's, and soon dissolved it' (Williams, 17), leaving him responsible for the opening of the chapel and the introduction of the liturgy. The preface to this universalist 'Liturgy' of 1776 describes the experiment as a form of social worship 'in which all men may join who acknowledge the existence of a supreme intelligence, and the universal obligations of morality' ('Liturgy', x-xi). Its format, containing an order for morning and for evening prayer and a collection of hymns and psalms, is reminiscent of an Anglican format, but the liturgy avoids all dogmatic statements of belief beyond an acknowledgement of the wisdom and goodness of a supreme intelligence and the moral obligations of a simple deism that celebrates nature as implying the existence of God. All specifically Christian doctrines of faith are carefully excluded. Copies of the liturgy were sent to Voltaire and Frederick the Great of Prussia, and in Paris in the summer of 1776 Bentley presented a copy to Rousseau. All three responded enthusiastically. Voltaire wrote: 'It is a great comfort to me, at the age of eighty-two years, to see the tolerance openly teach'd in your country, and the God of all mankind no more pent up in a narrow tract of land. That notable truth was worthy of your pen and of your tongue. (D. Williams, 'Lectures on Education', 3 vols., 1789, 3.302-3)' The Margaret Street venture has been seen as influencing the worship of reason and the Supreme Being in revolutionary France, and Henri Gregoire saw it as informing French theophilanthropy under the Directory. In Gillray's cartoon 'New Morality', published in 'The Anti-Jacobin' in July 1798, Williams, in the company of Paine, Godwin, Holcroft, Thelwall, Southey, Coleridge, and Lamb, appears as a snake slithering over his 'Atheistical lectures', paying homage to La Reveillere Lepaux, one of the five members of the French directory, in St Paul's Cathedral. Accompanying the cartoon is George Canning's poem 'New morality, or, The promised installment of the high priest of the theophilanthropes, with the homage of Leviathan and his suite': '
All creeping creatures, venomous and low, 

PAINE, W-LL-MS, G-DW-N, H-LC-FT, praise LE PAUX! 

' 1776 also saw the publication of Williams's 'Sermon Preached at the Opening of a Chapel in Margaret-Street' and 'The Morality of a Citizen', which he described as 'an ironical Injunction to Passive Obedience' ('Lectures on the Universal Principles and Duties of Religion and Morality', 1779). He again attacked what he saw as the tyranny of the dissenting sects in his 'Letters to the Body of Protestant Dissenters' (1777), and was to repeat his criticisms of any test of opinions two years later in 'The Nature and Extent of Intellectual Liberty', addressed to Sir George Savile, and in his 'Salutary Admonitions to the Dissenters' (1787). In 1778 appeared 'Unanimity in All Parts of the British Commonwealth', which contains a passionate attack on the entry of France into the American War. The same year was marked by personal enmity among the Margaret Street leadership, and personal and doctrinal dissension, together with financial difficulties, sparse attendance, and the political climate of the American War resulted in the closure of the chapel at mid-summer 1780. According to Gregoire, Williams claimed that many members of the congregation were moving from deism to atheism. Williams defended his deism in the 'Lectures on the Universal Principles and Duties of Religion and Morality' (1779), forty-six lectures delivered at Margaret Street and at the British Coffee House, Charing Cross, to which the services moved. Over the next two years he published translations of a number of Voltaire's works, including his 'Traite sur la tolerance' and five of his comedies. Successors to the Margaret Street Chapel with which Williams was associated included a Philosophical Society, formed in 1780, and a Liberal Society, established in the mid-1780s. In 1780 he opened an Academy of Sciences and Belles-Lettres and a School of Eloquence in Carlisle House, and published his 'Plan of Association on Constitutional Principles', motivated by the anti-Catholic Gordon riots. In 1782 Williams published one of his most influential political works, 'Letters on Political Liberty', which contains a defence of the American colonists and argues for a reform of the parliamentary system with a radical extension of the vote and a system of delegation that would invest political power in the body of the people. The work was widely circulated; Jean-Pierre Brissot de Warville, who between 1782 and 1784 was attempting to establish a 'lycee' in London and whom Williams met in 1783, arranged for a translation to be made, for which he was interrogated in the Bastille during the summer of 1784. In 1783 Williams established an occasional paper, 'Friend of the People', to promote political liberty. Having moved from Meard Street, Soho, back to Park Street, Grosvenor Square, Williams in 1785 relocated to special teaching facilities at 28 Great Russell Street, and between then and 1787 delivered three series of lectures on education. 
It was the death in 1787 of the seventy-seven-year-old Floyer Sydenham, translator of Plato, who had been imprisoned for a small debt, that provided the impetus for the establishment of Williams's brainchild, the Literary Fund. In October 1786 Williams had unsuccessfully sought to bring artists within his projected scheme of a benevolent fund for authors, but this came to nothing. He unsuccessfully approached Adam Smith, Pitt, Burke, and Fox for support, but in 1788 18 guineas were subscribed to fund an advertisement; a constitution was drawn up and published as 'Constitutions of a Society to Support Men of Genius and Learning in Distress', and the fund became a reality in 1790. From 1793 the fund instituted a successful programme of anniversary dinners with glees, a band, and the recital of poetic tributes, and early beneficiaries included the widow and children of Robert Burns, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, George Dyer, and the radical pamphleteer John Oswald. Members who sat on the fund's committee during its early years included such reformers as James Martin, John Hurford Stone, Major Alexander Jardine, Thomas Christie, and William Frend. Over the course of the first decade or so of its existence, however, political reactionaries such as John Reeves, founder in 1792 of the Association for Preserving Liberty and Property Against Republicans and Levellers, William Boscawen, and W. T. Fitzgerald were prominently represented. 
In 1788 Williams published anonymously his 'Royal Recollections on a Tour to Cheltenham', a satirical work purporting to be the journal of George III, which became his greatest commercial success, and 'Constitutional Doubts', written in reaction to the regency crisis, which recommends constitutional reform and warns the prince of Wales, who was later to become the patron of the Literary Fund, not to be deceived by Pitt. 1789 was a prolific year: in addition to the 'Lectures on Education', Williams published 'Lectures on Political Principles', in which he discussed Montesquieu's 'De l'esprit des lois'; 'Authentic Specimens of Ministerial Instructions'; and his 'Apology for Professing the Religion of Nature', which, together with his last attempt at a liturgy, the annexed 'Liturgy on the Principles of Theism', represents the culmination of his religious philosophy. From a position of a pared-down deism he roundly rejects what he sees as the metaphysical absurdities and morally pernicious doctrines of Christianity, scorns an anthropomorphic concept of God, whom he regards as unknowable and identifies with the laws of nature, and effects a separation of morality from religious dogma. 
In 1790 Williams addressed the prince of Wales in his 'Lessons to a Young Prince, by an Old Statesman', in which he attacks abuses of power in Britain and discusses the American constitution and the early stages of the French Revolution. The second edition contained a lengthy 'ad hominem' attack on Burke as an enemy of the French Revolution and a 'political Swedenbourg'. During 1792 he met Godwin, with whom he discussed the radical principles of Godwin's 'Enquiry Concerning Political Justice' (1793). On 26 August 1792 Williams, together with Paine, Price, Priestley, Mackintosh, Wilberforce, and George Washington, was granted honorary French citizenship. 
It was as the author of 'Letters on Political Liberty', which Williams claimed influenced French revolutionary thought, and as the mentor of Brissot, who introduced his Girondin colleagues to Williams's political ideas, that Williams was invited to Paris in November 1792 to take part in the debate on the French constitution of 1791 and in the framing of a new constitution following the 'journee' of 10 August 1792. With Paine he had been offered a seat in the convention if he consented to '[check] the rapidity of the revolution or commenced hostilities on the Jacobin Club' (Williams, 27); he declined. He arrived in Paris during the first week of December and immediately became disillusioned: 'I had not been in Paris a week when I perceived I could be of no use. The Convention was dividing into factions, while the Commune of Paris was seizing its power and the whole country crumbling into anarchy. The trial of the King, the whole of which I attended, gave me a perfect knowledge of the talents and spirit of the Convention. (Williams, 27)' He was accused in a forged letter, produced by Chabot in the convention, of wishing to act as defence counsel to Louis XVI, and called a traitor and hypocrite by Robespierre. Amid this intrigue he was asked to write down his objections to the first French constitution, and his report was published in 1793 as 'Observations sur la derniere constitution de la France'. Diplomatic relations between France and Britain were deteriorating by the day, and Williams was asked by Brissot, Roland, and Le Brun to act as ambassador to London. He wisely rejected the offer but agreed to deliver 'in [his] own private character... any papers they chose to send into the hands of Lord Grenville, and say everything he would permit me to say to prevent a war' (Williams, 29). At the end of January it was again proposed that Williams deliver a letter to Grenville. In it Le Brun, suggesting an alliance between the British government and the Girondins, revealed how a war might be averted. Williams returned to London with this diplomatic commission in February 1793 but got no further than Aust, the under-secretary of state. 'I... did not press myself uselessly on Lord Grenville', Williams remarks, 'and I did not write to him, that the contents of my letter might not reach France and send the Girondist government instantly to the guillotine' (ibid., 31). 
On his return Williams was received as 'a partisan of France' (Williams, 31). A contract with the miniaturist and entrepreneur Robert Bowyer to write a continuation of Hume's 'History of England' fell through when Bowyer was informed that Williams had accepted French citizenship (a claim for breach of contract was settled in 1795). 'I withdrew from the political arena', he states, 'into my own private circle' (ibid., 34, 37). His experience in France certainly dealt a blow to the radical in him, and in his writings he increasingly deprecated political experimentation. Madame Roland's gracious remarks in her 'Appel a l'impartiale posterite' (published in an English translation, 'Appeal to Impartial Posterity', in 1795) did much to rehabilitate his public image in the late 1790s: 'A deep thinker, and a real friend to mankind, he appeared to me to combine their means of happiness, as well as Paine feels and describes the abuses which constitute their misery' (Roland, pt 2, 42-3). 
At the suggestion of his friend the physician Dr Thomas Hooper of Pant-y-Goitre, Monmouthshire, and John Morgan of Tredegar, Williams embarked on the monumental 'History of Monmouthshire', published in 1796 with illustrations by John Gardnor; its heterogeneity reflects Williams's experience as an educator, religious philosopher, and political theorist. Williams in the same year published 'Letter to the Right Rev. Dr Warren on his Conduct as Bishop of Bangor' under the pseudonym Shon Gwialan at the behest of Thomas Williams, the north Wales copper magnate. In his 'Regulations of Parochial Police' (1797) he responded to an expected French invasion by presenting a plan of parish security that would guard against the threat of internal malcontents. His reminiscences of Brissot, who had been executed on 31 October 1793, appeared in the second volume of 'Biographical Anecdotes of the Founders of the French Republic' (1797-8), and he offered an appraisal of the Girondins in his autobiography. His partnership at this time in the projected loyalist 'Imperial Gazette' came to nothing. In May 1800 a decision was taken to publish a history of the Literary Fund, written by Williams, which duly appeared in 1802 as 'Claims of Literature'. A celebrated quarrel resulted when one of the vice-presidents of the fund, Sir James Bland Burges, took violent exception to the moral and political principles of the work. 
In October 1802 during the peace of Amiens, Williams returned to Paris to gauge the political climate as an agent of the British government, for which he produced a report on the Napoleonic regime. During 1802-3 he was active as adviser on political and defence issues to Thomas Pelham, second earl of Chichester, home secretary in the Addington administration, who became vice-president of the Literary Fund in 1803. In that year he published 'Egeria', a collection of essays on political economy and philosophy that had appeared from 1802-3 with government subvention; it again marks a retreat from his former radical beliefs. In July 1805 he secured the patronage of the prince of Wales, and moved into the premises of the Literary Fund that had been secured by the prince in 36 Gerrard Street, Soho. His final publication, 'Preparatory Studies for Political Reformers', appeared in 1810, in which he once again warns against rash political change. 
Williams's health had always been fragile, and during the final six years of his life he was dogged by 'a severe paraletic affliction' (BL, Royal Literary Fund, registered case file no. 335) and financial problems. Major strokes laid him low in 1809 and 1811. His sister Anne, wife of the Revd Walter Thomas, had died in 1809, and Williams was cared for in his declining years in Gerrard Street by his niece, Mary Watkins, daughter of Anne from a previous marriage. In July 1815 the Literary Fund voted their founder $50 every six months. He died at his home, 36 Gerrard Street, on 29 June 1816 and was buried in St Anne's, Soho, on 6 July. Mary Watkins was voted $50 after his death. His will bequeathed his manuscripts to his executors, the Revd Richard Yates and Thomas Whittingham, and his 'Bank annuities... furniture & printed Books plate and Linen and all the residue of [his] Estate' to his niece (TNA: PRO, PROB 11.1582/411). 
His contemporaries describe Williams as tall and slender (though in later years he was considered corpulent), with coiffeured and powdered hair and a languid gait. During his early years in London he seems to have dressed rather foppishly. The full-length 1774 portrait by J. F. Rigaud, now at the headquarters of the Royal Literary Fund at 3 Johnson's Court, London, shows a tall figure with an aquiline nose wearing a long blue gown over a dark suit and white shirt, with buckles on his shoes. James Boaden describes his 'placid countenance' and the bright purple suit he wore later in life, 'which invested his really venerable figure' (Boaden, 1.lv). He was fair-complexioned and very short-sighted, and spoke without a Welsh accent in a voice that was considered mellifluous. In the introduction to his 'History of Monmouthshire' he stated that he possessed 'so much knowledge of [Welsh], as to read, speak, and write, one of its dialects, with facility' (p. iv). His manner was polished but relaxed; he often seemed careless of his reputation. He was loyal and generous, but could also be querulous. He was known as a 'singular' and maverick, and was ever a staunchly non-party man. His most original contributions lie in the field of religion, in his attempt 'to institutionalise and furnish with a liturgy a social and non-dogmatic religious philosophy' (Jones, 180); in political philosophy, as a thinker on political and social liberty and as a precursor of an organic approach to political theory; and in education, in his pioneering of an experiential pedagogic method. His lasting legacy is the Literary Fund, now the Royal Literary Fund, which continues to distribute funds to indigent authors. 


@@@@@


doc= 29495


Williams, David (1792-1850), geologist, was born at Bleadon, Somerset, where his father, John Williams -- originally from Barry, Glamorgan -- was a major landowner. Williams matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 24 October 1810, graduated BA in 1814, and proceeded MA in 1820. Prior to this he was ordained, and after a curacy at Avebury, Wiltshire, was presented in 1820 to the rectory of Bleadon and the vicarage of Kingston Seymour, both in Somerset. He seems to have lived at Bleadon. Williams had married Marianne, daughter of William Bartlett, vicar of Newark and East Stoke, Nottinghamshire, on 30 December 1819. Their eldest son, Wadham Piggot Williams (1822-1902), was vicar of Bishops Hull, Somerset, and an authority of Somerset dialect. Their third son, David Bartlett Williams ('b'. 1830), was also a clergyman. 
Williams was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1828 and in 1831 published his first paper; he continued to write at intervals on geological subjects until 1849. He explored the various caves of the Mendips and was involved with William Beard at Banwell bone cave. He investigated the geology of the west country, and thirty-one scientific subjects appear under his name in the Royal Society's catalogue, seventeen relating to the geology of Cornwall and Devon. 
Williams was a player in the great Devonian controversy, but as an amateur his opinions were largely over-ridden by the London geological establishment. The controversy arose because of some stratigraphic problems observed in the geology of Devon, and was resolved by geologists formulating a new geological period -- the Devonian. Williams's contributions are discussed in detail by Rudwick in 'The Great Devonian Controversy'. 
Williams was evidently unmusical and objected to music in church services. Joseph Leech, in the 'Bristol Times' (14 June 1845), roundly condemned him for the condition of his church at Bleadon, for the lack of a school in the village, and for his appearance and personal habits while conducting the service, which could only be described as scruffy. Williams died at Weston-super-Mare on 7 September 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 29496


Williams, Edward (fl. 1650), author, was perhaps the son of Edward Williams baptized at Ampthill, Bedfordshire, on 17 November 1616. From Charterhouse School he was admitted as a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, on 21 September 1635. He received no degree but on 31 March 1639 the master of Charterhouse recommended him as a tutor to Sir Francis Windebank. 
In 1650 an Edward Williams was the author of a pamphlet published in more than one edition. The first was entitled 'Virgo triumphans, or, Virginia Richly and Truly Valued; more Especially the South Part thereof'. In the address 'To the Reader' Williams disclaimed 'being the sole author of this Tractate, the whole substance of it... was communicated to me by a Gentleman of merit and quality... Mr. John Farrer of Geding in Huntingdonshire'. That this Williams was the Williams born at Ampthill is suggested by the fact that at this time John Ferrar's niece Mary Wraughton, the daughter of Richard Farrar, was at Ampthill in the service of Lady Oxford and was then corresponding with her uncle. 
The work's second edition, also published in 1650, had a variant title, 'Virginia, More Especially the South Part Thereof, Richly and Truly Valued'. To it were now added sections entitled 'The discovery of silkworms, with their benefit; and implanting of mulberry trees; also the dressing of vines, for the rich trade of making wines in Virginia; together with the making of the saw-mill, very usefull in Virginia', doubtless also supplied by Ferrar. 
The New York Public Library has copies of both editions. The earlier was once John Ferrar's. In it he made numerous extensive annotations and also included a manuscript sketch of his map of Virginia, of which the first printed state is in the library's other copy. 


@@@@@


doc= 29497


Williams, Edward (1750-1813), Independent minister and tutor, was born at Glan Clwyd, Denbighshire, on 14 November 1750, the son of Thomas Williams, a farmer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Williams. He was educated at St Asaph grammar school and then at Caerwys grammar school, for a year. He was intended for the church but came under the influence of the local Methodists, headed by the minister Daniel Lloyd. While studying with David Ellis, curate at Derwen, he attended Methodist meetings. He joined the Independent church at Denbigh, where he began to preach, and in 1771 entered the dissenting academy at Abergavenny, under Benjamin Davis. 
Williams was ordained minister on 27 March 1776 at the Independent church at Ross-on-Wye, where he remained until September 1777, when he settled as minister at Oswestry. He kept a school in Oswestry and in 1781 began educating students for the ministry on Lady Glenorchy's foundation. In the same year he was invited to succeed Benjamin Davis as principal of Abergavenny academy. Concerned that ministerial training should be made available to students from north Wales, he accepted the post but stipulated that the academy should move to Oswestry. His advocacy of theological moderation, exemplified in 'Antipaedobaptism Examined' (1789), brought him into conflict with the Baptist Abraham Booth, who firmly opposed infant baptism. Williams was very active in founding Sunday schools in Wales, thirteen of which had been established by 1797. 
In 1792 Williams was called to the Carrs Lane Independent Church in Birmingham, where he remained for three years. He then took up his last charge, as minister of Masbrough Independent Church, in Yorkshire. In 1795 his wife, Mary Llewellyn, whom he married in 1777, died, and the following year he married Jane Yeomans (died 1823). At Masbrough, Williams kept a school and worked as principal of the Yorkshire Independent academy. He was tireless in promoting his faith and church in the region, and a number of new Independent congregations were formed under his influence. Having been awarded the degree of DD by Edinburgh University in 1792 he helped to found and edit the 'Evangelical Magazine' in 1793. The most significant of his publications, 'An Essay on the Equity of Divine Government and the Sovereignty of Divine Grace' (1809), strove to 'bring Calvinism in harmony with the evangelical preaching of the day, which emphasized the universal application of Christ's sacrifice' (Owen, 2.1195) and is regarded as one of the founding texts of the moderate Calvinist school of theology. 
Williams died at Rotherham on 9 March 1813, and was buried at Masbrough church. His collected works were edited by Evan Davis and published in four volumes in 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 29498


Williams, Edward (1747-1826), Welsh-language poet and literary forger, was born on 10 March 1747, at Pennon, Llancarfan, Glamorgan, the eldest of four sons of a stonemason, Edward William(s) (1715-1795), and his wife, Ann Matthew(s) (1713-1770). They moved, probably in 1754, to nearby Flemingston, which became Iolo Morganwg's home until his death in 1826. He received no formal education, but the family were all literate, the mother possessing a certain genteel culture, having been brought up as a poor relation of the neighbouring Seys family of Boverton. English was his mother tongue, but Welsh was the language of his literary awakening. This came from being taught Welsh verse by a local farmer, and from several key friendships, that of two neighbouring clergymen and Welsh lexicographers, Thomas Richards of Coychurch and John Walters of Llandough near Cowbridge, and of poets such as Lewis Hopkin and John Bradford. Williams followed his father's profession as monumental mason and builder, and was a wandering craftsman, in London and Kent from 1773, returning home in 1777. In London he came across a lively circle of literary figures, mostly from north Wales, especially the society of Gwyneddigion, who fired his imagination with the manuscript poems of Dafydd ap Gwilym, but also mocked him for his Glamorgan Welsh. 
Williams had always had a great facility for Welsh versifying. He read widely, especially historical and antiquarian works, compiling lists of obsolete Welsh words, and published a long elegy for his bardic teacher Lewis Hopkin in 1772. After his return to Flemingston in 1779 he fell in love with Margaret Roberts ('b'. 1749), daughter of Rees and Eleanor Roberts of the nearby village of St Mary Church, apostrophizing her as Euron in love poems imitating those of Dafydd ap Gwilym. They were married on 18 July 1781. She was long-suffering as Williams tried farming her patrimony in Monmouthshire, or set up as a builder in Llandaff, or traded along the Bristol Channel in his own ship. Determined to escape his 'drudgeries', he spent his time copying ancient manuscripts and composing bogus Welsh medieval poetry. He sank deep into debt, fleeing to Cheltenham and Wells to escape his creditors, fleeing home to Wales to escape his creditors in England, and in 1786-7 was in Cardiff gaol. He and his wife had in all four children, two surviving into adulthood, Margaret, born 7 July 1782, and Taliesin ['see below'], born 9 July 1787. 
While in prison, Williams composed a treatise on Welsh metrics (not published until 1829) to show that Glamorgan bards had never accepted the classical rules of Welsh poetry agreed in 1453. He also composed verse in English and fabricated poems so close to the style of Dafydd ap Gwilym that, when sent to the editors in London of the 1789 edition of Dafydd's works, they were inserted as an appendix and for over a century accepted as the poet's genuine poems. During the 1780s Williams became deeply interested in the ancient druids, anxious to prove to the world that not only were the Welsh bards their true successors, but that the Glamorgan bards (of which he was one of the two last survivors) alone had kept up their primeval traditions. He revealed his neo-druidic fantasy to the world in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (November 1789, 976) and then in his prefatory sketch to W. O. Pughe's 'Heroic Elegies... of Llywarch Hen' (1792). 
Williams tired of his work as a mason in 1791 and went to Bath, hoping to become an Anglo-Welsh poet, but soon moved to London, where he appears mostly to have remained until 1795, surviving on the charity of English patrons and the London Welsh, having a wide circle of friends, such as Robert Southey, the generous London Welsh currier Owen Jones (Owain Myfyr), father of the designer Owen Jones, and several political radicals favouring the French Revolution. He claimed to have taken laudanum since 1773, but during 1791 he started to take it in large quantities, moderating his cravings somewhat by the end of 1792. One aspect of his activities at this time was his pamphleteering, publicizing the myth that America had been discovered by the twelfth-century Welsh prince Madoc, with the aim of mounting expeditions to contact his followers' descendants, perhaps surviving in the American mid-west. 
More remarkable was Williams's invention of the Gorsedd of Bards of the Isle of Britain, of which the first meeting was held under his aegis on 21 June 1792 at Primrose Hill, London. The place was suggested by meetings of the Ancient Druid Order, founded early in that century, but the gorsedd was an entirely separate association for supporters of all things Welsh, its rites and rituals, however, invented by Williams, who now became universally known by his bardic name of Iolo Morganwg (Edward of Glamorgan). Several druidic meetings were organized, but the gorsedd was not connected to the revived eisteddfod until the latter's meetings at Carmarthen in 1819. 
In 1794 Williams published a two-volume collection of his English verse, which appeared as 'Poems Lyrical and Pastoral' and which airs a number of his myths and inventions, such as neo-druidism. The plight and near starvation of his young family, however, called him home to Flemingston in 1795, where he again tried his hand at masonry, though for some years in the later 1790s he moved into the nearby market town of Cowbridge to keep a shop, supplementing his income by copying out Welsh manuscripts for Owen Jones (Owain Myfyr) and writing reports on south Wales agriculture for government surveyors. He joined Owen Jones and William Owen Pughe as editors of the first printed corpus of Welsh medieval literature, 'The Myvyrian Archaiology' (3 vols., 1801-7), but the third volume contains much that is fabricated by Williams. 
About 1797 Williams became interested in Unitarianism, becoming one of the founders of the South Wales Unitarian Society in 1802 and the author of its book of regulations in 1803 and of large numbers of hymns published in 1812. From 1807 to 1813 Williams ran his business at the neighbouring village of Gileston, working into the mid-1820s, spending his last years in his cottage at Flemingston, surrounded by a vast collection of genuine and fabricated Welsh manuscripts, concocting materials on Glamorgan history and texts of lore and rites and rituals for his druid bards. He died at Flemingston on 18 December 1826 and was buried in the churchyard. A monument was erected to him inside the church in 1858, while in 1926 another was placed in the main street of Cowbridge on the wall of his former shop. His son edited some of his father's manuscripts: 'Cyfrinach y beirdd' (1829), 'Coelbren y beirdd' (1840), and the 'Iolo Manuscripts' (1848), while his follower John Williams (pseudonym Ab Ithel) later published two further volumes of bardic lore from the manuscripts removed from Flemingston to Llanover Court. 
Although several contemporary Welsh scholars expressed doubts about Edward Williams's neo-druidism, for the most part he was admired for publicizing the Gorsedd of Bards and for staunchly radical and dissenting beliefs. At the end of the century a new generation of University of Wales academics began to analyse all aspects of his work, his manuscripts being donated to the National Library of Wales in 1916. Soon after this Griffith John Williams began his lifetime study of Williams, coming to the conclusion that, although a pioneering Romantic poet in Welsh, and the most talented writer of the eighteenth-century Welsh cultural renaissance, he had forged a vast quantity of Welsh historical material, that the poems of the appendix to the 1789 edition of Dafydd ap Gwilym were forgeries, and that the Gorsedd of Bards was his invention. His mind was affected by a lifelong addiction to laudanum, but he strove to show that Glamorgan had had a more brilliant historical and literary past than was justified by genuine evidence, that Wales itself was the most interesting part of Britain, and that bards were the true guardians of national tradition. 
Iolo's son 


@@@@@


doc= 29499


Williams, Edward (bap. 1762, d. 1833), antiquary, was born at Leighton, Shropshire, and baptized there on 8 September 1762, the eldest son of Edward Williams (1730-1824), later of Eaton Mascott, said to have been a coachman by trade, and his wife, Barbara Letitia (1732-1796), daughter of John Mytton, of Halston, Shropshire, and widow of John Corbet (died 1759), of Sundorne in the same county. Educated at Repton School, Williams matriculated from Pembroke College, Oxford, on 28 October 1779, and graduated BA in 1783. He was ordained deacon and priest in 1786, when his half-brother John Corbet nominated him to the perpetual curacies of Battlefield and Uffington, near Shrewsbury. On 26 October 1787 he proceeded MA from All Souls College, where he held a fellowship from 1783 to 1818; on 13 June 1817 the college presented him to the rectory of Chelsfield, Kent. He retained his three livings for life. As there was no benefice house at Battlefield and only a small one at Uffington, Williams was licensed to be absent, and he lived at Eaton Mascott, about 6 miles from Uffington, until his father died. 
A good classical scholar and botanist, Williams was well acquainted with 'most subjects in polite literature' ('GM', 1.182) and early became interested in the antiquities and topography of his native county. He transcribed the Haughmond and Shrewsbury abbey cartularies (the latter from a copy) and compiled abstracts of Shropshire deeds (in private hands and Oxford libraries), pedigrees (some from the Harleian MSS), parish registers, and other records both printed and unprinted, as well as a Shropshire flora cataloguing over 1000 flowering plants and cryptogams. His drawings of church monuments, with inscriptions and arms, fill two large volumes (now held in the British Library). Of perennial interest are his 'c'.300 drawings of Shropshire churches and chapels, made between 1786 and 1791, and now housed at the Shropshire Records and Research Centre in Shrewsbury. Many are aesthetically pleasing, though Williams did not strive for mere artistic effect, and every one is -- as was said of his drawings of the principal gentlemen's seats -- an accurate record of what preceded the 'ravages of time' and the alterations of 'equally relentless innovators' (ibid.). Williams assisted Archdeacon Plymley with his 'Agriculture of Shropshire' (1803), the Revd H. Owen and the Revd J. B. Blakeway with their 'History of Shrewsbury' (1825), and Blakeway with his 'Sheriffs of Shropshire' (published posthumously, 1832). Perhaps through modesty Williams seems to have had no strong wish to print his work, but his manuscripts (most now in the Shropshire Records and Research Centre and the British Library) continue to be of use to historians and, in the case of his manuscript 'Flora of Shropshire' (held at Shrewsbury), to botanists. 
Latterly Williams discontinued his antiquarian studies, his religious and pastoral duties having claimed him. Touched by the evangelical renewal within the church, he seems to have formed his life on the model of Archbishop Robert Leighton of Glasgow, whose commentary on the first epistle of 'Peter' he read annually. He was an exemplary parish minister and devoted most of his Chelsfield income to his curate there and to the parochial schools and charitable donations to the poor. His Shropshire cures he served himself from his home, Glansevern Lodge, Coton Terrace, on the Berwick road out of Shrewsbury, where he had moved after Eaton had passed to a younger brother in 1824; it was convenient for his two churches. Both parishes were small, but at Battlefield, Williams also undertook (by arrangement with the vicar of St Alkmund's, Shrewsbury) the pastoral care of the inhabitants of Harlescott. The subscription school he established and managed at Battlefield drew pupils from many surrounding villages, and he also founded a Sunday school there. His sermons were plain and practical but very far from 'mere moral essays'. Williams preached last on 23 December 1832, caught a severe cold, and died at Glansevern Lodge, unmarried, on 3 January 1833. He was buried at Battlefield a week later. 


@@@@@


doc= 29500


Williams, Edward Ellerker (1793-1822), friend of Percy Bysshe Shelley, was born on 22 April 1793 in India, the son of Captain John Williams (1741/2-1809) of the 2nd battalion of sepoys in the Bengal army and Jane Dale (1764/5-1798), the second of his four wives. In 1805 Edward was sent to Eton College, where he may have seen Shelley, who was just eight months older but more advanced in his studies. It is perhaps significant that Williams had no memories of the 'Shelley baiting' first mentioned by W. H. Merle in 1848 (White, 2.489-93). 
Edward soon tired of his studies. Just before his fourteenth birthday in April 1807 he enlisted as a midshipman in the Royal Navy, a career cut short by his father's death at sea in June 1809. Having received a 'comfortable settlement' from his father's will and perhaps deterred by his father's fate from further service in the navy, the seventeen-year-old Edward enlisted on 7 June 1810 as a cornet in the eighth light dragoons. He appeared on duty at Cawnpore in January 1812. By March he was serving under his half-brother John (died 1823), with whom he was on good terms. Transferred in November 1812 to another unit, he was promoted lieutenant on 28 April 1813. In January 1814 he left Cawnpore for Meerut, again serving under his brother. From April to October 1814 he was on local leave, hunting big game and perhaps sightseeing. A talented amateur artist, he made many watercolour sketches of army life and the Indian countryside that have been preserved along with his journals and notebooks. He remained on the lists for his regiment until the end of 1817 and did not officially retire on half pay until 28 May 1818. During his tour of duty he met Shelley's cousin and future biographer Thomas Medwin, serving in India in another regiment. Medwin's biographer considers it probable that both young men participated in the siege of Hathras in February-March 1817 (Lovell, 33). 
A handsome young man with a pleasant expression who made friends easily and retained them for life, Williams quickly caught the attention of Jane Johnson, 'nee' Cleveland (1798-1884), a slender, dark-haired young woman who had been married at sixteen to Captain John Edward Johnson ('c'.1789-1840) of the East India Company. Rees speculates that Edward met Jane in England before her husband again sailed to India on 6 May 1817, but it seems more probable that they met in 1818, just before or soon after Williams's retirement from the army. In any case, Jane had no difficulty persuading Williams that Johnson had mistreated her and that she was justified in leaving him, and at some point before Johnson's return to London in September 1818, Williams assumed the place of her 'husband'. Concerned that Edward's career would be blighted or destroyed by this irregular union, his stepmother, Mary Ann Williams, bitterly opposed this decision and may have informed Captain Johnson that his wife was planning to elope with her stepson. Although Captain Johnson returned to London in September 1818 and 'lurked about town', he made no move to retrieve his wife, perhaps because, as Rees speculates, he was 'in some kind of trouble himself at the time, and unwilling to attract the attention of the law' (Rees, 40). 
Medwin, who returned to London in 1819 full of rekindled enthusiasm for his poet cousin, encouraged the couple to join him in his travels on the continent, where he hoped to encounter Shelley. Their desire to leave England made more urgent by Jane's pregnancy, they sailed to France in July. After a brief stop in Paris, they made a leisurely journey to Geneva, where Medwin had rented a house for the three of them. Their first child, Edward Medwin Williams 
(Meddy; died 1897)
was born on 7 February 1820 and baptized in June with Medwin as godfather. Medwin dedicated his forty-two-page poem 'Oswald and Edwin, an Oriental Sketch' to Williams on 10 February. As Lovell notes: 'Williams deserved the dedication, for he had supplied notes on a lion hunt for the poem' (Lovell, 61). Later in the year Williams produced an article on big game hunting for the Swiss encyclopaedia 'Biblioteque universelle des sciences, belles-lettres, et des arts'. 
After Medwin's departure in late September, the little family resumed their journey, spending two months in a hotel at Chalon and postponing the voyage to Italy until after Christmas. On 13 January 1821 they again met Medwin, who was staying with the Shelleys in Pisa and soon arranged an introduction. From this time onward the two families lived near each other, at times sharing the same house, often with other guests including Mary Shelley's stepsister Claire Clairmont. Impressed by 'Epipsychidion' and other poems, Williams contentedly took Medwin's place as Shelley's constant companion and amanuensis after Medwin again departed on 27 February. Under Shelley's tutelage he completed a play, 'The Promise, or, A Year, a Month, and a Day', which was submitted to Covent Garden but rejected. In October 1821 Williams began a journal, including a summary of the elopement. Among the events recorded is the birth of the Williamses' second child, Jane Rosalind 
(Dina; died 1880)
, born on 16 March and baptized on 30 December with Mary Shelley as godmother. 
Introduced by Shelley to Lord Byron on 5 November, Williams quickly became a member of Byron's male-only 'Pistol Club' (Williams's phrase), whose members enjoyed riding, dining, and conversing as well as shooting. They were soon joined by Medwin, who returned to Pisa on 14 November, and by Edward John Trelawny, another Shelley admirer, whom Williams had met in Geneva on 14 January 1822. 
At this time Mary was frequently depressed and ill and Shelley sought the company of pretty, musical Jane, finding in her a source of inspiration for some of his loveliest lyrics. In January 1822 he bought her a guitar, presented along with a famous poem in which he appears as Ariel to Jane's Miranda and Edward's Ferdinand. This strange triangle in no way decreased Williams's admiration for Shelley or their mutual friendship, celebrated in 'The Boat on the Serchio'. Williams aroused Shelley's interest in sailing, and they enlisted Trelawny's help in building a sailboat. The 'Don Juan' arrived on 12 May, and Williams described it in his journal as 'a perfect plaything'. Confident in Williams's abilities as a seaman, Shelley retained only one young sailor, eighteen-year-old Charles Vivian, to serve as 'crew'. 
On 1 July Shelley and Williams sailed for Leghorn to meet Leigh Hunt, belatedly arriving in Italy with his family. Williams, eager to return to Jane, persuaded Shelley to leave Leghorn on 8 July. About 10 miles off the coast of Spezia they encountered a storm and the 'Don Juan' disappeared under the waves. 
Desperate for news, Jane and Mary took a carriage to Leghorn. In the meantime three bodies had floated ashore, one of which Trelawny identified as Williams's based on his one remaining boot and a black silk scarf tied sailor-fashion around his neck. The bodies were quickly buried in keeping with quarantine laws, but Trelawny obtained permission for cremation ceremonies. Williams was cremated in Tuscany on 15 August, followed by Shelley in Lucca the next day. The women, who had returned to Pisa, did not attend. In September Jane sailed for England, taking the small casket filled with Edward's ashes with her; those of Shelley were buried in the protestant cemetery in Rome. Jane found a father for her children in Shelley's friend Thomas Jefferson Hogg, living as his wife from April 1827 until his death on 27 August 1862. When Jane died on 8 November 1884, the little casket containing Williams's ashes was buried with her at Kensal Green. 
Williams's journal, recovered from the 'Don Juan' barely damaged, is an important supplement to the Shelleys' letters as a record of Shelley's last days. His pencil sketch of Shelley, made at Pisa on 27 November 1821, provides the only good likeness of the poet. But even without these contributions, Williams would deserve his place in Shelley biography as 'the most satisfactory friend [the Shelleys] ever had' (Jones, 13). 


@@@@@


doc= 29501


Williams, Sir Edward Vaughan (1797-1875), judge and legal writer, was born at Queen Square, Bayswater, London, the eldest surviving son of John Williams (1757-1810), serjeant-at-law, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Charles Clarke of Foribridge near Stafford. Educated at Winchester College from 1808, he moved to Westminster School in 1811. An able classicist, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1816, and was elected a scholar in the following year. He graduated BA in 1820 and MA in 1823. 
On leaving Cambridge, Williams entered Lincoln's Inn on 22 June 1818, and read successively in the chambers of John Patteson and John Campbell. He was called to the bar on 17 June 1823. He initially joined the Oxford circuit where he soon found work, but joined the south Wales circuit when it became independent and travelled also on the Chester circuit. 
On 5 September 1826 Williams married Jane Margaret, eighth daughter of the Revd Walter Bagot, brother of the first Lord Bagot of Blithfield, Staffordshire. They had six sons, the fifth of whom, Sir Roland Vaughan Williams, became a lord justice of appeal in 1897. 
In 1824 with John Patteson, Williams edited the fifth edition of 'Williams' Saunders', his father's notes to Saunders's reports. This established his reputation as a lawyer, and he produced two further editions in 1845 and 1871. Saunders's reports were not methodically arranged, and subsequent editions with notes, though deeply learned, were no more orderly than the original. Very different was Williams's 'Treatise on the Law of Executors and Administrators' published in 1832. Described by Joseph Chitty in his 'Practice of the Law' (2nd edn, 1834, 1.511) as 'one of the most able and correct works that have ever been published on any legal subject', it went through seven editions in the author's lifetime, and reached its seventeenth edition in 1993 in the form of 'Williams, Mortimer and Sunnucks on Executors, Administrators and Probate'. In addition to his two major works, Williams edited Richard Burn's 'Justice of the Peace' with Thomas D'Oyley (1836), and contributed a chapter on evidence to William Russell's treatise on crimes. 
Having served an apprenticeship as recorder of Kidwelly, Williams was created serjeant-at-law on 27 October 1846 and on the same day appointed a justice of the court of common pleas. He was knighted on 4 February 1847. Sitting 'in banco' at Westminster he was acknowledged to be one of the most powerful constituents of the court, and because of his deep learning and common sense probably gave rise to fewer new trials on the ground of misdirection than any of his fellow judges. His judgments were cautious, concise, and extremely accurate, although he was perhaps too cautious, in his books in particular, allowing doubtful points to remain unresolved which his authority might otherwise have settled. Williams was compelled by increasing deafness to retire from the bench in February 1865. On his retirement he was sworn of the privy council and gave valuable assistance on its judicial committee between 1865 and 1868. 
Despite his learning Williams's modesty stood in the way of his general reputation. His choice of words was fastidious and his speech somewhat laboured and embarrassed, but he was a fine scholar and man of letters, with refined and cultivated tastes. At Westminster he spent much time in the company of Henry Milman, William Buckland, Richard Trench, and Henry Liddell. He died on 2 November 1875 at his home, 24 Queen Anne's Gate, Westminster, and was buried at Wotton near Dorking. 


@@@@@


doc= 29502


Williams, Eliezer (1754-1820), Church of England clergyman and genealogist, was born at Pibwr-lwyd, Llangynnwr, near Carmarthen, and baptized in Llandyfaelog church, Carmarthenshire, on 4 October 1754. He was the eldest son of Peter Williams (1723-1796), Methodist minister, and his wife, Mary Jenkins (1726-1822), and was the brother of Peter Bailey Williams (1763-1836) ['see under 'Williams, Peter]. After an elementary education at home, he was educated in the free grammar school of Carmarthen. About 1770, while he was still at school, he assisted in preparing for publication the annotations of his father's Welsh Bible and his 'Mynegeir Ysgrythurol' ('Welsh concordance') (1773). 
Williams matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 3 April 1775, and graduated BA in 1778 and MA in 1781. He became curate of Trelech, and was ordained deacon in 1777; subsequently he accepted the curacy of Tetsworth, Oxfordshire, and in December 1778 he was admitted to priest's orders. Soon afterwards he was chosen second master of the grammar school at Wallingford, Berkshire, and he also undertook the cure of Acton, a village in the neighbourhood. In 1780 he was appointed chaplain of her majesty's ship 'Cambridge', then under the command of Admiral Keith Stewart, and he became tutor to Lord Garlies (afterwards earl of Galloway), who was nephew of the admiral and midshipman in the same ship. 
After being two or three years at sea Williams, at the request of Lord Galloway, relinquished his chaplaincy and became tutor in the earl's family in Galloway House. He was afterwards presented by Lord Chancellor Thurlow to the vicarage of Cynwyl Gaeo with Llansawel, Carmarthenshire, to which he was instituted on 14 September 1784. After going to London, he became evening lecturer at All Hallows, Lombard Street, and chaplain and private secretary to a gentleman named Blakeney. He assisted in investigating the pedigree of the ancestors of the earl of Galloway for the purpose of establishing the earl's claim to the English peerage, and ultimately his labours were crowned with success. About 1794 he published 'A Genealogical Account of Lord Galloway's Family', and this was followed by three other similar works. 
Williams married first, in 1792, Anne Adelaide Grebert (died 1796), a native of Nancy in Lorraine; and secondly, in 1796, Jane Amelia Nugent, daughter of St George Armstrong of Annaduff, near Drumsna, co. Leitrim (she died on 31 December 1811). 
On the death of his patron in 1799 Williams moved to Chadwell St Mary's, Essex, of which parish he became the curate; and in addition he held the appointment of chaplain to the garrison of Tilbury Fort. Soon afterwards he published anonymously 'Nautical Odes', commemorating the achievements of the British navy. On 14 July 1805 he was inducted to the vicarage of Lampeter, Cardiganshire. There he opened a grammar school for the education of young men, with a view to their entering the church. He ran this institution with great success for nearly fourteen years. 
Williams died at Lampeter on 20 January 1820 and was buried there. His 'English Works' was published in London in 1840, with a memoir by his son from his second marriage, St George Armstrong Williams. These works include several essays on subjects of Welsh and Celtic interest which reveal his attachment to his native land. 


@@@@@


doc= 29503


Williams, Frederick Smeeton (1829-1886), Congregational minister and railway historian, was born in Newark-on-Trent, the second son of 
Williams also enjoyed a deserved reputation as a pioneer railway historian. 'Our Iron Roads' appeared in 1852 and had run to seven editions by 1888. This was an excellent introduction to Britain's early railway history and was not superseded until Sir William Ackworth's 'Railways of England' appeared in 1889. Williams also wrote 'The Midland Railway, its Rise and Progress' (1876). This, too, had reached a fifth edition by 1888 and is particularly memorable for the writer's eye-witness description of the construction of the Settle-Carlisle railway. As the definitive work on the Midland system it was not seriously challenged until C. E. Stretton wrote his 'History of the Midland Railway' in 1901. Williams also entered the controversy over railway nationalization, against which he argued in a pamphlet 'Ought the State to Buy the Railways?' (1873), under the name 'A Midland Shareholder'. He died at Forest Road West, Nottingham, on 26 October 1886, leaving a widow, Louisa Hester, and eight children; he was buried in Nottingham on 30 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 29504


Williams, George (bap. 1762, d. 1834), physician and librarian, was baptized at Catherington, Hampshire, on 24 November 1762, the younger son of John Williams, vicar of Catherington, and his wife, Anne. Educated by his father, he was notably competent in Greek when he arrived at Winchester College in 1775. He entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as a scholar in 1777, graduated BA in 1781, was elected a fellow, and later served the college repeatedly, either as bursar or vice-president. After studying medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, he proceeded MA in 1785 and MD in 1788. 
While practising in Oxford, in 1789 Williams was appointed a physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary. This was sufficient for the Royal College of Physicians (of which he was elected a fellow in 1799) to appoint him, in 1796, to the regius and Sherardian chair of botany. The Oxford Physic Garden was run down and liable to regular flooding. Williams did nothing to improve it, but since he obtained election to fellowship of the Linnean Society in 1798, collected plants in the Oxford area which he added to the herbarium, and took a keen interest in the garden at Corpus, it seems likely that it was the condition of the physic garden, together with lack of means, which deterred him. His botany lectures were given by William Baxter, the gardener. 
In 1810 Williams became the first physician to be appointed to the part-time post of Radcliffe librarian, which was worth $150 per annum. Williams's enduring legacy was his innovative flair in giving the Radcliffe Library, for the first time, both an identity and utility. The Radcliffe Camera of 1749 had had no settled policy of acquisition or collection, and some 2300 books on many subjects had been shelved almost randomly. Neglect by Williams's predecessor, Thomas Hornsby, who had not spent a penny on acquisitions in twenty-seven years, had allowed surplus to accrue in the Radcliffe Fund. The founding in 1803 of the Aldrichian chair of anatomy and physiology to complement the Lee's readership had put medical teaching on a sound basis, and a chair of rural economy was in prospect. Hence Williams 'in large part' initiated a policy of transforming the library to specialize in natural history, sciences, and medicine, and to include relevant works in the major European languages (Guest, 167). By 1813 he had spent $2000; he spent a further $1000 in 1814, and $500 per annum thereafter -- a total of $9000 by 1834. Diligent, capable, and selflessly helpful to all enquirers, by the time of his death he had almost completed the great labour of cataloguing the collection, the product of which was published by his successor, John Kidd, in 1835. This at last made the library an important repository. By 1857 the collection numbered 15,000 volumes, and it remained in the Radcliffe Camera until 1861. 
Williams's health gradually weakened after 1829 but did not prevent him serving Corpus again, as vice-president, in 1832. Never married, he died at his home in High Street, Oxford on 17 January 1834. He was commemorated by an elaborate and affectionate monument in the chapel of Corpus Christi College, and by a tribute from the Radcliffe trustees, appreciating their remarkable librarian. His thoughtful bequest of $500 to improve the physic garden was the nucleus for successful fund-raising by Charles Daubeny, his successor there. 


@@@@@


doc= 29505


Williams, George (1814-1878), Church of England clergyman and topographer, born at Eton on 4 April 1814, was the son of Edward Williams, a bookseller and publisher in Eton, and his wife, Sarah Turner. He was educated on the foundation at Eton College, being in the first form of the lower school in the election for 1820, and was admitted scholar on 15 September 1829. In 1832 he received the money collected at the traditional Eton montem ceremony as captain of the school, and obtained $957. On 14 July 1832 he was admitted to a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge, and was a fellow from 14 July 1835 to 1870. He graduated BA in 1837 and MA in 1840, was admitted 'ad eundem' at Oxford on 10 June 1847, and proceeded BD at Cambridge in 1849. 
In 1837 Williams was ordained, and on 22 September 1838 he was appointed by Eton College to the perpetual curacies of Great Bricet and Wattisham, Suffolk, which he held until Michaelmas 1840. He was appointed by Archbishop Howley to accompany Bishop Alexander as chaplain to Jerusalem, and was in that city from 1841 to May 1843. He then served as chaplain at St Petersburg (1844-5), and it was through holding those posts that he became imbued with the desire of bringing together the Greek and Anglican churches. In 1846 he took up his residence at Cambridge, where he filled the post of dean of arts at his college until 1848, and was dean of divinity from 1848 to 1850. He contributed to the 'Christian Remembrancer', 'The Ecclesiologist', and 'The Guardian'. 
Williams was appointed warden of St Columba's College at Rathfarnham, near Dublin, in 1850. The college was kept in existence mainly by the liberality of Lord John George de la Poer Beresford, archbishop of Armagh. When, in 1853, Williams joined with Archdeacon Denison, Dr Pusey, and others in protests against the action of Bishop Gobat, the bishop of Jerusalem, for attempting to seduce from their creed the adherents of the Greek church, the archbishop called upon him to resign. An angry correspondence then ensued on the position and principles of Williams, and the archbishop severed his connection with the institution, though Williams retained his post until 1856. From 1854 to 1857 he was vice-provost of King's College, Cambridge, and in 1858 acted as pro-proctor to the university, but he incurred some unpopularity, and his nomination as proctor was rejected by the senate on 1 October 1860, the 'non-placets' being 29 and the 'placets' 26. 
In 1858 Williams took temporary charge of Cumbrae College, and was appointed an honorary canon of that institution in 1864. He made 'a long and arduous journey in Russia' in 1860, with a view to spreading knowledge of the benefits available for foreign communities at English universities. He printed in that year a French tract on a project to establish at Cambridge 'des hotelleries en faveur des etrangers' of the Greek or Armenian churches, but the scheme proved abortive. 
After a tour in the East with the marquess of Bute and several years in residence at Cambridge, Williams was presented by his college on 9 February 1869 to the important vicarage of Ringwood in Hampshire. He was Lady Margaret preacher at Cambridge in 1870, and was created honorary canon of Winchester Cathedral in 1874. One of his last deeds was to send his signature to the clerical declaration against war with Russia. He died suddenly at Church Farm, Harbridge, one of the chapelries of Ringwood, on 26 January 1878, and was buried at Harbridge on 1 February. Williams was endowed with a noble presence and dignified voice. A reredos was erected in Ringwood church as a memorial to his memory, and a George Williams prize for distinction in the theological tripos was founded by his friends at Cambridge. 
Williams had an extensive knowledge of the topography of Jerusalem which was, in his lifetime, unsurpassed by any English writer. He brought out in 1845 a volume entitled 'The Holy City, with Illustrations from Sketches by the Rev. W. F. Witts'. For this work he received from the king of Prussia a medal for literary merit. Williams invited Dr Ermete Pierotti to Cambridge, assisted him in preparing his work 'Jerusalem Explored' for the press, and revised it during printing. The author was accused by James Fergusson and others of plagiarism, and Williams defended him in 'Dr Pierotti and his Assailants' (1864). He published in 1846 a collection entitled 'Sermons Preached at Jerusalem in 1842 and 1843', and supplied the introduction to William Wey's 'Itineraries to Jerusalem and Compostella' printed for the Roxburghe Club in 1857. His work 'The Holy Land: Travels in Palestine from Dan to Beersheba', announced in 1849 as 'preparing for publication', never appeared. 
Williams edited in 1868 'The Orthodox Church of the East in the Eighteenth Century', correspondence between the Eastern patriarchs and the non-juring bishops on the reunion of that church and the Anglican communion. He also edited, with a long introduction and an appendix of illustrative documents, for the 'Rolls Series', in 1872, two volumes of official correspondence of Bishop Beckington. He was one of the two cataloguers of monastic cartularies for the catalogue of manuscripts at the Cambridge University Library, volume 4, and he described the 'Baumgartner Papers' in volume 5. Other miscellaneous writings included many articles in Smith's dictionaries of Greek and Roman geography, Christian biography, and Christian antiquities. 


@@@@@


doc= 29506


Williams, George James (1719-1805), wit and letter writer, was born at Denton, Lincolnshire, the youngest of the four sons of William Peere Williams (1664/5-1736), law reporter, and Anne (died 1724), the second daughter of Sir George Hutchins, a king's sergeant and commissioner of the great seal. He was educated at Westminster School from June 1727, and was elected king's scholar in 1733. He was elected from Westminster to Trinity College, Cambridge, but chose instead to go to Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 13 June 1737, aged seventeen. He never took a degree. On 13 June 1751, at Northolt, Middlesex, he married Diana Bertie, formerly Poltney ('bap'. 1708, died 1754), elder of the two known daughters of Peregrine Bertie ('c'.1663-1711), politician, and his mistress Elizabeth Allen (died 1738), known as Mrs Poltney during her relationship with Bertie. Elizabeth Allen subsequently married William, fifth earl of Coventry. Williams and his wife had no children. Williams embarked on a career holding administrative office, becoming inspector-general of inland excise duties in 1751, and deputy cofferer of the king's household in 1754. However, by the time of his marriage Williams appears already to have established himself as a fixture in the so-called 'out-of-town party', consisting of, among others, the wit and politician George Selwyn, the poet and politician Richard (Dick), second Baron Edgcumbe, and the author Horace Walpole, who met regularly at Walpole's residence at Strawberry Hill, Twickenham. 
In this society Williams, known to his friends as Gilly Williams, enjoyed a reputation as a wit, though he was personally suspicious of his claim to, or the merit of, such a title. Writing to Selwyn in November 1751, for example, Williams mentioned that Lord Robert Bertie (his wife's cousin) was to propose him for White's Club, but asked that no member 'shake his head at me for a wit, for God knows he may as well reject me for being a giant' (Parnell Kerr, 73). Three years later Williams was duly elected to White's, where during the parliamentary sessions he met members of his circle for 'wit and whist' before retiring to Selwyn's Thursday club at the Star and Garter tavern in Pall Mall during recess. From the early 1750s until 1770 Williams was one of Selwyn's most regular correspondents, his writing displaying a sharpness and humour if not the fineness of Walpole's letters. It was at Selwyn's house at Matson, near Gloucester, that Williams's wife Diana died on 16 September 1754. The friendship was commemorated by Sir Joshua Reynolds in a rare conversation piece depicting Williams (seated to the right of the group in a mauve coat) with Selwyn and Lord Edgcumbe. Painted between 1759 and 1761, the portrait was presented to Horace Walpole, who thought it 'charming... being one of the best things he has executed' (30 Dec 1761, Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.41). From 1770 Williams appears to have played a less active role in Selwyn's circle, though later correspondence reveals him to have remained a lingering presence at the card and dinner table. Perhaps he chose now to focus on the third component of his motto derived from that of Sir William Temple: 'Old wood to burn, old friends to converse with, and old books to read'. Alternatively, perhaps his office-holding had become more onerous after the appointment of his niece's husband Frederick North, Lord North, as first lord of the Treasury in 1770. In 1772 he was appointed joint receiver of revenue in Virginia, and in 1774 receiver-general of the excise, a post he still held at his death. Following North's resignation in March 1782 he was described by Walpole as one of 'Lord North's confidants' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 29.206) and his support for the former minister as 'setting up with the corpse' by Selwyn (ibid.). He may have effectively retired from the excise by 1792, as in that year a deputy is listed for the first time. Williams died at his house in Cleveland Court, St James's, Westminster, on 28 November 1805. In his will he directed that his body be buried in the Williams family vault at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 29507


Williams, Griffith (1587/8-1672), bishop of Ossory and controversialist, was born in the township of Treflan near Caernarfon into a well-established family of freeholders; according to Sir John Wynn, his mother's ancestors were from Penmynydd, Anglesey. After private education at Caernarfon, on 15 June 1604, aged sixteen, he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford. Unhappy there, as he later recounted, he attempted to leave for France. However, with the assistance of John Williams (1582-1650), then fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, Griffith transferred to Cambridge, where early in 1606 he graduated BA from Jesus College. He was ordained deacon at Rochester early in 1607 and priest at Ely on 30 May, and the following year was presented by Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton, to the rectory of Foxcott, Buckinghamshire. He proceeded MA from Cambridge in 1609. 
In 1612 Williams resigned Foxcott when his career took a significant step forward. On the presentation of the crown he was instituted on 11 January that year to the rectory of St Benet Sherehog, London. He also became a Sunday preacher at St Peter Eastcheap and St Paul's Cathedral. At this point he would have been well placed to marry, and in view of later references to his wife, Anne, it seems likely that they were the Gryffyn Wyllyames and Ann Cheany married on 5 September 1614 at St Olave Jewry, London. On 13 June that year he preached at Paul's Cross; although 'The Resolution of Pilate' was entered in the Stationers' register on 22 July, the contemporary printed version appears not to have survived, and it is difficult to tell from the amplified version in Williams's 'The Best Religion' (1636) exactly which elements of its anti-puritanism were aired in 1614. However, the opinions in 'The Resolution' and more general dissatisfaction expressed by some of his leading parishioners led in 1616 to his suspension from preaching by John King, bishop of London; by 20 December, when his successor was instituted, he had resigned his living. In the meantime some parishioners charged that he had attempted to obtain the benefice by causing the death of the previous incumbent, but this accusation was firmly dismissed by the recorder of London, Thomas Coventry. 
Released from an uncomfortable time in Newgate, Williams retreated to Cambridge, where in the course of 1616 he proceeded BD and successfully appealed against his suspension to the prerogative court. His controversial opinions were evidently far outweighed by his connection to John Williams, now chaplain to the lord chancellor, Thomas Egerton, Lord Ellesmere. Still in 1616, Griffith was presented by Ellesmere and the archbishop of Canterbury, George Abbot, to the rectory of Llanllechid in his native county. Here he soon clashed with his bishop, Lewis Bayly (who was already at odds with Abbot) over the non-payment of a double benevolence, and was allegedly prohibited for a long time from holding services. On appeal to the court of arches, Williams's licence to preach was again restored; Bayly was reprimanded. 
Over the next few years Williams apparently spent periods both in England and in Wales. In 1621 he proceeded DD at Cambridge. He retained a pronounced sense of grievance at what he perceived as persecution, and a deep gratitude to his patrons. His 'The Delights of the Saints' (1622), based on a sermon at Paul's Cross on 2 December 1621 and others at St Paul's Cathedral, centred on the doctrine of free and universal grace. Dedicated to John Williams, now bishop of Lincoln, the work acknowledged him as the author's 'chiefest comfort' throughout his career, when he had 'got nothing but afflictions and puritanicall hatred in every place' (sig. A3). It also recognized encouragement given by Philip Herbert, earl of Montgomery, and his countess, to whom he already seems to have been chaplain, and with whom, as he explained elsewhere, he spent a significant portion of eighteen years living 'in His Majesty's house at the Cock Pit', Westminster (Bolton, 325). A further 'epistle gratulatorie', addressed to his kinsman Sir John Wynn of Gwydir and his son Sir Richard, gentleman of the privy chamber to the prince of Wales, praised the former as an enlightened and godly layman who defended the religious order and promoted preaching. In 1625 Williams asked Wynn, also an ally of Bishop Williams, to obtain for him the living of Llanaber, Merioneth, because he desired 'to return to Wales and do his best for his country' ('Calendar of the Wynn of Gwydir Papers, 1515-1690', 1926, nos. 1338, 1378). He was appointed preacher at Llanrwst and in 1626 rector of Trefdraeth in Anglesey. 
By about this time Williams had preached before the king at Greenwich and at Theobalds. These sermons were included in his 'Seven Golden Candlesticks, Holding the Seaven Greatest Lights of the Christian Religion' (1627), dedicated to the earl and countess of Montgomery and their children, to whom he acted as tutor. An additional epistle to Bishop Williams and Wynn, which perhaps glanced at their common foe Bishop Bayly, castigated the 'practise of many' in the Church of England 'either basely to sell their spirituall promotions, or sinisterly to bestow them on their friends, their kinsmen and alliances' (sig. A5'v'), while 'To the Christian Reader' thanked God for the author's deliverance from 'wicked men', who 'did combine with a craftier cruelty, then ever... the Arrian Bishops did against that innocent constant Athanasius, to take away my feeble life' (sig. A7). On 17 July 1628 Williams was appointed to the prebend at Westminster vacated by William Laud on his translation to the bishopric of London, but the following year Laud allegedly hindered Williams's proposed promotion to the bishopric of St Asaph. The content of his 'The True Church Shewed to All Men' (1629), dedicated to Montgomery and his brother William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, suggests that any antagonism was not doctrinally based. While the work stressed the importance of sabbath observance, it argued that scruple over ceremonies was no excuse for separation from the church and deplored the tendency of Christians to adopt labels such as Calvinist or Zwinglian. 
In 1634 Williams finally received promotion in Wales when he was made dean of Bangor, where he was installed by proxy on 28 March, and archdeacon of Anglesey. The following year, however, he was summoned before the court of high commission for neglecting his wife, Anne, and entered a bond of $500 to improve his behaviour towards her. She brought a suit for alimony against him in the court, but the case ended in a reconciliation. In 1636 Williams gathered twenty-four of his sermons given at court and elsewhere and published them as 'The Best Religion', with a dedication to the king. None the less, about 1638 Laud, then archbishop, apparently prevented his becoming tutor to the prince of Wales and the duke of York. 
In 1641 Williams gained his bishopric, but had little chance to enjoy his success. Preferred by the king to a candidate advanced by the Irish bishops, he was nominated on 19 July as bishop of Ossory. Consecrated in Dublin on 20 September, he was permitted to hold the deanery of Bangor 'in commendam' because of the see's poverty. But, according to his own account, he had preached only once in the cathedral when rebellion broke out in Ulster in late October, and following its subsequent spread southwards, he returned to England and joined his family at Apthorpe, near Towcester, Northamptonshire. Early in 1642 he was back in Dublin, but rebels had control of towns in his diocese and the Catholic bishop, David Rothe, had assumed the see. After attending the Irish parliament in early August, on 16 August he received a licence to return to England on his own affairs. Once at Apthorpe he was immediately arrested by parliamentary forces, but, defending himself as a victim of the Irish rebels, he obtained a safe conduct, joined the king's army, and served as a chaplain at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October. 
The following winter Williams stayed in the royalist headquarters at Oxford, where he published 'Vindiciae regum' (1643). According to the dedicatory epistle to Charles I, he had completed the manuscript in Dublin before his flight and concealed it during his brush with the parliamentarians. Addressing both English and Irish issues, the work defended the king and his bishops from a dual onslaught of Catholics and puritans: they were 'pressed, opposed and abused betwixt two rebellious factions... persecuted and crucified betwixt two hereticall and tyranicall parties' (p. 97). This drew from John Goodwin, London minister and leading apologist for war against the king, 'Os Ossoriarum, or, A Bone for a Bishop to Pick' (1643), an attack on monarchical divine right. Williams's next work, 'The Discovery of Mysteries', also published in Oxford and dedicated to Charles, was written from Plas Hwfa, Llanllechid. Subtitled as an exposure of 'plots in... this present Parliament to overthrow the established Religion' it revealed that the author had come to consider puritans an even greater threat than Catholics: 'this Faction hath justified all the Romanists, and shewed themselves worse Christians, lesse Subjects and viler Traitors than all the Papists are' (p. 102). As if to confirm this judgement, on 8 March 1644, while Williams was away preaching to the royalist parliament at Oxford, his house at Apthorpe was plundered, his family was driven out, and his possessions were sequestered. He responded with 'Jura maiestatis: the Rights of Kings both in Church and State' (1644) and 'An Examination of such Particulars in the Solemn League and Covenant as Concern the Law' (1644). 
In the next fifteen years Williams moved regularly between England, Wales, and Ireland, sometimes in the later 1640s carrying letters between the king and the marquess of Ormond. He attended the Irish House of Lords eight times between 3 February 1645 and 24 February 1656, and in the summer of 1645 was one of the protestant bishops who signed a paper proposing increased jurisdictional powers for the ecclesiastical courts of the established church. Caught up in the abortive royalist resistance in north Wales in 1646, he several times narrowly avoided capture by parliamentary forces, and reached Dublin, by his own account, after some subterfuge. There he preached regularly and took prayer book services. On 1 April 1647 he was presented to the rectory of Rathfarnham near Dublin, but following the city's capitulation later that year he was briefly taken prisoner. With assistance from Ormond and from Dudley Loftus of Rathfarnham, the politician and orientalist, he then went to London seeking to take advantage of the Dublin articles of surrender to regain his living in Anglesey and his sequestered Northamptonshire estate. His request was denied by the committee for sequestrations, and although back in Dublin he enlisted the support of Henry Jones, bishop of Clogher, his brother Colonel Michael Jones, parliamentarian governor of Dublin, and through them General Sir Thomas Fairfax, he failed to get the decision overturned. In London again with Ormond, he saw the king at Hampton Court prior to the latter's escape to the Isle of Wight in November. 
Returning briefly to Wales, Williams rejected an offer from the earl of Pembroke of a substantial Lancashire living since it was conditional on submission to parliament. In March 1648 he preached three times in Dublin, where he courted controversy then and later by praying for Fairfax as an instrument of peace. Back in Llanllechid he began to write 'The Great Antichrist Revealed' in which he 'applied all the apocalyptic passages to puritanism which had previously been used against the established church' (Milton, 119n). Following his refusal in 1650 to take the Welsh form of the engagement, he was sequestered from his parish of Trefdraeth in Anglesey and forbidden to preach in the principality, but the next year, during Charles II's campaign before the battle of Worcester, he emerged to deliver a staunchly royalist sermon before the judges at Conwy; uproar ensued. Thereafter Williams was often in Ireland, regularly preaching in Dublin. Some time after Henry Cromwell became lord deputy in November 1657 Williams delivered in his presence a sermon upholding the episcopal order and the prayer book liturgy and calendar; Cromwell's response was reportedly quite amicable. Unsuccessful in 1659 in finding a London publisher willing to take his 'The Great Antichrist', despite a personal visit, Williams once more made his way back to Ireland. 
In the early summer of 1660 Williams was at Holyhead when he heard of the king's restoration. Having landed at Dublin he preached at St Bride's Church, claiming later that he had been the first man in Ireland to pray publicly for Charles II. After fleeting visits to Kilkenny and to Lady Ormond at Donmore, he hurried to London, where 'The Great Antichrist' was finally published and presented to the king. At this more opportune moment its subtitle denounced the Westminster assembly as 'a collected pack or multitude of hypocritical, heretical, blasphemous, and most scandalous wicked men, that have fulfilled all the prophesies... of the coming of the great Antichrist' but probably struck more than a few of its readers as 'a piece of Restoration triumphalism' (Bolton, 334). 
Restored to both his Irish bishopric and his Welsh deanery, Williams participated on 27 January 1661 in the consecration of twelve brother bishops and then turned his attention to the reconstruction of his own diocese, whose parlous state he first described in 'Seven Treatises' (1661). His primary visitation found devastation in his cathedral, widespread intrusion of non-episcopally ordained clergy into livings, and alienation of revenues. Although the bishop spent his own money on extensive refurbishment, his combative spirit led him also into expensive lawsuits and self-justificatory tracts. 'The True Relation of a Law Proceeding between the Bishop of Ossery and Sir George Askue' (1663) described his ultimately futile attempts to regain permanent possession of the chief episcopal residence, Bishopscourt, and the $400 of annual rent which he calculated went with it. 'The Persecution and Oppression of John Bale, Bishop of Ossory, and of Griffith Williams' (1664) recounted personal tribulations going back over several decades with the touch of paranoia apparent in much of his writing. When in 'The Sad Condition of the Church and Clergy of the Diocese of Ossory' (1664) Williams not only exposed the scandalous under-endowment of competent parish clergy throughout Ireland but also criticized the frequent, and as he saw it burdensome, archiepiscopal visitations, he provoked considerable protest. His request to the archbishop of Canterbury, Gilbert Sheldon, in dedicating to him 'Several Sermons' (1665), that visitations in the Church of Ireland might be reduced to the form and frequency practised in England effectively challenged earlier affirmations of the former's independence. On 2 December 1665 convocation censured the tract for 'bringing scandal on 'the national Church of Ireland'' (Bolton, 333) and both Williams and his archdeacon, Joseph Teate, who had also made indiscreet remarks about visitations, apologized. 
While further investigations conducted under the eye of the archbishop of Armagh, James Margetson, apparently ended in reconciliation, with a breach between Williams and the dean of Ossory, Thomas Ledsham, publicly healed, the bishop had not lost his sense of ill-usage. 'Four treatises... whereunto is added a small part of the great wickedness, and sacrilegious dealings of the great Antichrist in the diocese of Ossory' (1667) not only revisited his unsuccessful lawsuits to recover alienated church lands but also reproduced a letter from the bishop of Bangor threatening Williams with sequestration if he did not repair his deanery. Choosing to disbelieve that the Welsh bishop was acting under pressure from Canterbury, Williams noted that this was a blow worse than any he had received from 'King, bishop of London or any other assistant of antichrist' (Bolton, 333). In 1668 his high-handed treatment of his cathedral and other clergy led to a rift with Dean Teate, whose complaint to the king was taken seriously. By this time hopeful rumours were circulating of the elderly bishop's death, but when Ormond anticipated it by recommending Teate to succeed him in the see, Archbishop Sheldon had to reply that Williams was alive and well in London. Well aware of Williams's anger over the Bangor deanery, Sheldon predicted that he would be attacked in the bishop's next publication. 
None appeared, but Williams outlived Teate, who was drowned in December 1670. The bishop died at Kilkenny on 29 March 1672. He was buried on the south side of his cathedral, where he had repaired the choir and spent a further $1400. The almshouses he had had built nearby for poor women lasted into the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29508


Williams, Griffith (1769-1838), Welsh-language poet, was born at Hafod Olau in the parish of Llanbeblig, Caernarvonshire, on 2 February 1769, the only son of William Williams and his wife, Catrin, daughter of Morgan Gruffydd (Morgan y Gogrwr) of Llyn. Not long after his birth, the family moved to Llwyn Celyn, Llanberis; his father died soon afterwards, and when Williams had attended school for only a year, he was forced to seek employment as a farm hand. After serving in various farms at Anglesey, he found work in 1790 at Lord Penrhyn's quarry, and henceforward followed for thirty years the occupation of a quarryman, holding subordinate offices as he grew older. Early on in his work at Penrhyn he broke his ankle, and during a nine-month period of enforced convalescence was lent books and learned the rules of Welsh prosody. He married, on 21 June 1794, Elizabeth, daughter of Ellis Jones, and in a few years moved to her home at Braich Talog, Llandygai, Caernarvonshire, where he spent the rest of his life. 
As Gutyn Peris he won his first triumph as a bard in 1803, when the Gwyneddigion Society awarded him their medal for his ode to the memory of Goronwy Owen. In 1808 he composed for Lady Penrhyn a Welsh elegy upon her husband; two years later he was the winner at St Asaph eisteddfod of prizes for an ode on the royal jubilee and another to the memory of Queen Elizabeth. Some of his poems were printed by David Thomas (Dafydd Ddu Eryri) in 'Corph y gainc' (1810), and in 1816 Williams published a volume of Welsh verse himself, entitled 'Ffrwyth awen'. In 1811 he again won a prize for an ode to agriculture. During the rest of his life he was less successful, coming second at the eisteddfod at Denbigh in 1828 (although his ode was printed with the winner's in the 'Transactions' of the competition, 1830), and in 1832 at Beaumaris he also took the second place. His knowledge of the Welsh metres was thorough, but he had few of the gifts of a poet. Griffith Williams died on 18 September 1838, and was buried at Llandygai. 


@@@@@


doc= 29509


Williams, Helen Maria (1759-1827), writer, was born in London on 17 June 1759, the daughter of Charles Williams (died 1762), secretary to the island of Minorca, and his second wife, Helen, 'nee' Hay (1730-1812). Charles and Helen Williams were married in London in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 1 June 1758. They had two daughters, Cecilia ('bap'. 29 September 1760) and Helen Maria, who were both baptized at St James's Church, Piccadilly. Charles Williams was buried in St John's, Westminster, in December 1762, survived by his wife and two children, and a daughter from his first marriage, Persis Williams. 
Along with her sister and half-sister, Williams was raised by her widowed mother in Berwick upon Tweed. In the summer of 1781 they returned to London, where Williams's literary talents were encouraged by their minister, Dr Andrew Kippis of Princes Street Presbyterian Church. Her first poem, 'Edwin and Eltruda', was published in 1782, and several other pieces followed, including the epic 'Peru' (1784), and 'An Ode on the Peace' (1783), which Samuel Johnson praised when they met in May 1784. Kippis introduced her to writers such as William Hayley and the Warton brothers, and about 1785 Williams became a correspondent of the poet Anna Seward and gained another mentor in Dr John Moore. The success of Williams's 'Poems' (1786) secured her position as a prominent poet of sensibility and inspired several tributes, including the young William Wordsworth's first published work, 'Sonnet on Seeing Miss Helen Maria Williams Weep at a Tale of Distress' (1787). 
The British campaign against the slave trade contributed to the charged political atmosphere of the late 1780s, and several women published abolitionist poems, including Williams, who remained committed to the cause throughout her life. Kippis was also involved in the campaign to repeal the 'Test and Corporation Acts', and guests at the Williams tea table included fellow dissenting writers such as Samuel Rogers, William Godwin, and Anna Laetitia Barbauld. In 1789 the fall of the Bastille was widely celebrated, and Williams included a poem on the subject in her novel 'Julia' (1790). 
The French Revolution had a great impact on Williams's own life and literary career. She went to France in the summer of 1790, and her enthusiastic book about her travels, 'Letters Written in France' (1790), would become the first of eight volumes of eyewitness accounts, later known as the 'Letters from France' (1790-96). She explained in her first book that the historic Bastille day celebration in Paris was 'not a time in which distinctions of country were remembered. It was the triumph of human kind... and it required but the common feelings of humanity to become in that moment a citizen of the world' (p. 14). 
In September 1791 Williams returned to France for an extended stay, announcing her departure to her readers in a poem entitled 'A Farewell for Two Years to England', which the 'Analytical Review' praised for its 'happy mixture of energy and tenderness', written 'on her favourite topic, liberty' (1791, 188). Almost a year later, her second volume of 'Letters from France' was published during a brief visit to London. 
When she went back to Paris in August 1792 Williams was shocked by the increase in violence, but she remained committed to the struggles of her Girondin friends including Madame Roland, Pierre Verginaud, and J. P. Brissot. To bolster their cause and inform the British public of the crisis in France, she wrote her next work, which covered events from 1792 until early May 1793, severely criticizing Robespierre and lamenting the execution of Louis XVI. The reign of terror meant that these two new volumes of 'Letters from France' (1793) had to appear anonymously. 
Since France was at war with England, in October 1793 British citizens in Paris were subject to arrest, and Williams, her sisters, and her mother were imprisoned for six weeks, first in the Luxembourg Palace and then in the convent Les Anglaises. In March 1794 Williams's sister Cecilia married a Frenchman, Martin A. Coquerel, and the family settled in Paris. However, it was dangerous for Williams to remain in France. In July 1794 she went into exile in Switzerland for six months, travelling with John Hurford Stone and Benjamin Vaughan, and under the protection of the family of Colonel Johann-Rudolf Frey in Basel. After returning to Paris she completed her second series of 'Letters from France' (1795-6) on the reign of terror and its aftermath. The series earned her the appellation 'English historian of the French Revolution' (Coquerel, viii), but reviews were characteristically divided along party lines, with some finding her 'a misguided female' ('British Critic', 1796, 210) and others a 'friend of liberty' ('Critical Review', 1795, 361). One reviewer stated that her 'Letters from France' 'will form a valuable, authentic, and entertaining history of the most astonishing event of modern times' ('Critical Review', 1796, 7). 
Meanwhile, rumours circulated in England about Williams's relationship with John Hurford Stone, an Englishman living in Paris whose wife had divorced him in 1794. There is no conclusive evidence about the relationship, though Williams wrote to her friends that her conduct was beyond reproach and that her family had given Stone a home during the storms of the revolution. He remained a permanent member of their household, and in the years that followed Stone and Coquerel (Williams's brother-in-law) joined in several different business ventures, from publishing to china manufacturing. 
The late 1790s seemed a time of renewed hopes for political progress, as shown by Williams's 'Tour in Switzerland' (1798), which anticipated the revolutionary activity in the Swiss cantons. Like many of her books, it was translated immediately into French. Optimistically calling the new century the 'age of rights' (2.216), Williams lauded the rise to power of Napoleon Bonaparte in her next book, 'Sketches of the French Republic' (1801), a work that became known for its critique of Nelson's actions in Naples. The peace of Amiens allowed visitors once more into France, and many famous guests attended her salon or 'conversazione', including Tadeusz Kosciuszko, Frederic-Cesar de La Harpe, Joel Barlow, Amelia Opie, Henri Gregoire, Pierre-Louis Ginguene, and Thomas Erskine. Catherine Wilmot wrote that Williams's 'Hotel is in the midst of a delightful garden and we spend the evening in her Library, which was particularly corresponding with her style of society, the latter being compos'd of Senators, Members of the National Institute (in their blue embroider'd coats) and every one in the literary line. (Wilmot, 39)' Williams became disillusioned with Bonaparte's policies, and her salon was for a time placed under police surveillance. In 1803 Napoleon forbade the sale of her edition of Louis XVI's correspondence, letters she had purchased which unknown to her had been forged. Although she was helped out of this predicament by Antoine Francais de Nantes (1756-1836), an influential statesman, the political climate was such that she stopped publishing original works for several years. During the Napoleonic period domestic concerns occupied much of her time. Her sister Cecilia had died in 1798, and Williams became the adoptive mother of her two nephews Athanase (1795-1868) and Charles (1797-1851). 
Williams had earlier had some success as a translator with her 1796 edition of Bernardin de St Pierre's work, as 'Paul and Virginia', and in 1810 she began to prepare an English edition of Alexander von Humboldt's major works on South America (published as 'Researches', 1814, and the seven-volume 'Personal Narrative', 1814-29). This marked the beginning of a long friendship with Humboldt. 
When Napoleon abdicated in 1814, there was an influx of visitors to Paris, and Williams welcomed to her salon Thomas Clarkson and many others. Her literary career was renewed with the publication of her 'Narrative' of the Hundred Days of 1815. She was naturalized as a French citizen in 1817, but the last decade of her life was a difficult one, with financial and personal losses. Her mother had died in 1812 and John Hurford Stone in 1818. Henry Crabb Robinson helped her to find a British publisher for her 'Letters' (1819) on the French protestant church and on the Bourbon restoration. 
Still maintaining a keen interest in current events, Williams knew young reformers like John Bowring, who regarded her as one of the literary celebrities of the French Revolution, and who arranged for the publication of her last book of poetry, 'Poems on Various Subjects' (1823). Her two nephews helped to support her in her advancing years, and in 1823 she left Paris to live with the eldest, Athanase Coquerel, now a protestant minister in Amsterdam, where later that year her half-sister Persis died. In May 1827 she sent Benjamin Constant a copy of her memoirs, 'Souvenirs de la revolution francaise', just published in a French translation by her nephew Charles Coquerel. That same year she moved back to Paris, where she died at rue neuve St Eustache on 15 December 1827. She was buried in Pere Lachaise cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29510


Williams, Henry (1792-1867), missionary in New Zealand, was born at Nottingham on 11 February 1792, the fifth of nine children of Thomas Williams (1754-1804), a prosperous hosier 'of good Welsh family', and Mary, 'nee' Marsh (1758-1831). After the death of Thomas Williams from typhus, the well-educated Mary supplemented her income by running a school for young ladies at Southwell, Nottinghamshire, and her dissenting piety and strong character, together with the example of her three naval-officer brothers, are said to have been major influences on the young Henry. 
In 1806 Henry Williams joined the Royal Navy. His career followed the normal pattern for officer cadets: first-class volunteer in 1806, at the age of fourteen; midshipman the following year; and lieutenant in 1815. He saw considerable active service against the Danes, the French, and the Americans, aboard the 'Barfleur', 'Christian VII', 'Maida', 'Galatea', 'Race Horse', 'Saturn', 'Thames', 'Endymion', and the USS 'President' -- the last as a member of the prize crew after that frigate had been taken by 'Endymion' in 1815. Earlier actions included the seizure of the Danish fleet at Copenhagen in 1806, and a clash between British and French frigate squadrons off Madagascar in 1810, in which Williams received a minor but persistently troublesome wound. A Maori version of Williams's war service included a personal encounter with Napoleon Bonaparte, in which the French emperor broke the young naval officer's glasses. 
Williams was disbanded from the navy on half pay when the war ended in 1815. Apart from temporary employment as a drawing master, his interests increasingly focused on missionary work. Already an evangelical, nonconformist Christian by family background, his conversion to staunchly low-church Anglican and fully-fledged missionary was guided by his cousin Edward Garrard Marsh from about 1816. A member of the Church Missionary Society (CMS), Marsh gave Williams fair warning of the perils of his calling, but Williams remained determined and by 1819 had fully committed himself to the CMS. Marsh helped Williams to equip himself with the approved missionary outfit: training in medicine, boat building, and basket-making; ordination, in 1822; and marriage -- to Marianne Coldham (1793-1879), Marsh's sister-in-law. Both families had lived in Nottingham; the marriage took place at Nuneham Courtenay, Oxfordshire, on 20 January 1818, and the newly-weds set up house in Cheltenham before moving to London. As was often the case, marriage, migration, and mission-work decisions went together for both parties. Although Marianne accepted the traditional subordination of wife to husband, it was always clear that she too was to be a missionary and, as for other evangelical women, God lent some autonomy. Unlike many women of the period, when she wrote of her 'Lord and master' she did not mean her husband. Like Henry, she was energetic, capable, and tough. She bathed her children, put them to bed, and went for a walk immediately after the birth of the fourth of her eleven children. Both she and Henry were also accustomed to servants and aware of their own station in life. They were part of a widespread nineteenth-century attempt to reconcile godly work with middle-class standing. On 17 September 1822 this formidable pair of genteel but muscular Christians set sail from England, never to return. 
The CMS had established a mission at the Bay of Islands, in Northland, New Zealand, in 1814, under the supervision of Samuel Marsden, Anglican chaplain of New South Wales. The Maori people were considered the perfect prospects for conversion, despite such peccadillos as cannibalism, and it was this particular mission 'field' which had fascinated Henry Williams from the outset. After five months' final preparation at Marsden's base at Parramatta, Williams arrived at the Bay of Islands on 3 August 1823 to take over leadership of the New Zealand mission; he settled with his family at Paihia, which remained their home until 1850. After nine years, though it had expanded to three stations, the mission had made no conversions. It had faced severe difficulties, not least the threat of reverse conversion. The first leader, Thomas Kendall, had been dismissed for adultery with Maori women; the second, John Butler, was expelled for drunkenness; and a third senior missionary, William Yate, was eventually sacked for alleged sexual relations with between fifty and a hundred young Maori males. Over the next twenty years the apostolic labours of Henry Williams transformed and magnified the mission, gave it economic autonomy from its Maori hosts, established his personal prestige among the Maori, and led to their conversion to Christianity; it also brought peace to tribes embroiled in the bloody 'musket wars', and persuaded the Maori to accept British sovereignty in 1840. So, at least, runs the Williams legend, and separating out its kernel of truth is not easy. 
Missionaries had busy pens, and their impact on the historical record tends greatly to exceed that on history itself. Yet Williams did not make all these claims, and left in his journals the means for refuting those who made them for him. The journals show, for example, that Williams's peacemaking efforts, while real and brave, were normally coupled with those of Maori peacemakers, who usually took the leading role. Both peace and Christianity did spread from around 1830, as did missionary autonomy, and Williams did contribute to all three developments. He systematized missionary training in the Maori language, helped by the increased availability of printed texts in that language from 1827, and by the arrival of his linguist brother, William Williams, in 1826. Henry Williams reversed Marsden's policy of 'civilize first, Christianize later', and so helped interlock Christianity with literacy and other desirable European arts in Maori minds, allowing them to act as 'Trojan horses' for each other. Despite stubborn and intolerant strands in his personality, Williams did manage to weld the Anglican missionaries into an effective team, to travel and eventually to expand beyond the Bay of Islands in the 1830s, and to maintain a working alliance with the Wesleyans, though emphatically not with the Roman Catholic mission established in 1838. At the core of the Anglican team was the extended Williams family -- Henry, Marianne, William, William's wife, Jane, and their twenty children -- who practised a species of communal living and provided selective but massive hospitality to the chosen at Paihia. 
But other factors were more important than Henry Williams in bringing increased autonomy to the missionaries and peace and Christianity to the Maori. One was the death in 1828 of the great mission-master and general in the musket wars, Hongi Hika, of the Ngapuhi tribe. Hongi's heirs competed to sponsor missionaries; rival Maori masters meant less mastery and an increasing willingness to permit the evangelizing of slaves and children, if not warriors and chiefs. From 1828 the missionaries and their religion were no longer seen as Hongi's creatures. Another factor was saturation in the gun trade. The musket wars began in 1818 because some tribes had muskets while others did not; they began to end, around 1830, because all tribes had muskets. Peacemaking occurred -- mostly without missionary mediation -- and it involved the release of prisoners, including the leading Maori Christian theologians of the day. It was these people, not European missionaries, who first took a form of Christianity to the Maori south of Northland. As mission stations spread south from about 1835, they found Christianity there before them. Again, this is evident from Williams's own journals, which have too often been read through hagiographic spectacles. 
From 1837 Williams began to advocate official British intervention in New Zealand, hoping for a godly protectorate which would restrain the ungodly Europeans who were entering the country, impeding mission work, and allegedly visiting 'fatal impact' upon the Maori. His wishes were fulfilled in 1840, when New Zealand became a nominal British colony and the treaty of Waitangi was signed by many Maori chiefs. Henry Williams and his son Edward translated the brief treaty into Maori, and by the late twentieth century were best remembered for this act, often unfavourably. It may well be true that Henry Williams bent the translation in a direction which made the Maori more likely to sign, believing that British sovereignty was now the only means of saving them from spiritual or even physical extinction. A bishop, long desired by Williams, soon followed the governor. George Augustus Selwyn arrived in 1842. Although Selwyn was a high-churchman, with what was unkindly described as an embryo tonsure, he and Williams appear initially to have co-operated well. Selwyn's shift from Paihia to Auckland in 1844 was prompted by CMS headquarters in London, not by Williams. Selwyn appointed Williams archdeacon of Waimate in the same year. 
Between 1833 and 1837 Henry Williams had purchased some 11,000 acres of land from the Maori to provide for his numerous brood. The Maori appear to have accepted the sales, and the price paid (over $1000 in goods) was high for the time, but so was the acreage. The CMS had authorized the buying of land by missionaries for their families, but it had not envisaged estate building on this scale. Criticism of Williams's land acquisitions began in 1840, and increased during the New Zealand War of 1845-7 between the British and a section of the Ngapuhi, when it merged with false allegations of treason on Williams's part. The treason charge quickly collapsed; the charge of unscrupulous buying of land stuck, partly because Bishop Selwyn supported it, but largely through the efforts of the new governor, George Grey, who may have seen Williams as a rival for prestige among the Maori. The issue eventually resulted in Williams's dismissal from the CMS in 1849. He retired from Paihia to Pakaraka, the family estate, in 1850. Though he was reinstated by the CMS in 1854, and remained a locally important figure, his national influence ended. He died at Pakaraka on 16 July 1867 and was buried in the churchyard there. Marianne died on 16 September 1879. 
Williams was a stoutly built man, more cheerful than his portraits suggest. Although his travails in New Zealand missionary work were epic, the privations can be exaggerated. His diet on a long evangelical journey in 1833 consisted of fresh bread, stewed eels, ducks, snipe, pigeon, fish, oysters, and cockles, and peach, plum, or gooseberry puddings, 'with a glass of wine, port or sherry as circumstances required'. His achievements were also exaggerated, like those of the other New Zealand St Augustine, Marsden. His land dealings, though far from the machinations alleged by Grey, may not have been as innocent as his defenders claimed. His son Samuel Williams accumulated a fortune of at least $479,566, and the Pakaraka estate might have been a kernel of this. Yet Henry Williams's self-abnegation generally is beyond dispute, as is his courage and energy. He was an important pioneer settler and churchman, and few Europeans did more to introduce Europe to the Maori, which is what the Maori wanted at the time. As his two Maori bynames, 'Te Wiremu' (The Williams) and 'Karuwha' (Four Eyes) may suggest, his reputation for prestige among the Maori needs pruning, not uprooting. Henry and Marianne Williams and their ilk ventured to the fearsome equivalent of an alien planet and devoted most of their lives to something other than themselves. 


@@@@@


doc= 29511


Williams, Hugh William (1773-1829), landscape painter, was probably born in Devon. The tradition that he was the son of a Welsh sea captain, though current during the lifetime of his wife, appears to have no foundation. Nothing is known of his early years except that by 1790 his board and lodging, in the house of a Dalkeith bookseller, was being paid for by one Louis Ruffini, an emigre Italian manufacturer of embroidered muslin. 
Williams almost certainly learned his draughtsmanship with Ruffini's encouragement; the production of fabric designs was an important part of such a business. It is possible too that he took classes with David Allan and Alexander Nasmyth. By 1793 he appears to have been working in Glasgow, where, with Alexander Galloway, he advertised a drawing academy. He published his first print, a view of Glasgow, in 1794. 
By the time Williams had exhibited his first work at the Royal Academy, in 1800, he was living in Edinburgh once more. Shortly afterwards he appears also to have attempted to join the growing circle of professional watercolour painters active in London; he was a founding member (along with his fellow Scot Andrew Wilson) of the short-lived Associated Artists in Water-Colours in 1807. He was also a founding member of Scotland's first exhibiting society, the Associated Society of Artists, formed in Edinburgh in 1808. Williams was always anxious to see his work reproduced in print; many of his early topographical drawings appeared in the 'Scots Magazine'. In 1813 he published a series of six large engravings of scenes in the Scottish highlands. 
In June 1816 Williams embarked on an extensive journey through Italy and Greece in the company of his friend and patron William Douglas of Orchardton MP. They visited Rome, Athens, Malta, Sicily, and Naples before returning to Edinburgh in 1818. The material gathered on this journey was central to his output for the remainder of his career, and earned him the name Grecian Williams, by which he is known. An account of his journey, 'Travels in Italy, Greece and the Ionian Islands', appeared in 1820. Written in the form of letters, and dedicated to his fellow landscape painter John Thomson of Duddingston, the illustrations were engraved by W. H. Lizars from drawings by the author. In 1822 and 1826 Williams held exhibitions of the powerful watercolours, on a substantial scale, which he had produced after his travels. Another illustrated publication, his 'Select Views in Greece', appeared between 1823 and 1829. Williams had married Robina Miller (died 1874) of Garnock on 6 July 1827. They had no children. 
Although he painted a number of landscapes in oil, including a view of Castle Urquhart, Loch Ness (NG Scot.), Williams's principal and more characteristic work was executed in watercolour, which he handled in broad washes of transparent colour. The influence of Turner on Williams's work is not hard to detect. The two men knew each other and evidently sketched together in the company of John Thomson of Duddingston. Turner apparently admired Williams's watercolours although in scale and conception they were entirely at odds with his own treatment of the landscape. At the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, five drawings, three of which are dated before 1807, represent his earlier style. The most substantial group of his works, including some of his grandest views in Greece, are now in the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh. These were presented by his widow in 1859 and have subsequently been badly discoloured through extended display. Williams was closely involved in the preparations for the establishment of the Scottish Academy, in 1826, but he had been ill for some time before his death on 14 June 1829 at his home, 65 Castle Street, Edinburgh. He was buried on 22 June in the Canongate Kirk, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 29512


Williams, Isaac (1802-1865), poet and theologian, was born on 19 December 1802 and baptized on 27 December 1802 at Cwmcynfelyn, an estate overlooking the village of Llangorwen, near Aberystwyth, Cardiganshire, the third son, among four sons and one daughter, of Isaac Lloyd Williams (1771-1846), magistrate of Cardiganshire and chancery barrister of Lincoln's Inn, and his wife, Anne, elder daughter and coheir of Matthew Davies of Cwmcynfelyn, formerly high sheriff of Cardiganshire. The family lived in Southampton Street, Bloomsbury, London, and later in Belgravia. Williams and his elder brothers were taught in London by a Revd Polehampton, whose pupils subsequently moved with him when he took a curacy at Worplesdon, near Guildford, Surrey. Unhappy there, Williams entered Harrow School in 1817 along with his brothers Charles Lloyd and Jonathan, gaining a reputation for his skill in Latin composition and winning several school prizes, as well as captaining the cricket team in his final year, 1821. In that year Williams's parents settled at Cwmcynfelyn on the death of his maternal grandfather, though protracted legal action between his mother and her sister over the division of the estate was significantly to diminish the family's means. 
Williams was directed to Trinity College, Oxford, by his Harrow tutor the Revd Henry Drury, matriculating there on 7 June 1821. Although he held a scholarship at Trinity from 3 June 1822 until 1831, Williams spent much of his time as an undergraduate in company at Oriel, initially since it was the college of his Harrow friend Robert Dallas, though increasingly because of its associations with many of those later to become prominent in the Tractarian or Oxford Movement. In the summer of 1822 he was introduced to John Keble, then fellow of Oriel, at the Aberystwyth home of a mutual friend, the Revd John Richards, and they became more closely acquainted after 1823 when Williams won the chancellor's prize for Latin verse with his 'Ars geologica', which Keble volunteered to revise for publication. In that year Williams was invited to join a reading party of Keble's at Southrop, near Fairford, Gloucestershire, along with the later Tractarians Richard Hurrell Froude and Robert Isaac Wilberforce. Keble's influence served to inculcate more studious and pious habits than those of school and early college, and Williams came to regard this invitation as the 'turning-point' in his life (Williams, 12). He repeated the excursion to Southrop in 1824, when he began his long association with Sir George Prevost, second baronet, which was reinforced in March 1828 when the latter married Williams's sister Jane against the wishes of Prevost's family. In 1825 Williams stayed at Prevost's home in Belmont, Hampshire, near Keble's new curacy at Hursley, and in August accompanied Froude to his father's rectory at Dartington, near Totnes, Devon, where he was introduced to the Champernowne family of Dartington House to whom Archdeacon Froude was guardian. Williams first proposed to the sixteen-year-old Caroline Champernowne (1810/11-1886), third daughter of the late Arthur Champernowne, about Easter 1827, though at this point their engagement foundered on the younger Froude's urging Williams towards celibacy. 
At Oxford, Williams studied hard in attempting to emulate Keble's double first in classics and mathematics, but his labours especially over the latter broke his health. His London physician Dr Abernethey required him to abort his studies, and he was forced in 1825 to take a pass degree, graduating BA on 25 May 1826, and subsequently MA in 1831 and BD in 1839. Having sat unsuccessfully for a fellowship at Oriel in April 1829, Williams was ordained deacon in December 1829 by Christopher Bethell, then bishop of Gloucester, taking a curacy under the Revd James Davies, a high-churchman with whom he formed a lasting friendship, at Sherborne-cum-Windrush, close to John Keble's parish at Fairford, Thomas Keble's at Bisley, and the Prevosts' home at Chalford. He remained there for two years studying Hebrew and writing poetry, though afflicted by the first of the asthmatic attacks from which he was to suffer chronically the rest of his life. 
On 30 May 1831 Williams obtained a fellowship at his former college, Trinity, whereupon he took clerical orders and then went into residence as a tutor in 1832. W. J. Copeland was elected to a fellowship at Trinity in 1832, and in their common churchmanship and their endeavours to improve the religious tone of the college he and Williams formed a close association. Williams served as philosophy lecturer in that year, dean in 1833, rhetoric lecturer from 1834 to 1840, and vice-president from 1841 to 1842, and although his 'rule was too strict and his standard too high' (Pycroft, 1.20) to make much impact on the college's 'wilder set' (ibid., 1.186), Williams's example of moral austerity and academic rigour made a lasting impression on a generation of Trinity scholars, among them the later lord chancellor Roundell Palmer, the theologian Frederick Meyrick, the historian E. A. Freeman, and Arthur West Haddan, who was to succeed Williams as classics tutor in 1842. 
Williams's return to Oxford, moreover, coincided with the emergence of the Tractarian movement. In 1832 he enlisted as curate to John Henry Newman, to whom he soon became close, serving St Mary's while Newman was in the Mediterranean with Froude in 1832-3, and thereafter mostly the Littlemore part of the parish. In 1833 Williams, Froude, and Keble, later joined by Newman, began submitting to the high-church 'British Magazine' the series of verses published collectively in 1836 as 'Lyra apostolica', which went through numerous editions, Williams's writing signified by the Greek letter greekLetterzeta. Growing in confidence, though bristling at Newman's superintendence of the venture, Williams increasingly concentrated on his own verse, and among his other contributions to the magazine between 1833 and 1837 were verses which were expanded and published anonymously in 1838 as 'The Cathedral, or, The Catholic and Apostolic Church in England', which ran through several editions, and if not his best is now his best-remembered poetry. Inspired schematically by George Herbert's 'The Temple' and by William Wordsworth's preface to the 'Excursion', and metrically by William Collins and perhaps also William Cowper, the collection explores the structure of a Gothic cathedral in verses celebrating the religious doctrines evoked by its various parts. Emboldened by its success, Williams immediately issued 'Thoughts in Past Years', also anonymously (though as 'The Author of 'The Cathedral''), a collection mostly of sonnets celebrating the various scenes of his life in Wales, Gloucestershire, and Oxford, and written over the previous twelve years, with further verses, some school exercises, and the 'Ars geologica' added in the sixth and final edition of 1852. Though it lacked the obvious coherence of 'The Cathedral' Williams considered this his best work, and with later verse always serving to promulgate church principles it is notable as his only composition in a conventionally Romantic vein. 
Williams published further poems in the 'British Magazine' between 1833 and 1837, which were collected as 'Hymns Translated from the Parisian Breviary' in 1839, with a second, posthumous edition appearing in 1874. Despite Williams's own deprecation of metrical hymnody for congregational use other than that of the psalter, these greatly influenced such hymn writers as the Revd John Chandler and John Mason Neale. Williams's inadvertent but thus important role in the development of Anglican hymnody was furthered by his publication of 'Ancient Hymns for Children', also from the Parisian breviary, in 1842, and (anonymously) his 'Hymns on the Catechism' of 1843. 
Williams contributed several reviews to the 'British Critic' after Newman's accession to its editorship in 1838, but much his most controversial publication in these years was his 'Reserve in Communicating Religious Knowledge', which appeared in 1838 as no. 80 in the series of the 'Tracts for the Times'. The tract, whose notoriety was owed rather to its title (which was Newman's) than contents, argued that the sacred truths and mysteries of faith were reserved for those with the preparatory discipline to receive them, and drew numerous reproofs from low-church critics to whom it seemed definitive evidence of Tractarianism's excessive emphasis on the authority of the church hierarchy. In suggesting that indiscriminate religious instruction and church building were ineffectual without antecedent subscription to church principles, the tract was directed against evangelical emphasis on individual atonement and feeling, and was drawn theoretically from antiquity, particularly Origen's 'Commentaries on the Gospels', and practically from the example of the Kebles. In 'The Cathedral' Williams had represented this doctrine of reserve in poetic terms, with the beauty of the natural world found in its remotest places. Williams tried to remain aloof from Tractarian counter-attacks in its defence, but was finally drawn into print in 1841 with 'A Few Remarks on the Charge of the Lord Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol', James Henry Monk, who had accused Williams of seeking to withhold scripture from the laity. Williams wrote two further 'Tracts for the Times', no. 86, on the prayer book, arguing that the church's purity was brought out by persecution and appealing to the example of the Caroline divines and the nonjurors, and no. 87, which attempted to calm the furore surrounding the tract on reserve. 
When Keble resigned as Oxford's professor of poetry in 1841, Williams was thought by many the obvious candidate to succeed him, but after the controversy surrounding the tract on reserve his nomination was unlikely to proceed untouched by religious politics. James Garbett of Brasenose College, a reputable scholar but no poet, was nominated in opposition, and after Edward Pusey issued a pamphlet accusing Garbett's supporters of promoting him solely as an anti-Tractarian candidate the contest became a trial of strength between the theological parties, with Roundell Palmer acting as secretary to a London committee of Williams's supporters and defending Williams from epistolary censures in 'The Times' by Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Lord Ashley (later seventh earl of Shaftesbury). An appeal was then issued for both parties to retire, Bishop Richard Bagot of Oxford and William Ewart Gladstone among the signatories, but while Williams's natural deference to episcopal authority and personal regard for Bagot led him to wish to accede, Tractarian friends dissuaded him. The matter was only resolved when after a comparison of pledged votes Garbett was found to have 921 to Williams's 621, whereupon, a week before the election was due, he withdrew from the contest, the Tractarians thereby sustaining their first defeat in Oxford's university politics. 
Wounded both by the hostile exposure he had suffered and the perceived defection of some he had thought firmer friends, Williams in 1842 resigned his fellowship and his curacy at St Mary's and left Oxford. His deep personal affection for Newman had always been accompanied by distrust of what he was to call a 'want of repose in his character' (Williams, 101), and after Newman confided his increasingly pro-Roman sympathies in 1841 Williams had informed him that they could no longer retain their intimacy. On 22 June 1842 he married Caroline Champernowne at Bisley, Gloucestershire, where they settled and he served as curate to Thomas Keble. In January 1846, having only just recovered from a lumbar abscess, Williams fell gravely ill with consumption, with both Pusey and Henry Manning travelling to see him for what they took to be the last time. Though he unexpectedly recovered after several months, thereafter Williams lived essentially in retirement. In 1848 he moved to Stinchcombe, also in Gloucestershire, to serve as curate to Sir George Prevost, with E. A. Freeman moving to the neighbourhood in the same year. A house was built for Williams near the vicarage, and he dedicated himself to such parochial work as his health permitted, the education of his children (eventually six sons and a daughter), and an unrelenting flow of religious writing. 
Williams is chiefly remembered as the poet of the Oxford Movement, but posterity has not been especially kind to his verse, which is unoriginal and often leaden in expression, and inhibited by its adherence to the sonnet form. But it was written to commend church principles to an age with an appetite for religious poetry even of a minor order, and defeat in the poetry professorship contest did nothing to check Williams's output. 'The Baptistery', of 1842, a series of thirty-two verse meditations, was inspired by the allegorical drawings of the Flemish engraver Boethius a Bolswert, which Williams had found in Antoine Sucquet's 'Via vitae aeternae', or 'The way of eternal life', first published in 1620. Part of Pusey's efforts to introduce foreign books of devotion to the country, and both critically and commercially the most successful of his published poetry, its anti-Roman verses furthered Williams's breach with Newman. In 1845 Williams published 'Some Meditations and Prayers', selected and translated from the originals by Sucquet, and issued a companion volume to 'The Baptistery' entitled 'The Altar', comprising thirty-four meditations in sonnet form, in 1847. Of less interest are his 'Sacred Verses, with Pictures' of 1845, and 'The Seven Days, or, The Old and New Creation' of 1850. 
In his own day, however, Williams was actually better known for his voluminous devotional writings. His series of commentaries entitled 'The Gospel Narrative', published serially between 1841 and 1850 and posthumously reissued in a uniform eight-volume edition by Rivingtons in 1869-70, gained Williams a wide public. Other devotional commentary on scripture included his 'Thoughts on the Study of the Holy Gospels' (1842), 'A Harmony of the Four Evangelists' (1850), 'The Apocalypse' (1852), 'The Psalms Interpreted of Christ' (1864, of which only volume 1 appeared), and 'The Daily Events of Holy Week' (1865), while 'The Christian Scholar' (1849) appended Christian comments to passages from various classical writers in order 'to render the study of the Classics subservient to a higher wisdom' ('The Christian Scholar', xiii). 'Selections from the Writings of Isaac Williams, B.D.' appeared posthumously in 1890. 
For much of the 1840s Williams was simultaneously occupied with the task of editing, jointly with W. J. Copeland, the series of 'Plain Sermons by Contributors to the Tracts for the Times', which he commenced in 1839 in an attempt to impart a more moderate tone to the movement after the furore provoked by the publication of Froude's 'Remains', and which appeared over ten unattributed volumes until 1848. His own sermons featured in the second, fourth, seventh, ninth, and tenth volumes, with 'Plain Sermons, on the Latter Part of the Catechism' (1851) essentially an addendum to the sermons of volume 9. Williams later issued 'A Series of Sermons on the Epistle and Gospel' (3 vols., 1853-5, 2nd edn 1875) and 'Sermons on the Characters of the Old Testament' (1856, 2nd edn 1870), with a companion volume of sermons on 'Female Characters of Holy Scripture' in 1859. In 1852 Williams also published 'A Short Memoir of the Revd. Robert Alfred Suckling', curate of Bussage in the parish of Bisley from 1846 until his sudden death in 1851, and edited a volume of Suckling's 'Sermons, Plain and Practical' in 1853. 
Williams's health declined seriously in 1865. Soon after Easter that year Newman paid a farewell visit to Stinchcombe, and Williams died there three days later on 1 May. He was buried that month alongside his father and sister in the churchyard, where a monument was erected to his memory, along with the reredos at Stinchcombe and two windows in the chancel. A stained-glass window in his memory was placed by subscription in the chapel at Trinity College, Oxford, though it was removed in 1959. Williams left one daughter and six sons, three of whom followed him into the Anglican ministry: the eldest, John Edward, co-founder of the missionary order of St Augustine in South Africa, the second, George Arthur, vicar of Weston Beggard, Herefordshire, and the third, Henry, at whose rectory at Ashleworth, Gloucestershire, Williams's widow, Caroline, died on 1 February 1886. 
It is an irony that the tract on reserve and the poetry professorship contest propelled Williams into national controversy, for his was the least disputatious of temperaments. Its natural expression was rather his association with Thomas Keble and George Prevost in forming the nucleus of what has become known as the 'Bisley school' of the Oxford Movement, marked by its religious and political conservatism and therefore hostility to Rome, reticence of manner, and pastoral zeal. Williams's 'Autobiography', written in 1851 and edited and published by Prevost in 1892, remains a valuable source for early Tractarianism, but it ends with his departure from Oxford, and was written for his children and never intended for publication. The modesty and exiguousness of these memoirs, Williams's chronic ill health, and his long seclusion at Stinchcombe have combined to marginalize both Williams's voluminous output and his central place in the Oxford Movement's first generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 29513


Williams, Jane (1806-1885), historian and writer, was born in Riley Street, Chelsea, London, on 1 February 1806, the second of seven children of David Williams and his wife, Eleanor Marsh (1781-1851). Her father, who held an appointment at the Navy Office, was descended from Henry Williams (1624-1684) of Ysgafell near Newton, Montgomeryshire, and was a friend and convert of leading Welsh puritan Vavasor Powell; it is from the old family estate at Ysgafell that Jane Williams takes the epithet that invariably accompanies her name. Little is known of her mother's family apart from its connection with Neuadd Felen, near Talgarth, Brecknockshire. 
Very little is known concerning the education of Jane Williams, or how she came to develop her formidable intellectual and literary talents; but she enjoyed a happy and comfortable childhood in a home well endowed with books. Ill health seemed to dog her throughout life. As a young girl, she was sent to Talgarth for the fresh country air, and lived mainly at Neuadd Felen and briefly at Pipton Cottage, Pipton, near Glasbury-on-Wye. Here she acquired a knowledge of Welsh and a love of Welsh literature and history. Here, too, she became acquainted with the charismatic Augusta Hall, Lady Llanover. She became an intimate and valued member of Lady Llanover's literary circle, with its passion for Welsh learning and its romantic pursuit of old traditions. 
Lady Llanover proved a generous and lifelong friend to Jane Williams, whose only income came from a small annuity, purchased with a legacy from her Marsh grandmother, and from what she earned from her writing. She managed her finances astutely, but when in 1856 she returned to London to live, she could only afford a series of rented rooms, mainly in Chelsea. She lived variously at 9 Hans Place, 38 Sydney Street, 40 Sydney Street, 56 Coleshill Street, and finally settled at 31 Oakley Crescent. 
A delicate, fine-featured woman, Jane Williams was described some forty years after her death, in a local Brecknockshire history, as 'a distinguished lady of letters, whom some of us remember as a kindly and somewhat stately personage' (T. R. Phillips, ed., 'The Breconshire Border', 1926, 125). Temperamentally highly strung and tending in later life towards eccentricity, her intellectual abilities were considerable. Her writings, which are clear and often lively, demonstrate her research skills, analytical ability, keen powers of observation, and, despite ill health, enormous industry. Her achievements are all the more remarkable, given the inadequacies of women's education in the early nineteenth century. 
Jane Williams's earliest publications include a volume of poetry, privately published when she was eighteen, and a collection of devotional essays. The main body of her work, however, reflects her two dominant concerns -- her deep interest in Welsh life and culture and a real concern with and recognition of the value of women's lives, both contemporary and historical. Her published response to the infamous parliamentary report on the state of education in Wales of 1847, which depicted the Welsh as drunken and ignorant and levied charges of immorality against the women of Wales, fused these interests: in 'Artigall, or, Remarks on the reports of the commissioners of inquiry into the state of education in Wales', published in Llandovery and London in 1848, she made a spirited defence of Welsh womanhood and systematically demolished the evidence, the research methodology, and even the English grammar of the commissioners. 
Williams made two major, and many lesser, contributions to Welsh scholarship. She compiled 'The Literary Remains of the Reverend Thomas Price (Carnhuanawc), with a Memoir of his Life', published in two volumes in Llandovery in 1854-5. It took her two years to sort out the 'mingled-mass of unsorted papers' of this eminent Celtic scholar, eisteddfod enthusiast, and founder member of the Cymreigyddion. Her other epic research task was the production of 'A History of Wales Derived from Authentic Sources' (1869), described by Daniel Lleufer Thomas in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as remaining 'even to this day the best history of Wales in the English language'. It was not fully superseded until the publication of J. E. Lloyd's 'A History of Wales' (1911). 
Much of Jane Williams's work, and indeed her life, was essentially woman-centred. The most accessible and liveliest of her works is 'An Autobiography of Elizabeth Davis, Betsy Cadwaladyr: a Balaclava Nurse' (1857). She interviewed the elderly Betsy Cadwaladr, a Bala woman who had led an adventurous life travelling the world as a domestic servant and a ship's steward and who had served as a nurse in the 1850s in the Crimean War hospitals of Scutari and Balaklava. Again, it was no mean task to turn Betsy's rambling reminiscences into a coherent narrative but Jane Williams persevered, motivated largely by the fact that Betsy severely criticized Florence Nightingale and the administration of the Crimean war hospitals; Williams produced this highly topical book while the scandal in Britain over Crimean maladministration still raged. In the long term, it has proved a valuable resource for students of Welsh women's history and was reprinted by Honno: Welsh Women's Press in 1987. 
Jane Williams's 'The Literary Women of England' (1861), which covers women writers from the ancient Britons to Mrs Hemans, is a further example of the centrality of women to her work. It is scholarly and still eminently readable and shows the store that she put on women's 'unwritten wisdom' ('Literary Women of England', 2), transmitted orally from generation to generation, as opposed to the more formal, academic 'knowledge possessed by men' (ibid.). Not surprisingly, her work is of interest to modern feminist scholars. While in her own time she was respected for her writings on Carnhuanawc and her history of Wales, late twentieth-century scholars are chiefly interested in her biography of Betsy Cadwaladyr and 'The Literary Women of England'. 
Jane Williams died unmarried on 15 March 1885 at her home, 31 Oakley Crescent, London. In her will she bequeathed a generous portion of her estate to her 'excellent personal attendant and faithful servant and attached friend, Mary Willey'. She was buried in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29514


Williams, John, Baron Williams (c.1500-1559), administrator, was the second surviving son of Sir John Williams (died 1508) of Burghfield, Berkshire, and his wife, Isabel, daughter and coheir of Richard More of Burghfield and Preston Candover, Hampshire. His father, who was of Welsh descent, was a kinsman of Morgan Williams, who married Thomas Cromwell's sister and became a courtier and soldier at Henry VIII's court. It seems likely that John was sent to court at an early age, although the name is too common to identify him with certainty as the man who was Henry VIII's footman or groom in 1519-20. By July 1524 he had married Elizabeth ('c'.1504-1556), the widowed daughter and coheir of a neighbour, Thomas Bledlow of Bledlow; her first husband, Andrew Edmonds, had died on 23 June 1523. By 1526 Williams can be confidently identified as a rising minor official around the court, with a chancery office and responsibilities for confidential matters, among them the conveyance of large sums of money to the court from London. He was beginning to accumulate profitable minor county offices such as that of bailiff of the lordship of Hanley, Worcestershire, and also leases of lands and lordships. By 1535 he was receiver at Thame, where the abbot was Robert King, the brother-in-law of his sister Anne, and he maintained his association with that town until he was eventually able to buy the abbey from the duke of Somerset. 
It is unclear where Williams received his financial training, but by the time he was appointed clerk of the king's jewels on 8 May 1530 he was sufficiently competent to move steadily up the ladder of royal financial offices, to which he added private receiverships. He became one of Thomas Cromwell's inner circle, and in January 1535 was joined with him in the office of master of the jewels. By then he was established enough to be appointed a JP in Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire. He evidently also had some military skills and served in the army against the rebels in the north in 1536. The duke of Suffolk assigned him the task of compiling a book for Lincolnshire 'of all... detections... by gentilmen, yeoman or commoner', as a result of which he wrote to Cromwell on 27 October 1536 that nowhere had he seen 'such a sight of asses, so unlike gentlemen' ('LP Henry VIII', 11, nos. 838, 888). By this time he had the resources to start buying land, acquiring Rycote from Giles Heron in a purchase that was confirmed in 1540 by a special clause in Heron's act of attainder. In 1538 he bought Wytham in Berkshire from Leonard Chamberlayne. 
Although one of his sisters was prioress of Studley, Williams seems to have been a willing reformer, serving as a visitor to the monasteries and writing to Cromwell from Winchester on 21 September 1538 that 'we intend both at Hyde and St Mary's to sweep away all the rotten bones that be called relics... lest it should be thought we came more for the treasure than for avoiding of the abomination of idolatry' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 401). He was knighted between 15 November 1538 and 28 June 1539, and in the autumn of 1539 was appointed sheriff of Oxfordshire and Berkshire. He was reappointed in 1544-5 and from this time was routinely appointed to all the major local commissions. In 1542 and again in 1547 he sat in parliament for Oxfordshire. In 1544 he was licensed to retain 10 men, and in 1545 was appointed captain of 20 archers and 40 billmen for the army in France. By 1540 he was involved in the purchase and resale of monastic lands, making considerable profits from his speculations in the following decade. He was rapidly increasing his holdings and offices in Oxfordshire, Berkshire, and Northamptonshire, buying both from the crown and privately, and he continued to expand his estates until his death. He was an unpopular landlord: in 1549 the rebellious commons threw down his parks and killed all the deer. 
Williams survived Cromwell's fall to become sole master of the jewels, a potentially dangerous responsibility since it was not only a crucial financial reserve but also one easy to raid, particularly since the gold and jewels that Williams had helped to strip from the monasteries were assigned to the jewel house but imperfectly inventoried. Henry VIII failed for many years to order a survey, and although Williams surrendered his position in 1544 to Anthony Aucher, his accounts as master could not be finalized until 1552, and as late as 1556 it was alleged that he had received jewels with which he should be charged. As the office for the jewel house he used the London house of the dissolved priory of Elsing Spittle, Cripplegate, which he bought in 1540. There was a major crisis on 24 December 1541 when there was a big fire there and 'divers juelles and goodes of the Kinges and allso of his were embesylled and convayed away' (Wriothesley, 1.133). But Williams survived this disaster, and in March 1544 he was appointed treasurer of augmentations, a position he retained in the second court set up in 1547 until its dissolution in January 1554. As such he was a major paymaster of council warrants and had to appear regularly before the council to give advice on royal resources. He remained an adviser in the early years of Edward's reign. In October 1549 he was among those ordered to Windsor to arrest Somerset and protect the king. The earl of Warwick, however, distrusted him, and in October 1551 the imperial ambassador reported that he had been arrested. As news of the death in Padua of his two surviving sons in August can only just have reached him, this must have been a moment of personal crisis. On 8 April 1552 the council committed him to solitary confinement in the Fleet, but this was rescinded on the 25th on the grounds of his deteriorating health. Edward VI recorded that he had disobeyed an order not to pay pensions without the council's foreknowledge. On 22 May 1552 he was released after making a humble submission to the council for failing to do his duty in his office, and he sat in parliament for Oxfordshire in March 1553. 
Williams's methods of keeping his books appear to have been distinctly less satisfactory than those of his predecessor. This may explain the discrepancies and failure to record payments that caused problems for men like Sir Maurice Denys, the treasurer of Calais, and bedevilled his own final accounting which was not completed for several years. Moreover he did not assist in the hearing of accounts, and the overall management of the second court of augmentations was more lax than that of the first. He himself apparently claimed a payment of $15,000 to Peter Osborne, the keeper of the king's privy purse, in two successive accounts. The fraudulent discharge of certain obligations, about which he knew nothing, became a matter of textbook law. When his account was finalized, on 5 June 1556, he owed the crown $25,000, but five days later in consideration of his services he was pardoned all his arrears both as master of the jewels and treasurer of augmentations. This magnanimity came after some anxious moments when, as Sir Edmund Peckham reported, Williams was 'fayent to brake up hys howse and to lyve at beconfeld because of the queen's lack of generosity' (TNA: PRO, SP 11/8/52). 
Mary had good reason to reward Williams. Before 13 July 1553 he had proclaimed her queen in Oxfordshire and raised troops -- some said 6000 -- in her support. On 22 July he was ordered to dismiss his men and to wait upon the queen but she continued to employ him in a military role. His loyalty led to his appointment for the third time as sheriff of Oxfordshire and Berkshire, which in the year 1553-4 gave him a key role in maintaining Mary's hold on the home counties. In February 1554, in the aftermath of the Wyatt rebellion, he was commanded to provide 100 horse and 100 foot for the queen's retinue. On 8 March 1554 he was ordered to convey Thomas Cranmer, Nicholas Ridley, and Hugh Latimer to Oxford. As a reward he was summoned to parliament in April as Baron Williams of Thame, and given the honourable position of chamberlain to King Philip. He was also made responsible for the safe keeping of Princess Elizabeth, and in that capacity escorted her from the Tower to Woodstock and entertained her 'en route' at Rycote, establishing a good relationship with her in the process. He was a regular attender in the Lords and a trier of petitions, but was not otherwise prominent there. His wife died on 25 October 1556 and was buried on 4 November in the chapel at Rycote. In the following year, about 19 April, he married Margaret (died 1587), daughter of Thomas, first Baron Wentworth of Nettlestead. 
Williams's religious attitude is unclear. He was present at the burning of Latimer and Ridley on 16 October 1555 and of Cranmer on 21 March 1556, but there were rumours that he was favourable to protestants and he was consequently dismissed. The latter report was unfounded, but the friends named in his will -- the earl of Bedford, William Cecil, Walter Mildmay, and Robert Dudley -- were undoubted protestants, and in 1559 he received Bishop John Jewel, recently returned from exile, in his house. In November 1558 he was one of those who attended Elizabeth from Hatfield to London and in January 1559 was appointed lord president of the council in the marches of Wales. He died at Ludlow Castle while exercising this office on 14 October 1559 and was buried with great pomp on 15 November 1559 in Thame church, where his splendid tomb, with effigies of Williams and his first wife, still stands in the middle of the chancel. His widow later married William Drury and then James Crofts. His heirs were the two daughters of his first marriage, one of whom was Margery Norris ['see under 'Norris, Henry, first Baron Norris]. In his will he assigned property for the endowment of a free school at Thame and provision for the restoration of the footway between Oxford and Botley. 


@@@@@


doc= 29515


Williams, John (1582-1650), archbishop of York, was born at Aberconwy, about 25 March 1582, and baptized in the parish church of St Mary's, Conwy, on 27 March, the younger son of Edmund Williams (died 1601) of Conwy and his wife, Mary (died 1585), daughter of Owen Wynn of Eglwys-bach. Both parents were members of well-established Caernarvonshire gentry families, his father descended from the houses of Cochwillan and Penrhyn, and his mother from the cousinage around the Wynns of Gwydir, in the Conwy valley. 
Williams was sent to school at Ruthin, where he caught the eye of Richard Vaughan, bishop of Chester, a distant relative, before entering the bishop's college, St John's, Cambridge, in 1598. He owed more, however, to his godfather Sir John Wynn of Gwydir, who persuaded Edmund Williams, a man of moderate substance but choleric disposition, to let John take his education further. Wynn subsequently interested himself in his material welfare, something he did only sparingly for his own sons. A cousin, Owen Gwynn, was already a fellow of St John's, but Wynn clearly appreciated Williams's unusual abilities, including a talent for languages which in time brought him familiarity with nine of them. After graduating BA in 1601, the year his father died, Williams became a fellow of St John's on 14 April 1603; he took his MA, and entered holy orders as a Calvinist with liberal inclinations in 1605. 
On 17 October 1605 Williams was instituted to the modestly endowed crown living of Honington in Suffolk, which he assured his godfather 'will do well, being joyned to my place in Cambridge' (Ballinger, no. 369), suggesting that James I too had quickly become aware of his high ability and limited finances. He spent some time each year with Vaughan during the latter's period as bishop of London (1604-7), and through him met John Lumley, Lord Lumley, a kinsman by marriage and Prince Henry's tutor and benefactor; he proved generous with both books and money until his death in April 1609 revived Williams's worries about his uncertain means. However, Richard Clayton, the elderly master of St John's, increasingly employed him about college business, in the course of which he impressed Archbishop Richard Bancroft sufficiently to be made archdeacon of Cardigan in 1610, and won the approval of Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, the chancellor of the university. As junior proctor Williams's contribution to the disputations which entertained the duke of Wurttemberg came to the king's ears, and lively preaching at St Mary's, Cambridge, led to an invitation to perform at Newmarket in November 1611 in the presence of James and Prince Henry; Williams afterwards remarked that his sermon brought them 'some extraordinary contentment' (Dew Roberts, 18). Thus prompted, lord chancellor Thomas Egerton, Lord Ellesmere, invited him to become another of his carefully chosen band of household chaplains, while in 1612 James granted him the living of Grafton Underwood, Northamptonshire, on the surrender of Honington. Ellesmere's chief secretary, John Panton, was one of John Williams's numerous cousins and a few years later was to nominate him as guardian to his children, leaving him 'a great Wind-fall' in his will (Hacket, 1.35). 
Before he joined Ellesmere, in 1611-12 Williams insisted on serving his term as the university's senior proctor, allowing himself a further opportunity to emphasize his capabilities. On the death of Salisbury he played a leading role in pacifying James's anger at the premature nomination of Prince Henry as his successor in the chancellorship and smoothed the way for the earl of Northampton to take the position instead. On a smaller scale, in May 1612 he adroitly managed Owen Gwynn's election as master of St John's in succession to Clayton, thereby improving the chances of a fellowship there for Robin Wynn, one of Sir John's younger sons. In May 1613 he also gave himself the leading role in St John's contribution to the celebrations to mark the visit to Cambridge of Prince Charles and the elector palatine, and hurried to take his BD in order to participate in the theological disputations that took place simultaneously. He acquitted himself so well in his encounter with the formidable Dr Samuel Collins -- 'the one was the buckler, the other the sword of that learned exercise', according to John Hacket -- that James Montagu, dean of the Chapel Royal and bishop of Bath and Wells, was added to his patrons (Hacket, 1.26). 
Williams was already beginning to climb the ladder of ecclesiastical preferment. In July 1612 he was elected to a prebend of Hereford Cathedral, and his association with Lincoln Cathedral began shortly afterwards. On 10 October 1613, during the interval before Richard Neile succeeded William Barlow as bishop of Lincoln, Williams was granted the prebend of Lufford, subsequently exchanging it for Asgarby; on 29 December he was appointed precentor, with the prebend of Kelsey attached to the office. Probably at Ellesmere's instigation, Neile granted him the rectory of Walgrave in 1614, to be held in conjunction with Grafton Underwood, and in June 1616 Bishop Thomas Dove instituted him as first prebendary of Peterborough Cathedral. In all, Ellesmere helped him to five livings but when he died, in 1617, Williams gracefully declined to continue as household chaplain under the new lord chancellor, and Francis Bacon amiably responded by appointing him a JP and member of the quorum for Northamptonshire. 
Williams made an awkward start to his new role of JP, however, making little attempt in 1618 to settle an ill-concealed difference of opinion with the senior JP in the neighbourhood, Sir Edward Montagu, Bishop Montagu's godly eldest brother, over the meaning and intent of certain passages in King James's recently issued 'Book of Sports' encouraging approved forms of recreation on Sundays after divine worship. Instead Williams, after some leaning on witnesses at Grafton Underwood, retired to the court where his superior connections succeeded in deflecting the protests of the Sabbatarian Montagu and another brother, Henry Montagu, chief justice of king's bench. At Grafton, where he was scarcely known, Williams had allegedly justified his brash behaviour by asking his parishioners, 'Am I not Justice of the peace and Justice of the Quorum, Doctor and parson of the town?' ('Buccleuch MSS', 3.208). He had yet to attend quarter sessions and, Edward Montagu believed, had still to take the oath of office. It was to be characteristic of Williams's interventions in local government that they tended to focus on himself at least as much as on the problems in front of him and, even when he had a sound point to make, might be compromised by at least a hint of irresponsibility. 
In 1617, as in 1611, Williams showed an inclination to reserve his position in dealing with patrons other than the crown during the early years of his advance. Williams had his eyes on a loftier course. His place at court was in no jeopardy after Ellesmere's death, as James Montagu had him made a royal chaplain and at the same time convinced the king that, rather than accompanying him to Scotland, Williams might be more usefully employed entertaining the archbishop of Spalato at Cambridge by an able defence of his thesis for a doctorate of divinity. By 1618 Williams had had bestowed on him at least seven parochial livings, the prebends of three cathedrals, the archdeaconry of Cardigan, and a royal chaplaincy; yet, encouraged by the quality of his patronage, he remained acquisitive. In September 1619 James's favour secured for him the deanship of Salisbury despite the marquess of Buckingham's support for a rival candidate, and set in train Williams's advance to the centre of the political stage. 
Williams had not been at Salisbury more than six months when on 11 March 1620 Martin Fotherby, the bishop, died. The next day Williams, already aware that the dean of Westminster, Robert Townson, was to be Fotherby's successor, applied to Buckingham for the Westminster deanery, the modesty of his phrasing not entirely concealing the precipitate manner of his approach or his determination to succeed. In the process Robert Cecil's old chaplain, Dr John Bowle, who had the kind of prior claim which he professed to be anxious not to prejudice, was brushed aside. Williams was fortunate that James had recently entrusted him with bringing into the Church of England Buckingham's future wife, Lady Katherine Manners (whose father, the earl of Rutland, he had visited on journeys to Lincoln), for he had not been in the habit of paying court to the favourite, and had only done so recently when bluntly advised by the king to remedy the omission. It was a timely warning, as Buckingham happened to be high steward of Westminster. Williams explained to the favourite that as he was 'unmarried, and inclining so to continue... [he considered] that Westminster is fitter by much [than Salisbury] for that disposition'. He made no mention of the injury in his youth which had, according to his chaplain Hacket, rendered him 'chast perforce' (Hacket, 1.8). Lest his case seemed thin, he concluded his letter by declaring himself 'Your honours poor Beadsman already ever bound', and set about cultivating Buckingham's mother. He also summoned Hacket from Cambridge so that he could draw on his experience, while a scholar at Westminster, of the exemplary way in which Lancelot Andrewes had run the school and educated its pupils. His collation did not take place until 10 July, which may indicate that others were seriously considered, but John Chamberlain noted as early as 20 March that 'one Williams' was to succeed Townson at Westminster ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.296). Like Sir Edward Montagu, Chamberlain was still coming to terms with his rapid rise. Williams himself did not forget his roots, finding time to preach in Gwydir chapel shortly after Easter, on 24 April 1621. 
The deanery of Westminster was to become a cherished prize. It allowed Williams a close relationship with the court, entertaining ambassadors and others on James's behalf with banquets and the abbey's music, and it encouraged an attachment to parliament where later, as bishop of Lincoln, he was stoutly to maintain his right to sit in the Lords. As dean he presided over an influential school and had ready access to a celebrated pulpit. In the years ahead the deanery provided a fitting base for him while in high office, and in darker days allowed him a continuing presence at Westminster, sustaining the hope that he might recover his political fortunes. In the later 1620s and early 1630s he was still casting a shadow which could not be entirely ignored, even though, as George Garrard later remarked, he would have lived more easily had he agreed to resign on one of the several occasions he was asked to do so. 
In the summer of 1621 Williams became the first clerical lord keeper since Archbishop Nicholas Heath in 1558. The manner of his appointment was a further demonstration of his ability to react quickly to the needs of the moment. James I was known to be anxious to redefine the relationship between the courts of common law and of equity, in order to emphasize the paramount role of chancery as the court in which God's law and the king's conscience were most fittingly expressed, and had toyed with the idea of a clerical lord keeper before appointing Bacon. His determination grew in 1621 when, alongside their attacks on Bacon, the Commons embarked on a sweeping review of the jurisdiction and processes of chancery. What James needed was an authoritative statement of his own position, and Williams promptly supplied one. Implicit in his paper was the assumption that its author was the man to carry out its proposals. James was convinced; but although he formally announced Williams's appointment as lord keeper on 15 June 1621, and had him sworn privy councillor three days later, the seal was not delivered to him until 10 July. In the interim James had to dismiss an approach from Prince Charles on behalf of his chancellor, Sir Henry Hobart, chief justice of common pleas, and turn aside Buckingham's pleas for first Lionel Cranfield, and then Sir James Ley. He had also to counter privy councillors' objections to Williams's youth and inexperience. As a consequence the new lord keeper was unavoidably cast as James I's man. 
Although to the Wynns he had achieved enough for them to 'daunt the arrogance of their enemies' (Ballinger, no. 966), Williams still had ambition unfulfilled. The death on 30 March of John King, bishop of London, had excited his interest. As early as 2 March young William Wynn, now in Williams's service, had heard that his cousin aimed to succeed King, and a letter from Williams to Buckingham of about that date leaves no doubt that it was so. By June he was pleading that, as a cleric intended for high office in the state, it was appropriate that he should enjoy similar status in the church. This time, however, he presumed too much on the king's indulgence. Instead of the diocese of London, which went to George Montaigne, he found himself chosen by James on 3 August as Montaigne's successor to the vast and unwieldy see of Lincoln, with a dilapidated palace at Buckden in Huntingdonshire; worse, he was now in danger of having no London base which he considered suitable. He had to scramble to recover the deanery of Westminster, intended for the dean of Gloucester, William Laud, who had been a prebendary since January 1621, and did not scruple to disappoint his own kinsman, Owen Gwynn, in the process. He was formally confirmed in the deanery by a patent of 14 August, having secured it by prevailing on John Bowle to 'most willingly give way to... [his] retayninge thereof', and by persuading the king and prince to approve Laud's belated elevation to the bench of bishops by nominating him to the diocese of St David's ('Fortescue Papers', 158). St David's had recently been offered to Gwynn, but he had been slow to accept it and it was technically still vacant. 
Wrong-footed, Williams had rallied, but he had done so awkwardly, without always calculating the consequences of his dealings. One of them had long-term significance. Laud, now a Welsh bishop unlike the Welshman Williams, was in future to be numbered among the prince of Wales's higher clergy, in whom Charles took a close interest. He could thus look with new expectancy towards the future, particularly when the prince became king. On the other hand Williams, despite having got back the deanery of Westminster, was in due course obliged by the turn of events to 'shut himself fast [in it] with as strong Bars and Bolts as the Law could make; Else', as Hacket observed afterwards, '... he had been sure to be thrust out of Doors in a storm, when he had most need of a Covering' (Hacket, 1.62). Gwynn, meanwhile, was consoled that November with 'the poore archdeaconry of Huntingdon' worth no more than $30 a year which, Williams confessed to Buckingham's secretary, John Packer, he really ought to improve ('Fortescue Papers', 168, 170). Some months earlier, he had dealt more subtly with another St John's man, Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton, an old friend in political disgrace in the parliament of 1621, skilfully making peace with James and, as one in holy orders, warning Buckingham on 2 August of the perils of obduracy in a good cause: 'Of all actions forget not those of mercy and Goodnesse, wherein men draw nighest to God himself' (Stopes, 413). 
One of Williams's first duties as lord keeper was to preside over the House of Lords during its second sitting in 1621, where he confidently set out the reasons for their meeting and rehearsed the state of foreign affairs. He sought to exercise a moderating influence, sticking close to James's own policy where he could, at times modifying it with James's consent to the taste of parliament. Like Ellesmere, he looked to develop a network of contacts in both houses, according to Hacket customarily carrying a list of MPs with him, and having 'Spies... in many private conferences' (Hacket, 1.205, 2.80). More generally, though, Williams's keepership soon had an air of impermanence about it, arising from the various doubts in court and council about his appointment, and reflected in the conditions of his tenure. His term was to be a three-year one, with a review half-way through, and in difficult matters he was to be assisted in the court of chancery by senior common-law judges. Williams later maintained he had proposed these terms to James in acknowledgement of his inexperience but, however arrived at, they gave the impression that he was on trial. Williams insisted that after three years he would resign, and James would then offer him a better see than Lincoln, perhaps York as Archbishop Toby Matthew came to believe; but it was soon rumoured that a man of proven competence, such as Henry Montagu, Viscount Mandeville, might be put in over his head as lord chancellor. 
Williams, however, never lacked confidence in his own ability and judgement. On taking office he appointed as his secretary Richard Oakley, James Whitelocke's promising but raw former clerk, still to be called to the bar, and within weeks, he was giving Southampton advice based on his close reading of Star Chamber precedents. The coaching in the law which Ellesmere and Sir Henry Finch had provided may have been limited, but he was clearly at ease with legal process, and quickly developed an appreciation of the political context within which he was working. Buckingham seems to have found him an uncomfortable correspondent, too knowing by half. Instructed by James on 1 September 1621, less than two months into office, to seal the earl of Arundel's patent as earl marshal and to confirm his pension of $2000 a year, Williams raised with Buckingham a series of questions about the patent's sweeping definition of the earl's authority and, while confirming the pension, made it plain it would have been politic to have delayed it until parliament was over. His opening speech in chancery, however, faithfully reflected the king's intentions in appointing a churchman to the keepership, and he soon earned a reputation for dispatching cases with an expedition not seen in many years. In court he took the initiative. Although he had common-law judges with him, in later days regularly including his old friend Whitelocke, he was quick to assert himself, often speaking without consulting them. Sometimes justice was rougher than it might have been and during the 1621 parliament Sir John Bourchier complained about the indecent haste with which Williams had disposed of his business in chancery, but found the Lords protective of the new lord keeper. Lionel Cranfield took up the charge at court in September 1622, accusing Williams of racing through business in the interests of profit from process. James eventually dismissed the accusation, but Williams felt obliged to provide Buckingham with a detailed summary of his just and economical proceedings. He also offered an alternative explanation for his busyness: he had inherited a large backlog from Bacon but since he needed to sleep no more than three or four hours a night, and was accustomed to working from 5 a.m. to 10 p.m. or later, he had managed to clear it without delay. A search of the chancery registry revealed that by November 1622 he had produced 1600 court orders, including more final orders than Ellesmere had managed during his entire service. Self-effacingly he informed the favourite: 'I am one of those that labour in his Majesties Cole-mines under the earth and out of sight' ('Cabala', 74), but William Wynn noticed that his eyes had become rheumy and his face swollen, and that he had taken to walking with a staff, as lack of exercise had stiffened his right thigh. However, in case his father, Sir John Wynn, grew alarmed at the collapse of his investment, he assured him that Williams was now out of danger. 
Even so Williams's attendance at routine meetings of the privy council, the only ones for which early Stuart evidence survives, was noticeably less frequent than that of Ellesmere and Bacon before him and Thomas Coventry afterwards. Where they managed to attend three meetings in every four, Williams could do no better than one in two over a relatively limited period. He was never wholly comfortable at the council table in the company of several of those who doubted him, and seems to have preferred to go his own way rather than take heed of the collective will. He did not engender trust. On 12 October 1622, within days of the settlement of his dispute with Cranfield, he was in danger of overreacting when he found that in his absence the council had sensibly decided to advise James, away at Newmarket, not to consider any more Irish suits until Sir William Jones, Sir Nathaniel Rich, and the rest of the English commissioners made their imminently expected return from Ireland. As he later reported to Buckingham: 'Against this... I spake first to the Prince privately (who allowed of my reasons), then (when the President [of the council, Henry Montagu, Viscount Mandeville] would not mend it) at the Table openly, that I did utterly dislike we should tutour his Majesty how to grant suits, especially in Letters that are to remain upon record.' Told by Archbishop George Abbot and Arundel that there were precedents aplenty, he retorted they had shallow roots and were all from James's reign. He wished 'them... all torn out of the book and cast into the fire' ('Cabala', 75). He reminded Buckingham this was the third time he had protested against the council limiting the king, other than by word of mouth, but he does not seem to have paused to wonder why James, who was not unversed in council practices, had for so long neglected to make any protest of his own. 
Four months later, however, Williams himself had the temerity to delay the publication of the proclamation of February 1623 to the king's subjects for their relief against a wide range of public grievances of a kind raised in the recent parliament, which James was eagerly awaiting, and he came dangerously close to teaching the king his business. He recommended trebling the number of commissioners named from five to fifteen by adding six peers and four bishops (including Abbot 'unless your Majesty... have some reasons for the omission'), all of whom were in touch with popular sentiments but who, in 1621 had 'kept themselves within the compass of Duty and due Respect to your Majesty' and so might serve as 'witnesses of your Majesties justice and good government against the next ensuing Parliament' (Hacket, 1.109). His thinking was sound enough but he conveyed it to James only on 23 February after secretary of state Sir Edward Conway had written to Mandeville from Royston enquiring on the king's behalf about the delay. Although Hacket believed otherwise, James promptly had the proclamation published in its original form, bearing its intended date (14 February 1623), even though now almost a fortnight late. One of Williams's suggestions as an additional commissioner had been his friend John Holles, Lord Houghton, once comptroller of Prince Henry's household and a caustic observer of contemporary politics, now anxious both to get back into public service and to acquire an earldom. After Holles had been denied the first, Williams persuaded Buckingham that it would be prudent to accommodate his social ambitions and, for a price, secured for Holles the earldom of Clare, traditionally reserved for princes of the blood royal. 
Williams's fellow councillors had not been slow to act on their mistrust of the newcomer, however. They too were busy on 12 October 1622, taking away from him the lord keeper's traditional function of appointing JPs and reserving it to themselves. They had in mind the need for tighter internal security, particularly after the recent ill-defined 'connivance' for English Catholics prior to a possible Spanish match for the prince, which the assize judges had been attempting to carry out under Williams's direction. Afterwards he chose to make light to Buckingham of what he thought was a futile gesture, although one in which he may have suspected the favourite had had a hand: it was 'to no purpose in the world, nor service to his Majestie', even though that same day, in similar vein, James had agreed to take responsibility from the lord lieutenants for nominating deputies ('Cabala', 76). Williams's own early, rather whimsical, circular letters to the counties, moreover, had usually ended with a clear threat that he would remove idle JPs, and London newsletters in January 1622 had noted that a culling of JPs was supposed to be afoot, although it seems to have left no trace. 
Perhaps crucially for his prospects, Williams was never enthusiastic about Charles and Buckingham's expedition to Madrid in 1623, although he found himself, in much the same way as other Hispanophiles, awkwardly placed politically after the collapse of the marriage negotiations. In the parliament of 1624 he resisted any equation between political preferences for Spain and the endorsement of popery at home. As lord keeper he was ready to see the penal laws strictly applied but like James he remained anxious not to break ties with Spain altogether. Williams came to believe that it was his foot-dragging in consultations during the 1624 parliament about ending the treaties with Spain, 'which the Duke made the Bishop's sin against the Holy Ghost', that finally undermined him (TNA: PRO, SP 16/8/63). Even though the pull of the reversionary interest must have been apparent, the evident antipathy between him and Buckingham helped to confirm Williams in his faithfulness to James's preferences. His association with James was to be emphasized as the reign ended. On his deathbed James called for Bishop Lancelot Andrews to perform the last rites, but as he was ill Williams deputized. He also preached the king's funeral sermon, over two hours, late in a disordered day. Published as 'Great Britain's Salomon' (1625), it was generally agreed to have done justice to his old master without entirely overlooking his successor. 
During the few months he remained lord keeper under Charles, Williams rarely put a foot right. Buckingham's nervousness at Williams's capacity for intrigue increased as he realized how much the bishop knew of the follies of prince and favourite during their months at Madrid, and he wanted to be rid of him. The new king was prepared to seek advice from his lord keeper but rarely found it palatable. When Charles attempted to recall his father's last parliament, adjourned in 1624, in the hope that it would hasten his preparations for war, Williams very properly ruled against it on constitutional grounds and time-consuming elections had to be held in a spring heavy with the menace of plague. Justifying himself in print in 1626, Charles cited this ruling as an example of what he was up against. While the plague spread as MPs awaited the arrival of the new queen, and for the first time a bishop of St David's (Laud) prepared to preach at the opening of parliament, Williams kept Westminster School under tight control and repeatedly sought a firm decision on whether the session would hold or not. He regretted the brushing aside of his advice not to convene a parliament at all until such time as Charles was able to make his foreign intentions better known in the country. 
Once the parliament of 1625 was in session, however, Williams was soon openly in contact with senior MPs critical of the new king's rush to war, in the form of a maritime expedition likely to be directed against the Spanish coast. Most of them had sat in the 1624 parliament, and were by no means convinced that it had then entered into a commitment to offensive action. The first meeting of the parliament, at Westminster, produced no funding on a scale appropriate to war. Williams advised against adjourning that parliament to Oxford where, as the plague spread westwards, the king failed to secure any further supply at all; yet while recommending an early end to a misjudged meeting, he unavailingly urged Charles not to dissolve the parliament for fear of increasing political unrest in the localities. At Oxford he had been denied the lord keeper's traditional responsibility for informing parliament why it had been convened, giving way to Lord Conway and Sir John Coke, whose assessments of the grounds for urgent military action were altogether more acceptable to Charles. 
Williams's three-year term, now long exceeded, provided sufficient grounds for dismissal from the keepership but his fall was so widely expected that, politically, it seemed inevitable. Late in September, Conway somehow forgot to summon him to the privy council, and in early October, Williams thought it advisable to seek Charles's permission to retreat to the house of one of his Panton cousins, Lady Sandys, at Foxley near Windsor, until such time as there was sealing to be done. He last attended the council, at Salisbury, on 24 October and the great seal was removed from him the next day. Sir Thomas Wentworth was among those regretting the downfall of a fellow Hispanophile, ill at ease with the tenor of current foreign policy. Williams still refused to be cowed, and promptly urged George Goring to persuade Buckingham to produce letters he had sent him while lord keeper to establish whether he had ever been disloyal in them. But the duke was bound for The Hague, and had more pressing problems on his mind. 
The image Williams presents in his portraits is that of a gentleman rather than a senior cleric, and it was to be ten years before he presided over a visitation of the sprawling diocese of Lincoln, visiting the whole diocese in person in 1634, a year after the metropolitical visitation by Laud's officers, and jauntily remarking that none of his predecessors had done as much 'these hundred years' ('Works of... Laud', 5.333). Far more pressing in 1625-6 was the delicate business of discovering what, if anything, was left to him in and around the court. What Charles immediately required was that he should keep away from meetings of the privy council and, as he was to have no part in the coronation service, arrange for Laud, then still bishop of St David's, to carry out the ceremonial duties of dean of Westminster. He was also to absent himself from the parliament of 1626, thereby provoking a protracted tussle over the years to assert, with the help of his fellow peers, his entitlement as bishop of Lincoln to sit in the Lords and in convocation. In 1626, he was in danger of having a proxy 'thrust upon... [him] against all precedents' (Hacket, 2.69), and wrote to Charles squarely blaming Buckingham for this excess before nominating the ailing Andrewes with the proviso that the proxy should not be sent until such time as there was a use for it. His absence coincided with that of seven prominent MPs from 1625, deliberately pricked as high sheriffs in order to keep them out of the Commons in 1626, an act Williams noisily dismissed as frivolous while speculating whether he might now be sheriff of Huntingdonshire. 
None of Williams's livings was taken from him, however, not even the much-coveted deanery of Westminster. Late in 1625 he was at Buckden, ready to make use of the $5000 allotted in 1622 for urgent repairs to its decaying fabric. He approached Charles again early in March 1626, regretting that he had not been 'paid that part of my pension that should pay the creditours, who lent me money to buy the same' even though Charles had directed he should have it, and asking for mitigation of the council's displeasure, especially that of Buckingham 'who is so little satisfied with any thing I can doe or suffer that I have no meanes left to appease his anger but my prayers to God and to your sacred Majesty' ('Verulam MSS', 28-9). Charles, on confirming him in office in March 1625, had apparently promised him the archbishopric of York (as James had done in December 1623) or another diocese after he had given up the keepership, and as late as October 1626 Williams still entertained a faint hope of translation to Winchester, assuring Buckingham he 'would not receive it... but as from' him (TNA: PRO, SP 16/37/87). More immediately, he was faced with the problem of necessary residence in his diocese, and the possibility of leave from it. He was never sure how he stood with the king. Charles granted him permission in the autumn of 1626 to reside that winter at his 'poor house' at Westminster (TNA: PRO, SP 16/37/87) yet when he returned there in the following July to supervise the election of the king's scholars to the universities, he was within days commanded to return forthwith to his bishopric. That November he had to write to secretary Coke beseeching him to get the king's consent to a more flexible arrangement 'that I may upon these necessary occasions (the chapter of our college) repair thither, if my sick and crazy state of body will so permit' ('Cowper MSS', 1.329). In 1628, however, the new parliament provided unusual security. After Williams had refused to accept the king's proxy, the lord keeper admitted that he had already been sent a writ of attendance, and the House of Lords promptly invited him to resume his seat. He did so on 1 April 1628 and, as one of the five peers who kept the committee of the whole house in being against Buckingham's wishes, helped to secure the passage of the petition of right. 
The duke's death on 23 August did not bring with it any access of royal favour. When, as dean of Westminster, Williams preached in Charles's presence on Good Friday, 3 April 1629, in the regular Lent series of court sermons (as he was to continue to do until 1632) he found that, in Sir Richard Wynn's words, he was 'nothinge greater with him than if he had not done it' and so far was he 'from the hope of the great Seale' that he returned to Buckden without even the prospect 'of being a Courtier' (Ballinger, no. 1540). Clare visited him there from time to time and at least once Wentworth came too. At court Francis Cottington, Lord Cottington, did his best for him before he went to Madrid for peace negotiations, but he could only report that Charles 'objected to the Lustre wherein he lived, the great Company that resorted to him, and his profuse Hospitality... that it was not the King's Meaning that one whom he had plucked down should live so high'. Charles took it particularly badly that Williams was still 'so near a neighbour to Whitehall, but would be better contented if he would part with his Deanery'; but although, as Hacket noted, Williams took some slight account of the first objection, 'for the other touch, to relinquish his Deanery, he was utterly deaf unto it' (Hacket, 2.89). He had good reason. Within days of the House of Lords securing his attendance in 1628 he had preached the Palm Sunday sermon from the abbey pulpit in the presence of his fellow peers, at one point arguing, rather as he had once advised Buckingham, that it was 'not the man of the world but the man of God that can judge the world' ('A Sermon Preached... the Sixth of April 1628', 1628, 25). From the same pulpit on Ash Wednesday 1629 he affirmed his Calvinist beliefs in uncompromising terms by stressing the importance of 'persevering in patience, repentance and humiliation in time of affliction' ('Perseverantia sanctorum', 1629, 37). His ally the disgruntled earl of Essex, whom he was shortly to visit at Chartley to advise about remarriage, may well have been present. Both sermons were promptly printed by John Bill, the king's printer, and published by order of the Lords. 
Yet at much the same time Williams was building at Lincoln College, Oxford where, as bishop of Lincoln he was visitor, what might be regarded as 'the beau ideal of a Laudian chapel' (Newman, quoted in 'Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 165). Hacket described its form as 'costly, reverend and church-wise', and it was lavishly endowed with coloured windows, a fine ceiling, walls lined with cedar wood, and copes, plates, books, and 'all sort of furniture for the holy table, rich and suitable' (Hacket, 2.35). Its black and white paving set a new fashion. Richard Corbett, the bishop of Oxford, chose to treat its consecration in September 1631 as an Arminian celebration; but Williams surely intended to provide a timely reminder that the beauty of holiness, in a less ideologically charged form than the Laudian one, had been appreciated in godly communities and their churches long before the ascendancy of an anti-Calvinist episcopacy. Neither Laud, Oxford's chancellor since April 1630, nor the king can have been entirely comfortable with the chapel's associations. Its cost must have been considerable, and yet was borne principally by Williams at a time when he had lost his major office of state. 
In less important matters Williams did not shrink from being merely perverse. The choice of a successor to Buckingham as high steward of Westminster was technically in the dean's gift. Almost certainly Williams had received the king's letter ordering him to appoint the lord chamberlain, the earl of Montgomery, before he wrote to secretary Conway from Buckden on 30 August 1628. He confessed to Conway that he dared not intrude on the king, and asked him to inform Charles that he had settled on Buckingham's dearest friend, the unappealing earl of Holland. He had already written to Holland on 29 August telling him of his nomination and, while warning that it would have to be ratified by the chapter, emphasized that it was a profitable office. When told that Charles could not believe that, before proposing Holland, he had not already seen his order about Montgomery, Williams affected innocence. Warned by the king not to contest his decision, he wrote promptly enough to Montgomery; but in contrast to his letter to Holland, he said nothing about the role of the chapter and failed to make it clear either to Montgomery or Charles that any appointment by the dean alone would have a very limited term to it. When ordered to make amends to Montgomery, always a man of uncertain temper, he assured Conway on 16 September 1628 that, as it happened, he would be in town shortly to pay his last respects to the duke of Buckingham, and would then procure a serviceable patent for Montgomery, always providing six of the prebendaries could be convened. In April 1630 he joined John Prideaux in strongly but unsuccessfully backing Montgomery against Laud in the election for Oxford's chancellor, apparently unaware that the king would have preferred Lord Weston. With Cottington away in Madrid, Weston was then serving as Williams's intermediary with Charles; but although he appears to have been the first to raise the possibility of some kind of financial composition with the king, he was never afraid to confront the bishop with the seriousness of his predicament. On Cottington's return, Williams in March 1631 could only report his continuing frustration: Buckingham's death, he now realized, had deprived him of all chance of the duke's forgiveness and left his displeasure 'like to proove everlastinge and aeternall'; all in all, he concluded, 'by some straunge Witcherye of Fortune or State, the more I endevoured to recover porte, the more I still found myself by one wave or another, dryven from it' (S. Antiquaries, Lond., MS 203, fol. 7). 
By then Williams was on the way to becoming a long-term litigant, committing himself to tortuous and continual entanglements in Star Chamber and other courts throughout the 1630s. For the future he still hoped that one or other of several intermediaries might secure for him a reasonable settlement with the king out of court; but his troubles had taken on a new dimension shortly after his arrival at Buckden late in 1625, making it likely that he might have to attempt, by whatever means, to prevail in the courts. As in other dioceses, but on a larger scale than most, Lincoln had numerous well-established vested interests among the officials who administered its various jurisdictions, each jealous of his offices and income. Not all of them welcomed the belated arrival of a bishop with his own reasons for a close interest in such matters, and few dioceses can have had more litigation between its officials, in more courts, than Lincoln in the later 1620s and 1630s. Williams quickly made enemies among the more influential, and more than ever needed discretion. Instead in July 1627 he tried to settle a dispute about how severely puritans should be treated in his courts by calling some of his officials for a meal at Buckden. They included Sir John Lambe, a multiple office-holder in the dioceses of Lincoln and Peterborough, the anti-Calvinist Dr Robert Sibthorpe, who was Lambe's brother-in-law, and Henry Allen, a leading proctor in the diocese, all of them in favour of a firm hand. Allen, who had recently been discomfited by the appointment of John Prigeon as registrar of the commissary court at Leicester, was to keep both the earl of Dorset and Sir John Coke informed about his difficulties with Williams. Prigeon, who was also present, followed Williams in favouring a lighter touch, and had already dismayed Allen by how little he had to show by way of fees and fines from inconformists. At table Williams spoke largely of James I's preference for taking a liberal line with puritans for political reasons, a probable breach of privy council confidentiality. 
By November 1627 some account of Williams's remarks had been sent to the king by Allen and, no doubt aware that his critics were stirring but not knowing how, Williams had himself felt obliged to send Charles, by way of Buckingham, a vaguely worded petition dated 13 February 1628, apologizing for any rash words spoken in the king's presence without mention of Allen's accusation. Later in the year Allen sent a second petition with further information about the bishop's excesses, but it led only to Allen's examination before Weston and three others, at the end of which he was condemned as being 'as good as frentick', having drawn up one of his petitions in rhyme (Hacket, 2.113). In the Lords debate on 13 June 1628 Williams spoke firmly against Robert Sibthorpe and his offensively Arminian preaching. Thus encouraged, Prigeon petitioned the Commons in February 1629 with counter-accusations against Allen, in the process revealing the nature of Allen's charges, which had been sealed and put in the keeping of William Trumbull, clerk of the council, but which had nevertheless become known to him. After the session ended Allen, who had submitted books and papers in anticipation of making his defence, complained that Trumbull, Sir Ralph Freeman, and John Wright, the clerk to parliament, were all in Williams's interest, and were reluctant to hand them back. The agitation hardly contributed to the peace and quiet of the church on which Charles was insistent and for this reason as much as others Williams should not have been surprised at the king's coldness after his Lenten sermon that year. 
A composite bill, based partly on the examinations of Lambe, Sibthorpe, Allen, and another official, Reginald Burden, was lodged in Star Chamber shortly afterwards. It addressed Williams's attitude towards puritans, and his 'publishing divers false Tales and News to the scandal of his majesty's Government' as well as 'revealing some things contrary to the duty of his place and oath as a Privy Councillor' ('State trials', 3.771, 772). Some of the examinations had been leaked to Williams, apparently by Sir William Becher, like Trumbull a clerk of the council. In characteristic fashion the preliminaries moved with what Williams regarded as satisfactory slowness through interrogatories and examinations, their plenary process offering the unscrupulous ample opportunity for tampering with the record. At Christmas 1631 he had time to travel to Fawley Court in Buckinghamshire to consecrate Whitelocke's new chapel with 'maximum ostentation' and with Bishop Robert Wright of Bristol and other senior clergy in attendance, heedless of the generally disapproving attitude of Laud and Neile to chapels and chaplains (Heal and Holmes, 369). 
It was only after a petition by Lambe, in February 1632, that the case got under way. The king's order on 12 February that it should do so also made it clear that Williams's long suspension from the council had now ended in dismissal, reportedly drawing from Williams words of such defiance that Peter Heylyn, recently the king's choice for a prebend at Westminster, took care to pass them on to secretary Coke that July. If the testimony of Richard Kilvert is to be believed, Williams again took every opportunity to defer and deflect the action. Kilvert's comments are contained in one of his newsletters to Lambe, and his interest in the bishop's affairs was to develop into heavy-handed investigations on behalf of the crown. But more reliable sources also suggest that Williams took a delight in pitting his wits against councillors and lawyers, no matter how flimsy his grounds. There can be no doubt that the privy council grew tired of his evasiveness when at the board and his elusiveness when absent. The case was still limping through 1633 when it was halted by a collateral action which was to take on major significance, and which was pursued to final sentence. 
This second bill arose out of an attempt finally to discredit one of Williams's key witnesses, John Prigeon. A man of doubtful reputation, he was accused, with a fair show of evidence, of fathering a bastard by a local girl, but his guilt took several sessions to establish firmly. In the absence of most of his principal accusers he was acquitted of the charge at a quarter sessions in Lincolnshire in May 1633. A minor gentleman called Booth, a recusant, was held responsible; and there were signs that Williams had been busily influencing witnesses. At the October sessions, when more JPs were present, the earlier verdict was reversed, and the chairman of the bench, Sir John Monson, a kinsman of Booth who had his own associations with the court and king, ordered that Prigeon should accept responsibility, which he did. Williams had, however, again been at work behind the scenes. In the charged words of Sir John Bankes, attorney-general from August 1634, there had been 'such tampering, seducing, and labouring of the king's witnesses as never was in any cause... such instructions... to his own witnesses, to direct them how far they should swear, and to what to give answer and to what not' that it was clear that a new action in Star Chamber might now lie against him, charging him with perverting the course of justice by suborning witnesses ('State trials', 3.772). Williams did not help himself by carelessly throwing scorn on the October quarter sessions' decision, dismissing it as a pocket order, made in an inn or alehouse, for his jibe stung Monson, who was to provide crucial impetus to the bill's progress in its later stages. It also served to deflect attention from the possibility that Lambe and his friends had ventured upon a similar game. 
With the original bill set aside for the time being because of doubts about its supporting testimony, the second, collateral, bill provided the ground on which Williams's immediate fate was to be decided. As normal in Star Chamber, its preliminaries moved slowly; and although there was a growing view within the council that this time Williams would have to be nailed, Cottington came close in the autumn of 1635 to agreeing a settlement for Williams with the king. A fine of $4000 and the surrender of two livings, then one of $8000 and retention of his deanery, were both mooted; but, as unsatisfied as ever, Williams wanted better terms. He began to use other intermediaries as well, and the moment passed. It served, however, to alert Laud, who was already relishing his role of bearer of ill tidings after approaching the king on his behalf, as Williams from time to time asked him to do, and by his own account on each occasion getting brusquely rebuffed. He now intervened in his own interest, convincing Charles that he should put all thoughts of composition with Williams aside. Laud may not, however, have brought about the resumption of prosecution. That was almost certainly the result of a conversation between Monson and the king at Belvoir late in 1635, prompted by Monson's determination to get redress for Williams's slur but also covering the whole scope of the case. Laud had heard of it by 14 January but it was only on 9 August 1636 that Monson sent him a detailed account of the Belvoir meeting, as though for the record, showing that the king had freely admitted he was in negotiation over a settlement with Williams late in 1635, but that 'he had not then given anye assurance of the Tearmes, nor would, if mye Information weare truth' (LPL, MS 1030, fol. 78). 
The coils were already tightening around the bishop when early in November 1636, as the preliminaries continued, Cottington 'did quite discharge himself from anye more dealinge with my Buisines, mislikinge me to make use of some other mediator (nameinge none)' as Williams confided in Laud some weeks later (LPL, MS 1030, fol. 82'v'). Before the final proceedings in Star Chamber began in the Trinity law vacation of 1637, Charles reminded the bench of the damage done to Sir John Monson's honour. The judges, guided by a preliminary discussion in inner Star Chamber which Bankes also attended, presented an unusual front of unity at the end of an exhausting nine-day hearing, scarcely varying from one another in their recommendations after Cottington had given the lead. The sentence on 11 July 1637 was a heavy one, intended, as Laud thought, to have 'that fierce mastiv tyed up... until he [the king] finds means to secure him from doing more hurt to himself, the state and the church' ('Works of... Laud', 7.370). Williams was to be suspended by high commission from his benefices and offices with loss of revenue, fined $10,000, and imprisoned in the Tower of London at the king's pleasure; Monson was awarded 1000 marks in damages. Even then there were attempts to ease his lot within the inner circles of the court where the residual influence of the Villiers womenfolk survived. Before sentence young James Stuart, fourth duke of Lennox, proffered $10,000 to buy him peace and quiet; and immediately afterwards James Hamilton, marquess of Hamilton, failed in an attempt to get the king to vary its terms. Within days Cottington 'with his usual retinue' paid Laud a visit at Croydon, as if to confirm that all went well but, in Laud's view, also to see what prospect there might now be to try again for an overall settlement with Charles, giving Williams freedom from further prosecution ('Works of... Laud', 7.369-70). But so quickly was an extent placed on the bishop's Caernarvonshire estates to cover his fine that it was taken as a sure sign that 'the king is much displeased with him' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.118), while Kilvert's respectable brother-in-law, the prince's tutor Dr Brian Duppa, hastened to register his interest in the profits of the deanery of Westminster. Kilvert himself was reported to have received $1500 from the king, as from the bishop's fine. 
After his solitary visit to Croydon, Cottington turned instead, by way of Holland, to the queen. At the king's bidding, she got Edward Sackville, fourth earl of Dorset, to negotiate, and once more Williams proved awkward. He now so mistrusted Wentworth, who had grown close to Laud, that he declined to go to Ireland on any terms; and he refused to concede that his recent book, 'The Holy Table, Name and Thing' (1636), was doctrinally unsound, as Charles required him to do. Published anonymously in March 1636, as though from a minister of Lincolnshire but licensed by the bishop of Lincoln, 'The Holy Table' soon exhausted its initial run of 1400 copies, the work of several printers. It provided a rebuttal to Peter Heylyn's anonymous and opportunist 'A Coale from the Altar, or, An Answer to a Letter to the Vicar of Grantham' (late 1636), one of several works from a small group of new prebendaries of Westminster anxious to make the most of Williams's troubles. The letter Heylyn used had been written by Williams, as his diocesan, to Peter Titley of Grantham back in 1627 and it had somehow surfaced again. In it Williams had advised against usage which became official policy as a result of the order of king in council at the close of the St Gregory's case in November 1633. Ingenuously Heylyn purported to believe that the letter could not have been written by a bishop of the Church of England. Williams's rejoinder in 'The Holy Table' did no more than reiterate traditional values contained in the Elizabethan settlement, and enunciated by Richard Hooker among others. He argued that the parish communion table ought to be aligned east and west and not altarwise at the end of the chancel, and that it was permissible to move the table for the celebration of holy communion. Unusually for a confirmed Calvinist, however, he also believed in railing-in tables, on all four sides if they remained in the old position; and at his own visitation in 1635 he seems to have hoped his insistence on railing might be enough to divert attention from his favoured position for the table. It was only subsequent to the visitation, and particularly after his removal to the Tower, that conversions of tables into altars took place in any number within his diocese. Laud, impressed that the book was 'almost an inch thick' in quarto, thought there was 'wit, and reading and scorn enough -- more like the doings of a young Master of Arts than a Bishop' and with 'as little judgement in it as there need be'; while Garrard, who found it learned and sharp, predicted it was likely to 'breed some Trouble' of a kind which Williams was almost daily bringing on himself ('Works of... Laud', 7.337; 'Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 2.57). But Laud made nothing of his uniquely ambivalent attitude to the table, and he does not seem to have suffered for it while his trial proceeded or in its aftermath. 
Still in the Tower, Williams was unable to attend further proceedings against him in Star Chamber in February 1639 to answer a charge of having at his palace at Buckden letters from the former Westminster schoolmaster Laurence Osbaldeston abusing Laud and other dignitaries in terms with which Laud, at least, was becoming familiar. The letters had come into Kilvert's hands during one of his forays into the bishop's papers, and he made the most of them. Williams was fined $5000 to the king and $3000 to Laud. The earl of Leicester's agent William Hawkins noted that his servants had fallen from him and 'his friends are not many that dare appeare for him' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.140). Yet even though Williams was not summoned to the Short Parliament in April 1640, small gestures hinting at future reconciliation were to be seen. A further Star Chamber bill against him for subornation of witnesses was held over in February 1640 and Hawkins, among others, hoped that he might make his peace 'if he come to his Majestie with as much submission as he ought' (ibid., 6.230). A Rossingham newsletter reported that he had for a few hours left the Tower for a meeting with Laud at Lambeth on 4 May, and as a result he had, apparently voluntarily, withdrawn 'The Holy Table'. But Charles's mood changed when after parliament had been dissolved on 5 May a search was made into the effects of several leading peers and MPs. When John Hampden, a kinsman, turned out his pockets, they revealed a recent letter from Williams asking him to move in the Commons for his writ of summons to the Lords as an issue of general concern to parliament, on the precedent of Sir John Strangway's motion for the earl of Bristol in 1626. With the letter was Hampden's draft reply, counselling caution and further consultation with friends; but it did little to appease the king. 
Probably anticipating a new parliament, Williams wrote to the earl of Arundel on 2 October 1640, ostensibly to seek relief from the Tower, now noisy with soldiery, by being allowed to move under supervision to the countryside. His real purpose was to explain that his proposition to Hampden had been of little account, 'made... and recalled in twenty-four hours' at least ten days earlier, and that his need to establish his entitlement to sit in parliament remained: the first approach he had from the king about his writ of summons to the Short Parliament had been on 4 May, the eve of its dissolution. The earl marshal should know that he did not 'go about to excuse this accident [with Hampden] otherwise than in humbly craving pardon of his Majesty' if he had offended him ('Fairfax Correspondence', 1.341). He had, however, certainly upset the constable of the Tower who, as Sir Francis Windebank had already written to Charles at York on 18 September, complained that Williams's presence was such 'a very great inconvenience and hindrance' to the king's service that he wanted him sent to another prison. This drew from Charles a rare touch of humour: 'I know none, except it were Hanworthe [in Middlesex, Cottington's nearest country house]', adding over-confidently, 'in earnest I know none, nor see I reason why he should be a hindrance' (Scrope and Monkhouse, 2.118). 
The king was soon disabused when he tried to strike a bargain with Williams for the new parliament: he might take his seat in the Lords, but must return to the Tower when the parliament was over, unless pardoned in the meantime. Given the sensitivity of both houses to irregular exclusions, the offer was ill judged. Incensed at this further restriction on a fellow peer, on 16 November 1640 the Lords ordered his unconditional release from the Tower. Charles then gave way so far as to relieve Williams of the consequences of his Star Chamber sentence, thus restoring his ecclesiastical authority and leaving him to be received 'as it were in triumph' on his return to parliament. Not only was the constable of the Tower gratified but Laud, close to confinement himself, was even rumoured to have invited him to dinner, despite having thrown him 'soe many bones to knawe' during the 1630s (Gardiner, 187). 
Williams's first act as restored dean of Westminster was to move the holy table at St Margaret's to the middle of the church so that it was ready for the Commons' communion service on the coming Sunday, 22 November, an act intended to reveal any MPs with Catholic leanings. In the Lords he was soon appointed to the committees of privileges and petitions, possibly with the aid of the earl of Essex. More important, he increasingly assumed a leading role among those peers hoping to steer a responsible course between zealots on either wing of the church, especially those for root-and-branch reform. He was thus, in changing times, more in tune with the king's thinking than often in the past. While jeering crowds chanted 'Little Willy, art thou there?' as Laud settled into the Tower, Williams was named, on Lord Saye and Sele's motion in the Lords on 1 March 1641, as chairman of the committee for innovations in matters of religion (Ballinger, no. 1677). In time he also chaired its subcommittee of assistants, with a core of Calvinist prelates such as Archbishop James Ussher, Thomas Morton, and Joseph Hall, influential moderates like Ralph Brownrig, Daniel Featley, John Prideaux, Richard Holdsworth, and Hacket, as well as zealous ministers like Stephen Marshall, Edmund Calamy, and Matthew Newcomen. Robert Sanderson, a well-disposed Laudian, was also included. He was among the majority of the small group of bishops, consulted by the king on 9 May 1641 about his response to the earl of Strafford's bill of attainder, who advised him to 'submit in judgement to those who were learned in the law', as George Radcliffe put it, thereby satisfying his public conscience, as king, no matter what private misgivings he had ('Strafford's Letters and Despatches', 2.432). The earl of Clarendon, but not 'Eikon basilike', reserved particular venom for Williams's contribution. He urged the king to reject the bill removing his right to dissolve parliament without the consent of the two houses and, after Charles had failed to do so, pointedly asked him whether it would in future be possible for his 'true lieges' any longer to serve him (Hacket, 2.162). 
But Williams was solidly with the king in his determination to preserve episcopacy. In May 1641 he spoke in committee in the Lords against the bill for excluding bishops from parliament and on 1 July he introduced a detailed and considered bill intended to regulate church government, no doubt as part of Charles's recently advertised intention of getting back to Elizabethan purity. Bishops were to have twelve assistants to help with ordination and with exercising their jurisdiction, and when a see fell vacant other bishops were to ensure that three names were presented to the king so that he could choose a successor; like other cathedral clergy, they were all to preach regularly; and none was to be a JP except a bishop who was also dean of Westminster, a plurality Charles was unlikely to encourage. Church courts were also to be reformed. Reasonable men in both houses wished the bill well but after its second reading in the Lords, it was lost from view in committee. 
Williams slipped up, however, after he and other bishops had struggled through hostile crowds to reach the House of Lords on 27 December 1641. Supported by eleven of his fellows, he presented Charles with a petition declaring that they could not attend the House of Lords while their lives were in danger, and that in their absence all proceedings since 27 December were to be null and void. Here was a chance Pym was not going to miss. After the Commons had listened to the lord keeper reading the bishops' protest on 30 December, they voted to impeach all twelve, thereby depriving the upper house of their votes. Williams thus found himself back in the Tower, this time not alone and mocked as the decoy duck. Less than a month earlier Charles, anxious to advance men of settled views within the church, had made him archbishop of York. When he was eventually released on 5 May 1642 the terms of his bail forbade him to venture into Yorkshire, but he still headed for York, where the king then was, and on 27 June 1642 was enthroned as archbishop of the northern province, too late to make up for lost time, but claiming a prize he had long coveted. 
After doing what he could to fortify his run-down castle at Cawood, Archbishop Williams did not linger in Yorkshire. He fled at young John Hotham's approach and only assumed the role of militant archbishop, in which Wenceslas Hollar's fine print neatly cast him, after arriving safely at Conwy on 4 October 1642. He had no official standing in north Wales, but depended heavily on his status as a landowner and a descendant of ancient gentry families. He spent so freely from his own funds in making Conwy Castle serviceable that the king made it over to him until he could recover his expenses. He did what he could to organize the local militia in the royalist interest, and establish adequate sea defences, making regular contact with the marquess of Ormond in Ireland and co-operating fully with Prince Rupert while he was active in north Wales. More broadly, his aims were to support the garrison city of Chester and to retain access to the sea for royalist forces. But all the time, the archbishop was aware that some form of settlement might prove the most satisfactory outcome, and grew to mistrust the high-handed single-mindedness of the local royalist commander John Owen, whom he regretted having recommended, while at Oxford, to the king as a possible sheriff. Charles had promptly knighted him and made him governor of Conwy. As the king's cause faded Owen became more peremptory. Early in May 1645 he broke into the castle, seized Williams's goods and those his neighbours had deposited there for safe keeping, and exhibited nine articles accusing the archbishop of what he called 'high treason'. Charles eventually disciplined him; but Williams was confirmed in his drift towards an accommodation, achieved in June 1646, with Thomas Mytton the parliamentarian commander, whom he found easier to deal with than Owen's superior, Sir Nicholas Byron. Some thought it treachery; but with the king in the hands of the Scots, it looked to most to be a realistic decision. 
Williams spent much of his remaining life with the Wynns at Gwydir but he died, intestate, from quinsy on 25 March 1650 while staying with Sir John's daughter, Mary Mostyn, at Gloddaith. He was buried in the nearby parish church of St Tegai at Llandygai, close to Penrhyn Castle, where a small marble monument with a flowing tribute from Hacket was erected on the south wall of the chancel, with his helmet and spurs on a bracket nearby. It was a far cry from the high pomp of some of the Westminster funerals he had conducted. Afterwards there was talk of at least two wills, but none was found. His affairs had been disordered ever since his fall in 1625, and he and his servants had grown used to dispersing his papers and evidences 'to avoyd Kilvert's Par[r]ie', particularly during the 1630s (Ballinger, no. 2870); some of his properties in Huntingdonshire were thought to have been bought in other men's names (ibid., nos. 2005, 2014). He had always meant, but not quite managed, to provide for Sir John Wynn's dull son Owen, who had married his favourite niece, Grace, more than twenty years earlier; it took a series of actions in chancery by Owen and his cousins to establish a final settlement, the bulk of it to his next heir at common law, Griffith Williams, a nephew the archbishop had never thought much of. 
By 1627 Williams's total estate within Caernarvonshire, including three manors and two ferries newly leased from the crown, may well have covered 'something like one-third' of its overall area (Dodd, 138). Yet despite his continual concern with north Welsh affairs, his major expenditure on buildings was elsewhere. In his home county he quickly recovered Cochwillan, an ageing part of his heritage, after his cousin Henry Williams, preferring the comfort of his Elizabethan mansion of Y Faenol, had sold it to the third earl of Pembroke in 1620; later it became known as the archbishop's barn. He also acquired a large and run-down part of the Penrhyn estate, including its medieval house, which had been the foundation of his family's fortunes. He had been reluctant to venture on Penrhyn but Sir John Wynn's brother, Ellis, the clerk of petty bag in chancery, who seemed to Hacket to know everyone that mattered, had lent him more than $1000 to do so in 1622, and then carried the purchase through for him and paid off the mortgage as well. Ellis Wynn, who occupied the prebendal house at Westminster intended for Laud, died in September 1623 while buying his cousin a manor in Northamptonshire from one of the Cecils. Had he lived, Williams believed he would have made him 'a huge rich man' (Ballinger, no. 1941). As it was, some weekly household reckonings for Penrhyn in 1646 do not suggest poverty: if maintained over the year, expenditure on food alone must have amounted to almost $900. 
Williams had had resources enough to give $2000, over half the overall cost, towards a new library at St John's, Cambridge, built by 1628 in what he intended to be an appropriately gothic style, to house books originally collected by William Crashawe, a former fellow, and donated by the third earl of Southampton. Wentworth, another member of the college, chose to believe the library compared favourably with anything Laud might have at St John's, Oxford. Williams had spent even more at Lincoln College, Oxford, one of the five colleges where as bishop of Lincoln he was visitor (Balliol, Brasenose, and Oriel at Oxford, King's at Cambridge, were the others). As dean of Westminster he shouldered many expenses which came his way in the course of his duties, as he told John Coke in March 1636 when defending himself against Heylyn and his allies. He sent eight, and sometimes ten, scholars to university each year where once there had been four. From the increased revenues of the church, he had bought plate and ornaments to the value of $700. He had also improved the stipends of the prebends, including those who had complained. Out of his own means he estimated he had 'laid out upon the Library and the repairs of the Church between $5000 and $6000' ('Cowper MSS', 2.112). A library was also bought for Buckden, from which Clare and Wentworth borrowed a book of parliamentary notes and precedents in 1627; and he spent freely on its gardens. He founded eight scholarships at Westminster School as well as four more, and two fellowships, at St John's, Cambridge. The St John's scholarships were worth only $5 a year, less than Westminster ones; but they were open to pupils from Wales and the diocese of Lincoln as well as Westminster and were backed by well-funded livings which Williams had put at the disposal of his old college. He set up charities in parishes with which he was associated, as at Walgrave and belatedly at Honington in 1633. Sir John Wynn was asked in November 1621 to look out for a piece of land fit to produce an annuity of $30 to $40 for a free school in Conwy. 
Inherited wealth, profits from office, income from at least some of Williams's estates, helpful friends, and freedom from family expenses may be enough to explain his ability to spend heavily, on lavish entertainment as much as on buildings and scholarships, and his release in January 1641 from what remained of his Star Chamber fine must also have helped in wartime; but, as Hacket found, it is difficult to be sure quite where much of his income came from. Even in reflective mood towards the end of his life, Williams remained unhelpfully vague, separated as he was from many of his papers and evidences. There was talk of disposing of property by deed rather than bequest; but in unsettled times little seems to have been done. If he had written a final will it is likely that his assets, whatever they were, would simply have been devoted to charitable uses. That would have gratified Thomas Fairfax, Lord Fairfax, the parliamentary general and once of St John's College, Cambridge, who while in London in July 1637 had noticed with approval how Williams was regarded on the City streets as one who 'bestowed most of his revenues in pious works and charitable deeds', which his imprisonment would surely curtail ('Fairfax Correspondence', 1.338). 
William was nothing if not a man of high passion and restless ambition, delighting in his own cleverness. James often indulged him, relishing his learning as well as his wit, seemingly unflustered by his extravagant hospitality and flamboyant lifestyle. Williams's brand of Calvinism readily found a place in the Jacobean church and court. But after he lost the keepership late in 1625, within months of James's death, his friends doubted whether he would be able to 'keep within a circle' and restrain his inclination to break ranks long enough to win Charles's favour (Ballinger, no. 1406). He must have been one of very few courtiers that James had had to urge to pay his respects to Buckingham; and he was never close to Charles. Both mistrusted him and, unlike James, were unsettled by his knowingness on all too many fronts. Complexity attracted him, and he seldom behaved in a wholly straightforward way. He could be drawn, too, into indiscretion, every so often talking too freely and too loudly about subjects best left unmentioned. In giving hostages to fortune, he became vulnerable to men of little scruple, like Sir John Lambe and his associates, and found himself having to devote time and energy to fending off one of the more notorious of the king's enquiry agents. 
Yet Williams had, and retained, an exceptionally varied circle of friends, too numerous to catalogue, who tried to minimize the damage caused by his excesses. His critics, too, conceded his wider popularity, while muttering that it was only because he was 'bold enough to adventure upon that which few else will', as Laud remarked to Wentworth in October 1638; but Williams very early saw the dangers in Charles's authoritarian tendencies in a way Laud did not ('Works of... Laud', 7.493). Indeed, for a man of volatile temperament, he proved in his own distinctive way notably steady in his Calvinist faith, his political leanings towards Spain, and his support for libraries, schools, and colleges. He also did much, in and out of the Tower, to clarify the constitutional position of a peer kept from parliament. Above all, Williams refused to be forgotten. If he often made life difficult for himself, he also knew how to survive, even as a primate without a province. Unlike several of his old enemies he died in his bed, at an advanced age, surrounded by members of his family, and with the settlement he had for the past twenty years been about to bestow on Owen Wynn and his wife still only days from signing and sealing. 


@@@@@


doc= 29516


Williams, John (1633x6-1709), bishop of Chichester, was born in Northamptonshire; his parents are unknown. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, as a plebeian, aged about seventeen, either in 1651 or in 1653; he graduated BA in 1655 and MA in 1658. He was incorporated at Cambridge in 1660, where he was created DD in 1690, 'comitiis regiis'. In 1660 he also became the rector of St Peter Paul's Wharf. He was instituted rector both of St Mildred Poultry, London, and St Mary Colechurch in 1673. He was preferred to the prebend of Rugmere in St Paul's in 1683 and was appointed as chaplain-in-ordinary to William III soon after the revolution of 1688-9. He was subsequently made a prebendary of Canterbury Cathedral and in 1696 was appointed bishop of Chichester. 
Williams was a prolific writer and controversialist, though most of his important publications were produced before he attained his bishopric. Underlying most of his writings was a firm adherence to protestantism. He spent much of his time defending the Church of England against the aspersions of Catholic authors. In work after work he strove to define the difference between the Anglicans (who he maintained were clearly protestant) and the Catholics. He averred that though there were some commonalities between the Church of Rome and the Church of England as Catholic authors of his time had claimed, there were still significant disparities, and Anglican clergy more often than not were correct when they decried the errors of Catholicism from their pulpits. Thus Williams rhetorically asked, 'But what if after all, this 'Pulpit-Popery' is true Popery; and that nothing is charged them as a Principle, but what the Pulpits learn'd from themselves' (Williams, 'Pulpit-Popery', 5). 'Pulpit popery' was 'true popery'. Williams's political perspective was also shaped by his commitment to protestantism. In 1679, and again in 1681, he published a book that argued that the Popish Plot was a genuine, nefarious Catholic conspiracy reminiscent of the Gunpowder Plot of 1605, and that it demonstrated that the English needed to remain vigilant against the threat of popery. He also seems to have favoured the 'Exclusion Bill'. After the bill failed and James II acceded to the throne Williams was roundly criticized for his thanksgiving sermon on the occasion of the defeat of the duke of Monmouth because he took for a text 'We must not do Evil that Good may come' thereby implying that the removal of James would be a good end, even if rebellion was not the means by which it should be achieved (J. Williams, 'A Sermon Preached July 26, 1685, being the Day of Publick Thanksgiving for the Late Victory over the Rebels', 1685, i-vi). Williams had no sympathy for nonjurors at the time of the revolution either: he argued that they were nothing more than schismatics (J. Williams, 'A Vindication of a Discourse Concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation on Account of the Oaths', 1691). 
Williams was the Boyle lecturer for 1695 and 1696. His lectures, which were published separately as they were delivered, focused on the validity of scripture as genuine revelation, the adequacy of scripture as religious authority (without the need of an infallible interpreter like the pope), and the unreasonableness of infidelity and heterodoxy. John Evelyn seemed quite pleased with Williams's lectures: after the 1695 series he voted that Williams be again selected for the 1696 lectures. 
Williams's success as a Boyle lecturer undoubtedly influenced the decision to elevate him to the bishopric of Chichester, which was done in 1696. He remained bishop of Chichester until his death at Gray's Inn, London, on 24 April 1709. He was buried in the church of St Mildred Poultry, and was survived by his daughter Elizabeth, who was unmarried at the time of his death. 
Many prominent clergymen thought highly of Williams. Gilbert Burnet considered him a moderate and judicious clergyman, who was in no small part responsible for keeping the church on a steady course when the winds of controversy threatened disaster. Archbishop Tillotson, whom Williams defended against accusations of Socianism and in whose comprehension scheme he participated, considered him 'one of the best men I know, and most unwearied in doing good, and his preaching is very weighty and judicious' (Birch, 210). Williams's works were popular. His 'Brief Exposition of Church-Catechism' (1689) went through at least twenty-seven editions, and was in print until the late eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29517


Williams, John (1727-1798), nonconformist minister and author, was born on 25 March 1727 in the market town of Lampeter, Cardiganshire. His father was a tanner. He was first educated at the local free school, probably in Lampeter, where he gained a knowledge of the classics. At the age of nineteen he entered the Cambrian Academy at Carmarthen, superintended by the revds Samuel Thomas and Evan Davies, to qualify for the dissenting ministry. On completing his studies, Williams was appointed classical assistant to the Revd Mr Howell at a large school in Birmingham. In 1752, having received a unanimous call from the congregation, he became minister at Star Lane Chapel, Stamford, Lincolnshire. It is recorded that this was on Lady day and that he remained until Lady day 1756 (Jackson, 5). Most sources, however, state that he moved from Stamford to a similar charge at Wokingham, Berkshire, in 1755. In any event, there is general agreement that this move was occasioned by Williams's desire to be nearer London. 
While resident in Wokingham, Williams spent much of his time in the preparation of 'A concordance to the Greek testament with the English version to each word; the principal Hebrew roots corresponding to the Greek words of the Septuagint; short critical notes... and an index for the benefit of the English reader' (1767). Among the list of subscribers are laymen and women, Oxford and Cambridge dons, and dissenting and established clergymen, including Gregory Sharpe, chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. In a prefatory letter Williams acknowledges Sharpe's considerable assistance in the work. The London 'Monthly Review' states it was 'compiled with great pains and accuracy' (1767/1, 400). It remained a standard work until 1839, when George Vicesimus Wigram published a similar compilation. 
In 1767 Williams completed his migration to the metropolis on succeeding the Revd Mr Barron as minister of the Independent chapel in Sydenham. On 5 July 1768 he married Martha Still (died 1777), a widow from his congregation at Wokingham. Following her death, he married on 22 January 1781, at St Giles Cripplegate, Elizabeth Dunn (died in or after 1798), the daughter of John Dunn, a merchant of Newington Green described as 'one of the most useful laymen among the Dissenters' ('Cambrian Register', 3.191). 
From June 1777 Williams combined his ministry at Sydenham with the post of curator, or librarian, at the Dr Daniel Williams's Library in Red Cross Street, London, a position that provided good opportunities for his academic studies. On retiring from the appointment in 1782 he became a trustee of the library, remaining so until 1790. In 1794 or 1795 the lease on the Sydenham chapel expired. The congregation was also considerably reduced, and Williams retired to Islington, where he spent the remainder of his life. 
Little is known of Williams the pastor. His reputation rests primarily on biblical and linguistic scholarship and at some point in his career he received the degree of LLd. In addition to the concordance, his main theological work was a refutation of, or 'A Free Enquiry into the Authenticity of the First and Second Chapters of St Matthews Gospel' (1771; 2nd edn, 1789). The work attracted various responses. In 1796 he again addressed the subject in 'Remarks on Dr W Bell's Arguments for the Authenticity of the Two First Chapters of Matthew and Luke'. He published several single sermons, including 'The Favours of Providence to Britain in 1759', in which he draws parallels between '1 Samuel' 7 and General Wolfe's capture of Quebec. Two of his publications, 'Thoughts on Subscription to the Thirty Nine Articles' (n.d.) and 'A serious and earnest address to gentlemen of all denominations who opposed the late application of the protestant dissenting ministers to parliament for relief in the matter of subscription' (1773), indicate, although there is no firm evidence, that as a London minister he would have been involved in the 1772-3 dissenting movement. In the preface to his 'Address', he states that he wishes 'to contribute his mite towards farthering the much wished for Relief in the matter of Subscription'. 
Other publications include 'Thoughts on the Origin and the most Rational and Natural Method of Teaching the Languages' (1783), in which Williams advocates 'as the most natural order' that young people should first have accurate grammatical knowledge of their own language, followed in order by Hebrew, the most ancient and 'the most simple and concise of any', Arabic, Samaritan, Chaldee, Syriac, and especially Greek. Latin, he suggests, as it derives from the others, should be taught last. He also concluded that Latin should be the universal language for the sciences. 'Clerical Reform, or, England's Salvation' was published in 1792, 'shewing its necessity by a comparative State of the Landed Property, in respect to Taxes, Mortgages, Funds, Tithes, &c' (Watt, 969). Arguably his most important literary works were 'An inquiry into the truth of the tradition concerning the discovery of America by Prince Madog ab Owen Gwynedd, about the year 1170' (1791) and 'Further Observations on the Discovery of America by Prince Madog' (1792), which contained an account of a Welsh tribe of American Indians in western North America. It has been suggested that the interest aroused may have suggested the topic for Southey's poem 'Madoc'. The 'Monthly Review' notes the author 'earnestly recommends a subscription, to defray the expenses of a visit to the North West part of America, for the purpose of ascertaining the fact in question' ('Monthly Review', 1792/9, 470). 
Williams died on 15 April 1798 at his home in Canonbury Row, Islington. At the time of his death he had almost finished printing a translation into English of a scarce work by M. P. Cheilomeus, 'Graeco-Barbara novi testamenti quas orienti originem debent' (1649). He was survived by his wife, to whom he left all his property and his papers. 


@@@@@


doc= 29518


Williams, John (1757-1810), lawyer and legal writer, was born at Job's Well, near Carmarthen, on 12 September 1757, the son of Thomas Williams of that town. He was educated at the grammar school in Carmarthen, matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 19 February 1773, migrated to Wadham College on 29 September, and was admitted a scholar on 23 September 1774, graduating BA on 17 October 1776 and MA on 11 July 1781. He was elected a fellow of Wadham on 30 June 1780. He filled the office of librarian in 1781 and 1782, and of humanity lecturer in 1782, and resigned his fellowship on 30 June 1792. In 1789 Williams married Mary, eldest daughter of Charles Clarke of Foribridge, near Stafford. The couple had three sons, and three daughters, of whom Mary married August Edward Hobart, sixth earl of Buckinghamshire. From 1790 Williams was the guardian of John Jones (1777-1842). 
Beginning a legal career, Williams was a student of the Middle Temple. He became a pupil of George Wood, at that time well known as a special pleader, and, after successfully practising as a special pleader on his own account, he was called to the bar by the benchers of the Inner Temple on 23 November 1784. He went on the Oxford and 'Old Carmarthen' circuits, the Oxford ending by arrangement before the 'Old Carmarthen' began. On 21 June 1794 he became a serjeant-at-law, and in 1804 a king's serjeant. 
In conjunction with Richard Burn, Williams brought out the tenth edition of Sir William Blackstone's 'Commentaries on the Laws of England' in 1787, and the eleventh edition in 1791. Between 1799 and 1802 he also prepared the third edition of Sir Edmund Saunders's 'Reports of Cases and Pleadings in the Court of King's Bench in the Reign of Charles II', adding notes and references. His notes were highly valued and established the fame of the compilation. Contemporaries regarded them as a lucid and accurate statement of the common law, especially with regard to pleading. They were included in the editions of 1824 and 1845, and were issued separately with additions and an abridgement of the cases in 1871 by his eldest son, Sir Edward Vaughan Williams (1797-1875), judge of the court of common pleas. 
Williams died in London, at Queen Square, on 27 September 1810. He was buried on 6 October in the Temple Church, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 29519


John Williams (1745-1818), known as yr Hen Syr, Anglican clergyman and schoolmaster, was the eldest son of David Williams of Swyddffynnon, one of the earliest 'exhorters' among the Welsh Methodists. He was educated at Ystradmeurig grammar school under Edward Richard, whom he later succeeded as master in 1778. Under his mastership Ystradmeurig became for a time the leading school in Wales. Ordained deacon in 1768 and priest in 1770, he also held several clerical appointments in the diocese of St David's and was the author of 'A Dissertation on the Pelagian Heresy' (1808). Two of his brothers, Evan and Thomas, established a publishing business in the Strand, London (1792-1835), which brought out a large number of books relating to Wales; another brother, David (1751-1836), was the father of Charles James Blasius Williams. During his latter years John Williams senior was assisted, and eventually succeeded, at Ystradmeurig School by his eldest son, David (1785?-1825), a fellow of Wadham College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 29520


Williams, John (1754-1818), satirist, was born on 26 January 1754 in London. His father was Benjamin Williams, perhaps the corn factor of that name in Southwark in the 1760s. If he was the John Williams, son of Benjamin, baptized at St Leonard, Shoreditch, on 17 February 1754, his mother's name was Ann. He was educated between 1762 and 1768 at Merchant Taylors' School, where he wrote his earliest verses (satirical Latin and sentimental English) and was much influenced by the headmaster, James Townley, friend of Garrick and associate of Hogarth. 
Williams then studied engraving under the engraver and caricaturist Matthew Darly in the Strand before entering himself as a student in the Royal Academy Schools on 6 December 1773. His sentimental novel 'The Curate of Elmwood' was serialized in the 'Westminster Magazine' (January-March 1773). He exhibited engravings and drawings at the Society of Arts and the Royal Academy between 1770 and 1775, after which his activities are unrecorded until 1780 when he was an itinerant portrait painter for three years in Ireland until 1783. Early in 1784 his comedy 'The Unfortunate Beau', adapted from Christopher Bullock's 'Woman's a Riddle', was acted in Dublin and his pro-Catholic, anti-government articles, signed 'Socrates', were appearing in a radical Dublin newspaper, the 'Volunteer's Journal'. The publisher of this paper, Mathew Carey, was charged with seditious libel and imprisoned in April 1784, but escaped to the United States, while Williams withdrew to London, where he wrote for the 'Morning Herald' until he violently quarrelled with its proprietor, 'the fighting parson' Henry Bate Dudley. Williams wrote theatre and art criticism for other journals and worked as a translator. He skirmished constantly with other reviewers. 
In 1786 Williams adopted the pen-name Anthony Pasquin and published his first extended satires on actors, in 'The Children of Thespis', a collection of verse portraits, and on artists, in the never staged and unactable 'The Royal Academicians, a Farce'; he also conducted his own unsuccessful weekly satirical review 'The Devil'. Of these, only 'The Children of Thespis' was profitable. Two more parts appeared in 1787 and 1788, and the thirteenth edition of the complete work was published in 1792. It was said that Williams used his reputation as a satirist to coerce 'timid painters and performers, musical and theatrical', into giving him and his friends free dinners and gratuities (Taylor, 276), and there is an account in his own hand of the sums, ranging from 10's'. 6died to $100, he received from those he had praised in 'The Children of Thespis'. However, Williams's wit and sparkling conversation made him genuinely welcome in fashionable, if raffish, society. He passed 'attic and luxuriant hours' (Williams, 'Eccentricities', 1.313) with the convivial actor John Edwin, and was fellow rioter and salaried poet laureate of the wild, profligate, and short-lived Richard Barry, earl of Barrymore. Williams's rattling, anecdote-packed memoirs (1791 and 1793) of these two notorious men testify to friendship as well as catchpenny opportunism. His 'Treatise on the Game of Cribbage' (1791) was another by-product of misspent hours. 
Williams's 'Poems' in two volumes (1789) attracted over 700 subscribers, including a good sprinkling of English and Irish peers. The first volume contained verse tales, complimentary and occasional poems, and a few satires; the second was a new edition of 'The Children of Thespis' with copious notes. His later verse was mostly satirical. His 'Postscript' (1790) to Christopher Anstey's 'New Bath Guide' was well received, perhaps because it was less politically contentious than, for instance, Williams's anti-clerical and anti-aristocratic 'Shrove Tuesday' and 'Ode to Thomas Paine' (1791) or his 'New Brighton Guide' (1796), written ostensibly to justify the prince of Wales's ill conduct towards his wife, but highly critical of the prince's entourage. In 1795 Williams published a longer version of 'The Curate of Elmwood', a work from which he probably earned little because it was pirated (complete or abridged) and plagiarized at least a dozen times under various titles between 1773 and the 1820s, one version being attributed to a Mr McMillan. 
Though Williams's statement in 1797 that he had edited more periodicals than any man living is probably an exaggeration, there is no doubt that he was a busy journalist, both in short-lived periodicals launched by himself and in established newspapers, including the 'Morning Chronicle', then the leading whig organ under James Perry. Williams also wrote separately published anti-government prose pamphlets from the standpoint of a Foxite whig: these included 'Authentic Memoirs of Warren Hastings' (1793), 'Legislative Biography' (1795), and 'A Looking-Glass for the Royal Family' (1797). He wrote art reviews in newspapers, separately published reviews of Royal Academy exhibitions, and critiques of individual artists in 'Memoirs of the Royal Academicians' (1796), and an 'Authentic History' (1796) of the artists of Ireland, the last of which remains a useful biographical source for its subjects. His writings on politics and art alike appeared under the name of Anthony Pasquin. Several of his books were illustrated with frontispieces and vignettes drawn and/or engraved by him. 
Such versatility did not save Williams from poverty. His dedication of the later of his two versions of 'The Pin-Basket to the Children of Thespis' (1797) -- effectively a fourth part of his most popular verse satire -- frenziedly berates Warren Hastings for not rewarding him for many years of journalistic support. Another sign of financial desperation and an unbalanced mind was Williams's decision to sue for libel forty booksellers who were selling a new edition of 'The Baviad and Maeviad' (1797) in which his tory enemy William Gifford had vilified him. Williams, who claimed $1000 against each defendant, was represented by Thomas Erskine, successful former defender of Thomas Paine and other famous radicals. The trial was on 8 December 1797 before the expeditious lord chief justice Kenyon. Counsel for the defence, William Garrow, alluded darkly to Williams's own libels on respectable public figures, such as Edmund Burke and the prince of Wales, which were too offensive to read in court, at which point the judge intervened and advised the jury to nonsuit the plaintiff, which they immediately did. The trial took 90 minutes in all. It was said, probably correctly, that the jury was packed and the judge politically biased against Williams (Cobbett, cols. 327-9). 
Kenyon refused Erskine's application for a new trial and Williams fled to America to avoid the heavy legal expenses he had incurred. In New York he sought work in the theatre with little success, though a patriotic afterpiece by him was performed in June 1798. Journalism hardly proved a more reliable resource. The weekly 'Columbian Gazette', edited and published by John Mason Williams, as he sometimes called himself in America, survived for only twelve numbers (April-June 1799) and exposed him to abuse from William Cobbett, the leading English tory journalist in America, who was at that time an enemy of Erskine and an ally of Gifford. That summer Williams became an itinerant painter again: portraits of Indian chiefs, drawn when he was touring near the Great Lakes in 1799, were exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1802. 
By the beginning of 1800 Williams was in Boston, where he wrote for the 'Columbian Phenix' and republished 'The Curate of Elmwood'. In 1802-3 he was in England, having perhaps compromised with his creditors. On the return voyage in October 1803 he lost everything, 'except life itself' in a storm off Madeira (Williams, 'Dramatic Censor', 282). Back in Boston, he was editor of the 'Boston Democrat' for some months until, in June 1804, he quarrelled violently with his partners. Earlier in New York he had supported Alexander Hamilton and the Federalist Party; in Boston he changed sides, supported Jefferson and the democrats, and, within three months of Hamilton's death in June 1804, published a savage satire, 'The Hamiltoniad, or, An Extinguisher for the Royal Faction of New England' by Anthony Pasquin. 
Williams returned to England, perhaps as early as 1806. He wrote art criticism for the 'Morning Herald' in 1809-10, apparently having made his peace with Dudley, whose political views regarding the prince and princess of Wales coincided with his own, and, in 1811, published monthly theatre reviews in his own 'Dramatic Censor' 'by J. M. Williams, LL.D'. (There is no independent evidence that he had any university degree.) The collected 'Dramatic Censor' (1812) was dedicated to Williams's last patron, the eccentric amateur actor Robert ('Romeo') Coates. In June 1814 Williams visited Paris, employed as a theatrical agent by Henry Harris, manager of Covent Garden Theatre, to search for plots, tricks, and artists for London pantomimes. The next, and last, trace of Williams was the, probably correct, report from America that he had died of typhus 'in obscure lodgings and in very indigent circumstances' at Brooklyn on 12 October 1818 ('New York Evening Post', 16 Oct 1818), but his enemy John Taylor claimed in 1832 that this report was false and that Williams died 'at an obscure village not far from London' (Taylor, 279-8). 
In his day Williams rivalled Peter Pindar (John Wolcot) as a wit, but his literary reputation did not outlive him. He was boorish, arrogant, belligerent, and reputedly dirty. It is said that when he asked Lord Barrymore what disguise he should wear at a masquerade, the reply was 'go in a clean shirt, Anthony, and nobody will know you' (Bernard, 2.323); also that he 'died of a cold caught by washing his face' (Moore, 3.239). It is not known whether Williams was ever married; his writings show evidence of misogyny. 


@@@@@


doc= 29521


Williams, John (1796-1839), missionary in the Pacific islands, was born at Tottenham High Cross, Middlesex, on 29 June 1796, fifth of the six children and second of the three sons of John Williams and his wife (died 1819), whose maiden name was Maidment and whose first name was probably Hannah. Although his father's side of the family had been Baptists since the seventeenth century, his father was not pious. The dominant religious influence in the family came from his mother, a daughter of an affluent china and glass merchant who was associated with the Revd William Romaine of St Ann Blackfriars, London, and the Calvinistic Methodists. She later joined an Independent chapel. 
Williams received his elementary education near Tottenham at a school in Lower Edmonton. In 1810, destined for a commercial career, he was apprenticed to Enoch Tonkin, a furnishing ironmonger in City Road, London. As a young apprentice he was conventionally lukewarm about religion; he later described himself as not 'outwardly immoral, tho. very wicked' (Gunson, 'John Williams', 75). Invited by his employer's wife to attend Moorfields Tabernacle on 30 January 1814, he was converted by a powerful sermon by the Revd Timothy East of Birmingham on the text: 'For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?' In September 1814 Williams was admitted to church membership. He also became a teacher in the Sunday school, where he gave his first public addresses, and attended meetings of the tabernacle auxiliary to the London Missionary Society (LMS). 
The minister of the tabernacle, the Revd Matthew Wilks, fired Williams's imagination with accounts of the work of the LMS and the millions of heathen 'daily perishing for lack of knowledge' (Gunson, 'John Williams', 76). This led, in July 1816, to Williams applying to the LMS as a missionary candidate. He was accepted and was appointed to the south seas mission, centred on the Society Islands. The directors of the LMS evidently decided that his knowledge of theology and scripture was adequate, for, unlike most other candidates, he was not required to undertake formal theological study at the LMS seminary at Gosport. Fascinated by technology, Williams instead prepared himself for missionary work by finding out as much as he could about mechanical and manufacturing processes of all kinds. Even before he left England he was forming a philosophy of missions in which the teaching of 'saving knowledge' was combined with instruction in the arts of civilization. The conversion of a 'heathen' people to Christianity, he always insisted, would inevitably produce among them a desire for civilization. It was a view shared by many LMS missionaries of his generation. 
Williams, with eight others, was ordained for work in the LMS mission field at Surrey Chapel in London on 30 September 1816. The following month, on 29 October 1816, he was married to Mary Chawner (died 1851), a fellow member of Moorfields Tabernacle, who had also been accepted by the LMS as a suitable person to go out to the mission field as his wife. On 17 November 1816 they embarked in London in the 'Harriet', in a party of LMS missionaries bound for the Pacific. Williams loved ships; his wife found sea voyaging a misery. On the outward voyage the ship called at Hobart in Van Diemen's Land, where the LMS missionaries conducted the first dissenting service in the colony, and at Sydney in New South Wales, where they established friendly relations with evangelical Anglicans and Methodists. The mission party then sailed in the 'Active', first to the Church Missionary Society mission in New Zealand and then to the Society Islands, which they reached on 17 November 1817. 
The LMS south seas mission had begun in 1797, when the first party of missionaries arrived at Tahiti in the Society Islands. The Tahitian mission had made no headway for some years and at one stage was nearly abandoned, but its success was assured in 1815 when the principal chief, Pomare II, having changed his allegiance from the god Oro to Jehovah, gained paramountcy over the islands of Tahiti and Moorea. This was followed by a general movement in favour of Christianity. In the Society Islands, Williams initially spent seven months with other LMS missionaries on Moorea, where he quickly learned Tahitian. After a further three months on Huahine, where he preached his first sermon in the local language, in September 1818 he and his fellow missionary L. E. Threlkeld moved with their families to Raiatea to begin a permanent mission station. Raiatea had once been the centre of the worship of the god Oro. The islanders had outwardly accepted Christianity, but Williams deplored what he described as their continuing licentiousness, idleness, and 'abominable' customs (Prout, 16). He devoted much time and skill to building a substantial house with seven rooms and a veranda, with carpeted floors and furniture made by himself. This was intended to be a model for Christian converts, who were encouraged to leave their scattered settlements in the interior and build European-style cottages in a village on the shore, near the new chapel. Eventually the majority of them did so. Williams also taught them the 'useful arts' of carpentry, plastering, boat building, and blacksmithing. He was full of energy and optimism. 
Williams was critical of the directors of the LMS, who he believed had no real knowledge or understanding of the local situation. He was particularly outraged by their decision that the ship 'Haweis', begun by the Tahiti missionaries and which he had completed, should be sold. 'I have never seen a kind, Christian-like, affectionate, encouraging letter from the Directors, since I have been in connection with the Society', he told them in 1820 (Gutch, 25). At about this time he requested a transfer to a more significant and demanding mission field. However, his mood changed. By the end of that year he had decided to stay in the Pacific. Having learned of the existence of island groups to the west of the Society Islands, he realized that these offered plenty of scope for his restless energy. The first breakthrough was in 1821 when, through contacts with the Christians of Raiatea, the entire population of the small island of Rurutu in the Austral group accepted Christianity. He soon dreamed of extending the mission to every island group in the south Pacific. 
It was Williams's view that the expansion of Christianity in the Pacific islands promoted the extension of trade and civilization. To this end he dreamed of having a ship that would take the island products of sugar cane and tobacco to Sydney. Through participation in commerce, Christian islanders would be led towards industrious habits and prosperity; they would also provide a market for British manufacturers. With a vessel of his own, moreover, he himself could be independent and travel wherever he pleased. In a famous letter to the LMS he wrote that, 'for my own part I cannot content myself within the narrow limits of a Single reef' (Gunson, 'Messengers of Grace', 145). In 1822 he achieved his objective. While visiting Sydney for treatment for filariasis, he bought the schooner 'Endeavour' for the Christian chiefs of the Society Islands using money he had inherited from his mother, who had died in 1819. Governor Brisbane of New South Wales had a high opinion of Williams and his plans. He appointed him as a justice of the peace and gave presents to assist the work of the mission, as well as cows, calves, and sheep for the Christian chiefs. With a ship at his disposal, Williams sought openings for Christian teachers in unevangelized islands. The directors of the LMS, on the other hand, disapproved of the purchase of the 'Endeavour' and deplored Williams's involvement of the society in commerce. When the ship failed to pay its way it had to be sold, in 1823. 
In 1823 Williams placed Raiatean teachers on several of the Cook Islands group. He claimed to have discovered Rarotonga, the largest island, though he already knew of its existence and was not in fact the first European to land there. On his second visit to Rarotonga in 1827 -- stranded without a vessel and unable to return to Raiatea -- he supervised the building, with ingenious use of local materials, of a 50 ton two-masted schooner. Named the 'Olive Branch', it was more familiarly known as the 'Messenger of Peace'. In this vessel he sailed further afield. In 1830 he set out on a missionary voyage that was intended to reach Fiji and the New Hebrides (Vanuatu). Calling first at Tonga, he learned of the dangers for Europeans in the 'dark islands' of southern Melanesia and decided to go instead to Samoa. While in Tonga he claimed to have made a compact with the two Wesleyan missionaries, Peter Turner and William Cross, that the mission fields in Tonga and Fiji would be left to the Wesleyans, while the LMS would have missionary charge of Samoa. At Williams's insistence this agreement was ratified by the directors of the two missionary societies in London in 1836, but it was disputed by the Wesleyans in Tonga whose work had already diffused to Samoa. Williams was the first European to introduce Christianity into Samoa in 1830. By this time he was more positive in his view of native custom than when he first arrived in the Pacific. With a Samoan chief who had been living in Tonga acting as intermediary, he was able to leave eight teachers on the island of Savai'i, under the protection of the powerful chief, Malietoa. When he made his second voyage to Samoa in 1832 the conversion of the Samoans to Christianity was under way, and the LMS church soon became the focus of the religion of the majority of the population. 
Early in 1834 Williams with his wife and three sons took the opportunity of a passage on a visiting whaling ship to return to England. They arrived on 12 June and stayed for almost four years. Williams had several objects: the raising of money to support the LMS mission and for a ship to replace the 'Messenger of Peace' (sold in 1833); the printing of the 'New Testament' and other religious works in the language of Rarotonga; and the preparation for publication of a manuscript, based on his journals, on missionary work in the Pacific islands. To arouse interest in the work of the LMS he went on lengthy lecture tours through England and Scotland; he was rarely at home with his family at Bedford Square in London. Although his delivery was described as heavy and his voice monotonous, he became a popular publicist for the missionary cause: 'Common sense was his great and distinguishing quality; and the conviction which irresistibly darted into the mind of every hearer, was, -- This is an honest man!' (Campbell, 201). One of his favourite themes was the advantage to British commerce that inevitably followed the spread of Christianity: 'not one ship has ever been taken, not one drop of British blood has ever been shed at any island, after the inhabitants had been brought under Christian instruction' ('The Missionary's Farewell', 77). 
Williams's account of his missionary voyages to the Cook Islands and Samoa, 'A Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands', was published in 1837. In an imaginative bid to boost its impact, he persuaded the directors of the LMS to send copies to fifty members of the nobility, with a letter soliciting a donation. Money and commendations flowed in. Williams, conscious of his humble background and lack of education, delighted in aristocratic and royal patronage. His book, illustrated by the printmaker George Baxter, was to become the most popular work on the Pacific islands since the 'Voyages' of Captain James Cook; within six years 38,000 copies had been sold. In 1836-7 Williams gave evidence to the parliamentary select committee on Aborigines, and by the time he left England in 1838 he had become a celebrity. His London valedictory meeting at Moorfields Tabernacle on 4 April 1838 was a huge demonstration of enthusiasm for the protestant missionary movement. A report of the addresses was published as 'The Missionary's Farewell' (1838). 
Williams had wanted to return to the Pacific with a ship of his own. With $4000 that he raised from the public for the purpose, he bought and fitted out a 200 ton brig, the 'Camden'. This was the first official LMS missionary vessel, but to the annoyance of his co-workers he appeared to regard it as his own possession. On its outward voyage it was alleged that one-third of its cargo space was occupied by trade goods belonging to Williams's eldest son, John Chawner Williams, who was intending to set himself up as a trader in Samoa and who was later British consul there (1858-74). 
Having settled on Upolu in Samoa, Williams was eager to be on the move again. For him the next missionary frontier lay in the islands of Melanesia, and in particular the New Hebrides group which, he believed, was the key to the evangelization of the region. On his first missionary voyage in the 'Camden', on 20 November 1839 he landed with two companions at Dillons Bay on Eromanga in the southern New Hebrides. While walking inland the party was attacked by a party of islanders. James Harris was killed on the spot; the rest of the party fled to the ship's boats, but Williams was clubbed to death in the shallows. It was believed that their bodies were subsequently eaten. The reason for the killings was not immediately apparent. At the time missionaries interpreted the attack as an act of revenge for the misdeeds of sandalwood traders at Eromanga ten years earlier, but this seems unlikely. It is more probable that the missionary party unwittingly violated a taboo by approaching food prepared for a local feast. In February 1840 a British warship, HMS 'Favourite', was sent from Sydney to Eromanga to investigate the killings. The naval party obtained the bones and skulls of Williams and Harris, which were buried at Apia, Samoa, on 31 March 1840. 
Through his violent death, at the peak of his missionary career, so soon after his successful visit to England, Williams became a heroic figure among English nonconformists and the subject of a huge popular literature. The Revd Dr John Campbell of Moorfields Tabernacle reflected that 'for the purposes of history, he died in the proper manner, at the proper place, and at the proper time' (Campbell, 228). Baxter's prints of Williams and his martyrdom at Eromanga only added to his reputation. Williams was indeed a 'remarkable all-round missionary' (Garrett, 86) and a chief-like figure, but his image was greater than his actual achievements. From 1844 until 1971 a succession of LMS ships in the Pacific were named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29522


Williams, John (1753-1841), mining entrepreneur and banker, was born on 23 September 1753 in Lower Cusgarne, Cornwall, the eldest son of Michael Williams (1730-1775) and his wife, Susanna (1732-1814), granddaughter of John Harris of Higher Cusgarne and his wife, Elizabeth, only daughter of John Beauchamp of Trevince, head of an ancient Cornish family. He became a leading figure in a dynasty of businessmen involved in the Cornish mining industry whose success made them one of the wealthiest and most influential families in Cornwall. Their involvement with the industry began with Williams's great-great-grandfather, James Williams (died 1673) and his brothers Davey and Richard, who came to Cornwall from Shropshire to profit from the developing metal mines; James's grandson John (1685-1761) and John's youngest son Michael Williams followed them. 
Williams attended Truro grammar school. Following the death of his father in 1775 he inherited a little more than $1000 and was employed as purser, manager, and bookkeeper of the Wheal Maiden mine. However, as the industry grew apace Williams's involvement in mines increased. By 1779 he was acting as agent to about twenty-two mines, running his operations from the 'copper office' at the counting house of Wheal Damsel near St Day. The duties of superintending a large number of mines led Williams to move from his home at Burncoose to Scorrier, at the other end of the parish of Gwennap, where he built Scorrier House. As a staunch Methodist, Williams also had Wheal Rose Chapel built near his new home. On 23 January 1776 at Kenwyn, Cornwall, he married Catherine (1757-1826), daughter of Martin Harvey of Kenwyn. They had five sons and two daughters. 
As well as superintending mines, Williams purchased shares in many mines, and he was so successful that he came to control the majority of mines in the Gwennap area. His business interests also diversified. By the end of the century he leased and worked sulphur mines in co. Wicklow, Ireland, and was involved in the tin-smelting industry in Cornwall. In 1806, after purchasing the manor of Calstock in east Cornwall, he developed the manganese industry in that area. In 1810 he became a partner in the Cornish Bank at Truro, and in 1812 he and members of the Fox family of Falmouth contracted with the government to build the breakwater at Plymouth, employing the engineer John Rennie (1761-1821). The success of this project was aided by Williams's knowledge of tides, currents, and the locality. In 1813 members of the Williams and Fox families entered into a partnership with Collan Harvey to develop the harbour at Portreath in Cornwall, which was of strategic importance in the trade of copper ore and coal between Cornwall and south Wales. Williams had long expressed an interest in copper smelting. In 1822 he and his sons formed a partnership with Pascoe St Leger Grenfell and Lewis Fox, originally for the production of copper and the copper-zinc alloy 'yellow metal' at Burncoose. In 1823 the partnership took over the Rose Copper Works in the Swansea valley. This firm, after various changes in partners, later became the largest in the industry under the name Williams, Foster & Co. Williams retired from business in 1828, though his three surviving sons maintained the family connection with the mining and smelting industries and related business activities. 
Through his direct involvement in the industry Williams established a reputation as a leading authority on mining, such that between 1795 and 1800 he received a visit from the Bourbon princes (later Louis XVIII and Charles X of France). However, he is also well known for his apparent precognition on 2 or 3 May 1812 of the assassination of the chancellor of the exchequer and prime minister, Spencer Perceval, eight or nine days before the event. He dreamt three times the same night that he saw a man shot in the lobby of the House of Commons, whom he was told was Perceval. The dreams left such an impression that the next day he discussed with some friends whether he should go to London to warn Perceval. They dissuaded him, in case he was thought to be a fanatic. However, after the assassination Williams met government officials at the home of John Rennie, and later he wrote an account of the event which was included in the biography of Perceval written by Perceval's grandson, Spencer Walpole. 
In 1832, at the age of seventy-nine, and six years after his first wife's death Williams married a Miss Edwards, who was twenty-five, apparently to the disapproval of his family. They lived in Sandhill House on his Calstock estate, where Williams had retired. Williams died at Sandhill on 17 April 1841, survived by his wife. Of his children, John (1777-1849) was a member of the Society of Friends and was elected to fellowships of both the Linnean Society and the Royal Society; Michael Williams ['see under 'Williams, John Charles] was the member of parliament for the western division of Cornwall from 1853 to 1858; and William (1791-1870) was created a baronet in 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 29523


Williams, Sir John (1777-1846), judge, was born in January 1777 and baptized on 10 February 1777 at Bunbury, Cheshire, the only son of William Williams (died 1813), vicar of Bunbury, and his wife, Ester, daughter of John Richardson of Beeston, Cheshire. He was said to be descended from an ancient Merioneth family. Williams was educated at Manchester grammar school, which he entered on 26 June 1787, and where he was remembered as sound and industrious rather than brilliant. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1794, being elected a scholar in 1796. He graduated BA in 1798, was elected fellow of Trinity in 1800, and took his MA in 1801. 
Williams entered the Inner Temple in 1797 and was called to the bar in 1804, joining the northern circuit and the Lancaster and Chester sessions, and joining Lincoln's Inn in 1813. His choice of the northern circuit and his adherence to the Liberal Party were considered 'bold steps' at the time, professional competition being keen on the large northern circuit, and the prospect of promotion small among opponents of the government. Williams did not acquire a first-rate practice, but he took great care to get to the root of his cases, and it was said that Mr Baron Bayley more than once declared that 'if he were to be tried for his life he should desire to be defended by Mr. Williams'. 
Williams made his name at the bar as junior counsel for the defence at the trial of Queen Caroline in 1820. His strength as an advocate lay in his treatment of witnesses, as he demonstrated in his cross-examination of Louise Demont, one of the queen's maids, which, together with his speech at the opening of the defence, was commended by his leaders, Henry Brougham and Thomas Denman. 
Williams was returned to parliament for the city of Lincoln at a by-election on 23 March 1822. He sat for that constituency until he was returned for Ilchester in 1826, and sat for Winchelsea from 1830 until the borough was disenfranchised in 1832. He was an effective speaker in the House of Commons, where he made it his business, with Michael Angelo Taylor and others, to attack Lord Eldon and the delays and expenses of the court of chancery. His motions on the subject led to the appointment of the chancery commission of 1825 which reported in 1826, though without effective result. 
Williams's political conduct was prejudicial to his professional advancement, but when the whigs joined Canning in office in 1827 he became king's counsel; and on the accession of William IV he became first solicitor-general, and then attorney-general to Queen Adelaide, in the place of Brougham and Denman, who became lord chancellor and lord chief justice respectively. On 28 February 1834 Williams was created serjeant-at-law, and appointed a baron of the exchequer. He sat in the exchequer for one term, and having been knighted on 16 April 1834 was appointed a justice of the court of king's bench to replace Sir James Parke (afterwards Lord Wensleydale). 
Williams did not have a profound knowledge of the law, or judicial talents of the very highest order, but he was sincere and earnest in his desire to administer justice and was admired both 'in banco' and at 'nisi prius'. His initial ignorance of the details of practice led him to refuse to grant orders of course, but this difficulty was soon overcome. He was below middle height, and appeared severe, but this was not his true character and he was well liked by both the bar and his fellow judges. He wrote occasionally for the 'Law Review', and was a distinguished classical scholar, contributing several articles on the Greek orators to the 'Edinburgh Review'. 
Williams married Harriet Catherine (died 1861), only surviving daughter of Davies Davenport of Capethorne, near Congleton, his father's friend and patron. There were no children. He died at his house, Livermore Park in Suffolk, on 15 September 1846. His death was attributed to 'angina pectoris' or to 'gout in the stomach'. He was buried in Temple Church on 23 September 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 29524


Williams, John (1792-1858), schoolmaster and classical scholar, was the youngest child of John Williams, vicar of Ystradmeurig in Cardiganshire, and Jane, daughter of Lewis Rogers of Gelli, high sheriff of Cardiganshire. His father, 
John Williams (the youngest son) was born at Ystradmeurig on 11 April 1792. He was educated chiefly at his father's school, then started teaching at the age of fifteen at Chiswick School, Chiswick, Middlesex, and at Ludlow School before going up to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1810 to read classics. He graduated BA with first-class honours in 1814 (DD, 1831; MA, 1838). In 1814 Williams was appointed a tutor at Winchester College, and personal assistant to the headmaster, Dr Henry Dison Gabell. His next four years were unhappy: he was the first non-Wykehamist to be appointed, and was greatly resented by the governing body of New College, Oxford, and by the staff and pupils. Unrest at the school culminated in the 'schoolboy rebellion' in 1818, when the pupils locked themselves in and occupied the roof, and the military had to be called in. John Williams was made the scapegoat and was forced to resign. Gabell was later (1824) to provide for Williams a glowing testimonial which refuted the Wykehamists' slanders. 
Williams then taught for two years at Hyde Abbey School in Winchester (1818-20). In 1820, following the death of Eliezer Williams, vicar of Lampeter, Thomas Burgess (1756-1837), bishop of St David's, appointed Williams vicar of Lampeter, in Cardiganshire, and master of Lampeter grammar school, a private or 'adventure' school which had been established a few years earlier by Eliezer Williams. It had already an excellent reputation; it had eighty pupils (including fifteen divinity students) and two assistant masters. John Williams added to the school's lustre, and seems to have moved it to better accommodation on the Falcondale estate on the outskirts of the town. Lampeter was subsequently chosen for a new theological college in the diocese of St David's -- St David's College, Lampeter -- which opened in 1827. John Williams had hoped to become its first principal, but became involved in a crucial disagreement with Bishop Burgess about the precise nature of the new college. 
While he was at Lampeter in the early 1820s he married Mary (died 16 Aug 1854), only daughter of Thomas Evans of Llanilar, Cardiganshire. They had six daughters; the eldest, Jane Eliza, in 1861 married Major Walter Colquhoun-Grant, 2nd dragoon guards, who died the same year in India; subsequently she became lady principal of Kidderpore House, Calcutta, where she died in 1895. 
One of John Williams's closest friends at Balliol had been John Gibson Lockhart, the future son-in-law and biographer of Walter Scott. In 1820, presumably on Lockhart's recommendation, Scott sent his second son, Charles, to Lampeter as a private pupil to be tutored for entrance to Oxford; Scott was so impressed with Williams that Lampeter soon received the sons of other eminent Scotsmen, including William Forbes Mackenzie, the son of Colin Mackenzie, the deputy keeper of the signet. 
Scott and Mackenzie were two of the leading protagonists in the establishment of a new proprietary day school in Edinburgh, the Edinburgh Academy, in 1824. It was intended to raise the standard of classical education in Scotland and to put Scottish pupils on an equal footing with boys from English public schools for entry to English universities. Scott wrote to Williams asking for advice about a suitable candidate for the rectorship; to his surprise and delight, Williams (realizing that he had no prospects in Lampeter) offered himself as a candidate. Scott, a tory, lobbied tirelessly to have him appointed in the face of stiff opposition from some of the whig directors of the school. His campaign paid off, and Williams was appointed to the post five months before the school opened on 1 October 1824. 
Williams's rectorship was an outstanding success. In September 1827, however, he suddenly resigned to become professor of Roman language and literature in the new London University. It was an unfortunate decision: he had hoped for ecclesiastical preferment by forging a link between this new secular college and the Church of England. He soon discovered, however, that the church wanted nothing to do with 'that godless institution in Gower Street' -- indeed, Anglicans were planning a new Anglican institution, King's College, so before he had taken up his chair Williams resigned it. Scott and his fellow directors of the Edinburgh Academy were dismayed. In his 'Journal' (26 June 1828) Scott noted: 'Wrote a long letter to Lockhart about Williams' situation saying how by sitting betwixt two stools he 


-- had fallen with heavy thump 

Upon his reverential rump. 

' Williams stayed on in Edinburgh, working on his notes for 'The Life and Actions of Alexander the Great' (1829) and for his magnum opus, 'Homerus' (1842), on the essential unity of the Homeric poems. His successor as rector of the Edinburgh Academy (the Revd Thomas Sheepshanks) proved disastrous and resigned in May 1829. Williams was reappointed and stayed on as rector until 1847 (although he applied unsuccessfully for the post of headmaster of the King Edward VI Free School at Birmingham in 1838). 
When he retired the directors praised him in their 1847 'Report': 'He leaves the School, matured chiefly through him, in an admirable system. He has exhibited in his own Classes a model of perfect teaching, and he has established witnesses of his kindness, vigour and success, in grateful and eminent pupils, scattered over every quarter of the globe.' His 'grateful and eminent pupils' included: Archibald Campbell Tait (dux of the school in 1826 and 1827), who became archbishop of Canterbury (1869-82); James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879), the great Scottish physicist; Peter Guthrie Tait (1831-1901), the mathematician; Edward James Harland (1831-1896), who established the shipbuilding firm of Harland and Wolff; John Campbell Shairp, principal of St Andrews University and later professor of poetry at Oxford; and a host of others. 
Williams and Scott remained close friends. In his 'Journal' Scott recorded his admiration for Williams: 'Mr Williams was there, whose extensive information, learning and lively talent makes him always pleasant company' (29 June 1827); 'he is a heaven-born teacher' (28 Aug 1827); 'the best Schoolmaster in Europe' (25 June 1828). Williams also had a special interest in the early history of the Celtic races, and particularly of the language and literature of Wales, and his enthusiastic conversations with Scott on Welsh history prompted the writing of 'The Betrothed' (1825), Scott's only Welsh romance. On Scott's death in 1832 Williams conducted the funeral service in the ruins of Dryburgh Abbey. 
During his years at Edinburgh Williams maintained his connections with Wales and his concern for his Welsh heritage. In 1833 he was appointed archdeacon of Cardigan (albeit an absentee). He hoped to return to an ecclesiastical or educational post in Wales, and in 1836 considered resigning the rectorship to work on literature and a history of Wales. Since its foundation in 1837 he was associated with the Welsh Manuscript Society. He would have left Edinburgh earlier if offered a suitable Welsh ecclesiastical preferment, and in 1840 was very disappointed at not being appointed bishop of St David's. He continued to hope for a see. A few weeks after he retired from the Edinburgh Academy in 1847 he was appointed, reportedly through the influence of Benjamin Hall, the first warden of a new school at Llandovery, in Carmarthenshire, the Thomas Phillips Foundation at Llandovery (also called the Welsh Education Institution, now Llandovery College), which had just been endowed by Thomas Phillips (1760-1851), to teach not only the usual classical curriculum, but also Welsh and science, and to provide the church with Welsh-speaking clergy. The school opened in temporary accommodation in March 1848, pending permanent buildings which were completed by May 1851; Williams's prestige was crucial in raising the necessary funds. Williams wanted to develop the school into a collegiate institution which might supersede the college at Lampeter. He and Benjamin Hall openly attacked Lampeter for the inefficiency of its training and its neglect of Welsh studies. By the time ill health forced Williams to retire in 1853 he had raised Llandovery to prominence among the schools of Wales. 
The last five years of Williams's life were devoted chiefly to literary work. He resided in Brighton, and for three months in 1853 he stood in for one of his old pupils, Frederick Robertson, at Trinity Chapel. Subsequently he lived in Oxford, but in 1857 he went to Bushey Heath, in Hertfordshire, where he died on 27 December 1858 and was buried on 4 January 1859 in Bushey churchyard. He was considered one of the greatest classical scholars Wales has produced. The man who ministered to him at the end and conducted the funeral service was his most distinguished pupil, Archibald Campbell Tait, then bishop of London. 
At his death Williams left behind him several unfinished works, including some slight portions of an autobiography ('Bye-gones', 1874, 159). His eldest daughter, Mrs Colquhoun-Grant, acted as his literary executor and collected further materials for biographical purposes, but most of his papers and correspondence were lost in July 1878 in the wreck of the steamship 'Europa', in which she was returning from India, off the coast of Spain. 


@@@@@


doc= 29525


Williams, John (1811-1862), antiquary, was born at Ty Nant, Llangynhafal, Denbighshire, the son of Roger Williams (son of William Bethell or Ab Ithel) and his wife, Elizabeth. He received his early education in Ruthin grammar school, and on 15 March 1832, at the age of twenty, matriculated at Oxford from Jesus College. He graduated BA in 1835 and was ordained deacon on 19 July that year and priest on 1 May 1836. On 11 July 1836 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Owen Lloyd Williams of Dolgellau. He was at the time a curate in the parish of Llanfor, with special charge of the new church of Holy Trinity, Rhosygwaliau, and when in 1839 a separate endowment was provided for this church, he became its first incumbent. In 1838 he proceeded MA. From 1843 to 1849 he was perpetual curate of Nerquis, near Mold; in the latter year he received the rectory of Llanymawddwy, where he remained until 1862. 
From his youth Williams was keenly interested in Welsh historical studies, and the Welsh 'tract', afterwards translated into English, which he published at Bala in 1836 under the title 'Eglwys Loegr yn anymddibynol ar eglwys Rufain' ('The Church of England independent of the Church of Rome') was the first of a long succession of similar works. In 1841 he won a prize at Swansea eisteddfod for an essay, published in 1842, on the human sacrifices of the druids. These earlier efforts were embodied in 1844 in 'Ecclesiastical Antiquities of the Cymry' (2nd edn 1854). Ab Ithel, as he had now begun to style himself, was an active opponent of the scheme for the union of the bishoprics of Bangor and St Asaph, and was thus brought into association with Harry Longueville Jones. The two issued in January 1846 the first number of 'Archaeologia Cambrensis', a quarterly journal devoted to Welsh antiquities, and before the end of the year succeeded in forming the Cambrian Archaeological Association, which took over the new journal and appointed Williams and Jones joint editors. Ab Ithel was a constant contributor to the early volumes, and many of his papers were separately issued, including the account of Valle Crucis (1846), the essay on druidic stones (1850), and the glossary of terms used for articles of British dress and armour (1851). In 1851 he became sole editor; this office he resigned, however, at the end of 1853, and in 1854 he established the Cambrian Institute and started the 'Cambrian Journal', which he edited until his death. The control of the older association had passed to men who had no sympathy with his uncritical methods and perfervid patriotism. In 1852 he published 'Y Gododin', an edition with a translation, introduction, and notes. Another Welsh association, the Welsh Manuscript Society, appointed him one of its editors, and under its auspices he published at Llandovery in 1856 'Dosparth edeyrn davod aur', a medieval Welsh grammar. At the Llangollen eisteddfod of 1858, of which he was one of the chief organizers, he won a prize for the best essay on Welsh bardic lore; this was published by the Welsh Manuscript Society under the title of 'Barddas' (1862), though in an incomplete form, the second volume not appearing until 1874. Ab Ithel was also the editor of the society's volume on the physicians of Myddfai (1861), though his part in this was small. Among his other works were 'Crwydriadau yr hen wr' (1849), 'Cloch y llan' (1854), 'Brwydr yr alma' (1855), 'Dafydd Llwyd' (1856), and 'The Traditionary Annals of the Cymry' (1858). In 1854 he began a church monthly, 'Baner y Groes', and during 1859 and 1860 he edited the journal 'Taliesin'; his activities also involved him with a group of clergymen, later known as 'yr' hen bersoniaid llengar ('the old literary clerics'), who fostered Welsh literature in the first half of the nineteenth century. 
For all his industry and enthusiasm Ab Ithel had no critical ability, and blindly accepted the bardic traditions popularized by Iolo Morganwg and William Owen Pughe. His defects as a scholar were brought out clearly in the editions of 'Annales Cambriae' and 'Brut y tywysogion', which he issued for the master of the rolls in 1860. All that was valuable in these was the work of Aneurin Owen, whose papers were at Ab Ithel's disposal, and were used without any acknowledgement ('Archaeologia Cambrensis', 1861). In 1862 the rectory of Llanenddwyn, with the perpetual curacy of Llanddwywe, near Barmouth, was given to him; but on 27 August of that year, very shortly after moving to his new home, he died. He was buried at Llanddwywe. 


@@@@@


doc= 29526


Williams, Sir John Bickerton (1792-1855), nonconformist memorialist, son of William Williams of Broseley, Shropshire, and his wife, Hannah, daughter of John Bickerton, was born on 4 March 1792 at Sandford Hall, West Felton, Shropshire; he was a collateral relative of the family of the seventeenth-century nonconformist divines Philip and Matthew Henry. His parents moved to Wem, Shropshire, early in his life, and there he was educated and articled to an attorney. Between 1811 and 1815 he lived in Liverpool, and in 1816 was admitted an attorney at Shrewsbury, where he went into practice. On 31 August 1819 he was admitted a burgess. On 27 December 1813 he married at Aston, near Birmingham, Elizabeth (died 1872), daughter of Josiah Robins of Birmingham. They had three sons and two daughters. 
From an early age Williams was deeply religious and became a member of the Wem Congregational Church in 1809. He began to form a collection of manuscripts by the Henrys and other theologians of their school, and devoted his leisure to writing. His first publication was 'Eighteen Sermons of the Rev. Philip Henry, M.A., from Original Manuscripts' (1816). This was followed in 1818 by a memoir of Henry's daughter Sarah Savage, which, in its 1821 edition, included a memoir of her sister, Ann Hulton. Memoirs of Philip Henry (1825) and Matthew Henry (1828) followed -- the latter was frequently reprinted -- along with several other works on the Henry family. A regular contributor to the 'Evangelical Magazine' and the 'Congregational Magazine', Williams also published a memoir of Sir Matthew Hale (1835) and two series of 'Letters on Puritanism and Nonconformity' (1843 and 1846). 
After the passing of the 'Municipal Corporations Act' of 1835, Williams was elected an alderman of Shrewsbury, and in November 1836 became mayor, the first dissenter so appointed. In this capacity he presented an address to the duke of Sussex, and this introduction to the duke led to a friendship based on their mutual literary interests. To this friendship he owed the knighthood bestowed on 19 July 1837 by Queen Victoria, the first of her reign. He was elected FSA in 1824 and a fellow of the American Antiquarian Society in 1838. In 1831 he received the degree of LLD from Middleburg College, Vermont. 
Williams retired from his legal practice in March 1841 and went to reside at The Hall, Wem, where he died on 21 October 1855. He was buried in the cemetery in Chapel Street, Wem, on 27 October; his funeral sermon was preached by John Angell James on 4 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 29527


Williams, Joseph (b. c.1663, d. in or after 1707), actor, was a performer of some distinction about whom few personal details survive. He has been speculatively identified as the son of the actor Walter Williams, and when he gave a deposition in chancery in October 1691, he was 'aged about 28 yeares', the only clue to his birth date. According to the prompter Downes, Williams joined the Duke's Company as a boy about 1673 and 'served Mr [Henry] Harris', the actor and co-director. (There is no evidence that, as some authorities state, he was apprenticed as a seal-cutter.) The presence of David Williams in the same company makes assignment of early roles uncertain. Joseph was probably Alcander in John Dryden and Nathaniel Lee's 'Oedipus' (1678), which would be his first known role. He definitely played Troilus in John Banks's 'Destruction of Troy' in November that year and Aeneas in Dryden's 'Troilus and Cressida' the following spring. About 1680 he took parts in John Crowne's 'Misery of Civil War', Aphra Behn's 'Revenge', Lawrence Maidwell's 'The Loving Enemies', and Nahum Tate's 'The Loyal General'. 
As early as 1680 Williams, then about seventeen, took such major roles as Polydore in Otway's 'Orphan' and Bertran in Dryden's 'Spanish Fryar', a promising sign. He probably joined the United Company in November 1682 when the Duke's Company absorbed the King's, but revivals dominated the repertory, so there is no definite evidence of his participation until 1684, when he played Decius Brutus in 'Julius Caesar' and Alberto in Tate's 'A Duke and No Duke'. He became a sharer in the United Company, probably when he turned twenty-one. Between 1684 and the actors' rebellion of 1695 Williams performed significant roles in both new and old plays. He was Sir Petronell Flash in Tate's 'Cuckold's Haven' (1685), Captain Marine in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Commonwealth of Women' (1686), the King of Sicily in his fellow actor William Mountfort's 'The Injur'd Lovers' (1688), the Duke of Guise in Lee's 'Massacre of Paris' (1689), the title characters in Dryden's 'Don Sebastian' (1689) and 'Amphitryon' (1690), and the rake Wilding in Thomas Southerne's 'The Wives Excuse' (1691). Luttrell records one of the few personal details known about Williams: on 18 March 1692 he killed 'Captain Hoard of the Provo' in a duel (Luttrell, 2.394). Absent from the stage for about six months, Williams may have been gaoled or gone into hiding. 
Awaiting Williams when he returned were Vainlove in Congreve's 'The Old Batchelour' (1693) and Mellefont in his 'The Double-Dealer' (1694), Garcia in Dryden's last play, 'Love Triumphant' (1694), and Biron in Southerne's 'Fatal Marriage' (1694). The play 'Have at All' was attributed to him in the 'Gentleman's Journal' of May 1694 but was never printed. In revivals he took such parts as Rains in Shadwell's 'Epsom-Wells', Lysimachus in Lee's 'Rival Queens', and Cassio in Shakespeare's 'Othello'. In December 1694 Williams signed the 'petition of the players' to the lord chamberlain against the management of Christopher Rich (preserved in TNA: PRO, LC 7/3). The 'reply of the patentees' states that his salary had been $3 per week prior to 1692, but that he demanded and received $4 a week when he returned to the company. Williams is named among the actor-sharers in the licence granted by the lord chamberlain in March 1695 to the rebel troupe opening at Lincoln's Inn Fields, but, not liking the terms offered, he chose to stay at Drury Lane. One immediate result was that the lead role of Valentine in Congreve's 'Love for Love', written for Williams, had to be taken by the sixty-year-old Betterton. 
At Drury Lane, Williams was useful to a young and hard-pressed company, taking such parts as the Lieutenant-Governor in Southerne's 'Oroonoko' (1695), the Elder Worthy in Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift' (1696), Valerius Asiaticus in Crowne's 'Caligula', and the dashing Roebuck in Farquhar's 'Love and a Bottle' (1698). For the season of 1699-1700 he appears to have defected to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he is listed as Pylades in John Dennis's 'Iphigenia', but the shift cost him a role in the most popular play of the era, Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple', and signals a downturn in his career. A year later he was back at Drury Lane, playing Constant in Mrs Trotter's 'Love at a Loss'. He remained there the rest of his career. Though his presence is thinly recorded, he still won some important roles, among them the Archduke of Austria in Trotter's 'Unhappy Penitent' (1701), Gainlove in Richard Wilkinson's 'Vice Reclaim'd' (1703), Hannibal in Cibber's 'Perolla and Izadora' (1705), Woolfort in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Royal Merchant', and the Tsar in their 'Loyal Subject'. Williams's last known new part was Worthy in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer' in April of 1706. He shared a benefit on 22 April 1707, but whether he performed at that time is unclear, nor is anything known about him thereafter. 
If not quite of the first rank, Joseph Williams was a talented actor who excelled in comedy, exhibiting a considerable range in his parts. In tragedy he was useful, though not powerful enough to carry a play himself. Cibber judged that the rebel actors erred badly in refusing Williams full sharer status in 1695, but admitted that his 'Industry... was not equal to his Capacity... he lov'd his Bottle better than his Business' (Cibber, 1.200). Williams had great innate capacity, was well trained, and enjoyed considerable early success, but his career never fulfilled his promise. 


@@@@@


doc= 29528


Williams, Joshua (1813-1881), legal writer, was born at Kensington, London, on 23 May 1813, the fifth son and seventh child of Thomas Williams (1773-1852) of Cote, Bampton, Oxfordshire, and Cowley Grove, Middlesex, and his wife, Violetta, 'nee' Williams said to be a remote descendant of Sir David Williams (1550-1613), judge. He was educated at a private school, and afterwards at University College, London (then London University). He was admitted as a student of Lincoln's Inn on 31 January 1833. After practising for three years under the bar as a certificated conveyancer, he was called to the bar on 4 May 1838. In 1845 he published his 'Principles of the Law of Real Property' (which first appeared as 'Williams on Conveyancing'), a work which reached a twenty-fourth edition in 1926. This was followed in 1848 by his 'Principles of the Law of Personal Property', of which the fourteenth edition appeared in 1894. 
The publication of these books brought Williams an extensive practice as a conveyancer and real property lawyer, and in March 1862 he was appointed by Lord Chancellor Westbury one of the four conveyancing counsel to the court of chancery. His health suffered from the strain of increasing work. He was made QC on 30 March 1865, and on 20 April 1865 was elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn. As a QC he was especially noted for cases defending rights of common, in Epping Forest, Plumstead Common, Berkhamsted, Wimbledon, and elsewhere. 
In 1875 Williams was appointed professor of the law of real and personal property to the inns of court by the Council of Legal Education. He was annually re-elected to this office until his resignation in 1880. Among his publications were a series of lectures on property law, an edition of a contemporary text on succession, and a text on law reform. He died at his home, 49 Queensborough Terrace, London, on 25 October 1881. He married four times: first, to Lucy, daughter of William Strange, of Upton, Essex; second, to Elvira Anna, daughter of Pownoll Phipps of Oaklands, Tipperary; third, to Martha, daughter of the Revd Cyprian Thompson; and fourth, to Mary Webb of Hereford. His son with his third wife, Thomas Cyprian Williams, was a barrister and edited many editions of his father's works. 
Exceptionally tall, at 6 feet 41/2 inches, Williams was one of the most popular barristers of his day. 


@@@@@


doc= 29529


Williams, (Maria) Jane (1795-1873), singer and compiler of traditional Welsh music, was almost certainly born at Aberpergwm House in the Vale of Neath, Glamorgan, south Wales, where her family had lived for generations. She was the daughter of Rees Williams (1755-1812), a landowner, businessman, and coal master, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Jenkins ('c'.1759-1834). Aberpergwm had an ancient association with poetry, and Rees Williams is thought to have been the last Welshman to uphold the tradition of employing a household poet, Dafydd Nicholas. Jane Williams had her first education at home before attending a school in Swansea with her sister, Elizabeth Ann (1794-1871), who was to be her lifelong companion. She was taught the harp later in life by the English harpist Elias Parish Alvars; at some point she also learned the guitar. 
The Williams family moved in Anglo-Welsh London society, particularly when the sisters were young and marriageable (although neither, in fact, ever married). Jane, it seems, was a vivacious young woman who enjoyed the attention she received for her musical talents: her soprano singing voice was distinctive and widely acclaimed. It is not entirely clear how she acquired the name Llinos (the Welsh for linnet), but her obituary in 'The Athenaeum' refers to her unwillingness to be called by the more flattering name Eos (nightingale). It was her singing and playing which apparently brought her to the attention of Lady Llanover, one of the most prominent figures in that social circle, with whom Jane kept up a friendship throughout her adult life. Williams appears to have met the author Crofton Croker in 1826 while returning from a visit to Ireland. She introduced him to the fairy legends of Cwm Nedd, which he later included in his book 'Irish Fairy Legends' (1828). They continued to correspond on their mutual interest in Celtic myth and legend. 
With her sister and brother William (1788-1855), Jane Williams was associated with the Welsh literary society Y Cymreigyddion Y Fenni and the Abergavenny eisteddfod, which it instituted in the 1830s. Aberpergwm House and nearby Ynys-las, at Blaen-gwrach (to which the sisters moved on William's marriage in 1837), became a lively focus for their 'Celtic renaissance' circle. Jane competed at Abergavenny, but there are conflicting accounts of her victories. She probably won in 1838 for an arrangement of a Welsh air for four voices, and a year earlier for the best collection of unpublished Welsh music. This was to be published as 'Ancient Airs of Gwent and Morgannwg' (1844), the collection of folk-songs for which she is best remembered. She was considered an authority by her contemporaries and was consulted by them on matters pertaining to folk-songs, but her authority has been challenged by modern scholars. Some have suggested that the contribution of her sister to her published work has not been fairly recognized, and others claim that her texts were sent to John Jones (Tegid) and Taliesin Williams (ab Iolo) for rendering into more refined Welsh. Her practice of providing only abbreviated versions of song texts has also been criticized. But Jane Williams was undoubtedly one of the first Welsh women to gain a close understanding of the country's poetic and musical traditions through a systematic study of songs. 
Jane Williams died on 10 November 1873 at Ynys-las. She was buried on 15 November with Elizabeth Ann, who had died two years earlier, in the family vault in Aberpergwm church, where a simple plaque commemorated the lives of the sisters. She had lived most of her later life in a small area of Wales, and her principal interest was in the cultural heritage of her own country. Therefore, despite the later criticism of her work, it is a mark of her achievement that her death was widely reported not just in Wales, but in major English newspapers such as 'The Times' and 'The Athenaeum'. It is clear from contemporary writings about her that her endeavours as a scholar, together with her unmannered brilliance as a singer, were matched by a kind and lively personality. 


@@@@@


doc= 29530


Williams, Montagu Stephen (1835-1892), barrister and magistrate, was born at his great-uncle's house, at Freshford, Somerset, on 30 September 1835. His grandfather was a barrister on the western circuit, and his father, John Jeffries Williams, a barrister on the Oxford circuit. He was educated at Eton College, but failed to gain a scholarship at Cambridge and at the age of twenty became for a short time a classical master at Ipswich grammar school. During the Crimean War he decided to enter the army. His father's friend Colonel Sibthorp gave him a commission in the South Lincoln militia, and on 14 March 1856 he obtained an ensigncy in the 41st foot. The conclusion of peace made military service less attractive to him, and when the regiment was ordered to the West Indies he resigned. For a time he was a member of a touring company and acted at Edinburgh, Belfast, Sunderland, and Nottingham. At Edinburgh he became acquainted with Louisa Mary Keeley (died 1877), daughter of Robert Keeley and Mary Anne Keeley, well-known actors. He married her in 1858. Partly on his wife's advice, partly on that of Montagu Chambers QC, his godfather, he then decided to go to the bar and entered the Middle Temple on 9 June 1859. Meantime he wrote for the press, had a share in a magazine called the 'Drawing Room', contributed to 'Household Words', and was author and adapter of several plays and farces, usually in collaboration with F. C. Burnand. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 30 April 1862, and joined the Old Bailey sessions and the home circuit. 
Williams took naturally to criminal work and swiftly gained a large practice, especially as a defender of prisoners (indeed it was said that he defended more criminals than any other counsel). For fifteen years he was engaged in most of the sensational criminal cases in London and in 1879 was appointed junior prosecuting counsel to the Treasury. In 1884 he developed a throat disorder which in 1886 required an operation on the larynx. Its success was complete, although his voice was almost destroyed. A short attempt to return to practice at the bar proved to Williams that he must retire. He was then appointed a metropolitan stipendiary magistrate in December 1886, and sat successively at Greenwich, Wandsworth, and Worship Street. He was made a queen's counsel in 1888. He was active in charity, and was said to have been known among the poor as 'the poor man's magistrate'. He published two autobiographical and anecdotal works, as well as 'Round London' (1892), which described the condition of the poor in the east and west of London. He died at his house, 3 Chartham Terrace, Ramsgate, on 23 December 1892, and was buried at Brompton cemetery. He was well-known in society and in his profession and very popular. 


@@@@@


doc= 29531


Williams, Morris (1809-1874), Church of England clergyman and poet, was the son of William Morris, a farmer of Pen-tyrch Isaf, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of William Jones of Coed Cae Bach, in the parish of Llangybi, Caernarvonshire. He was born on 20 August 1809 at Caernarfon, but the family settled soon afterwards at Coed Cae Bach. After attending school at Llanystumdwy he was apprenticed to a carpenter; he showed at an early age much skill in writing Welsh verse, and contributed an ode to the 'Gwyliedydd' in 1827. He was encouraged to prepare for orders, and entered King's College, Chester, in 1830. On 13 April 1832 he matriculated at Oxford from Jesus College, graduating BA in 1835 and MA in 1838. He was ordained deacon at Chester in 1835 and priest in St Asaph in October 1836, holding curacies at Holywell, Pentir, and Llanllechid successively. On 28 April 1840 he married Anne Jones of Denbigh; they went on to have five daughters and three sons. Williams received in 1847 the perpetual curacy of Amlwch, which he held until 1859, when the rectory of Llanrhuddlad (with Llanfflewin and Llanrhwydrys attached) in the county of Anglesey was conferred upon him. 
William's connection with eisteddfodau began in 1849 at Aberffraw, when he was awarded the chair prize for an ode, 'The Creation'. It was in this competition he first assumed the title of Nicander. He subsequently won prizes for poems at Rhuddlan (1850), Llangollen (1858), Denbigh (1860), Aberdar (1861), and Caernarfon (1862). In 1851 he acted as adjudicator of poetry at the Porthmadog eisteddfod, and thereafter was much in request for work of this kind until his death. Except the ode on the creation, which appeared in the Aberffraw volume of 'Transactions', none of Nicander's prize poems have been published, but he did issue several other works, including 'Y flwyddyn eglwysig' (1843), a series of poems on the plan of 'The Christian Year'; Welsh versions of Dr Sutton's 'Disce vivere' and 'Disce mori', under the titles 'Dysga fyw' (1847) and 'Dysga farw' (1848); and 'Y Psallwyr' (1850), a new metrical version of the 'Psalms'. His son allowed the Bangor publishers Jarvis and Foster to publish 'Damhegion Esop ar gan', the Welsh verse of the fables of Aesop, which his father had prepared in instalments in the 'Haul' (1868-74). 
This version was republished in Llandybie in 1957. Williams, though not to be ranked with the foremost of Welsh poets, was equally deft in the use of the free and the strict metres, enriching the liturgy of the church by his hymns, and wrote, especially in his letters to Ebenezer Thomas (Eben Fardd), Welsh prose of remarkable vigour (J. Jones, ed., 'Adgof uwch anghof'). He was also regarded as one of the pioneers of the Oxford Movement in the diocese of Bangor. In 1872 Williams was appointed rural dean of Talebolion. He died at Llanrhuddlad rectory on 3 January 1874, and was buried at Llanrhuddlad. One of his sons, W. Glynn Williams (1851-1938), was headmaster of Friars School, Bangor, from 1879 to 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 29532


Williams, Moses (1685-1742), Welsh scholar and translator, son of Samuel Williams ('c'.1660- 'c'.1722), vicar of Llandyfriog and rector of Llangynllo, Cardiganshire, and his wife, Margaret Prydderch, of Llandysul parish, was born on 2 March 1685 at Glaslwyn, Cellan, Cardiganshire. After a period at Carmarthen grammar school he matriculated at University College, Oxford, as servitor on 31 March 1705; he graduated BA in 1708, and incorporated MA from King's College, Cambridge, in 1718. At Oxford he was nurtured by Edward Lhuyd, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, who appointed him sub-librarian in 1707, a junior post which, however, allowed him to work closely with Lhuyd in the preparation of his 'Archaeologia Britannica' (1707). Williams's translation and adaptation of Julian Manoir's Breton grammar and glossary appeared as sections 3 and 4 (pp. 180-212). Lhuyd died in 1709 but it is clear that the time Williams spent with him was to be one of the strongest influences on his scholarly ambitions. He was ordained deacon on 2 March 1709 and became curate of Chiddingstone, Kent, where he remained until early 1713. 
Samuel Williams was an antiquary, copyist, and translator, who was well versed in the Welsh literary tradition, and he brought Moses up to share these interests, bequeathing his library, worth $41 2's'. 6died, to him. The lower Teifi valley during the early years of the eighteenth century was then notable for the reforming zeal of a number of clerics and the enthusiastic patronage of some of the local gentry in attempts to translate and publish devotional and instructional literature in Welsh. Samuel Williams, who was already active in this field, was soon assisted by his son. Together they published in 1710 'Y namyn un deugain articlau crefydd', a revised edition of the Welsh version of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', followed by Moses Williams's own translations, 'Ymarferol-waith i'r elusen ysgolion', 'Llawlyfr y llafurwr', and 'Boreol a phrydhnawnol weddi i deulu' (all published 1711). 
After serving as chaplain to the countess of Denbigh for a brief period Williams was ordained priest on 31 May 1713. The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) had at this time decided to publish a new edition of the Welsh 'Bible' and Williams was appointed editor in 1712. He spent the summer of 1714 travelling through Wales gathering subscriptions and advance orders, but he also used the opportunity to acquire books and manuscripts -- 'bought... begged... stole', claimed Lewis Morris ('Cambrian Register', 2.540), to familiarize himself with the major libraries and, as John Morgan advised him in his letter of May 1714, to become acquainted with their owners and other Welsh writers and scholars in preparation for his projected revision -- never fulfilled -- of John Davies's 'Dictionarium duplex' (1632). He was in London in 1715 overseeing the printing of the Welsh 'Bible' (published in 1718) and his translation, 'Cydymmaith ir allor' (1715). Also in 1715 he received the vicarage of Llanwenog, Cardiganshire, and the following year that of Defynnog, Brecknockshire. He married Margaret Davies of Cwm Wysg at Defynnog on 10 November 1718; their daughter, Margaret, was baptized there on 21 August 1720. 
Williams, who was elected FRS in 1719, inspired by Lhuyd's unrealized intentions and probably by his acquaintance with English scholars such as Humfrey Wanley, John Hudson, William Baxter, Thomas Hearne, William Wotton, and William Jones, increasingly turned his attention to meticulously transcribing medieval Welsh manuscripts and preparing texts for publication, to building up his personal library of rare books and manuscripts (thereby ensuring their preservation), and to compiling catalogues and indexes. 'Cofrestr o'r holl lyfrau printjedig', a catalogue of Welsh printed books dating from 1546 to 1717, based on his own collection, appeared in 1717; it is regarded as the cornerstone of Welsh historical bibliography although its declared aim was to inform the SPCK which Welsh books might usefully be reprinted by them. His 'Reportium poeticum', a first-line index of Welsh poetry and an alphabetical list of poets, was published in 1726, but a similar Welsh index, 'Llech o'r holl brydyddion Cymreig', was never published. That he intended publishing his transcripts and editions of medieval prose texts is indicated both by the draft title-page of his edition of the Welsh triads in Llanstephan MS 65 (1717) and by his 'Proposals for printing... a collection of writings in the Welsh tongue to the beginning of the sixteenth century' (1719). Williams also edited the unpublished work of William Baxter (which contained some of Lhuyd's notes), and Humphrey Lhuyd's 1573 'Britanniae descriptionis commentariolum' (1723, 1731), but his most important work was his contribution to 'Cyfreithjeu Hywel Dda ac eraill, seu, Leges Wallicae' (1730), the first attempt at an edition of the Welsh laws. This work, begun by William Wotton who invited Williams to assist him about 1723, was completed by Williams with valuable annotations after Wotton's death in 1726. 
Williams was both a zealous and a patriotic reformer. His sermon before the Society of Ancient Britons in London in 1717 (published 1718) reveals his practical concern for the welfare of the underprivileged and deprived sections of the community and is an indictment of conditions to which society had a duty to respond. The strong Welsh national note struck in the sermon is more unambiguously political than the cultural one which was more usual at the time. Williams preached again before the society in 1721 (published 1722), but he appears to have been discouraged by the lack of response to both his humanitarian and scholarly aspirations. He sought to move from Defynnog and in 1732 he became rector of Chilton Trinity and St Mary's, Bridgwater. He justified the move by his desire to continue his studies -- Hearne noted in 1730 some of Williams's plans for publications -- but he lacked patronage and academic support for his work and did not undertake any further scholarly activities, although he is said to have put the Bridgwater borough records in order. 
Williams, who married again about 1730 following the death of his first wife, died at Bridgwater and was buried at St Mary's on 2 March 1742. His friend William Jones, tutor to the earl of Macclesfield and his son, purchased his library of books, manuscripts, transcripts, and notes from his widow. The collection passed to the earl by will and it was bought by Sir John Williams, who presented it to the National Library of Wales where the manuscripts are known as the Llanstephan collection (formerly Shirburn Castle collection). 


@@@@@


doc= 29533


Williams, Penry (1802-1885), painter, was born on 9 February 1802 at 3 Bridgefield Terrace, Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, the third son of William Williams, a painter and stonecutter, and his wife, Joan Meredith. His earliest surviving oil paintings depict the riots which occurred in 1816 at Merthyr (Cyfarthfa Castle Museum, Merthyr Tudful). About 1817 he painted views of the Cyfarthfa ironworks at Merthyr for its owner, William Crawshay. In 1819 Williams produced small oil views of waterfalls in the Vale of Neath (Cyfarthfa Castle Museum and National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff), copies of which were purchased by Michael Faraday and, probably, the Dowlais ironmaster Josiah John Guest. 
By 1820 Williams had moved to London; in that year, he was awarded a silver medal by the Society of Arts for a landscape. In July 1821 he received a second medal for a study after the Elgin marbles, and by November he was a student of Sir Thomas Lawrence, who considered his crayon portraits 'very delicate and pretty' (Webley, 32). On 4 April 1822 Williams entered the Royal Academy Schools; he began to exhibit regularly at the academy and at the British Institution. In 1824 he painted a landscape for Sir Joseph Bailey, and began a series of watercolours for the Crawshay family, some of which were engraved on banknotes issued by the Chepstow and Merthyr banks. In the following year he illustrated a manuscript account by John Britton of Sir Thomas Hope's residence at Deepdene (RIBA BAL and borough of Lambeth archives). At the Royal Academy in 1826 Williams exhibited a highly accomplished, Italianate oil painting of Lancaster. 
By 28 February 1827 Williams had crossed France, visited Switzerland and Florence, and arrived in Rome. His journey was financed by Sir Joseph Bailey, whom he reimbursed with oil paintings of continental scenes, including 'Young Italian Peasants' and 'A View of Rome from the Barberini Gardens', exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1828 to 1829. In 1828 Williams was elected a member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours and visited Naples. He became a close friend of the expatriate Welsh sculptor John Gibson, and established himself at Rome, where he remained, with only brief interruptions, for the rest of his life. His costume pieces in a landscape setting proved popular with British patrons, including the earl of Pembroke ('The Italian Family -- Ferry on the River Ninfa', 1830; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne), Sir J. J. Guest ('The Procession to the Christening in L'Ariccia', 1831; Cyfarthfa Castle Museum), Lord Vernon ('Rest by the Wayside', 1835, and 'Italian Girl, with a Tambourine', 1837; Tate collection), and Sir M. W. Ridley ('Festa della Madonna dell'Arco', 1836; Cardiff City Hall). Williams briefly visited Britain and Naples in 1837, became friendly with Edward Lear, and was commissioned by Lord Grosvenor to paint 'Il voto, or, The Convalescent' (exh. RA, 1842). Between 1839 and 1845 he executed a series of Neapolitan and Roman views for the duke of Sutherland, portraits of John Gibson (Accademia di San Luca, Rome) and Lady Charlotte Guest, and paintings for Bertel Thorvaldsen (Thorvaldsens Museum, Copenhagen) and his patron Baroness Stampe. 
As an expatriate, Williams was ineligible for election to the Royal Academy. In 1841 John Gibson complained to his patron 'Margaret Sandbach' that 'The works of Williams... are beautifully and admirably composed and drawn and very highly finished but are much ran down by English painters because they are not painted in the English style' (Webley, 62). Williams remained in Rome through the siege and political turmoil of 1848-50, and in 1854 was praised in the 'Art Journal' as 'undoubtedly the first English painter in Rome... Great delicacy and facility of execution, united with exquisite taste, the finest poetic feeling and the utmost freshness of colouring, pervade his works' (Webley, 81). From 1856 to 1857 he accompanied Gibson to England, and visited Henry Sandbach, who commissioned the 'Scene in the Roman Campagna', completed in 1865 (National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff). Albert Edward, prince of Wales, dined at his studio during a visit to Rome in January 1859. The critic James Dafforne commented on Williams in the 'Art Journal' in 1864: 'Except as a tolerably regular exhibitor at the Academy, and as an occasional visitor to London in the 'season'... he has become almost an alien from his country... His style of painting... is so entirely foreign, so thoroughly identified with the country of his adoption, that it would scarcely pass for the work of an English painter. (Webley, 93)' Williams attended Gibson during his final illness from 1865 to 1866 and served as his executor. Although still considered 'the most eminent painter of Roman scenery and groups of peasantry' by Murray's 'Handbook' in 1869 (Webley, 96), he produced few new compositions after 1860, and for the last two decades of his life confined himself largely to repetitions and variants of earlier, successful works. He consigned fifty-three oils, watercolours, and sketches for sale at Christies on 19 May 1876; the auction was not a success, only four of the lots finding buyers. 
Fifty years after a visit to Williams's studio in 1864-5, the artist and antiquary T. H. Thomas recalled his 'kindness and quiet geniality' and described his working method: 'Having the subject clearly in his mind, he would... draw the composition upon the canvas... in pencil almost without an error... Then, in the same simple definite way, he would put in the first painting in a bright, fresh series of tints, upon which he could work until it attained its final tone... There was no experiment either as to forms or colours; all were strictly methodic.... Neatness and precision were... characteristic of the man. (Thomas, 7)' Building on, and retaining, an initially local clientele, Williams became one of the leading painters in Rome, cultivating a highly finished style to accommodate a cosmopolitan circle of patrons. He died, unmarried, at his Rome address, via Babuino 65, on 27 July 1885 and was buried at the protestant cemetery in Rome. 


@@@@@


doc= 29534


Williams, Peter (1723-1796), biblical commentator, was born on 7 January 1723 at West Marsh, near Laugharne, Carmarthenshire, the son of Owen William (1694-1735), farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Bayly (died 1733). Peter had an older sister, Hester (1720-1764), and a younger brother, David, born in 1725. In 1741 he became a pupil at the prestigious Carmarthen grammar school, which provided him with a firm grounding in the classics. On 14 April 1743 he went to hear George Whitefield preaching at Carmarthen, and his sermon, on 'Isaiah' 54: 5, brought about his evangelical conversion. He left school in 1743 or 1744 and became a schoolmaster himself at nearby Cynwyl Elfed, where he prepared himself for holy orders. He was granted a title by John Evans (1702-1782), the incumbent of Eglwys Gymyn, and after his ordination as deacon by John Gilbert, the bishop of St David's, he was licensed as curate in the parish. Williams's Methodism soon brought him into conflict with Evans and he was dismissed, and the same happened in his two subsequent curacies at Swansea and Llangrannog, Cardiganshire. 
On 7 January 1747 Williams was formally received into the ranks of the Welsh Calvinistic Methodists. His preaching journeys in 1747 and 1748 took him to Anglesey and Denbighshire. He suffered much petty persecution, and his preaching at Adwy'r-clawdd, in Denbighshire, provoked Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (1692-1749) to issue a warrant on 3 January 1748 summoning Williams and some of his auditors to be examined by him in his capacity as a magistrate. He fined Williams $20 and the others 5's'. apiece. But, when appeal was made to the courts, Sir Watkin was found to have acted illegally and was ordered to refund the fines and pay the costs. 
On 3 August 1748 at Llanarthne parish church Williams married Mary (1726-1822), the daughter of John Jenkins, a small landowner of Gors in that parish. They had six children, the eldest of whom was the genealogist Eliezer Williams. Williams and his wife lived first at a farm called Moelfre, near Carmarthen, but their landlady was so opposed to their Methodism that she terminated the lease within a year, and afterwards they bought Gelli Lednais, a farm in the parish of Llandyfaelog, and spent the rest of their lives there. 
About 1759 it occurred to Williams to utilize the press as an instrument for evangelical work, and he thereafter became the chief contributor to the religious literature of Wales during the eighteenth century. His greatest undertaking was the publication at his own risk of a family edition of the Welsh 'Bible' with annotations of his own at the end of each chapter, this being the first Welsh commentary on the whole 'Bible' ever issued. This was also the first time that a 'Bible' was printed in Wales. The work was issued in shilling parts, the first appearing in 1767. The ''Beibl Peter Williams'' proved to be greatly popular in Wales, and many thousands of copies were issued. The whole work appeared in volume form in 1770. 
In May 1770, when the final part of Williams's 'Bible' was published by John Ross (1729?-1807) at Carmarthen, there was some immediate criticism. The comments on 'John' 1 raised misgivings because Williams, by writing such words as 'the Man Jesus is the everlasting Father', seemed to suggest that he was 'confounding the Persons' of the Trinity and so departing from the Athanasian creed. His close friend Daniel Rowland (1711?-1790) had drawn his attention to this possibility, but no changes were introduced in the second edition of 1779-81. About September 1786 David Jones (1741-1792) asked Peter Williams to assist him by editing a Welsh version of John Canne's pocket 'Bible'. That was printed at Trefeca and published jointly by Williams and Jones in 1790. Immediately trouble arose. The leading critic was Nathaniel Rowland (1749-1831), the son of Daniel Rowland. Williams was accused of changing the wording of two verses in order to support his alleged heretical doctrine of the Trinity. At the South Wales Association in Llandeilo, on 25 May 1791, Williams was excommunicated and prohibited from selling this new 'Bible' among the Methodists. The condemnation was endorsed by the North Wales Association at Bala on 8 June. It was a poignant end to Williams's splendid contribution to the development of Welsh Calvinistic Methodism. But this did not affect the popularity of his 1770 'Bible'. By 1877 it had been published in thirty-four editions. Williams made several attempts to persuade the Methodists to receive him back into their ranks but to no avail. 
Throughout his career Williams had been devoted to literary work. Apart from the 'Bibles' he edited, he published thirty-three other titles in all. These productions are of historical rather than literary or theological interest. His English-language 'Hymns on Various Subjects' (1771) included his translation of William Williams's 'Nerth i fyned trwy'r anialwch', now beginning 'Guide me, O thou great Jehovah'; his first verse was retained when William Williams produced his own English version, which in the twentieth century, set to John Hughes's 'Cwm Rhondda', became one of the most familiar Methodist hymns. He preached his last sermon at Llanlluan on 24 July 1796, but he was very weak and dictated his will on 1 August. He was suffering from asthma and a failing heart and died at his home, Gelli Lednais, on 8 August 1796, aged seventy-three, and was buried at Llandyfaelog churchyard. His wife, Mary, died at Gelli Lednais on 8 March 1822 and was buried with her him. 
Williams was a man of strong character. He was an attractive and, at times, a powerful preacher. No other Methodist leader suffered more persecution than he did. A lack of clarity in his thinking still makes it difficult to ascertain the precise nature of the heresy for which he was excommunicated. But of his large contribution to Welsh Methodism there can be no doubt. 


In September 1804 Williams married Hannah, the daughter of Henry Jones of Llanrwst. They had one son, Henry Bayley Williams (1805-1879), rector of Llanberis (1836-43) and Llanrug (1843-79). Hannah Williams died on 11 January 1835, aged sixty-four, and was buried at Llanrug. Williams, in November 1835, married as his second wife Mrs Charlotte Hands of Shrewsbury. They had no children. She died on 8 September 1849, aged seventy-four, and was also buried at Llanrug. 
Williams's interests were mainly literary, and he contributed to contemporary journals and patronized promising young writers. Although he was an assiduous copier of the works of medieval poets and a collector of historical minutiae, he can hardly be described as a competent antiquarian. He did, however, provide Nicholas Carlisle (1771-1847), the secretary of the Society of Antiquaries, with some information for his 'Topographical Dictionary of the Dominion of Wales', and gave similar assistance to William Cathrall when he was writing his 'History of North Wales' (1828). His own antiquarian interest is shown in his contribution to 'The Tourist's Guide to the County of Carnarvon' (1821). He was a keen supporter of education, and the Sunday school which he opened at Llanrug in 1793 was the first in the county. He was a conservative in politics and opposed vigorously those who supported the French Revolution. He took a prominent part in local life, and was a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for the county. Williams died on 22 November 1836 and was buried at Llanrug churchyard. 
Another 
Peter Williams was a vigorous critic of Methodism, as is revealed in his book 'A Short Vindication of the Established Church' (1803). He also published volumes of sermons in both Welsh and English as well as a translation into blank verse of part of Homer's 'Iliad' (1806). He died at Llanbedrog on 20 February 1837, aged eighty. Both he and his wife were buried at Llanbedrog. 


@@@@@


doc= 29535


Peter Williams (1756?-1837), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Edward Williams of Northop and Oakenholt, Flintshire, and his wife, Ann. He matriculated on 23 May 1776, aged nineteen, from Christ Church, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1780, MA in 1783, and BD and DD in 1802. From 1789 to 1803 he was chaplain of Christ Church and on 4 May 1790 became vicar of Bangor. On 22 November 1794 he was appointed headmaster of Friars' School, Bangor. He was rector of Llanbedrog, Caernarvonshire, from 1802 to 1837, archdeacon of Merioneth from 27 October 1802 until 1809, canon of Bangor from 1 July 1809 to 1818, and was appointed vicar of Llanrhaeadr, Denbighshire, on 21 November 1818, where he remained until his resignation in 1820. He married Mary, the daughter of John Roberts, archdeacon of Merioneth, who died on 7 August 1802, aged seventy-three. Mary died on 30 July 1826, aged fifty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 29536


Peter Bailey Williams (1763-1836), Church of England clergyman and writer, the fifth child and second son of Peter Williams and his wife, Mary, was born at Gelli Lednais, Llandyfaelog. He was baptized on 2 August 1763. He was educated at Carmarthen grammar school and Jesus College, Oxford, and graduated BA from Christ Church in 1790. He was ordained deacon in February 1788 by the bishop of Gloucester and licensed to the curacy of Eastleach Martin in Gloucestershire. The following November he was ordained priest. After a short curacy at Swinbrook, Oxfordshire, he moved early in 1790 to a curacy in Burford, and remained there until on 13 July 1792 he became rector of Llanrug and Llanberis, Caernarvonshire, where he stayed until his death. On 24 August 1815 he was also granted the perpetual curacy of Betws Garmon, Caernarvonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 29537


Williams, Richard Dalton (1822-1862), poet, born in Dublin on 8 October 1822, was the illegitimate son of Count D'Alton, the owner of extensive lands in co. Tipperary, and Mary Williams, a farmer's daughter. In 1828 he was taken to Grenanstown in Tipperary, at eight was sent to the Jesuit school of St Stanislaus at Tullabeg, and at fourteen was moved to St Patrick's College, Carlow. 
In 1842 Williams began to send verses to 'The Nation', and the 'Munster War Song', his first published contribution, appeared under the pseudonym Shamrock on 7 January 1843, with the support of the editor, Thomas Osborne Davis. 
Williams moved to Dublin in March 1843 to study medicine at St Vincent's Hospital in St Stephen's Green, where he wrote two of his best-known ballads, 'The Sister of Charity' and 'The Dying Girl', and composed the series of humorous verses, 'The Misadventures of a Medical Student'. By this time he was a regular contributor to 'The Nation', and as a result became involved with the Young Ireland movement. As the preface to his 'Collected Poems' was to declare, 'He gave his harp to Erin that he might make its inspiring strains ring out in the cause of liberty' (preface), and Williams published many stirring patriotic ballads in 'The Nation' and in 'Duffy's Irish Catholic Magazine' under the pseudonyms Milton Byron Scraggs, the Haunted Man, the Jealous Stoneybatter Man and D.N.S. The famine of 1847 prompted some of his most powerful poems, such as 'Kyrie eleison', 'Lord of Hosts', and 'Extermination', which articulated his Mitchelite view of the famine as deliberate genocide. He began to publish in John Mitchel's 'United Irishman', and after Mitchel's conviction and its suppression, attempted to replace it. In June 1848 he brought out the 'Irish Tribune' with a friend, Kevin Izod O'Doherty, but after six weekly issues it too was suppressed and Williams was brought to trial for treason-felony. He was successfully defended by Samuel Ferguson, after his father Count D'Alton concealed evidence connecting him to 'The Tribune'. 
After the failure of the 1848 rising, Williams resumed his medical studies in Edinburgh, obtaining his degree in 1849 and returning to Dublin to practise at Dr Steevens's hospital at the end of that year. Disillusioned by the political condition of Ireland, he emigrated to America in the summer of 1851 to take up the position of professor of 'belles-lettres' at the Spring Hill Jesuit College, Mobile, Alabama. On 8 September 1856 he married Elizabeth Connolly, and moved to New Orleans to resume the medical profession, moving on to Thibordeaux, Louisiana, some years later. With Elizabeth Connolly he had three daughters and a son. He contributed poems to various American journals. Williams died of consumption in Thibordeaux on 5 July 1862, and a monument was erected over his grave by Irish American soldiers some years later. Williams's poems were never collected during his lifetime, but a selection was published as a supplement to the Christmas edition of 'The Nation' in 1876. In the following year, it was issued in book form, which ran to a fifth edition by 1887. In 1877 a series of biographical articles on Williams appeared in the 'Irish Monthly', and in 1894 a revised 'Complete Poems' appeared, with a memoir by P. A. Sillard, reissued in 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 29538


Robert Williams (fl. 1680-1704), engraver, born in Wales, was a pupil of Theodore Freres, and had the misfortune to have his leg amputated. He worked chiefly for Cooper, occasionally publishing his own mezzotints. 


@@@@@


doc= 29539


Williams, Robert (1765-1827), naval officer, entered the navy in January 1777 on the 'Ardent', commanded by Lord Mulgrave. Early in 1778 he was moved to the 'America' (64 guns) with Lord Longford, and in her was present in the action off Ushant on 27 July 1778. In 1780 he went out to North America in the 'London', flagship of Rear-Admiral Thomas Graves and in her was present in the action off the Chesapeake on 16 March 1781. In August he was appointed to the 'Royal Oak' as acting lieutenant; on 5 September he took part in the battle of Chesapeake Bay, and on 12 April 1782 in the action near Dominica. On 12 April 1783 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Argo', in which he returned to England in 1784. In 1790 he was with Captain Charles Thompson in the 'Elephant'; in 1793 in the 'Centurion' in the channel; and in 1794 again with Thompson in the 'Vengeance' in the West Indies. After the capture of Martinique he followed Thompson to the 'Vanguard'. In 1796 he returned home in the 'Minotaur', and was immediately appointed first lieutenant of the 'Prince George', the flagship of Rear-Admiral Sir William Parker in the battle of Cape St Vincent. For this service Williams was promoted commander and appointed acting captain of the 'Blenheim', in which Parker had hoisted his flag. 
Williams later commanded the storeship 'Dolphin' and the 'San Ysidro' (74 guns) as acting captain. After he brought this ship to England his promotion was confirmed (dated 10 November 1797), and for a few months he was flag captain to Sir Charles Thompson in the 'Formidable' (98 guns); but in January 1798 he was put on half pay. In 1803 he went out to the East Indies in the 'Russell' (74 guns), returning in 1805 in the 'Ruby' (64 guns) after his health had broken down. From 1810 to 1812 he commanded the 'Dictator' (64 guns) in the Baltic with Sir James Saumarez, and from 1812 to 1814 the 'Gloucester' (74 guns) in the North Sea, the Baltic, and the West Indies. He had no further service, but became a rear-admiral on 9 April 1823. He died at his house in Queen's Square, Bath, on 1 March 1827. His wife had predeceased him in 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 29540


Williams, Robert (c.1787-1845), physician and pharmacologist, was born in London; nothing else is recorded of his family or early life save that at the age of fourteen he survived shipwreck on a voyage to North America in company with his uncles, who were merchants. On 27 June 1804 he was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge; he matriculated in 1806 and graduated MB in 1810. 
Williams began his medical career at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He became MD in 1816, the year in which he moved to the united hospitals of Guy's and St Thomas's as an assistant physician; on 1 October 1817 he was elected full physician in place of the recently retired William Lister. Williams stayed with St Thomas's when the hospitals divided in 1825 and remained there until his death. At the Royal College of Physicians he was admitted as an inceptor candidate on 12 July 1816, a candidate on 23 December 1816, and a fellow on 22 December 1817. He served as censor in 1831, and was declared an elect on 20 March 1840. He served a term as president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London. 
Williams was critical of the medical therapy of his day, which employed active items such as digitalis and ipecacuanha in a wide variety of diseases. The majority of medicines were palliatives to relieve or mitigate symptoms and Williams believed it was necessary for medical science to discover specific medicines to treat and cure maladies considered irremediable. The first volume of his 'Elements of Medicine: on Morbid Poisons' was published in 1836 and it was followed by a second volume in 1841. This work reveals Williams's familiarity with contemporary advances in the experimental studies of drugs and poisons carried out by Francois Magendie and others. Williams concluded that he would have to revise his therapeutic regimes if he was to make accurate observations on the action of drugs. In the preface to the 'Elements' he wrote: 'The opportunities which a large hospital affords, have made it a duty to deviate, in some instances, from the usual routine of practice, and reduce treatment to simplest forms.' He found that this approach improved the treatment of fevers. It also led to the introduction of potassium iodide as a curative agent. Following the suggestion of William Wallace (1791-1837) that potassium iodide might be of value in the treatment of venereal diseases, Williams demonstrated its specific beneficial effects in the later stages of syphilis. He also reported that potassium bromide was effective in cases of enlargement of the spleen, and this resulted in the salt's being introduced into the 'London Pharmacopoeia' of 1836. His observations, however, were not confirmed, and the drug was omitted from the 1850 edition of the pharmacopoeia. 
Williams's contribution to pharmacology and therapy is noteworthy for his recognition of the problems of contemporary therapy, and for drawing attention to the importance of making accurate observations of the action of drugs in the course of treatments. Contemporary clinical practice, however, presented considerable difficulties in making such observations, as Williams's experience with potassium bromide clearly demonstrated. For this reason his practical achievements were few, and after his death a close colleague acknowledged that he was less successful in his investigations than his zeal and perseverance deserved. 
In his later years Williams acquired a poor reputation and was accused of being lazy and uninterested in his practice. Nevertheless, a year after his death William Frederick Chambers in his presidential address to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London spoke warmly of Williams and his work. Chambers was a contemporary at Cambridge and the source of the story of the shipwreck. He recalled that at university Williams was regarded as a man highly cultivated and accomplished, and much given to literary pursuits. Chambers observed that Williams's intellectual interests, which persisted throughout his life, and his lack of faith in the physic of his day, did not fit him to the dull routine and often repulsive realities of day-to-day hospital medical practice. Chambers also revealed that Williams suffered from a debilitating illness which 'blunted the edge of his energies and masked the vigour of his talented mind'. This helps to explain why Williams, a good physician and scholar, was misunderstood in his lifetime and often misrepresented after his death. 
Williams made his final contribution to medical literature in an article on the elementary principles of medicine, in the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (1845). He died at his house in Lower Bedford Place, Russell Square, London, on 24 November 1845. 


@@@@@


doc= 29541


Williams, Robert (1766-1850), poet and hymn writer, only child of William Williams and Jane Parry, was born at Betws Fawr, a farm in the parish of Llanystumdwy, Caernarvonshire on 6 December 1766. He had some education locally but his mentors were the local poets of the area. His father was a substantial farmer and freeholder, and Williams succeeded him in the occupation of Betws Fawr. The farm also gave him the means to pursue his cultural, musical, and poetical interests, although he moved towards the end of his life to Mynachdy Bach in the same district. 
Robert ap Gwilym Ddu, as Williams was styled in bardic circles, first became known as the winner in 1792 of the Gwyneddigion Society's medal for the best ode on the 'Massacre of the Bards'. He immersed himself in 'Gorchestion beirdd Cymru', the anthology of Rhys Jones (1713-1801) published at Shrewsbury in 1773, as well as in the classical poetry of Goronwy Owen (1723-1769) which he read in 'Diddanwch teuluaidd' (1763). He became an expert in the strict metre and encouraged poets to visit his home. Every Christmas, he insisted on a gathering of the local poets from the Caernarfon, Porthmadog, and Pwllheli area to enjoy a meal at Betws Fawr. They included teachers of poets such as David Thomas 
(Dafydd Ddu Eryri; 1759-1822)
and his disciple, Griffith Williams 
(Gutyn Peris; 1769-1838)
, as well as remarkable eisteddfodic poets of the calibre of Ebenezer Thomas 
(Eben Fardd; 1802-1863)
. He consequently became an inspiration to those who regularly called on him, and he began to write religious verse and eschewed eisteddfodau after the one occasion when he did not get the prize for his effort. 
Williams was the close friend and bardic tutor of his neighbour, David Owen 
(Dewi Wyn; 1784-1841)
, whose mistrust of the eisteddfod authorities of the day he shared, and their names have been associated with a Baptist chapel called the Poets' Chapel (Capel y Beirdd). His poems, almost entirely religious or commemorative, were gathered together and edited by William Williams 
(Caledfryn; 1801-1869)
and published at Dolgellau in 1841 under the title 'Gardd Eifion'. They show a remarkable power of vigorous, clear expression, and include some of the best-known stanzas in the language. He and the Sandemanian Baptist minister John Richard Jones (1765-1822) of Ramoth were great friends, and although Jones also wrote hymns, Williams's hymns have proved more enduring. Of particular note is his meditation on the sacrifice of Christ, with the familiar opening line, 'Mae'r gwaed a redodd ar y groes', which was published in the Welsh Baptist magazine 'Seren Gomer', in 1824. There are another twenty of his hymns in the collection published by J. R. Jones in 1822, under the title 'Aleluia, neu, Caniadau Cristionogol'. 
Williams died on 11 June 1850 at Mynachdy Bach, and was buried at Aber-erch cemetery, near Pwllheli. He married when he was fifty a young local girl; their only child, a daughter, Jane Elizabeth, died in 1834, at the age of seventeen, and 'Gardd Eifion' contains an elegy upon her, described as 'one of the most poignant in the language'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29542


Williams, Robert (1810-1881), Celtic scholar and antiquary, was born at Conwy, Caernarvonshire, on 29 June 1810, the second son of Robert Williams, perpetual curate of Llandudno. He attended Beaumaris and Shrewsbury schools, before matriculating as servitor on 10 June 1828 from Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1832 and MA in 1836. After a short curacy at Llangernyw in west Denbighshire (1833-6), in 1837 he was appointed vicar of Llangadwaladr, to which was added in 1838 the perpetual curacy of Rhydycroesau, near Oswestry. He held the former until 1877, and the latter until 1879, when he was appointed to the rectory of Culmington, Shropshire. This, together with an honorary canonry at St Asaph conferred upon him in 1872, he held until his death. 
While still an undergraduate Williams had shown his interest in Welsh history by winning, in 1831, a prize offered by the Cymmrodorion Society for the best 'biographical sketch of the most eminent Welshmen since the Reformation'. The society had his production translated into Welsh and printed under the title of 'Enwogion Cymru'. In 1836 the English version was issued with additions, and it was subsequently developed into 'Enwogion Cymru: a Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Welshmen' (1852). 
Williams's most scholarly work, however, was his 'Lexicon Cornu-Britannicum: a Dictionary of the Ancient Celtic Language of Cornwall' (1865). In this lexicon copious examples with English translations were given from Cornish works, but its special feature was the addition of synonyms and cognate words from Welsh, Breton, Erse, Gaelic, and Manx. The author announced his intention of issuing a Cornish grammar, but this never appeared. When the Catholic epistles and gospels ('Liherieu hag Avieleu', 1870) were first brought out in Breton, with parallel Welsh and Gaelic versions, Williams was responsible for much of the Gaelic text. He also discovered at Peniarth Library the only extant copy of a previously unknown Cornish drama, the 'Ordinale de vita sancti Mereadoci'. This was edited and translated by Whitley Stokes and published in 1872. 
Williams's next undertaking was the editing, with translations and glossaries, of 'Selections from the Hengwrt MSS Preserved in the Peniarth Library'. The first volume, which was completed in 1876, contains the Welsh text of the legend of the holy grail. Of the second volume, containing the Welsh versions of the 'Gests of Charlemayne', 'Bown o' Hamtwn', the 'Elucidarium', and other religious compilations of the middle ages, two parts only were issued during Williams's lifetime (in 1878 and 1880 respectively), but the translation was completed with critical and bibliographical notes by the Revd G. Hartwell Jones, and the second volume completed in 1892. This, in spite of its importance, is perhaps the least satisfactory of Williams's works, as his reading of the text is sometimes unreliable. 
Williams supplied a translation of the Welsh poems contained in the 'Book of Taliesin' (a thirteenth-century manuscript then preserved at Peniarth) for William Forbes Skene's 'Four Ancient Books of Wales' (1868). He also wrote a history of his native town, published in 1835 under the title of 'The History of Aberconway'. He was for many years a member of the editorial committee of the Cambrian Archaeological Association, and contributed papers to the journal of that society as well as to the 'Cambrian Journal'. 
Williams died, unmarried, on 26 April 1881 at Culmington rectory. He was buried on 2 May at Culmington, where a memorial stone with a Welsh and Cornish inscription, provided by public subscription, was placed in 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 29543


Williams, Sir Roger (1539/40-1595), soldier and author, was probably the elder of two sons of Sir Thomas Williams of Penrhos, Monmouthshire, and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of Sir William Vaughan. His family was 'rather ancient than wealthy' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.643). However, a seventeenth-century tradition that he was 'but a taylour at first' probably reflects a genteel poverty more than reality, for there is fairly convincing evidence that he was at Brasenose College, Oxford, between 1552 and 1554, and his books on military affairs evince a wide knowledge of contemporary and classical literature ('Anecdotes and Traditions, Illustrative of Early English History and Literature', ed. W. J. Thoms, 'CS', 5, 1839, 47). He was also a page of William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke, a post that a tailor could not have obtained. 
Williams, then aged seventeen, may have accompanied Pembroke when, in 1557, English troops fought in the last of the Habsburg-Valois wars: they campaigned against the French in the southern Low Countries, under Philip of Spain, but his memoirs are not clear. It is likely, as John Evans suggests, that he served with the Huguenots during the early French wars of religion (1562-3, 1567-70). He may have been the Roger Williams who travelled to the Palatinate in 1568, where troops were being raised for service with the Huguenots. Certainly he was already a veteran when, in 1572, he joined the celebrated 300 volunteers raised by Thomas Morgan to serve in the Netherlands, which were now in revolt against Philip II for both political and religious reasons. Elizabeth I and her privy councillors sympathized with the Dutch, who, like the Huguenots, were their co-religionists, but England at this stage was weak. The government was building the nation's strength but dared not yet confront Europe's two great military, Catholic powers: France and Spain. It had covertly arranged for volunteers to aid the Huguenots and now did the same for the Dutch and their leader, William of Orange. 
This unofficial religious war with Spain and France was the backdrop to Williams's early military career. About 2500 English mercenaries served the Dutch in 1572, but suffered defeats 'and the most of our men not being acquainted with such disasters, sought all meanes to return into England' ('Works', 121). Morgan did serve into the following year with a newly raised regiment, which included his fellow Welshman, Williams. When Morgan fell out with William of Orange over pay and conditions at the end of 1573 and took his force home, Williams preferred to travel to the Rhineland, where the Huguenots were said to be raising an army. This rumour turned out to be false and Williams headed home, but took the direct route, through the southern Netherlands. He was arrested, but the Spanish commander who interviewed him had served with Pembroke in 1557 and therefore offered Williams the chance to enlist in his regiment. Williams accepted. His personal religious beliefs may still have been forming, for later in life he was a resolute protestant. When he eventually returned home in summer 1577, after three years' service in the Spanish army of Flanders, he was immediately employed by the principal secretary, Sir Francis Walsingham. Williams may thus have been an intelligence agent throughout. 
In 1578 Elizabeth decided to increase English assistance to the Dutch. The 'volunteers' in Dutch service increased to over 4000, mostly serving in a coherent battle group commanded by John Norris, whose patron, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, was one of the chief advocates of English intervention on behalf of continental protestants. The Dutch were suspicious of Williams because of his time in Spanish pay, but in late May both Walsingham and Leicester asked the English ambassador, William Davison, to recommend him to William of Orange for a commission, hoping that 'the valour of the man, who is indeede a very good soldiour, may overway... [his] offence' (Lettenhove, 10.475). 
Williams joined Norris's regiment and immediately won fame when he fought a single combat with a Spaniard and 'worthely acquitted hymself of the same' (Churchyard, 'A Generall Rehearsall', sig. S3'v'). He served with Norris throughout the early 1580s. Both men were choleric and they sometimes quarrelled explosively, but Williams was Norris's trusted lieutenant in these years. He particularly distinguished himself in Norris's campaign in Friesland (1580-81), albeit more for hard fighting than tactical acuity. In 1582 the English troops in Dutch pay were moved to the southern Netherlands, where they confronted the inexorable offensive masterminded by Alessandro Farnese, prince of Parma. Williams's brother was killed by the Spanish in 1582 but his cousins enlisted for the protestant war effort. In 1583, while Norris was visiting England to brief Elizabeth, Morgan tried to take over several of Norris's companies, but Williams thwarted him. 
Less successful was Williams's attempt to stop the English garrison of Aalst from mutinying. Norris's regimental major, Pigott, ejected Williams before betraying Aalst to Parma. Williams himself rejected two Spanish overtures at about this time. He spent some months detached with the Dutch army sent to the Rhineland to maintain Gethard Truchsess, prince-bishop of Cologne (a recent Calvinist convert), on his electoral throne, but the expedition was defeated and Williams returned to Holland. Norris left Dutch employ but Williams stayed. He became one of William of Orange's intimates and, despite expressing himself more frankly than the prince was used to, he was 'a man much beloved by the Prince of Orange' ('CSP for.', 18.642). Williams was in the prince's entourage at Delft on 10 July 1584 when he was killed by the Catholic fanatic Balthasar Gerard and 'pursued the assassin and caught him outside the Prince's residence [while] attempting to escape over the garden wall' (Miller, 89). In April 1585 Williams travelled to France and probably served as a gentleman volunteer with Henri, king of Navarre and leader of the Huguenots, in May and June. However, the death of William of Orange had been a calamity for the Dutch, and in August 1585 the English government decided it had to make outright war on Spain. An army was sent to the Netherlands, commanded by Norris -- Williams returned with him, in his trusted capacity as lieutenant-colonel. 
Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, superseded Norris in January 1586 and the two men quarrelled bitterly. Williams took Leicester's side: whether genuinely or from ambition is unclear. He also began to be drawn into the orbit of the young Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, Leicester's kinsman and protege. Leicester knighted Williams in October 1586, after good service in several actions. The next year he was made governor of the port town of Sluys. That summer it was the target of Parma, who was seeking harbours for the imminent arrival of the Armada. From 12 June to 5 August 1587 Williams inspired his 1600-strong garrison in heroic resistance against 10,000 men led by the best general in Europe, but he was obliged to accept the honours of war from Parma after suffering 900 casualties. Leicester, who had failed to relieve Sluys, resented the laurels Williams garnered by his gallant defence. By the end of the year Williams had fallen out with another one-time patron. 
Williams spent the Armada year, 1588, in England. He helped to prepare the English militia to do battle with the Spanish (whose military methods he knew so well) and was second in command, to Essex, of the cavalry of the army gathered at Tilbury. Then in 1589 Williams commanded a regiment in the large expeditionary force that Norris and Sir Francis Drake led to Portugal. For the English fleet and army generally, it was a disastrous mission, but Williams personally provoked the wrath of the queen when he let Essex (whom Elizabeth had expressly forbidden to go on the voyage) 'stow away' aboard his ship. On his return Williams for a time apparently even went into hiding. He was thenceforth a confirmed follower of Essex, who is described in his will of 19 June 1589 as 'the errle of Essex my gret prince' (Hatfield, Cecil MS 203, fol. 92'r'). When writing to the earl, Williams signed himself 'your Lordship's most assuryd to serve you to the death' (Longleat, Devereux MS 1, fol. 127'v'). Later in 1589 Williams crossed back to France and, after serving a month in Henri IV's pay, joined the English army commanded by Peregrine Bertie, thirteenth Baron Willoughby de Eresby, sent by Elizabeth. The army campaigned in France until January 1590, when it returned home; Williams returned too, having partially redeemed himself in the queen's eyes. 
In spring 1591 Williams was given a colonelcy in the army that Norris was leading to Brittany. This was despite his and Essex's attacks on Norris, whose command Essex wanted. That summer Essex brought over a separate army to operate with Henri. Williams's force was subsumed within it and he was promptly made marshal of the field. When Essex was recalled in January 1592, his Welsh retainer succeeded him as commander of the army. This force remained in France until late summer 1593, but its numbers steadily dwindled and Williams was obliged generally to act as a subordinate of Henri or his marshals, rather than as an independent general. 
Elizabeth had always tolerated rather than liked Williams. There is an oft-quoted tale of Williams at court, petitioning the queen for this or that, until Elizabeth exclaimed, 'Faugh, Williams, I prithee begone: thy boots stink,' to which he allegedly retorted, 'Tut, madam, 'tis my suit that stinks' (W. J. Thoms, quoted in 'DNB'). It is apocryphal, but sums up accurately Williams's relationship with his queen. In 1594 he was finally granted a life pension of $300 per annum (to cease if he was employed in Elizabeth's service in an office with comparable pay). Also in 1594, and then again in 1595, he was sent as special ambassador to Henri. These appointments reflect his special expertise in French affairs and friendship with the French king, but also perhaps a growing acceptance of him by Elizabeth -- and probably most of all the influence at court of his patron, Essex. 
Williams died of fever on 12 December 1595 after a four-day illness, with Essex at his side: 'he died well, and very repentant' (Collins, 1.377). It is known that in 1593 he had a mistress while on campaign in France, but he never married and in his will 'he gave all he had to my Lord of Essex' (ibid.). His jewels, cash, clothes, and accoutrements came to over $1600 in value. He may have left lands as well: probate was granted to his kinsmen Gelly Meyrick (c.1556-1601) and Thomas Powell. After Meyrick's execution (following Essex's fall in 1601) the commission of administration was quashed and was granted anew to Katherine Kemis, Williams's sister (probably the wife of a fellow veteran of Flushing in 1572). This implies his estate was still valuable. Williams was buried in London, in St Paul's Cathedral, on 23 December 1595. Powell and Meyrick made the arrangements but, as Paul Hammer shows, did so on Essex's instructions and at his expense. Essex used the funeral as a propaganda vehicle, to make heroic those who fought Spanish Catholicism. The earl attended, dressed in black, together with the rest of his military affinity. 
Some historians have suggested that Williams wanted to 'practise [his] trade' wherever pay and conditions were best, like an artist 'taking commissions from rival courts' (Fissel, 153); that he was, in the words of a Dutch military history, 'a genuine 'soldat de fortune', whose services were in the main open to the offer of friend or foe' (ten Raa and de Bas, 1.103). Such verdicts are the consequence of his period in Spanish service. However, many native soldiers and politicians, who later fought for the Dutch republic, sided with the Spanish in the mid-1570s, while such assessments ignore not only alternative explanations for Williams's time in Spanish pay, but his steadfast defence of Dutch territory at Sluys in 1587. 
To be sure, Williams in his correspondence regularly threatened to abandon the English army for foreign princes. A 'sullen request to go & serve abroad' and a petition for a 'licence to leave abroad in discontent' are just two examples of his frank approach (BL, Harley MS 6995, fol. 3'r'; BL, Lansdowne MS 64, fol. 96'r'). He lists kings, from the tsar of the Russians to the shah of Persia, as princes whom he might serve, but Williams was just sounding off. Apart from the one period in the 1570s he never showed any signs of fighting other than for England or her protestant allies. His real attitudes are summed up in his response to Parma's offer after Sluys fell, of any commission in Spanish pay -- against the Turks if he would not fight protestants. He declared his sword was Elizabeth's and when she had 'no further use for it, it was at the service of the King of Navarre' (Miller, 90). Williams's movements from one army to another were actually more like those of a questing knight errant than a ruthless 'condottiere' and he was steadfastly loyal to the protestant cause after 1577. 
In other respects, too, Williams's behaviour was like that of a character in the works of Arthurian romance that were popular in contemporary England and Wales. He delighted in charges; he told his lancers before one pell-mell attack in 1580 that it was 'farr more honorable for us to charge them in this maner, then scattered, straggeling, or in Ambush and Troupe' (W. Blandy, 'The Castle, or, Picture of Pollicy', 1581, 24). He had a penchant for acts of heroic exhibitionism. In spring 1586 he 'put in practice a haughty enterprise', raiding the main enemy camp with a picked force at night, intending to kill Parma himself: 'having slaughtered many, they had pierced as farre as the Dukes tent', before obliged to retreat by superior numbers (Camden, bk 3, 114-15). In 1589 Williams rallied fleeing French troops at the great battle of Arques, by thrusting himself in their path and 'crying 'Noblesse francaise, retournez; voulez-vous fuir, votre roi etant en terre?'' ('Nobles of France, turn back: are you willing to flee, while your king is in the field?'; 'Works', xxxvii). He also had a propensity for arranging single combats and jousts with soldiers from the enemy side, and during Norris's Friesland campaign, when his general was challenged to single combat by a Welsh Catholic officer in Spanish service, Williams fought as Norris's representative. The duel was a draw and ended with each combatant drinking the other's health. Similarly, Williams and a Spanish counterpart had an exchange of courtesies, carried by heralds, in June 1584. 
Williams himself could be vain about his achievements. When Sir Walter Ralegh was awarded a gold chain in 1589, Williams protested that he deserved it as much as Ralegh; and the next year told William Cecil, Lord Burghley, 'I am one that deserves better reward' (Miller, 92, 95). However, he had a realistic appreciation of his own virtues and weaknesses: he wanted what he regarded as appropriate reward for the former, but could and did recognize that 'many can lead troops better than myself' (ibid., 118). 
Despite his limitations as a general and his preference for a chivalric style of warfare Williams was still among the most advanced practitioners of the art of war in the sixteenth century. In 'A Briefe Discourse of Warre' (1590) he examined the competence and proficiency of the Spanish army and argued that it should be copied. He demolished the case of traditionalists for retaining weapons such as the longbow; and he dissected honestly the performance of the generals under whom he had fought, drawing appropriate lessons. The book was intended as a manual for Essex and for the new generation of officers whose careers the earl intended to promote. 
Contemporaries certainly thought Williams an excellent soldier. At times he sat on William of Orange's council of war. Leicester affirmed that 'Roger Williams is worth his weight in gold, for he is noe more valiant than he is wise, and of judgment to governe his doings' (Bruce, 430). Parma wrote to Philip: 'je n'ai jamais vu en Flandre une action militaire qui m'ait donne plus de travail et de preoccupations' ('I have never seen in Flanders a military action which gave me so much work and preoccupation') as the siege of Sluys ('Works', xxix). Henri, like William of Orange, would 'talk with [Williams] in his ear and confer with him which hardly will he do with any others', as an English observer noted in 1590, while the French king frequently commended Williams for his valour and diligence (Miller, 97). 
While Williams was remarkably brave and a redoubtable fighter, his achievements were comparatively minor; no long-term consequences can be attributed to any of his personal actions, or to the skirmishes won by troops under his command. Nevertheless, Williams still influenced the English art of war. His arguments helped ensure the longbow was consigned to the past. Further, during the 1590s Essex was the pre-eminent military patron in England and probably the most important figure in English grand strategic decision making. 'The personal bonds between Essex and Williams were very strong and the Welshman's influence on Essex's ideas of war was profound'; Essex also 'patently followed the advice and arguments' of 'A Briefe Discourse' (Hammer, 237-8). 
Williams's 'A Briefe Discourse of Warre' was published in 1590 and would have included a history of the Dutch wars, 'but for the negligence of a servant that lost part of my discourses' ('Works', 3). Yet a version of the manuscript did survive. It provided the basis for 'The Actions of the Lowe Countries', which was published in 1618, in effect by the old Essex affinity. The antiquarian Peter Manwood found it 'in a ragged hand, much maimed, both in sense and in phrase... thought good to publish [it] to the world' and hence had it edited by the historian and former Essex client John Hayward, who 'restored it so neere as I could, both to the stile and meaning of the Authour' (ibid., 56, 59). It was published with a dedication to another historian and former Essex partisan, Sir Francis Bacon, lord chancellor. 
Williams was part of a circle of soldier-writers whose members evidently knew each other and spent time together when in London. In early 1585 he received a letter from his close friend Jack Roberts, who described with ironic allegory the carouses of Thomas Churchyard, Barnaby Rich, and George Whetstone, all soldiers and poets. They would have all known each other and it is obvious from the letter that Williams, if not necessarily a friend, also knew them all well. In Roberts's letter it is also clear that Williams was at least acquainted with players, including one Lyllie, a member of the Men of Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford. Williams was certainly a playgoer when he was in London. Given Williams's connections with authors and the theatre, there must be a good chance that William Shakespeare knew him. Even if the two did not meet, Shakespeare could have known much about Williams. Shakespeare knew Ben Jonson, who had served in the Netherlands and collaborated with another veteran of Dutch service, George Chapman (another client of Essex). In one of his best plays, 'The Conspiracy and Tragedy of Charles, Duke of Byron, Marshal of France', Chapman alluded to 'Colonel Williams (a Welsh Colonel)' (pt I, III.i). Shakespeare in his plays borrowed from Churchyard (who praised Williams in some of his works) and Rich. At the very least, then, he surely knew enough about Williams for him to be the model for Fluellen in 'Henry V', which was first performed about 1599. 'Williams and Fluellen had the same type of ignescent personality', but Fluellen is 'a conservative upholding the pristine wars of the Romans', which was precisely the sort of attitude Williams loathed ('Works', lxxvi). However, it is striking that while Fluellen, the fiery yet witty, consummate Welsh professional soldier, is remarkably like Williams in personality, he holds views that could almost be drawn from the books by Sir John Smythe, Williams's great adversary in the controversy over whether to retain the longbow as a weapon of war. To combine the characteristics of two protagonists to a debate so public and fiery that the privy council had to intervene in it, using the personality of one but giving him the opinions of the other, would be a brilliant satirical stroke (and would not have been lost on many in the audience). 
Williams may have known writers, but how good a writer was he himself? Sir Walter Scott thought his style 'blunt [and] manly', which is damning with faint praise ('Works', 156). Williams's editor observes that alliteration is mostly 'accidental', there are 'few striking images' or 'instances of rhetorical balance and climax', and 'similes, metaphors, and analogies are just as scarce' (ibid., cxliv). However, Williams is an excellent historical source, not only for the wealth of information he provides, but for his extraordinary honesty. He almost invariably reports objectively, even when his account shows him and his fellow English and Welsh soldiers in a bad light. 'To say troth [truth]' or 'to speake truth' are off-repeated statements in his books -- and Williams's reliability is confirmed frequently when comparison can be made with other sources describing the same events. 
Williams also had a good eye for effect and was known by contemporaries for his sardonic wit. Anthony Standen wrote to Anthony Bacon in 1593: 'I wysshe you somtymes to here of Syr Roger in his satiricall humour, whiche malgre your gretest payne would make [you] to laugh' (LPL, MS 649, fol. 388'r'). A good example is the story, recounted by Williams in 'Actions', of how Sir William Pelham, sent in 1572 to survey Flushing, a city that ever after defied the Spanish and blockaded the Scheldt River, concluded that it was: 'a place not worthy to be kept [by England]; meaning not sufficient to withstand so great an enemy long time. If that bee true, we [had no] great Captains at that time; for then without fellowe, hee was accounted our chiefest souldier. ('Works', 121)' Williams repays time spent reading him, both as a historical source and as an example of 'direct and resolute' English prose, stripped of 'pointless abstractions and sentimentality' (ibid., cxlv). 
Williams was a brave, competent, generous, and steadfast soldier; a good friend (if a bad enemy) and bon viveur; and a notable memorialist. He was one of the men who by deed and word steered England to victory over Spain, then the greatest power in the world, even while rubbing shoulders with those who, at this same time, brought about the English literary renaissance. It was once thought that he was the notorious pamphleteer Martin Marprelate, but this is now discredited. Williams was of only secondary importance, but he was party to great events and he played his part in them in great style. 


@@@@@


doc= 29544


Williams, Roger (c.1606-1683), religious controversialist and founder of Providence, Rhode Island, was born in London, but no record of the exact date survives. He was the third of four children of James Williams (died 1621), merchant tailor, and Alice Pemberton (died 1625), and grew up in St Sepulchre parish. 
Little is known of Williams's youth, but he learned to read and write, and to take shorthand, which brought him to the attention of Sir Edward Coke. Coke employed the teenage Williams to take notes of sermons and also of speeches in Star Chamber. Williams was granted a scholarship in 1621 to study at Charterhouse School in London, probably through the intercession of Coke, who was one of the school's governors. His admiration for the great jurist was strong, and he remembered fondly their relationship in letters he wrote to Coke's daughter in the 1650s. Through his connection with Coke the young Williams became familiar with the major controversies and figures of the age, and honed his skills in logic and rhetoric. In 1623 he was admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge, though he did not matriculate in the university until a year later. 
Williams graduated BA in January 1627 and remained in Cambridge for another year and a half. He had, according to his later recollections, experienced God's loving touch while in his teens, an experience that set him on a course of seeking godliness, which initially drew him to the puritan critics of the English church. In winter 1628-9, perhaps on the recommendation of Coke, he entered the Essex household of Sir William Masham as family chaplain. Moving in the circles of the Essex puritan gentry he also offered spiritual guidance to Joan, Lady Barrington, Masham's mother-in-law. Williams wooed Jane Whalley, a niece of Lady Barrington, who had taken charge of Whalley's care and tuition after the death of Jane's mother. His attentions were blocked by Lady Barrington, leading to an exchange of harsh letters. Following the rebuff he married, on 15 December 1629, Mary Bernard ('bap'. 1609, died in or after 1676), the daughter of the clergyman and religious writer Richard Bernard, who was serving as a maid in the Masham household. 
In July 1629 Williams had met Thomas Hooker in Chelmsford and the two had journeyed to Boston, where they were joined by John Cotton. The three clergymen proceeded to the Sempringham estate of the earl of Lincoln where gathered clergy and gentry discussed plans for investing in the Massachusetts Bay Company and moving the corporation's government to the New World. At the Sempringham meeting Williams would also have met John Winthrop, who became the colony's governor. According to his later account, Williams, 'en route' for Sempringham, argued with his two fellow clergymen over the use of the 'Book of Common Prayer', asserting that to use those forms was against God's will. Rejection of some prayer book forms had long been advocated and practised by godly clergy, and was relatively easy for ministers, such as Williams, who did not hold parochial livings. But bishops such as London's William Laud had begun to curb the practice, and the options of migration to the Netherlands or New England were being seriously considered by many. 
In February 1631 Williams and his wife arrived in Massachusetts, the event being noticed by John Winthrop, who referred to him as 'a godly minister' ('Journal of John Winthrop', 44). His reputation for godliness had been established in puritan circles. His extreme views on religious government were less well known. Invited to join the Boston church he declined 'because they would not make a public declaration of their repentance for having communion with the Churches of New England... and besides had declared his opinion that the magistrate might not punish the breach of the Sabbath' nor any other breach of the first table of the ten commandments ('Journal of John Winthrop', 50). Because of these opinions the Massachusetts magistrates warned the church of Salem not to call Williams to the office of teacher, one of the two ministerial posts in New England churches. Finding his separatist views unacceptable in the Bay colony, Williams moved south to the Plymouth Plantation. 
In Plymouth Williams was admitted to the separatist congregation and preached there until, according to William Bradford in summer 1632, he 'began to fall into some strange opinions, and from opinion to practice, which caused some controversy between the church and him' ('History of Plymouth Plantation', 257). It was in Plymouth that Mary gave birth to the first of their six children. And it was there that Williams first developed his interest in the native Americans, forming friendships with tribal leaders that later stood him in good stead. The disagreement which Bradford alluded to was probably over Williams's belief that native land rights had not been taken seriously enough by the English colonists. As the controversy grew Williams requested a dismissal from the separatist congregation and returned to Salem. Despite holding views that the majority of his fellow colonists considered extreme, he was embraced for his brilliance, kindness, and, above all, his godliness. 
In Salem Williams preached 'by way of prophesy' -- the Massachusetts churches at that time still allowing lay preaching -- and informally assisted the pastor, the Revd Samuel Skelton. Once again he stirred controversy. He entered a debate over whether women should wear veils in church, asserting that they should adopt that comely practice in all public assemblies. He shared with the colony's magistrates a treatise in which he challenged the validity of the colonial charter, rejecting the notion that the king of England had the right to bestow Indian land on his own subjects, and adding an attack on the common practice of labelling Europe as Christendom, or Christ's kingdom. His opposition to magisterial enforcement of the first table led him to challenge the government's administration of oaths. His views may have precipitated John Endecott's act of iconoclasm in cutting the cross from the ensign of the Salem trained band. 
The clerical and lay leaders of the colony made several attempts to persuade Williams of the error of his ways, or at least to cease proselytizing his controversial views. Disturbed by reports that the Salem congregation was about to choose Williams for one of the church offices, the colony magistrates applied pressure on the community to dissuade them from that course. Williams responded by calling on the Salem church to separate itself from the rest of the colony's congregations. Despairing of bringing Williams into line, in October 1635 the general court of the colony sentenced him to be sent back to England, deferring execution of the sentence because Williams was ill. Learning that he continued to spread his errors the magistrates voted in January 1636 to send a sheriff to execute the sentence. Warned of his impending arrest by John Winthrop, Williams fled south through winter snows, taking refuge with a tribe of native Americans. Despite Williams's banishment the magistrate and the dissenter continued to correspond, and Winthrop invested in a cattle raising venture that Williams launched. 
Joined by his family and some friends from Salem, in spring 1636 Williams built homes at the headwaters of Narragansett Bay on land he purchased from the Narragansett sachems Cononicus and Miantonomo. He then transferred this land to the new community that he named Providence. Williams had always shown sympathy to the native population, and his strong ties with native leaders were useful to Providence, and made him a valued intermediary between the natives and the English colonies. During the following decade he studied the language and customs of the local tribes, leading eventually to his 'A Key into the Language of America' (1643). The close ties with the Narragansetts that he had started to form when he lived in Plymouth enabled him to play a key role in persuading the Narragansetts to ally themselves with the English colonies in the Pequot War that broke out in 1636. 
The residents of Providence committed themselves to a policy of toleration and the community became a haven for other dissenters who left Massachusetts. In his search for true Christianity Williams himself briefly embraced Baptist teachings in 1639 and helped found the first Baptist church in the colonies. But he came to believe that all churches invariably contained an unacceptable mixture of God's true saints and unregenerate men and women. He left the Baptist congregation a mere four months after he joined it, and prayed only with his wife for the remainder of his life. In addition to dissenters who settled in Providence others who rejected the orthodoxy of Massachusetts established communities in the neighbouring region. Most notable was the settlement of Aquidneck Island by Anne Hutchinson and some of her supporters. Another contentious dissenter was Samuel Gorton, who eventually founded Warwick. Concerned with the growth of these hives of dissenters, and jealous of the control the heretics held over some of the region's richest land, the neighbouring colonies of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Haven began to assert their own claims to the region. Faced with this threat Williams was persuaded to journey to England in an effort to seek protection from the puritan-controlled Long Parliament. Sailing from Dutch New Amsterdam because he was still forbidden to enter Massachusetts, he travelled to England in March 1643. Using contacts with some of the grandees he had known before his emigration -- most notably Sir William Masham, Sir Thomas Barrington, and the earl of Warwick -- he was able to secure a patent in March 1644 that united Providence with her sister settlements as the colony of Providence Plantations, later known as Rhode Island. 
At the time when Williams returned to England the puritan cause was divided over how the national church should be reconstructed. Congregationalist friends of orthodox New Englanders, fearing the imposition of a presbyterian settlement and seeking toleration for their own practices, joined forces with sectarian groups to lobby for ecclesiastical independence. The New England experiment was energetically picked over by English religious figures seeking evidence to bolster their own arguments. Williams identified with the Independents, but used his New England experience to warn against trusting congregationalists. He befriended John Milton, who introduced him to his publisher. Williams's 'The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution' (1644) recounted his suffering at the hands of the Massachusetts authorities and set forth an argument for toleration of every individual's views. His publication of 'Mr. Cottons Letter Lately Printed, Examined and Answered' (1644) triggered an extended debate with John Cotton over these issues. Williams argued that government derived from the people and that magistrates had no authority from God to impose religious forms or punish citizens for failing to abide by them. It was the task of churches themselves to strive to recover the character of the primitive Christian community. According to him the early church of the apostles was characterized by the poverty of its members in worldly things, its shunning of false gods, its effort to approximate the teachings of Christ as closely as possible, and by its patiently bearing the persecution of ungodly men rather than trying to persecute others. Christ, he argued, did not come to destroy lives for the sake of religion, but to save them. The effort of governments to impose one particular way of worship was a bloody tenet because it led to the mutilation and execution of men and women seeking in their own way to worship God. 
Cotton responded to these two works in 'A Reply to Mr. Williams' (1647) and 'The Bloudy Tenent, Washed and Made White in the Bloud of the Lambe' (1647). In essence he sought to argue that governments had the obligation to support the godly and to curb religious views that threatened the unity and safety of the Commonwealth. Williams had the last word in 'The Bloudy Tenent yet More Bloody' (1652). This was published during a second stay in England, from 1651 to 1654, when Williams continued to use his New England experience as a basis for entering the lists in favour of toleration in England, in the process befriending Oliver Cromwell, among others. He reported many discourses with Cromwell in which the two men discussed native American affairs and the possible approach of the millennium. Having been forced to conclude that men could not on their own find the proper forms of worship before Christ came again, Williams had come to look more eagerly for the approach of the millennium, which he hoped for fervently in these tumultuous times. He also renewed his friendship with John Milton, with whom he discussed the dangers of intolerance and of a hireling ministry. 
When he returned to Providence with the parliamentary patent in September 1644 Williams immersed himself in healing the divisions between the various settlements and helping to organize the new colony's government. He served from 1644 to 1647 as the chief officer, and then was chosen deputy president of the colony. It took until 1647 before the other towns in the jurisdiction came to co-operate as the patent had envisioned. But despite his best efforts Williams failed to get everyone to accept the value of the confederation that he saw as essential to their common survival. He faced a particular challenge from William Coddington, who had settled at Portsmouth, on Aquidneck Island, as part of the faction that had supported Anne Hutchinson. Coddington quarrelled with the Hutchinsons and established himself as a key figure in his own right. A merchant with strong English connections he was able to obtain a parliamentary commission making him governor of the colony for life in clear violation of the patent which Williams had obtained. It was this that had led to Williams's return to England, accompanied by John Clarke, in 1651. Though he was able to gain the nullification of Coddington's commission he failed to gain a reaffirmation of the patent that he had earlier obtained. 
After returning to New England in summer 1654 Williams was elected president of Providence Plantations in September. Once again his major task was to quell the factionalism that was largely rooted in the colony being open to settlers of many divergent religious views and socio-economic goals. Even in Providence itself divisions arose at this time over the authority of the civil leaders to impose compulsory militia training. This particular dispute seems to have prompted Williams's most famous statement of his views on the limits of freedom and the nature of the wall of separation that should divide state and church -- the 'ship of state' letter he addressed to his fellow citizens around January 1655. The letter opened with Williams denying that anything he had ever said or written could be properly construed to mean that government had no right whatsoever to punish those who transgressed against the common interests of the society. He likened society to 'a hundred souls in one ship, whose weal and woe is common'. If 'Papists and Protestants, Jews, and Turks, may be embarked into one ship', all he argued in terms of liberty was that none of these groups 'be forced to come to the ship's prayers or worship; nor compelled from their own particular prayers or worship, if they practice any'. Yet, 'notwithstanding this liberty, the commander of this ship ought to command the ship's course... and also to command that justice, peace, and sobriety, be kept and practiced, both among the seamen and all the passengers', and 'if any refuse to obey the common laws and orders of the ship, concerning their common peace and preservation', or 'mutiny and rise up against their commanders', or 'preach or write that there ought to be no commanders because all are equal in Christ', the commanders 'may judge, resist, compel, and punish such transgressors' ('Correspondence', 423-4). 
The letter did not bring dissension to a halt. In the remaining years of the decade quarrels over land began to grow in intensity and Williams himself became embroiled in a bitter dispute with a Providence group headed by William Harris which asserted that the boundaries of the community were larger than Williams contended that he had acquired from the native leaders. In 1657 Williams retired from the presidency and devoted himself more to his own private interests, spending considerable time away from the settlements at a trading post which he had established along the Narragansett Bay. During this period he corresponded extensively with friends throughout the region, including John Winthrop jun., the son of the former Massachusetts governor, who was himself governor of Connecticut. 
Williams was gratified by the success of his friend and ally John Clarke in England. Clarke secured a letter from Cromwell in 1655 that urged the citizens of Providence and her sister towns to take up the challenge of governing themselves in accord with the 1644 patent. Following the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 Clarke obtained a charter for the colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations from King Charles II in 1663, and the explicit guarantee that the charter provided for religious liberty. The colony's future was further bolstered when a royal commission sent to the region in 1664 recognized Rhode Island's rights to land that had been in dispute with neighbouring colonies. While continuing to focus on his personal affairs Williams served as a colony assistant in 1664, 1665, 1670, 1671, and 1672, as well as holding lesser offices for the colony and the town of Providence. 
In the 1670s Williams emerged from relative obscurity to attack the growing ascendancy of the Quakers in Rhode Island. Many of the original supporters of Anne Hutchinson, such as Mary Dyer, had been convinced by Quaker missionaries in the mid-1650s and the influence of the sect had steadily spread. Despite his views on toleration Williams held an intense belief in the importance of the scriptures. Indeed, his own spiritual pilgrimage had been driven by his careful reading of the 'Old and New Testaments' and his refusal to compromise what he interpreted as God's will. He believed that the Quakers had elevated their sense of an inner light above the written word of God, and was further disturbed by the religious and moral conclusions they drew from this inspiration. Furthermore he was disturbed when some Quakers used their perception of the inner light to justify disobedience to civil laws. While not seeking to proscribe their presence or influence he castigated Quaker leaders and their beliefs in public debates held at Newport and Providence in 1672, recounting his experience and views in 'George Foxe Digged out of his Burrowes' (1676). 
In 1675 King Philip's War broke out between the native Americans of southern New England and the English colonies. The conflict originated with the Wampanoag tribe and their leader, Metacom, named King Philip by the English. The land hunger of Rhode Islanders such as William Harris had undermined Williams's efforts to retain good relations with the Narragansett tribe that had welcomed him in the 1630s and sold him land. In June 1675 the Narragansetts joined the Wampanoags and other tribes in attacking the settlements. In March 1676 Providence was attacked and burnt even while Williams was negotiating with some native American leaders nearby. As the devastating war progressed Williams joined a militia company to defend the settlements, and after the conclusion of fighting in the area assisted in rounding up native Americans for sale into slavery in the West Indies. 
In the years after King Philip's War Williams became increasingly nostalgic, remembering his youth in England, the promise of early Rhode Island, and his efforts to understand and live in peace with the native population. Distressed by recent events he wrote to his friend John Winthrop jun. asking 'why is our Candle yet burning but to... [serve] God in serving the public in our generation' ('Correspondence', 699). He continued to urge his fractious fellow Rhode Islanders to heal the breaches that divided them, reminding them that 'there is not a man in the world (except robbers, pirates, rebels) but doth submit to government' (ibid., 774). He never gave up his grudge against Massachusetts for the way that colony had treated him. In Rhode Island he was increasingly dismissed as irrelevant by fellow colonists who took for granted what he had accomplished and did not share his zealous pursuit of truth and godliness. The exact date of his death was not recorded, though it was between 27 January and 15 March 1683. He was buried with full military honours on his Providence farm. 
Roger Williams was a seeker who was driven by a sense of God's love to find the proper way to worship and praise his Lord. He refused to compromise with the orders of the English church, the magistrates and ministers of Massachusetts, or any other group. He was unwilling to accept the imperfections of any religious group, including the Baptist church which he helped found in Rhode Island. His insistent refusal to sully worship by mingling believers and unbelievers in any religious act led him to radical views denying the commonly accepted right of the state to police the first table of the commandments, and eventually to conclude that until Christ's second coming no church could achieve the perfection demanded by God. He sought to erect a wall of separation to protect religious seekers from the contamination of civil rulers, and was the chief architect of the most tolerant English society in his time. Because he grudgingly came to accept that no sect or church could escape impurity he learned to tolerate all faiths so long as their beliefs did not interfere with the efforts of the captain to steer the ship of state in its secular courses. 
In time Williams became an icon for the cause of religious freedom, and historians and statesmen applauded him as a pioneer of American democratic traditions. Yet this distorts the nature of his life. Roger Williams was first and foremost a pious Christian who sought the best way to ensure the proper service of God. In seeking separation of church and state he was primarily concerned with defending religious seekers from civil authorities rather than, as later generations would fear, limiting the role of believers on the state. His commitment came from a concern for religion, not from indifference or a fear that its influence might become too great. 


@@@@@


doc= 29545


Williams, Rowland (1817-1870), Church of England clergyman, was born at Halkyn, Flintshire, on 16 August 1817. His father, Rowland Williams (died 1854), canon of St Asaph, held successively the livings of Halkyn, Meifod, and Ysgeifiog. One of the most able Welsh clergymen of his age, he married Jane Wynne, daughter of the Revd Hugh Wynne Jones of Tre Iorwerth, Anglesey, who was prebendary of Penmynydd. Rowland was their second surviving son. Educated initially by his father, he went to Eton College as king's scholar in 1828 and became Newcastle medallist in 1835. A year later, he went up to King's College, Cambridge, and gained Battie's university scholarship in his first year. Elected to a fellowship at King's in 1839, he travelled in Europe and taught briefly at Eton before returning to Cambridge in 1842. He was ordained deacon in 1842 and priest in 1843 by John Kaye, bishop of Lincoln, then spent the next eight years as classical tutor at King's. He proceeded MA in 1844 and BD in 1851. He also developed an interest in oriental studies, carrying off a prize in 1848 offered to the university by John Muir for a dissertation which compared Christianity and Hinduism. An extended version of his submission was published in 1856. 
During his Cambridge years, Williams remained very conscious of his Welshness. He was in active contact with London Welsh circles, spoke regularly at St David's day dinners, and sported a leek on appropriate occasions. Under the pseudonym Goronva Camlan, he published verse with the aim of rescuing some of the heritage of Wales from the 'threatening train of steam engines and schoolmasters', as he put it. He campaigned successfully, with the earl of Powis and others, against the mooted merger of the sees of Bangor and St Asaph. He played a leading part in the awarding of the Powis scholarships (held at Oxford and Cambridge), which were established to commemorate this triumph. Articles in the 'Quarterly Review' in 1849 and 1850 on Methodism in Wales and on the church and education in Wales confirmed his continuing interest in Welsh questions. It was for this reason that the invitation to become vice-principal and professor of Hebrew at St David's College at Lampeter in 1850 was attractive: it would enable him to combine his own academic work with the improvement of the educational standards of Welshmen who intended ordination. It was even possible that, in due time, though a Welshman, he would become a bishop. 
The college was founded in 1822 and took in its first students in 1827. From the outset, however, it was handicapped by an inadequate financial base, and also by the disposition of prominent local clergy to dispute among themselves too vigorously. There were also allegations, not without foundation, of administrative incompetence. Williams had no difficulty in settling into prevailing conventions of controversy -- it was later said that his pen dripped with vitriol the moment he began to write. His contentious defence of English as the medium of instruction in the college led to the grave accusation from some quarters that his heart was 'Anglo-Welsh'. Lady Llanover, one of his prominent critics, explained that such a heart was a much worse thing than a Saxon one because it was 'unnatural'. Williams hit back, publishing a defence of the broad type of education offered at Lampeter and initiating financial and administrative changes which helped to give the college a more secure future. A charter in 1852 gave it the power to grant the degree of BD. 
In December 1854, as select preacher in Cambridge, Williams delivered a course of sermons whose general contention was that everything doubtful or transparently erroneous in the 'Bible' could be surrendered with little or no detriment to the essentials of the Christian faith. The evolution of his ideas up to this point owed much to Julius Hare and Coleridge and, in Germany, to F. D. Schleiermacher (Williams read German). 'Rational Godliness', the published title of these and other sermons, did not altogether commend itself in west Wales. In 1855 the bishop of Llandaff forced Williams to resign his post as examining chaplain in his diocese. Williams tried to defend himself in his 'Lampeter Theology', published in the following year, but that volume only made matters worse locally, although a petition to the bishop of St David's that Williams should be removed did not succeed. Years of controversy followed. They were intensified by the publication, also in 1856, of Williams's 'Christianity and Hinduism'. This substantial work took the form of a dialogue between a Buddhist, a Hindu, a Vedantist, a German naturalist, and two English clergymen on the respective merits of Indian and other religions. On the strength of these publications, Williams was awarded his DD in 1857. 
Meanwhile, an acrimonious debate was launched in Wales involving Connop Thirlwall, bishop of St David's, and Alfred Ollivant, bishop of Llandaff, both Welsh-speaking Englishmen and graduates of Cambridge, who also had personal connections with St David's College as visitor and sub-visitor respectively. In the debate about orthodoxy and heterodoxy that ensued, opportunity was taken to revive old issues concerning the administration, structure, and mission of the college. Ollivant concluded that Williams's teaching, while it might be acceptable in Cambridge, was not suitable for the 'raw and undisciplined youths' who apparently constituted the chief body of Lampeter students -- Ollivant was himself a former vice-principal. Williams in turn found that observation to be an insult to the genius of the Welsh people. Ollivant subsequently found Williams's language sneering and unjust. Conscious of his own past reputation as a 'liberal', Thirlwall prevaricated obscurely and irritated all parties. 
It was in these circumstances that in 1858 Williams gratefully accepted the King's College living of Broad Chalke with Bower Chalke and Alvedistone, near Salisbury, though initially he limited its demands on his time to the vacations from Lampeter. In 1859 he married Ellen, daughter of Charles Cotesworth RN, a Liverpool merchant. They had no children. After Williams's death, she wrote his biography and returned to her original home in Liverpool. 
In 1862 Williams gave up his position in Lampeter completely. He thought it appropriate to preach his farewell sermon in the college on the text 'princes have persecuted me without cause'. In the meantime, he had become involved in further controversy as a result of his review of Baron von Bunsen's 'Biblical Researches'; the review appeared in the celebrated volume 'Essays and Reviews' in February 1860. This time the public argument extended beyond what Williams had dispiritedly come to regard as 'an unsympathizing corner of a barbarous land'. De Bunsen, diplomat and biblical scholar, was a personal friend with whom he had stayed in Heidelberg. The tone of Williams's contribution no doubt reflected what he had come to refer to as his 'Lampeter purgatory'. W. K. Hamilton, bishop of Salisbury, took proceedings against Williams for heterodoxy before the court of arches of the province of Canterbury. He was defended by J. P. Deane and J. F. Stephen in a hearing which lasted ten days in December 1861 and January 1862. The subsequent judgment sustained three charges relating to inspiration, propitiation, and justification, but dismissed the others. In retrospect, however, the liberty that the judgment allowed seems more significant than these three particular condemnations. Williams himself wrote: 'Whatever freedom I have claimed is judicially conceded as permissible by the Church of England. If we gain nothing more, I feel this day that I have not lived in vain; my Master has done a work by me which will abide.' Williams and H. B. Wilson (another of the essayists proceeded against in the court of arches) appealed in person on 19 June 1863 before the judicial committee of the privy council. In February 1864 the court reversed such parts of the judgment as were unfavourable to Williams. The essence of the position of the seven essayists, who wrote independently, was that the 'Bible' should be read with freedom like any other book. Condemnation of the reversal followed in the lower house of convocation, and Pusey made such contribution as he could to the reversal of what he took to be the tide of scepticism by lecturing on the book of 'Daniel'. 
Williams spent his remaining years largely at Broad Chalke where he was an active clergyman, rebuilding one of his churches, providing allotments out of his glebe, and starting a library for local inhabitants. He published sermons and issued a translation, with commentary, of the Hebrew prophets, though he did not live to complete this work. It was an achievement which excited the admiration of the German scholar Heinrich Ewald, who visited him in Wiltshire. At about this time Williams by chance shared a railway compartment with Pusey, but the two men did not fraternize. Williams was never strong and late in life had a disconcerting tendency to fall off his horse and to stumble when lighting a cigar. He died on 18 January 1870 at his home, the Broad Chalke vicarage, and was buried in the churchyard there. Three years later painted glass in the west window of his church was unveiled in his memory. Pupils and friends caused memorials to be put up in the college chapels at St David's, Lampeter, and King's College, Cambridge. 
The portrait by John Robertson, now at Lampeter, reveals a man with a large head and high-domed forehead. His features were held in the nineteenth century to be of the 'Celtic type'. In his study of Williams, Jones concludes that the portrait reveals Williams as a man of pride and passion, whose egotism was expressed alternately in melancholy and elation -- a man of a certain arrogance who had an intensely personal approach to everything he attempted. It was, however, the passion for freedom that he brought both to 'Old Testament' scholarship and to the study of religions which makes Williams a figure of abiding significance in nineteenth-century British theological study, even though his specific views and theories may not entitle him to a place in the first rank of biblical scholars. 
Despite his final decade in Wiltshire, thoughts of Wales were never far away and Williams died in the knowledge that the proofs of his final poem, significantly entitled 'Owen Glendower', were to hand. The intensity with which he fought for the freedom to conduct unfettered biblical research may reflect the experience in this era of a young Welshman from a rural background thrown into a very different social and cultural environment and anxious to prove, before there was a university in Wales, that he could match anything more assured Englishmen could achieve. It was in Wales that he wished to be primarily remembered and his library was, after his death, housed in Swansea. It is fitting that the major part of that collection, revealing his wide scholarly interests, was later transferred to the National Library of Wales in Aberystwyth. With all his limitations, he was the most important Welsh scholar in biblical studies and the comparative study of religion in the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29546


Samuel Williams (1788-1853), who was born on 23 February 1788, at Colchester, Essex, the son of John Williams and his wife, Elizabeth. Two of his siblings, Thomas and Mary Ann ['see below'], were also wood-engravers, and as a family they played an exceptionally conspicuous and influential part in the illustration of books. Little is known of Samuel Williams's parents, except that they were not well off. This meant that although he wanted to become a painter, his father apprenticed him in 1802 to J. Marsden, a printer in Colchester, thinking this a less precarious career. In the printer's studio he taught himself to etch and engrave on copper, and one of his early etchings was used as a frontispiece to a farce called 'The Coggeshall Volunteer Corps'. Additionally, he learned to draw and engrave on wood. His master must have been impressed for later he commissioned a wood-engraved frontispiece from Williams for a 'History of Colchester' (possibly that by Thomas Cromwell, in 1825). 
Williams started as an engraver on his own account first in Colchester, then in London. An early commission in 1810 came from the London-based publisher Benjamin Crosby for wood-engravings for a natural history book. (Later, in 1823-4, he produced plates for Mrs Mary Trimmer's 'Natural History'.) Quite often he was employed both to design and engrave book illustrations, and some proved highly popular, including those in editions of 'Robinson Crusoe' (1822), Lady Charlotte Guest's 'Mabinogion' (1838), James Thomson's 'Seasons' (1841), and Thomas Miller's 'Pictures of Country Life' (1847). On other occasions, Williams simply engraved the designs of other artists, for instance, in J. H. Wiffen's edition of Tasso's 'Jerusalem Delivered' (1824), J. G. Lockhart's 'Spanish Ballads' (1840), the Abbotsford edition of the 'Waverley novels' (1842), F. T. Kugler's 'Handbook of Painting' (1849), and in H. H. Milman's 'Horace' (1849). Of the engravings he produced for William Scrope's 'The Art of Deer-Stalking' (1846), the author spoke highly in the preface of the third edition. 
Williams also played a leading role in the embellishment of illustrated periodicals. He worked for William Hone, producing engravings for his 'Every-Day Book' (1825-7), and even more extensively for two other periodicals: a weekly, 'The Olio, or, Museum of Entertainment' (1828-33), and a monthly, 'The Parterre of Fiction, Poetry, History, Literature, and the Fine Arts' (1834-5). His name appeared on the title-page of the latter, while in prefaces to both the editors specifically mentioned the value of Williams's contribution. In all his work, Williams enjoyed playing up tonal contrasts, on which W. J. Linton thought him too dependent, so that his line work suffered, and became weak. One of his pupils, John Orrin Smith, was well known for the tone and refinement that he achieved in his engravings of landscapes. Another of his pupils was George Baxter. 
In his spare time Williams painted miniatures on ivory and full-scale oil paintings. He became known as a painter of rural life scenes, exhibiting, for instance, 'Sketching a Countryman' at the Royal Academy in 1831 (from 2 Hadlow Street) and several paintings at the British Institution, including 'Don Quixote Giving Advice to Sancho' in 1825 (from Harrison Street, Gray's Inn Road); and 'Sancho Requesting the Duchess to Superscribe his Letter' in 1834 (from 5 Mabledon Place, Burton Crescent). He died on 19 September 1853 at 20 Gloucester Street, Gloucester Gate, Regent's Park, after a long and painful illness, his wife having died some six weeks earlier. Samuel appears to have been a good-humoured person, Lewer recording that he enjoyed flying a kite (Lewer, 172-3). He signed his engravings 'S. WILLIAMS' or 'S. W.'. 



@@@@@


doc= 29547


Taliesin Williams (1787-1847) was born on 7 July 1787 at Cardiff (according to one tradition in Cardiff gaol), and baptized at Flemingston church on 16 September of that year. He was educated at Cowbridge, and became a partner in his father's business. He left in 1813 to train as a schoolmaster with the Unitarian David Davis at Neath, and in 1816 set up a successful school in Merthyr Tudful. He married Mary Petherick, and they had at least one son, Edward Williams (1826-1888). Taliesin Williams shared his father's radical politics, and druidic beliefs, apparently unaware of his father's forgeries and inventions, and edited a quantity of his father's manuscripts. He died at Merthyr on 16 February 1847 but was buried at Flemingston. 


@@@@@


doc= 29548


Williams, Thomas (1513/14-1566), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was the eldest son of Adam Williams of Stowford, Devon, and his wife, Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Prideaux of Ashburton in the same county. His father, a lawyer who served several towns in south Devon, had obtained a grant of arms in 1538 and enjoyed the favour of the prominent Edgcumbe family. Thomas was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1539 and was Lent reader there in 1558 and 1561. He soon established a legal practice centred on Plymouth, serving as feodary for Devon and Exeter in 1559, subsidy commissioner in 1565, counsel for both Plymouth and Exeter, and JP from 1559 until his death. He bought property at Ugborough and elsewhere in Devon. 
Williams's parliamentary career began under Mary Tudor. It was probably through the influence of Richard Edgcumbe, who owned houses at Mount Edgcumbe and Cotehele, that he was elected for the boroughs of Bodmin in 1555 and Saltash in 1558. Unlike Edgcumbe's son Peter, who sat in the Commons for Totnes, Williams displayed his protestant convictions in 1555 (later also made manifest in the preamble to his will) by opposing a government bill dealing with religion. Here Williams may have enjoyed the support of Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, since his brother-in-law John Belfield was in the service of the Russell family. 
Williams sat for Tavistock in Elizabeth's first parliament in 1559, and in 1563 was returned for Exeter. On 12 January 1563 he was chosen speaker of the Commons. Described by a contemporary as grave, wise, and learned in the laws of the realm, he referred to himself in his disabling speech as 'one among the Romans, chosen from the plough to a place of estimation', for he was 'a countryman, fit for the same and not for this place' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.626). On 15 January he was presented to the queen and made the traditional oration, an unusually literate exercise in which he spoke of the past, present, and future. Describing time past as notable for the great benefits Elizabeth had bestowed upon her people, Williams proceeded to delineate the three monsters of necessity, ignorance, and error that threatened the present, and concluded by urging the construction of an invincible fortress of spiritual virtues ruled by the queen as the lieutenant of God, one whose stones would be the hearts of faithful people. 
The problem of succession was the chief issue under discussion in this session. Williams helped draw up articles for a succession committee and on 28 January read the committee's petition to the queen in the gallery at Whitehall. After urging her to marry, Williams advocated the enactment of 'sharp and terrible statutes' to punish any who might presume to threaten the queen's safety. Elizabeth thanked him for his excellent oration but, as so often, deferred her answer to a further time. The speaker pressed the issue again when Elizabeth came to prorogue the session on 10 April. Her response, typically opaque, was that it should be dealt with by the 'zealous Prince's consideration', not by 'lip-laboured orations out of wrangling subjects' mouths'; they should not 'tempt too far a Prince's patience' (Neale, 'Elizabeth I and her Parliaments, 1559-1581', 171-6). 
During this session Williams secured the passage of five bills desired by the city of Exeter and was paid $20 for his services. He died probably in Devon, still 'in his young flourishing age' (in fact he was fifty-two) on 1 July 1566, thus leaving the Commons with the necessity of naming a new speaker when it met for a second session in September that year. He was buried in the church at Harford, Devon, where an effigy depicts him as an esquire in armour. Memorial verses conclude: '
The common peace he studied to preserve 

And true religion ever to maintain. 

In peace of justice where as he did serve 

And now in heaven with mighty Jove doth reign. 
(HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 626)' Williams was married to Emmeline, daughter and coheir of William Cruwys of Chudleigh, Devon, with whom he had at least two sons and three daughters. Both of the sons were said to be thriftless. In his will he left $40 to his daughter Elizabeth if she married the heir of John Trevelyan of Nettlecome -- 'no more in consideracion of the greate charge that I have and must be at abowte the education and bringinge upp of the sonne of the saide John Trevilian' -- or $200 if she chose not to do so (will, fol. 147). His law readings were published in 1680, over a century after their author's death, as 'The Excellency and Praeheminence of the Law of England above All other Lawes in the World'. Their appearance in print should probably be associated with that of other historic legal texts at about this date, notably the standard edition of the year-books between 1678 and 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 29549


Wiliems, Thomas (b. 1545/6?, d. in or before 1623?), Welsh lexicographer, was the son of Wiliam ap Tomos ap Gronwy, and Catherine, the illegitimate daughter of Meredydd ab Ifan, founder of the Wynn family of Gwydir and great-grandfather of its historian, Sir John Wynn. Born in Ardda'r Mynaich in Arllechwedd, probably in 1545 or 1546, and possibly on 20 April, Wiliems probably went to the school kept by the Wynn family primarily for its sons and also attended by William Morgan, the future translator of the Welsh 'Bible', but instead of proceeding to Cambridge as the latter did, he went to the University of Oxford, although there are no clear records of his stay there owing to confusion with others of the same name. He must have left Oxford without a degree to take holy orders, hence the 'Sir' usually prefixed to his name (the title traditionally accorded to clergymen in Wales). He served for a while as curate in Trefriw, not far from his home. There he remained for the rest of his life, although he later became a recusant and thereafter practised as a physician, a calling that at that time required no special training and at best only book- or manuscript-learning, of which he had much, having started transcribing manuscripts when he was twenty-one years old, if not earlier. Wiliems was fortunate to be born into a generation of gentry better educated owing to the influence of the Renaissance than ever before and for some time afterwards, a generation well represented as such by the 'generosi' of the Vale of Clwyd and its vicinity, who seem to have had in their possession some of the most important extant Welsh manuscripts. This meant for Wiliems easier, although not easy, access to manuscripts, to read and/or transcribe which he was prepared to make every effort. 
Naturally Wiliems could not disregard medical manuscripts such as Llanstephan MS 10 and BL, Add. MS 14913 (with its text of 'Meddygon Myddfai'), both of which passed through his hands, and it is not surprising to learn from Bishop Humphrey Humphreys that there existed in his time 'a pretty large Herbal in Latin, Welsh and English' written by Wiliems; parts of this may survive in Thomas Evans's hand in Cardiff MS 2.973. 
Like some of his fellow recusants denied access to the press, Wiliems took part in transcribing their works to secure their preservation and circulation. Father Vincenzo Bruno SJ's 'Trattato del sacramento della penitenza' was apparently translated by him into Welsh. A section of the second part of Gruffydd Robert's grammar was copied by him in Peniarth MS 62. Wiliems was free from the prejudice which led some protestant Renaissance scholars to disregard the documents relating to the history of the medieval church. 
But Wiliems's interest in Welsh manuscripts was wider even than that of the poets, their traditional conservationists, for it was the catholic interest of one who must have been planning at an early age to write a dictionary of the Welsh language. There is evidence enough to prove that he examined, transcribed, and/or used all kinds of manuscripts comprising genealogical texts (witness 'Prif Achae Holh Gymru Benbaladr', NL Wales, MSS 16962 and 16963), historical texts (transcripts of 'Brut y Brenhinedd' and 'Historia Dared', NL Wales, MS 5281), legal texts (a transcript of a Latin text of the Welsh Laws, Peniarth MS 225, and signs of having read Peniarth MS 29 and Peniarth MS 30), linguistic, including grammatical, lexicographic, and other pertinent texts (transcripts of 'Pum Llyfr Cerddwriaeth' in Peniarth MS 62, of two bardic grammars in Mostyn MS 110, and his copious summary of Welsh proverbs in Mostyn MS 204, although not in his hand), and selections from the corpus of late medieval professional poetry (Peniarth MS 77, Havod MS 26). Peniarth MS 188 is described by J. Gwenogvryn Evans as Wiliems's 'Common place book or dictionary-in-the-making', 'the whole having no apparent system or arrangement'. Although Wiliems does not mention Thomas Thomas's Latin-English dictionary (first edn, 1587), he found in it the system he could follow: all he had to do was to substitute Welsh equivalents for Thomas's English. It took him several years (4 May 1604-2 October 1607, although the date on the title-page is 1608) to write up his 'Thesaurus linguae Latinae et Cambrobritannicae', the three quarto volumes of Peniarth MS 228. 
The strenuous efforts of his friend John Edwards, Plas Newydd, Chirk, extending even to the making of a more legible partial copy (Brogyntyn MSS 9 and 10) to ensure publication, proved to be unsuccessful and Wiliems turned to his kinsman, Sir John Wynn, in whose possession the manuscript was (from 13 August 1623) after Wiliems had died. Sir John Wynn did not survive Wiliems for many years, but he quickly appealed to John Davies, Mallwyd, for his help, promising financial support providing Davies would see the work through the press and on condition that full recognition be given to the author and the dedication be to Sir John. Davies was known to be engaged on a Welsh dictionary, and eventually published the 'Dictionarium duplex' (1632) comprising a Welsh-Latin part composed by himself and a Latin-Welsh which is admittedly and obviously based on a very much abridged and revised version of Wiliems's 'Thesaurus'. Perhaps Davies should not be too harshly criticized for taking advantage of the circumstances, and especially of the support of the Gwydir family, but one must regret that Wiliems has been denied the recognition and honour he so richly deserves as the author of the 'Thesaurus' and as one of the greatest lexicographers of the Welsh language. 


@@@@@


doc= 29550


Williams, Thomas (1668-1740), vicar apostolic of the northern district, was from a Welsh Catholic family who owned the former Benedictine priory of Monmouth. Nothing else is known of him until on 30 October 1685 he entered the English Dominican priory in Bornhem, near Antwerp, in the Low Countries. He made his novitiate in the Dominican priory of Ghent and was professed at Bornhem on 5 December 1686, taking the name of Dominic. 
On 9 March 1688 Williams was sent to study at the English Dominican house of Saints John and Paul on the Coelian Hill in Rome. This house had been founded by Cardinal Philip Thomas Howard on a gift from Pope Clement X as a study house for young English friars. From Rome Williams was sent to Naples to complete his studies and was ordained in 1692, taking his lectorate in theology. He returned to Saints John and Paul on 26 November 1695. In that same year the English Dominican authorities closed the Roman priory. Williams was prominent in the party of younger friars who wished to withdraw from Rome. A new college of St Thomas Aquinas was then founded at Louvain in the Low Countries with the revenues bequeathed by Cardinal Howard. 
Williams became a professor at Louvain on 15 September 1696, and then in 1701 regent of the college. In 1706 he was created master in sacred theology, returning home in the following year to transfer the family estates, to which he was heir, to his younger brother. He was once more appointed regent in the college at Louvain in 1711, and from 1708 to 1712 was vicar provincial in the Low Countries, holding jurisdiction over the English Dominican establishments at Bornhem and Louvain, and the English Dominican nuns at Brussels. On 28 February 1712 he was elected provincial, resuming his teaching responsibilities at Louvain when his term expired. He was elected to represent the English province as diffinitor in the general chapter in Rome in May of 1721. In 1724 Williams was elected prior of Bornhem and once more acted as diffinitor at the general chapter of Bologna in May 1725. On 25 July of the same year he was again named provincial, but on 30 December 1725 was ordained a bishop by the Dominican pope Benedict XIII. He was named to the see of Tiberiopolis, under the archbishop of Hieropolis, in Phrygia Magna, 'in partibus infidelium'. 
Williams's appointment as vicar apostolic of the northern district of England on 6 June 1726 was, however, greeted with dismay by the secular clergy of the region. Bishop Williams landed in his new charge in December 1727 and endured great poverty and hardship in the first years of his episcopate before settling with the Gascoignes at Huddlestone Hall, near Pontefract. He was zealous in visiting his district, and died at Huddlestone on 3 April 1740. He was buried the following day in the Catholic chapel in neighbouring Hazlewood. 


@@@@@


doc= 29551


Thomas Williams (b. 1798) was born on 26 November 1798, also at Colchester. He was taught to engrave by his elder brother, and became a competent copyist, although not an original designer. Good examples of his work are found in James Northcote's 'Fables' (1828 and 1833), John Martin and Richard Westall's 'Illustrations of the Bible' (1833), and Edward Moxon's edition of 'Tennyson's poems' (1857). Thomas undertook much work for the printer Charles Whittingham senior, producing engravings, for example, for his 'Pocket Novel' series (39 vols.) and 'Peter Parley's Tales about Christmas' (1838). He also painted Whittingham's portrait and designed an emblem for the Chiswick Press. According to Whittingham's biographer, Thomas used to laugh at his own jokes and, more endearingly, blow through the stem of his pipe until the bowl smoked like a chimney (Warren, 73). The publisher Charles Knight also benefited from Thomas's assistance. Many of the engraver's woodcuts appeared in, for instance, Charles Knight's 'Land We Live In' series, Knight's 'Penny Magazine' (July 1842 issue), and Knight's edition of E. W. Lane's 'Arabian Nights' Entertainment' (1839). Thomas worked on this latter project with his brother and sister, while he and several family members collaborated in producing engravings after William Harvey's drawings for 'Solace of Song' (1836). His engravings were signed 'THOS WILLIAMS sc', 'T WILLIAMS', 'T W', or 'TW'. He trained Joseph Swain in 1837. Two addresses are known for him: 15 Wine Office Court, Fleet Street (1855) and 37 Ludgate Hill (1862). Thomas Williams never married and was always in a poor state both physically and financially. 



@@@@@


doc= 29552


Williams, Sir Thomas (1761/2-1841), naval officer, son of Captain William Williams RN (died 1778), was in 1768 entered on the books of the sloop 'Peggy', commanded by his father, with whom he continued serving, nominally or really, in different ships on the Newfoundland and North America stations. In June 1776 he was with his father in the 'Active' in the disastrous attack on Sullivan's Island. In 1777 he was moved into the 'Prince of Wales', flagship of Rear-Admiral Samuel Barrington, with whom he was in the engagements at St Lucia (15 December 1778) and Grenada (6 July 1779). On 8 December 1779 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'America', one of the ships with Sir George Brydges Rodney when he captured the Caracas convoy on 8 January 1780; after being sent home with the prizes, Williams went out to North America with Vice-Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot, and took part in the action of 16 March 1781. 
In May 1781 Williams was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Assurance', which he commanded with some success for several months during the absence of her captain at sick quarters. On 15 April 1783 he was promoted commander of the 'Rhinoceros', which he took to England and paid off in March 1784. In June 1789 Williams was appointed to the 'Otter', employed in the North Sea; and on 22 November 1790 he was advanced to post rank. In December 1792 he was appointed to the 'Lizard' (28 guns), and in August 1794 to the frigate 'Daedalus', both in the North Sea for the protection of trade, and to co-operate with the army in the Low Countries. For his good service in forcing a number of transports through the ice in the Ems in the winter of 1794-5, and so relieving the forces at Emden, he was specially thanked by the Admiralty, and appointed, in July 1795, to the frigate 'Unicorn' (32 guns), on the Irish station. 
On 8 June 1796, while cruising on the Soundings, having under his orders the 'Santa Margarita', Williams fell in with two French frigates of nominally equal force. They split up and were separately followed by the two British ships; and while the 'Santa Margarita' took one the 'Unicorn' captured the other, the 'Tribune', which, under that name, was added to the British navy. The most extraordinary feature of the action was that though the 'Tribune' was commanded by a capable seaman, and admirably manoeuvred, she did not succeed, in a running fight of several hours and a close combat of more than half an hour, in inflicting any casualties on board the 'Unicorn'. She herself lost thirty-seven men killed and fourteen wounded. The reward of the double victory fell mainly to the senior officer, and Williams was knighted by George III in June 1796. 
In March 1797 Williams was transferred to the frigate 'Endymion' (40 guns), carrying 24-pounders on her main deck. On 12 October, the day after the battle of Camperdown, she joined the North Sea Fleet, and was immediately sent by the admiral to follow up the Dutch ships which had escaped. A few hours later she found the Dutch ship 'Brutus' (74 guns), anchored inshore, and at once attacked her. The difficulty of the position, however, rendered it impossible for the inferior force to do anything effective; and when on the morning of 13 October the 'Endymion' and the 'Beaulieu' stood in to renew the attack, they were mortified by seeing the 'Brutus' slip her cable and get into Goree. For the next three years the 'Endymion' was employed on the Irish station and on convoy service to St Helena. 
In December 1792 Williams married the beautiful Jane (1771-1798), daughter of Edward Cooper (1728-1792) and his wife Jane, 'nee' Leigh (1736-1783), the sister of Jane Austen's mother. In August 1798 in the Isle of Wight, by collision with a runaway dray horse, she was thrown from her gig and killed. In 1800 Williams married Miss Whapshare of Salisbury. She died at Brighton on 17 December 1824. 
In February 1801 Williams was appointed to the 'Vanguard' (74 guns), which in the summer was sent up the Baltic, and on her return was employed in the blockade of Cadiz. In 1804-5 Williams commanded the 'Neptune' (98 guns), in the channel; in 1806-7 he had charge of the sea fencibles of the Gosport division; and in 1807-8 was again in the 'Neptune'. 
On 25 October 1809 Williams was promoted rear-admiral, and from May to August 1810 had his flag in the 'Venerable', under the command of Sir Richard John Strachan. In August he hoisted his flag in the 'Hannibal', as second in command of the Channel Fleet, and in October was sent with a strong squadron to Lisbon to co-operate with the army occupying the lines of Torres Vedras. On the retreat of the French he returned to England, and in May 1811 hoisted his flag in the 'Royal George'. In October he was appointed commander-in-chief at the Nore, where he remained for three years. He was made vice-admiral on 4 June 1814, KCB on 2 January 1815, admiral on 22 July 1830, and GCB on 13 September 1831. One of his last acts was to establish the Naval Female School for daughters of naval officers (first at Richmond Green, Surrey, later the Royal Naval School for Girls, Haslemere, and by 1995 the Royal School), to which he donated $1000, the largest sum subscribed; he was the school's first president. Williams died at his home, Burwood House, near Weybridge, Surrey, in his eightieth year, on 8 October 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 29553


Williams, Thomas (1760-1844), hymn writer, son of Richard and Margaret Williams, was born at Trerhedyn, in the parish of Pendeulwyn, Glamorgan. At a very early age he joined the Calvinistic Methodist society which met in the district. On 10 July 1790 he married Jane Morgan of Brewis, and thereupon settled as a farmer, in easy circumstances, at Fonmon in south Glamorgan. 
The controversy which led to the expulsion of Peter Williams from the Methodist body on charges of heresy was keenly waged in the society to which Thomas Williams belonged, and about 1792 he and others who sympathized with the expelled divine formed a separate church, unconnected with any other religious body, at Aberthaw, not far from Fonmon. On 3 June 1798 this congregation formally appointed him as its pastor. Williams's first published work was a (Welsh) elegy upon Peter Williams (1796). In 1806, when Williams moved to Flemingston, his congregation built in the parish of Llantwit Major a chapel which became known as Bethesda'r Fro ('Bethesda of the vale'), and in 1814 church and pastor were received into the Congregational denomination. W. J. Gruffydd's short story 'Bethesda'r Fro' (1940) imagines Thomas Williams having, in 1820, a premonition of the quiet village becoming an industrial centre. 
In 1812 Williams published a small volume of hymns entitled 'Llais y durtur yn y wlad'; this was reissued, with large additions, in 1824 as 'Dyfroedd Bethesda' ('Waters of Bethesda'), and a third edition, with the same title, followed in 1841. 'Perl mewn adfyd' (1814) was also a collection of hymns. Some of Williams's best-known hymns are 'Y gwr ar ffynnon Jacob' ('The man by Jacob's fountain'), 'O'th flaen, o Dduw, 'rwy'n dyfod' ('Oh God, I come before thee'), and 'Adenydd fel c'lomen pe cawn' ('Had I but the wings of a dove'). Elegies written by Williams, and published in pamphlet form in 1817, 1828, and 1830, are extant, and his elegy on John Williams of St Athans is notable. Contemporaries spoke of his handsome presence, his emotional temperament, and the influence which his career and social standing gave him among the nonconformists of south Glamorgan. After the death of his wife on 24 October 1827 Williams in his depression gave up the ministry. He died at Flemingston on 23 November 1844. 
Williams's poetical works were published in one volume at Hafod in 1882. His fame rests upon his hymns, many of which are still in high favour among Welsh congregations. As Thomas Parry has observed, Williams's hymns evolved from the emotionalism of the Methodist revival (Parry, 319). They are of some literary importance because they show an ease with free metre which was little in evidence in secular poetry until the mid-nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 29554


Williams, Thomas Walter (1763-1833), barrister and legal writer, was the son of Walter Williams, a London attorney who lived in Lamb's Conduit Street. He entered St Paul's School on 6 November 1772, and afterwards studied law and was called to the bar. He was not much known as a pleader, his repute chiefly resting on his writings. He died in 1833. 
As a writer, Williams was prolific. He published numerous abstracts of acts of parliament, and several legal handbooks. He also edited the 'Law Journal' between 1804 and 1806 with J. Morgan and in 1825 brought out a new edition of the work of William Sheppard, 'The Precedent of Precedents' (1655). 


@@@@@


doc= 29555


Williams, Sir William, first baronet (1633/4-1700), lawyer and politician, was born at Nantanog in Llantrisant, Anglesey, the second son of Hugh Williams ('c'.1596-1670), rector of Llantrisant and later canon of Bangor and prebendary of St Asaph, and of Emma, the daughter of John Dolben of Caeau Gwynion near Denbigh. 
After studying at Shrewsbury School Williams entered Jesus College, Oxford, in 1650 and in the same year was entered at Gray's Inn. His father was ejected from his rectory during this period, but this did not hinder Williams's entry into the legal profession, and he was called to the bar in 1658. The young lawyer began his practice in his native Wales and its marches, starting with his appointment as clerk of the crown in Denbighshire and Montgomeryshire. He also appeared in the borough courts of Shrewsbury where at one point he successfully represented Walter Kyffin of Llansilin in Denbighshire. On 14 April 1664 Williams married Kyffin's daughter and heir, Margaret (died 1705); they had four sons and one daughter. Margaret and her husband ultimately inherited Glascoed House in Llansilin, which became their principal residence. Williams also purchased Llanforda in Shropshire and lands thereabout, much to the dismay of at least one neighbour who begged to be released from Williams's grasp: 'Suffer not me to be a prey to this prodigious glutton who will not buy my land unless for sauce my discretion is served up to his taste' (Jenkins, 93). 
Williams first appeared in the courts of Westminster Hall in the early 1660s. In 1667 he was unanimously chosen recorder, freeman, and alderman of Chester, where he helped the city fend off over-eager excise collectors and countered heavy tax assessments by county leaders. As a city justice of the peace Williams was equally energetic against protestant dissenters. Thus he began an association with Chester that would provide the foundation for his legal and political career. 
Williams stood at a by-election at Chester in early 1673. Though considered one of 'the royal party' ('CSP dom.', '1672-3', 505-6), many felt that he split that interest by appearing against Robert Werden, a lieutenant-colonel in the duke of York's guards. A hot contest ensued and on the day of the poll Williams whipped up his supporters, at least nine of whom died when too large a crowd surged into too small a city hall. The mayor had endorsed Williams, who claimed that all freemen were required by their oaths to vote as the mayor did: an assertion of political deference that Williams would pointedly reject in later years. Such arguments availed little, and Werden was returned after a close poll. Williams unsuccessfully challenged the result in the Commons. 
Williams had to wait two more years before he obtained a seat, at Chester's next by-election in 1675. Once at Westminster he immediately addressed a major concern of his friends in Chester: excise charges which they thought were too high and too aggressively collected. Closely related was Chester's complaint that to enforce excise collection in the city county justices -- normally barred from the city by Chester's charter -- had been empowered to act there by a special commission of association. Williams prompted the Commons to vote that the appointment of county justices to serve on normally autonomous urban benches was a grievance. After this, county justices apparently withdrew from Chester's bench. 
Williams quickly became a leading member of the house. He served on many committees, including those for a bill for 'the liberty of the subject' -- promoting the use of the writ of habeas corpus -- and another charged with considering ways to limit the threats to common-law jurisdiction posed by courts of equity. Though a champion of some law reforms, he opposed a proposal to establish a public register of land transactions arguing that it would unleash 'an earthquake on estates' (Grey, 5.146-7). Williams spoke regularly and energetically against the power of France. More tendentiously, he suggested that the king could not legitimately raise troops. Sir Robert Sawyer and others challenged this surprising claim, and after being reprimanded by the speaker for using words that undermined the prerogative, Williams admitted his error and begged the house's pardon. None the less, Williams would continue throughout his life to speak against the prerogative of raising royal forces: 'I look upon the army as a sham upon the people' (Grey, 6.279-80). 
But Williams's views of the prerogative and its role in law were by no means simple. In June 1677 he appeared in king's bench to represent the earl of Shaftesbury, pleading on the habeas corpus by which the earl hoped to gain release from his imprisonment by the House of Lords for an alleged contempt. Williams contended: 'That the cause was of great consequence, in regard that the king was touched in his prerogative; the subject was touched in his liberty, and this court in its jurisdiction' ('State trials', 6.1276-7). Though he ultimately failed, Williams argued vigorously that the writ from king's bench to the House of Lords was good. Habeas corpus, he explained, was an unusual writ, founded on the king's prerogative to protect the liberty of the subject by empowering king's bench, in the king's name, to inspect the actions of other judges and administrative officers; as such, the writ should go wherever there was a threat to liberty, even to parliament. For Williams, the prerogative could protect liberty as well as threaten it. 
Williams quickly became an ardent believer in the Popish Plot when Titus Oates began telling his tales late in 1678. Re-elected for Chester in the parliaments of 1679 to 1681, he chaired the committee which prepared the articles of impeachment against the earl of Danby. Having led the attack on the king's leading servant and challenged the grant of supply to the king and the maintenance of a royal army, Williams was dismissed early in 1680 from the county commissions of the peace for Denbigh, Montgomery, and Shropshire. 
But Williams's profile in parliament continued to grow, and in October 1680 he was named speaker of the House of Commons. The Commons now decided to publish their votes, the responsibility for which was assigned to the speaker, who was to sign the votes before sending them to the printer. For now this decision seemed of little importance; later it had a profound impact on Williams, who was again named speaker at the third Exclusion Parliament in March 1681. He clearly relished the speaker's role. When Sir Robert Peyton was expelled the house in November 1680, Williams lashed out: 'You are absolutely the worst man and have committed the greatest of offenses for which you deserve to be obliterated from the knowledge of all... you are become nauseous to this house and therefore they now spew you out' (NL Wales, Coedymaen MS 51). Peyton challenged him to a duel but Williams reported him to the privy council, which sent Peyton to the Tower. 
With parliaments in abeyance from April 1681, the nation's attention turned to the courtroom and the localities; Williams played a prominent part in both arenas. Throughout his years in parliament he had remained one of the leading practitioners in the courts in Westminster Hall. He defended Benjamin Harris, Henry Care, and other publishers of political pamphlets in a series of proceedings against them for libel in 1680. Prosecuting in most of these cases was Sir George Jeffreys, who quickly became Williams's nemesis. 
Williams joined other whiggish lawyers -- George Treby, Sir Francis Winnington, and Henry Pollexfen -- to provide counsel to Edward Fitzharris, on trial for treason in June 1681. Williams argued in support of Fitzharris's plea that king's bench did not have jurisdiction of the matter since there was already an impeachment brought against Fitzharris in parliament. Though parliament had been dissolved, Williams contended that this was a good plea since 'parliament is the supreme court certainly, and this court is every way inferior to it, and it will be strange that that supreme court should be hindered by an inferior' ('State trials', 8.286). By relying on the supremacy of parliament over king's bench, Williams now undermined the ground on which he had made his case for the earl of Shaftesbury four years earlier. Williams knew this well, and turned it to his advantage, saying that the justices' decision in Shaftesbury's case -- that a habeas corpus could not run from king's bench to parliament -- had determined king's bench's inferior status, which now precluded it from hearing a matter that still lay before parliament. Creative as he was, he could not prevent the justices from proceeding and ultimately entering judgment against Fitzharris. Again, Jeffreys had led the prosecution. 
In 1683 Williams defended London sheriffs Thomas Pilkington and Samuel Shute, along with others, for their part in an alleged riot during the contested City elections of 1682. He also joined Winnington, Pollexfen, and Treby to defend Sir Patience Ward from charges of perjury. In both cases, Jeffreys conducted the prosecution. Williams also prepared extensive written advice for Algernon Sidney before his treason trial in 1683; in 1684 he counselled John Hampden in his treason trial and made extensive arguments on his behalf in court. In these two cases Jeffreys now presided as chief justice of king's bench, baiting Williams whenever he could. 
Throughout these years Williams also spent considerable time in Chester cultivating his political base. In September 1682 the duke of Monmouth visited the city and received a clamorous welcome from the populace, stirred up as they were by Williams's cronies on the corporation. Many were bound over, but a city grand jury returned 'ignoramus' to the charge of riot against them. Shortly thereafter none other than Chief Justice Jeffreys arrived in Chester to preside at the assizes, where he ultimately used a special commission of oyer and terminer to try the rioters again. Williams 'addressed himself to the people in a very factious harangue' ('CSP dom.', '1682', 438-9), claiming that Jeffreys's commission was void since Chester's charter reserved purview of such matters to the city's own magistrates. Jeffreys proceeded, commanding a new grand jury to return a true bill, which they did, over Williams's energetic opposition. 
Williams's Chester interest was crumbling rapidly, but he now had other concerns: the protection of London's charter from the 'quo warranto' brought by Attorney-General Sir Robert Sawyer in order to undermine the City's independence. Williams, Sir Francis Winnington, and six other 'true Protestant lawyers' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 359) signed the City's plea to the 'quo warranto', though Williams did not join them in court to plead on the City's behalf. With judgment entered against London in early 1683, most expected that all towns would now submit when threatened with 'quo warranto'. Most did; Chester did not. In August 1683, when 'loyal' Cestrians and area gentry subscribed an address to the king submitting to a 'quo warranto' brought against the city, Williams convinced the corporation overwhelmingly to reject the address. He and his friends then signed another address full of humble loyalty, but without the expected words of submission. When both addresses arrived at Whitehall, the king graciously received the first but refused the second. 
This did not deter Williams. On Christmas eve 1683, when the corporation was setting the annual mayor's Christmas watch, Williams made another important speech, contending that to surrender the charter would be a 'self-homicide' ('CSP dom.', '1683-4', 166). He encouraged them to fight on. At the city quarter sessions soon after the new year the grand jury proposed that the corporation appear in court to defend the city's charter rather than surrender it. But less than two months later, despite all the enthusiasm Williams initially inspired, the corporation voted not to answer the 'quo warranto'. It was, in short, a vote to surrender. Williams still refused to concede. Joining with the mayor and a handful of like-minded aldermen, he applied the mayor's seal to a warrant authorizing him to plead for the city against the 'quo warranto', a legally dubious manoeuvre at best, given the corporation's vote. But king's bench refused to hear him after thirty-nine of the corporation's members petitioned the court not to admit Williams's pleas. Williams had finally failed, Chester's charter was forfeit, and when the crown passed another charter, Williams and his friends were notably absent from the list of the city's new officers. 
Williams remained active in Westminster Hall. When the East India Company sued Thomas Sandys for violating their monopoly, Williams joined other prominent barristers arguing for the defence. He juxtaposed public good -- free trade -- with the private greed of the company, and again relied on the king's prerogative as the protector of the subject's liberty and of the public welfare: 'The property and liberty of the subjects, are put into the power of the company; and they are to dispose of the liberty and property to serve their own Company, and not the public... We that argue for Mr. Sandys argue for the king's prerogative. ('State trials', 10.496)' Williams also assisted the earl of Macclesfield when he unsuccessfully sued Sir Thomas Grosvenor -- Williams's main foe at Chester and the mastermind behind the new charter -- and other Cheshire grandees for 'scandalum magnatum' when they presented Macclesfield for disaffection to the king at the county's quarter sessions. 
Williams faced greater trouble in 1684 when he found himself the target of charges that he had libelled the duke of York when, according to Commons' orders to him as speaker, he had authorized the publication of Thomas Dangerfield's 'Information'. Williams pleaded that he had simply acted according to Commons' orders and thus could not be liable for any wrong. He also suggested that because what he did was done in parliament, it could not be inspected by the lesser court of king's bench. To provide more protection than these pleadings could give he sought a seat in parliament in 1685. His position at Chester having been destroyed by the new charter, he was instead returned for the Montgomeryshire boroughs. But he was unseated in June when the Commons resolved that he had been chosen without the votes of the out-boroughs entitled to vote for the seat. The prosecution against him could now resume. Henry Pollexfen represented him in court in May 1686 when the case at last came on. The justices refused to hear Pollexfen on the plea to the court's jurisdiction and the matter soon concluded with a $10,000 fine against Williams. Williams now made the most abject of apologies to the king in hopes of pardon. Within days the earl of Peterborough brought a similar action against him, and another fine for $20,000 soon followed. 
With $30,000 in judgments against him, Williams arranged to mortgage his properties. But he also discovered that he had supporters, if not friends, in high places. In a meeting with Chief Justice Sir Edward Herbert, he learned that it was his plea against the court's jurisdiction that had required judgment against him: 'I looked upon the plea as a diminution to the prerogative and not fit to continue upon record undetermined'. Herbert added, 'you have some friends near the king and I shall not oppose what shall be moved for you' (NL Wales, Wynnstay MS C47). By mid-July 1686 various agents for Williams at court seemed ready to help him strike a deal. The earl of Rochester in particular worked on his behalf. In the end Williams paid only $8000 of the fine in the judgment for the duke of York, who by now was James II; the king convinced Peterborough to drop his demands against Williams with only a token payment. 
Adverse judgments and heavy fines proved crucial to turning Williams from a foe of the court into its great champion. Ellis Lloyd reported to him in July 1686 that 'the king took it kindly that you had promised hereafter not to be of counsel against the prerogative and more that he expected that you should serve him hereafter and behave yourself loyally' (NL Wales, Trevor Owen MS 47). Despite Williams's protestations of loyalty, he was still advising the corporation of Montgomery early in 1687 about how to fight a 'quo warranto' brought against them by the king. None the less he ultimately kept his promise to serve the king: on 13 December 1687, James made Williams his solicitor-general, having knighted him two days before. Williams was now condemned as a turncoat: '
Williams, thy tame submission suits thee more, 

Than thy mean payment of thy fine before. 

Poor Wretch! Who after taking down thy arms 

Hast a court smile! Strange over ruling charms! 

Bankrupt in honor, thou art tumbled down 

Below the abject'st creature of the gown... 

Is this Wi. Williams, who made such a noise, 

Dreadful to all the lewd abhoring boys? 
(Bodl. Oxf., MS Firth c.15, 228-9)' Popular disdain notwithstanding, he could now redeem the mortgage of his houses at Llanforda, Glascoed, and in Spread Eagle Court in Gray's Inn. On 1 June 1688 the king promoted him to baronet. Williams was now deeply engaged in preparing his most important brief as solicitor: the case against the seven bishops who had refused to co-operate with James II's religious policies. In court against them at the end of June, Williams was described as 'violent and mighty zealous in the prosecution' (Luttrell, 1.448). Arrayed against him were many of the most prominent lawyers in the land, men who had figured prominently in the politically charged courtroom dramas earlier in the decade. Many of these Williams had worked with closely, such as Pollexfen and Winnington, but others were old tory foes such as Sawyer and Sir Heneage Finch. This wide range of legal talent on the other side suggests how marginalized Williams had become by serving James II. His strenuous efforts proved insufficient; when the judgment came in for the bishops he was hissed by the crowd. 
Throughout 1688 Williams provided legal leadership in two controversial areas. First, he assisted the king by helping to manage the effort to find pliable persons who would support James's policy of religious toleration. Second, as part of this effort, he now led the way in suing dozens of corporations on 'quo warrantos' to force them to surrender their charters, completely reversing his ardent defence of town governments earlier in the 1680s. It was hoped that by imposing new charters new corporators could be named who would return MPs that would support the king in the parliament he planned to call. Williams now worked closely with Jeffreys, though gossip suggested that Williams hoped to supplant him as lord chancellor. 
Williams spent most of September and October in Cheshire and Wales working on the election effort. Shortly before he returned, and as the popularity of the king's measures reached bottom, the windows in his Gray's Inn chambers were broken. By now it was clear both to the king and his solicitor that their policies would have to be reversed. Williams arrived back in London just in time to draft the proclamation of 17 October by which the king restored the urban charters surrendered since 1679. This was his last significant act in the service of James II. Given that service, and given his rather different political loyalties before 1686, Williams can only have watched the prince of Orange's arrival in England with great perplexity. 
In mid-December 1688, after William had arrived at Windsor and James II had fled, Williams tried to have an audience with the prince, who refused to see him. This left parliament as the only stage on which Williams might restore his badly damaged political fortunes. In the convention of 1689, to which he was elected by Beaumaris, Williams turned on James, joining those -- mostly Williams's former whiggish allies of the early 1680s -- who argued that his departure amounted to an abdication. Williams's approach to the nation's current problem was strictly pragmatic, with a bit of his characteristic humour tossed in for good measure. ''Tis a plain fact that he is gone'. Worse, James had gone to France, 'a nation that has ever been averse to England and we to them (for we never liked anything of France but their wine, [and] that indeed we like very well)' (D. Jones, 'A Parliamentary History of the Glorious Revolution', 1988, 240). Williams further recommended that parliament consider abuses of the last two reigns, especially the grant of too much supply to the king, the appointment of toadying judges, and the purging of corporations, a surprising addition to the list given Williams's own promotion of such purges in 1687-8. 
Williams recovered surprisingly well from the difficulties created by his participation in James's regime. In April 1689 he was named a king's counsel. He was also reappointed to the commission of the peace for the various Welsh counties on which he had served, and was made 'custos rotulorum' for Denbighshire and Merioneth, though gentlemen in the latter county refused to act with him. In parliament Williams worked to regain his former stature. In the debate on an indemnity bill in June 1689 he grandly declared that 'Though I have suffered by parliaments, I will vindicate them while I live' (Grey, 9.282-3). When he proclaimed that he had paid his $8000 fine 'for the commons of England' (NL Wales, Wynnstay MS C52), the Commons passed a resolution declaring illegal the judgment against him for printing Dangerfield's 'Information'. Williams hoped this might lead to a parliamentary order reimbursing him the amount of his fine, but this was not to be. When the Commons turned its interest from the prosecution of Williams by former attorney-general Sawyer -- whose actions in office Williams consistently condemned -- to the prosecution of the seven bishops by the former solicitor-general Williams, Williams suddenly took a very different line: 'Where there was counsel on both sides, I might be counsel' (Grey, 9.527). There was even a suggestion that for his part in James's government Williams might be excepted by name from any statutory indemnity. 
Williams was not returned to parliament in 1690, but he remained prominent at the bar, and in 1692 became the queen's solicitor. Throughout the 1690s he frequently argued appeals in the House of Lords. His most interesting brief after 1688 came in king's bench in 1690 when, as king's counsel, he argued for the legality of proceedings by informations, by which the attorney-general may prosecute without first obtaining a grand jury indictment -- a procedure used most notoriously in 'quo warrantos' against corporations and in prosecutions for seditious libel in the 1680s. Williams had figured prominently on both sides of such proceedings; his appearance now to defend informations must have raised eyebrows, which he well understood. He confessed that the crown had abused informations, but 'the abuse of a thing will not destroy it'. He then referred to the prosecution of the seven bishops by information: 'I will not undertake to justify the proceedings of the late government; we have all done amiss, and must wink at one another' (5 Mod. 462, 87 ER 766). A majority of the justices agreed; informations were safe. 
Williams remained involved at Chester where, in 1693, he helped the mayor, Colonel Roger Whitley, to purge the corporation of its foes by reverting to an ancient practice of holding annual elections to the common council. For the next two years Williams managed the legal battle to maintain the new advantage gained by his political friends there. Then in 1695, when Williams and Whitley were to stand together at Chester for election to parliament, Whitley at the last moment abandoned Williams -- amid mutual recriminations -- and was returned with the tory Sir Thomas Grosvenor after another riotous election. 
Williams was instead returned for Beaumaris. Once seated he again worked unsuccessfully on a bill that would reimburse him the fine he had paid in 1686. After the assassination plot of 1696 he joined others in refusing to subscribe the new association oath declaring William the 'rightful and lawful' king. Williams complained that if oaths were such an important security for the crown, then neither he nor anyone could have been justified in abandoning James. More to the point, he said he had once paid $8000 for signing something in parliament; because of that, he would never subscribe anything there again. The king was not pleased and Williams was dismissed as king's counsel. He remained a thorn in the king's side when, true to old form, he strenuously opposed a bill reforming the militia as it would create a permanent tax to fund a standing army. 
Now completely without political authority in Westminster or Chester, Williams died at his chambers in Gray's Inn on 10 July 1700 aged sixty-six and was buried in the church at Llansilin. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, who died in 1705, and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son, William (died 1740). A man of some dash and bravado, Williams was a marvellous orator, capable of galvanizing listeners in parliament or in the streets of Chester. He was a vigorous opponent both in court and out. As one observer noted, he was 'an obstinate competitor' ('CSP dom.', '1672-3', 559); others remarked on his 'fiery and vicious temper' (Knights, 125). He was certainly a vain man: on being selected as speaker, instead of professing his unworthiness for so great an honour he explained the difficulty of the job and the subtlety required, suggesting that he was precisely the person to hold such an eminent position. Given his political apostasy in the reign of James II, many reviled him. Burnet called him 'a corrupt vicious man, who had no principles' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.234). But he was a regular communicant of the Church of England, unsubstantiated rumours of 1687 that he had become a Catholic notwithstanding. In parliament he spent his entire career opposing standing armies and the higher taxes needed to fund them. He was a creative and energetic pleader, though at times he clearly strained law, logic, or both in trying to win his case. Resilient, even courageous, he possessed a good sense of humor, one that permitted self-deprecation -- a fine quality in one whose actions or words often shocked his contemporaries, even his friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 29556


Williams, William (1717-1791), religious revivalist and writer, was born early in 1717 at Cefncoed in the parish of Llanfair-ar-y-bryn, Carmarthenshire, the third and only surviving son of the six children born to John Williams (1656-1742), farmer, and his wife, Dorothy Lewis ('c'.1689-1784). The boy wanted to be a doctor. All that is known about his formal education is that he spent a brief period, when he was already past his twentieth birthday, at the dissenting academy of Llwyn-llwyd near Hay-on-Wye, or possibly at the branch established at Chancefield near Talgarth, Brecknockshire. 
In Talgarth churchyard, in 1737 or 1738, upon hearing the unlicensed exhorter Howell Harris preach on 'the judgement to come', Williams experienced a decisive religious conversion. The newly enthused young man, who had been brought up in Cefnarthen Independent Church, emulating Harris, became a communicant in the established church and soon decided to seek holy orders. Harris was refused, but Williams succeeded. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of St David's in August 1740 and licensed 'to perform the office of curate' at Llanwrtyd and Llanddewi Abergwesyn, two parishes in Brecknockshire in the gift of Theophilus Evans, a clergyman well known in Welsh literary circles for his 'Drych y prif oesoedd' (1716, 1740). In 1740 Evans published 'Llythyr-addysc esgob Llundain', one of Bishop Edmund Gibson's episcopal letters, which contains a polemic against George Whitefield. 'The History of Modern Enthusiasm', published in 1752, a more detailed criticism of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century papist and nonconformist heresies, brought Evans further, wider fame. Obviously Evans was not the ideal mentor for a curate regarded by Harris as one of 'my Spiritual Children' (Roberts, 1.36). It became just as obvious that Williams was not an ideal curate. In the summer of 1743 he was accused of absenting himself regularly from his parish duties and of greatly omitting and neglecting the service of his cures. The bishop refused to ordain him priest. 
Williams was a Methodist refused. His absences had not been those of a lazy curate but rather the absences of a preacher burning 'with Love and Zeal' (Roberts, 1.52) who devoted much of his time to help Harris and Daniel Rowland, curate of Llangeitho in Cardiganshire, another extraordinary exhorter, to organize the development of the private societies that were being formed in many parts of Wales to care for converts. The growth of these private societies led in 1742 to the formation of a Methodist Association in Wales, and ultimately, of course, to the severance of the Calvinistic Methodists from the Church of England. But throughout Williams's lifetime and for exactly twenty years afterwards Welsh Methodism, although 'it was irregular and smacked of Dissent or Enthusiasm', remained a movement within the church (Hughes, 3). 
As if in anticipation of the ructions Williams would face in the bishop's court in 1743, the association that met at Watford near Caerphilly in April that year resolved 'that the Revd Mr Williams leave his Curacies, & be an Assistant to the Revd Mr Rowlands' (Roberts, 1.58). Two things should be noted. First, from the beginning of what was later to be called the great awakening in Wales hundreds of converts thronged to Llangeitho on one Sunday every month to hear Rowland preach and to receive holy communion. Llangeitho became the Welsh Methodists' Mecca, and Rowland needed an assistant to cope with them. Second, following John Williams's death in 1742, his widow and their children moved from Cefncoed to Pantycelyn, her family home, which had been passed on to her on the death of her brother in 1731. William, the only son, came to inherit both farms. His was now a comparatively prosperous little estate; and although not rich he thenceforth lived in comfort and could afford to lead the kind of unfettered life that the Methodist cause demanded of some of its exhorters and counsellors. 
From January 1743 Williams was also responsible for superintending the private societies of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire. He undertook regular preaching tours in south Wales and went on extended tours of north Wales in 1742, 1744, and again in 1748. His letters from this period and his reports on the societies richly testify to the sensitivity and analytic maturity with which he approached the delicate task of caring for converts, the majority of whom were youngsters like himself, at once excited and traumatized by their religious experiences. One of his hearers in 1744 described him as 'a very warm, serious, and devout young man, intent upon doing good', but a young man who 'wants to give himself to read and study' (Roberts, 1.71). A year later Williams discovered Jonathan Edwards's book 'on the work of God in New England the best book I have seen to that purpose' (Roberts, 1.85). He was already turning his mind towards literature. His missionary zeal, his pastoral concern for his flocks, his interest in understanding their needs, and his obvious desire to enlighten and comfort them through literary descriptions of their conditions marked him as the most special of Harris's and Rowland's lieutenants. 
Before long Williams would reluctantly have to choose between Harris and Rowland. From 1745 onwards Harris and Rowland were constantly in debate or bickering: theological differences divided them; they were jealous of each other's claim to the leadership of Welsh Methodism; Harris, the general superintendent of the work in Wales, was envious of Llangeitho's popularity; at the same time Rowland rued Harris's absences in London, and, in one famous case, the company he kept. In 1750 the growing rift between them was seen to be irreparable. To exacerbate things, Harris retreated to his native Trefeca Fach to establish a sort of commune. Soon the Methodists became Harris's People and Rowland's People. Williams had little choice but to support Rowland. Generally the 1750s were a debilitating decade for them, but they were the making of Williams -- of Williams Pantycelyn (as he became known) as an author of great vision, brilliance, and pertinence. With Harris gone the Methodist revival in Wales lost its impetus and there were far fewer demands on its leaders' time. Williams devoted himself not only 'to read and study' (as Thomas Morgan of Henllan had suggested he should) but also to write, prolifically. 
Williams had already published a small collection of hymns in 1744. This was 'Aleluia', a collection he added to regularly until 1749. Following the example of English and Welsh writers of an earlier generation and now following Isaac Watts and more recently Charles Wesley, several Welsh Methodists had attempted to express in verse the essential zeal and individual sense of salvation and intimacy with Christ that characterized the revival, but no one had done so successfully. From the outset Williams wrote with that confidence about content and conviction of style that rang true to his purpose. Although most of the early hymns do not have the imaginative range and verbal power of the poetry he wrote twenty years later, his matter and his idiom were already established. He succeeded remarkably in bringing together theology and personal experience and in fusing the classic Welsh of William Morgan's 'Bible' to his north Carmarthenshire dialect. 'Aleluia' was followed by 'Hosanna i fab Dafydd' (1751-4) and by 'Rhai hymnau newyddion' (1757). 
Pantycelyn was now home to a wife, too. In 1748, or perhaps in 1747 -- the parish register has no record of the marriage -- Williams married Mary (1723-1799), the only daughter of Thomas Francis, a prosperous farmer of Llansawel, Carmarthenshire. It is said of her that like her husband she had been 'called to religion when she was about twenty years of age', that she was wise, attractive, tender, and an excellent singer whose company he sought on many a preaching tour: her singing sometimes stilled the wrath of enemies (Roberts, 1.97). As an addendum to an elegy that he wrote on the death of a three-week-old daughter in 1758, Williams wrote a heart-warming verse about his love for Mary. He was a kindly man; but we know from contemporary descriptions that, like the proverbial blond-redhead, he was quick-tempered, sometimes impatient and touchy. On the other hand, he enjoyed the banter of witty company, making impromptu verse for entertainment's sake, and selling tea, and was generally as well liked as he was highly revered. 
The maturing hymnist from 1750 onwards acquired through study a working knowledge of religious history that gave perspective to the awakening with which he was involved and a theological framework for his thoughts and imaginings. Perhaps the key to his substantial literary achievement is that he was a curious, in some ways rapacious, scholar, a thoroughly conscientious and (again) curious carer of souls, and that he was at the same time, artistically, a poet with a genius for adapting scriptural imagery and defining theological concepts in verse that encapsulated the real and ideal experiences of a readership that he knew intimately. Williams was in so many ways a pioneering artist. 
That said, it must also be said that eighteenth-century Methodism owed much to seventeenth-century puritanism and that Williams's eighteenth-century mind owed a lot to seventeenth-century divines, scientists, and other authors. His first major work after the Harris-Rowland rift was 'Golwg ar deyrnas Crist' (1756), a long poem of five and a half thousand lines that has its roots in late seventeenth-century debates on deism and that borrows much of its material from works by William Derham and James Hervey. Its five parts deal with the five stages of God's universal design, the covenant, creation, Christ's coming, the body of Christ (the church), and his fulfilment. The poem includes a noted celebration of creation. It is nevertheless a poem that puts creation in context, a poem that in the age of reason reaffirms Christ's suprascientific role as eternal redeemer. 
The year 1762 saw the second Llangeitho revival (as it is called), an awakening in 1762 as fervent as that of the first revival of the late 1730s and early 1740s. In Robert Jones's 'Drych yr amseroedd' (1820) it is reported that its cause was the publication of Williams's new collection of hymns 'Caniadau (y rhai sydd ar y mor o wydr)' (1762), but of course something must have brought people together to buy and then to sing them. Harris had returned -- Williams and Peter Williams had been seeking reconciliation with him since at least 1759 -- and the revivalists superintended the societies as before; but Harris's contribution was now not great. Rowland left his living and built Gwynfil Chapel to receive the converts in Llangeitho: in middle age he preached as powerfully as he had done in youth. As for Williams, he continued to visit societies, to go on preaching tours, to attend association meetings. The records are patchy, but we know that he was (for instance) in Fishguard in 1770, near Pont-rhyd-y-fen in 1771, in Woodstock in 1778, in Neath in 1780. In one of his last letters he reckoned that he had travelled 111,800 miles in the Methodist cause, 'four times the world's circumference' (Roberts, 1.164). For several years from 1765 he was in theological debate against Sandemanism. Throughout the 1770s he enjoyed celebrating the anniversary of the college established at Trefeca by Lady Huntingdon. And he was able to welcome to the leadership younger men of talent and devotion, most notably Thomas Charles. 
However, Williams's major and overriding contribution from 1762 onwards was his contribution as poet and prose writer. His later biography is his literary biography. During the last twenty-eight years of his life he wrote with such order, purpose, variety, and brilliance so as to provide his immediate audience with a comprehensive literature that formed as it informed the Welsh Methodist mind and the Welsh Methodist imagination. His writing gave modern Welsh literature generally a new direction. Gomer Roberts in 'Y per ganiedydd I' (p. 148) calls the years between 1768 and 1786 'nawnddydd tawel' ('quiet, or peaceful, afternoon'). Williams's paper supplier, like his publisher, would disagree with that description. 
The epistolary 'Llythyr Martha Philopur' (1762) and 'Atteb Philo-Evangelius' (1763) were the first literary fruits of the 1762 revival, and were followed by 'Bywyd a marwolaeth Theomemphus' (1764). Martha Philopur is the quintessentially sensitive convert, Philo-Evangelius the quintessential counsellor. They are models of Methodism. Theomemphus is no model. The poem describes the inner life of an arch-sinner who personifies 'all the sins of nature and every wrong reported throughout Scripture' ('Theomemphus', 6). Unfortunately, Williams adopts the same rather monotonous verse form as in 'Golwg ar deyrnas Crist', but whereas so much of the material there was traditional and inherited, and the method descriptive, the material in 'Bywyd a marwolaeth Theomemphus' is originally, vividly Methodist, and the method dramatic. Theomemphus is put through several kinds of crises, theological, moral, spiritual, sexual; but in the end the supernaturally hounded anti-hero is brought to rest in God's salvation. 
Theomemphus is Williams's most stupendous creation. The author states in the introduction to the poem that nothing in his own experiences or in the experiences of the people he had interrogated in twenty-four years in various private societies had been of assistance in creating him. This implies that most if not all of his other characters and characterizations are based on reality or at least on real-life aspects. These include the depersonalized subjects of 'Tri wyr o Sodom a'r Aipht' (1768), Afaritus, Prodigalus, and Fidelius, only the last of whom is a model for good. His other models are the two score subjects of his elegies. But some of his elegies are more than model makers. A few, notably 'Marwnad er coffadwriaeth Mr. Howel Harries' (1773), are literary historical landmarks. 
Another book from this period, 'Aurora Borealis' (1773), in part a description of the northern lights, demonstrates Williams's continuing interest in the natural and physical sciences. His two most profound prose works were published in 1777, and both are sustained analytical studies. The one, 'Templum experientiae apertum, neu, Ddrws y society profiad', is a series of dialogues on the essence, nature, and efficacy of the private society as confessional and spiritual academy. The other, 'Ductor nuptiarum, neu, Gyfarwyddwr priodas', is a treatment of contemporary behaviour in relation to the courtship and marriages of those who profess religion. Both books, often witty, sometimes satirical, thoroughly captivating, again testify to Williams's extraordinary understanding of human nature and of the effects of religious conviction on that nature. Theomemphus's imaginary guide and confidant is a character called Dr Aletheius. In at least five of his seven original prose books Williams is Welsh Methodism's Dr Aletheius. He also sought to be a teacher-doctor to the Welsh Methodists. Between 1762 and 1778 or 1779 he compiled and published in seven parts 'Pantheologia', ostensibly a history of world religions that includes geographical, historical, natural, and other descriptions of all parts of the globe. Of all his publications this was the least popular with his readers. 
Williams's most popular works were, and are, his hymns, of which he published nearly a thousand. The first three collections, discussed above, contain some excellent compositions, but in the main they are eclipsed by the wonderful hymns he published in three other collections published in the 1760s and 1770s. These are 'Caniadau (y rhai sydd ar y mor o wydr)' (1762), 'Ffarwel weledig, groesaw anweledig bethau' published in three parts (1763, 1766, 1769), and the two-part 'Gloria in excelsis' (1771, 1772). All these contain hymns that are lyric poems of the first rank, powerful individual songs and powerful, sustained sequences. Like all good hymns they praise the Lord, they contrast the sinner's weaknesses with Christ's constancy and love, and they give expression to some of the central Christian teachings. But like no other writer of poetry in the Welsh language before him, Williams in these hymns expresses the pain and ecstasy of personal religious experience with the bravado of a poet who is conscious of his own originality but who at the same time continues to recognize (and revel in) his adherence to scriptural imagery and scriptural idiom. In that way he is vibrantly novel and splendidly classic. In the hymns above all, but in his long poems and prose works too, Williams's contribution is such that one can claim with certainty that if he had not written, Welsh Methodism would not have found literary expression. 
In a letter to Thomas Charles of 14 October 1787 Williams notes that 'we [his generation of Methodist preachers] are galloping out of this wor[l]d in the greatest hast' (Roberts, 1.161). Although past seventy he continued to write hymns, meditations, translations, and he still conducted preaching tours; as late as March 1790 he reports on 'a long journey through Caermarthenshire, Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, and Breconshire, being about 250 miles' (Roberts, 1.163). Later in 1790 he was too ill to attend the association at Bala. He died at Pantycelyn on 11 January 1791 and was buried in Llanfair-ar-y-bryn churchyard. Mary survived him, as did seven of the eight children born to them. 


@@@@@


doc= 29557


Williams, William (1738-1817), antiquary, was born at Ty Mawr, Trefdraeth, Anglesey, on 1 March 1738, the son of William ap Huw ap Sion (died 1773), a stonemason, and his wife, Ann Williams (died 1768). After a short period at a local dame-school, he was apprenticed to a weaver but soon exchanged this for an apprenticeship with a saddler at neighbouring Llannerch-y-medd, where he remained for seven years. He was largely self-educated but through his friendship with local poets and other leaders of cultural life, especially Hugh Hughes (Y Bardd Coch), and the antiquary William Morris, he soon developed a taste for literature and Welsh antiquities. Friendship and correspondence with Robert Hughes (Robin Ddu yr Ail o Fon) further broadened his horizons and brought him into contact with the London-Welsh society Y Gwyneddigion, of which he became a corresponding member. 
At the conclusion of his apprenticeship as a saddler, Williams found employment as clerk to the agent at the Penrhyn estate office in Bangor, Caernarvonshire. He married Elizabeth Edmunds of Llandygai, Bangor, at the age of twenty-seven, and supplemented his income by keeping a saddler's shop at Llandygai, where his wife and daughters later kept a village grocery store, and more ambitiously by undertaking work as a surveyor of local estates; his surveys and maps of Gwenynog, Denbighshire, and of Meillionydd, Caernarvonshire, survive. He also developed his skills as an arbitrator and marketed the produce of the small slate quarries in the area. When Richard Pennant, first Baron Penrhyn, decided in 1782 to take over the running of Braich-y-cefn quarry instead of claiming rent and a levy on production, he appointed Williams to be responsible for all aspects of its development -- marketing, sales, transport, and bookkeeping. The newly named Penrhyn quarry became one of the largest and most successful industrial enterprises in north Wales under Williams's supervision, so that he may be regarded as one of the pioneers of the Caernarvonshire slate industry and thus a significant figure in the development of Bangor as an urban settlement. He retired on his full salary in 1803, when Penrhyn himself took on the management of the quarry. 
Williams had long since acquired a taste for reading in both Welsh and English and he had applied himself to the study of local and more general Welsh history. He was involved in contemporary theological disputes but also found time, it appears, to read current English magazines. Upon his retirement he embarked on a new career as an author and historian producing a range of works, most of which, however, he chose not to publish. He achieved recognition as a knowledgeable antiquary and he was able to assist Benjamin Malkin in his preparations for his projected north Wales tour; Richard Fenton and Sir Richard Colt Hoare also benefited from his correspondence. Williams's work includes some theological treatises, which assert his anti-Calvinist and anti-Methodist views, and a herbal, but more important are his topographical descriptions of north Wales. His descriptions of Caernarvonshire and of Anglesey are in manuscript but his 'Observations on the Snowdon mountains; with some account of the customs and manners of the inhabitants' was published in 1802. Originally intended as a private work for Lord Penrhyn, this is an interesting and well-written description of the terrain, economy, antiquities, and folklore of an area which Williams knew well. His character sketches and portrait essays of local and imagined people, which remained in manuscript during his lifetime, probably owe their inspiration to a genre popular in English. Williams's most ambitious undertaking, 'Prydnawngwaith y Cymry', was written in 1804 but was not published until 1822. This history of the Wales of the princes, from the Saxon wars to the defeat of Llywelyn in 1282, and then to the Tudor supremacy, was intended as a sequel to Theophilus Evans's 'Drych y prif oesoedd' (1740). He reflects traditional Welsh historiography in his view of the defeat of Llywelyn, 'the last prince', in 1282, and of the putting down of subsequent rebellions, as God's just retribution for the sins of the nation. Nevertheless, his pride in noble Welsh ancestry remained unshaken and he ascribed many contemporary moral and social failures to increased English influence following the opening up of the roads and the intermarriage of Welsh gentry and the daughters of English merchants and adventurers. Equally traditional, however, was the welcome which he gave to the Tudor dynasty and to the incorporation of 'the remnants of the Ancient Britons' with the English as a single nation enjoying the same laws and privileges -- a union which, Williams claimed -- had brought peace, security, and the blessings of reformed protestantism to a turbulent people. Williams died on 17 July 1817 at Llandygai, where he was later buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 29558


Williams, William (1781-1840), Independent minister, was the sixth child of William and Jane 'nee' Probert of Cwmhyswn-ganol in the parish of Llanfachraeth, Merioneth. His father was a small farmer and carpenter, and young William worked as a carpenter for several years. His interest in religion was prompted at the age of thirteen, when he heard 'Peg-Leg' Rhys Dafis preach a sermon at Bedd-y-coedwr farm. At the age of fifteen he was admitted a member of the Pen-y-stryd Independent chapel. In his nineteenth year he began to preach in connection with Pen-y-stryd Chapel and received some lessons from his minister, the Revd William Jones, who taught him to write. Shortly afterwards, he went for nine months to a school at Aberhafesb, near Newtown, Montgomeryshire. In 1803 he was accepted as a student at the dissenting academy at Wrexham under Dr Jenkin Lewis, where he remained until 1807. While a student there he used to preach in the smaller villages of the district, and this led to an invitation to become the pastor of two inactive churches at Y Wern and Harwd (now known as Brymbo) in the parish of Wrexham. After a year's probation he was ordained on 28 October 1808. 
Williams worked hard to strengthen his congregations and successfully formed, and for some years supervised, churches at Llangollen, Rhos, and Ruabon. Williams was one of the chief organizers of the General Welsh Union, formed in 1834 for the liquidation of chapel debts, and himself gave material assistance in many ways to the poorer churches of Flintshire and Denbighshire. Above all, he periodically made several preaching tours throughout Wales, becoming popularly and widely known as Williams y Wern or Williams o'r Wern. He was regarded as one of the greatest Welsh nonconformist preachers of the period. His vivid and imaginative style transformed the dry pulpit oratory of his own denomination. But Williams was not indifferent to doctrinal issues. Early in his career, he followed the example of John Roberts (1767-1834), abandoning higher Calvinism in favour of a more moderate doctrine. His article published in the 'blue book' of John Roberts (1820) caused a great deal of discussion at the time. 
In 1836 Williams became pastor of the Welsh Tabernacle Church, Great Crosshall Street, Liverpool. He remained there for only three years, and returned to Y Wern with broken health in October 1839. Domestic tragedies contributed to his condition. His wife, Rebecca Griffiths of Chester, whom he had married on 22 July 1817, had died on 3 March 1836 (an event which probably led to his first removal from Y Wern to Liverpool). His eldest daughter died in February 1840, and Williams himself followed, dying at Y Wern on 17 March 1840. His eldest son, James, died in March 1841. All four were buried at Y Wern, where a memorial column, provided by public subscription, was erected in 1884. His two surviving children, a son and a daughter, emigrated to Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 29559


Williams, William (1801-1869), Congregational minister and poet, was born on 6 February 1801 at Brynyffynnon, Denbigh, Denbighshire, the second of the seven children of Thomas Williams (1769-1844), weaver and shopkeeper, and his wife, Mary (died 1832), the daughter of William Roberts, farmer, of Llanefydd in the same county. His parents were fairly prosperous and he received a good primary education at local schools, being able to read the 'Bible' in Welsh and English by the time he was seven, but in 1814 they were obliged to sell their shop and moved to Henllan Street, where Thomas Williams continued to work as a weaver. The failure of his parents' business meant that the boy had to forgo a secondary education and take up the weaver's trade. For the next eight years, during which he learned the craft of writing Welsh poetry in the strict metres and read widely, he was employed at various mills in the Denbigh area. He adopted the bardic name Caledfryn in 1821 in honour of his native town, which he claimed had formerly been known as Caledfryn-yn-rhos. In 1822 he became a teacher at a school maintained by the Calvinistic Methodists in Denbigh, and in the same year his booklet, 'Cyfarwyddiadau i ddarllen ac ysgrifennu Cymraeg', a guide to the reading and writing of Welsh, was published. His first book of verse, 'Grawn awen', appeared in 1826. 
Shortly afterwards Caledfryn left the Presbyterian Church of Wales, where he made enemies for participating in the Cymreigyddion Society. He joined the Independent chapel in Swan Lane in his native town, where he began preaching. After a few months at Rotherham College in Yorkshire in 1827 he took charge of the Welsh Independent chapel in Gartside Street, Manchester, but stayed less than a year. He was ordained minister of Llannerch-y-medd and Maenaddwyn, Anglesey, in 1829 and served at Peniel, the Independent chapel there, for three years. He was an eloquent preacher and an inspiring teacher of poets, but he began to earn a reputation as a hard, stubborn man with an acerbic tongue who always insisted on having his own way, a consequence perhaps of his having had to earn a living from an early age. 
In January 1832 Caledfryn took up the pastorate of Pendref Chapel in Caernarfon, one of the most prestigious Congregational chapels in north Wales, and on 8 September of that year he married Margaret Griffith (1796-1855), with whom he had two children. He remained at Caernarfon until 1848, and it was there that he did his finest work, despite schism within his own congregation and the hostility of Calvinistic Methodists and local tories who were often offended by his outspokenly radical views. He was a scathing opponent of the established church and achieved notoriety because he preferred temperance to total abstinence. A Liberal in politics, he was prominent in the Anti-Corn Law League, the Peace Society, and the Society for the Liberation of Religion from State Patronage and Control. He opposed Sir James Graham's 'Factory Bill' in 1843 and gave evidence on behalf of nonconformists to the Anglican Commissioners whose report was published in 1847. 
But it was as a poet, critic, and editor that Caledfryn won a national reputation. He first came to prominence in 1832 after winning the chair competition and a gold medal at the Beaumaris eisteddfod with a long poem on the wreck of the 'Rothsay Castle' off the coast of Anglesey in the previous year. At the Rhuddlan eisteddfod of 1850 his ode on the resurrection was placed second to a poem written in the free metres -- an adjudication which provoked a long and bitter controversy in bardic circles. Between 1831 and 1868 he edited several short-lived periodicals from Caernarfon, then a major centre of Welsh publishing, and was much in demand as an adjudicator at local eisteddfodau, despite the ferocity with which he delivered his excoriating judgements. 
There followed pastorates at tabernacles in Aldersgate Street, London (1848-50), Llanrwst (1850-56), and Bangor (1856-7) -- it was in the latter place that he married again; his first wife had died two years before, and on 8 January 1857 he married Jane Edwards, like his first wife a wealthy widow. They went to Groes-wen, on a hill to the west of Caerphilly in Glamorgan, where he had his final pastorate. He worked tirelessly in all his ministries and he drew many to the Congregationalist cause with his fine preaching and pastoral care; but he made enemies wherever he went, usually as a consequence of his trenchantly expressed views. His second wife died in 1858, and in October 1863 he married Anne Hughes ('b'. 1803). Caledfryn died on 23 March 1869 at his home in Groes-wen and was buried seven days later in the chapel graveyard there; an imposing memorial in red marble with a bronze bas-relief and inscribed with his bardic name was erected by public subscription. He was survived by his third wife. 
Among Caledfryn's numerous writings the most important are 'Drych barddonol neu draethawd ar farddoniaeth' (1837), a work on Welsh prosody; 'Gramadeg Gymreig' (1851), a Welsh grammar; and 'Caniadau Caledfryn' (1856); he also published a collection of hymns (1861) and edited the works of two minor poets. His autobiography, 'Cofiant Caledfryn', which contains a selection of his unpublished verse, was edited by Thomas Roberts (Scorpion) and published in 1877. His verse, which is no longer read except by students of the period, is characterized by its objectivity and a flawless accuracy of form rather than by originality. As a critic he was much more influential: against the trend of his day, he argued for greater simplicity in the writing of Welsh verse in the traditional metres and his grammars served as textbooks long after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29560


Williams, William (1800-1878), linguist and first bishop of Waiapu in New Zealand, was born in Nottingham on 18 July 1800, the son of Thomas Williams (1754-1804), hosier, and his wife, Mary Marsh (1758-1831), a school teacher; he was the younger brother of Archdeacon Henry Williams. Among the best educated and most intellectually accomplished missionaries to New Zealand, he had attended Southwell grammar school, trained as a surgeon, graduated BA from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1825, and received a DCL on 3 July 1851. He married Jane Nelson (1801-1896), who had been a teacher at his mother's school, at Sheffield on 11 July 1825. William Williams was ordained in 1824, attended the Church Missionary Society (CMS) Training College in London in 1825, and on 12 August of that year embarked, with his wife of four weeks, to join his brother as a missionary in New Zealand. William and Jane Williams arrived at the Bay of Islands on 25 March 1826, after a three-month stay in Sydney, and immediately became part of a close-knit Williams missionary clan. Henry and Marianne Williams contributed eleven children; William and Jane nine. 
William Williams remained based at Paihia as mission doctor and superintendent of the English Boys' School until 1835, when the school was relocated to Waimate nearby. In the 1830s he undertook several evangelical journeys, which were more arduous than those of his brother. In 1840 William and his wife established a new station at Turanga, Poverty Bay, where they remained until 1865. William Williams was appointed archdeacon of the East Cape in 1842, and first bishop of Waiapu in 1859. He returned to England in 1851-2 to put his brother's case in a dispute with the CMS. During the New Zealand wars he and his family moved in 1865 back to Paihia for two years. The 'native rebellion' reflected badly on its teachers, and Williams published a long defence of the CMS mission to the Maori, 'Christianity among the New Zealanders', in London in 1867. Maori victories in 1868 brought him close to despair: 'What does this seem to indicate, but that God's hand has been turned against us' (MS Archives, CN/O 96, c). Nevertheless, Williams returned to his diocese in 1867, taking up residence at Napier. Ill health compelled him to resign as bishop in 1876. He died at Napier on 9 February 1878. 
Despite fluency in the language, neither William nor Henry Williams was very tolerant of Maori custom, nor much interested in it for its own sake, in intriguing contrast to their older colleague, Samuel Marsden. William was taller, thinner, less combative, and more scholarly than Henry, and had less immediate impact. William Williams and his family contributed significantly to Maori education. His nephew, Samuel Williams, founded Te Aute Boys' College in 1854, in the Waiapu diocese, and William Williams himself founded Hukarere School for Maori girls, run by his daughters, in 1875. A son and a grandson, W. L. and H. W. Williams, succeeded him both as bishops of Waiapu and as leading Maori linguists. Overall, William Williams's greatest contribution was possibly in the latter field. He made a new translation of the 'New Testament' into Maori in 1837, from the original Greek, and published 'A Dictionary of the Maori Language' at Paihia in 1844. Regularly revised by his son and grandson, it was not finally replaced until 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 29561


Williams, Sir William Fenwick, baronet (1800-1883), army officer, second son of Commissary-General Thomas Williams, barrack-master at Halifax, Nova Scotia, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Captain Thomas Walker, was born at Annapolis, Nova Scotia, on 4 December 1800. He entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich on 23 May 1815, and received a commission as second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery on 14 July 1825. The long interval between leaving Woolwich and obtaining his commission, due to the reduction of the army on its return from the occupation of France, was passed in travel. He made his way to the top of the army with remarkable regularity: lieutenant, 16 November 1827; second captain, 13 August 1840; first captain, 26 February 1846; brevet major, 22 May 1846; brevet lieutenant-colonel, 31 March 1848; regimental lieutenant-colonel, 18 September 1853; brevet colonel, 28 November 1854; major-general, 2 November 1855; colonel-commandant of Royal Artillery, 10 December 1864; lieutenant-general, 15 December 1864; general, 2 August 1868. 
The early part of Williams's career was passed uneventfully at Gibraltar, Ceylon, and some home stations until 1841, when he went to Turkey for employment in the arsenal at Constantinople. He was engaged as British commissioner in the conferences preceding the treaty signed at Erzurum in 1847, and in 1848 was appointed British commissioner for the settlement of the Turko-Persian boundary. For his services, military and diplomatic, he received two brevets and was made a companion in the Order of the Bath, civil division, in 1852. 
When the British army was at Varna in 1854 Williams's fourteen years' competent experience among the Turks led to his selection for the post of British commissioner with the Turkish army in Asia Minor. In what could have been a comfortable posting, Williams was energetic and effective in rallying and co-ordinating the Turkish army, already defeated once by the Prussians. Williams became, in effect, its commander-in-chief. 
Williams visited Kars, the isolated town in northern Asia Minor, in September 1854, and left his aide-de-camp, Captain Christopher Charles Teesdale, there during the winter to establish what discipline he could, and returned himself to Erzurum, where he vainly tried to get the British embassy at Constantinople and the Foreign Office to obtain from the Porte the urgently necessary supplies of money, ammunition, and clothing. At the same time he went energetically to work to organize such men and equipment as he had to fortify Kars against the expected siege by the Russians. 
In January 1855 Williams had been made a 'ferik' or lieutenant-general in the Turkish army, and also a pasha, which facilitated his task. On 1 June information reached Erzurum of the movement of the Russian army on Kars, and Williams went there immediately. Initially the Russian attack was repelled, but the fortress was besieged. Summary capital punishment was used to maintain the discipline of the starving and cholera-stricken garrison. Williams learned on 22 November 1855 that there was no hope of relief and, his troops too exhausted to retreat, he capitulated after negotiating reasonable terms. After imprisonment in Russia and presentation to the tsar in March 1856, he was allowed to return to Britain. 
There, the British government cloaked its failure to relieve Kars in the glories of Williams's tenacity. He received the medal and clasp for Kars, and was created baronet 'of Kars' in 1856, while parliament voted him a pension of $1000 a year for life. He was made KCB, received the freedom of the City of London with a sword of honour, and was made an honorary DCL of Oxford. Napoleon III bestowed upon him the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur, and the sultan the first class of the order of the Mejidiye. 
Williams commanded the Woolwich garrison from 1856 to 1859, and from July 1856 to April 1859 he was unopposed as MP for Calne, sitting as a Palmerstonian Liberal. In 1859 he went to Canada for six years as commander of the forces. From 1865 to 1867 he was governor of Nova Scotia and, from 1871 until 1876, of Gibraltar. On 9 May 1881 he was appointed constable of the Tower of London. 
Williams died, unmarried, at Garland's Hotel, Suffolk Street, London, on 26 July 1883, and was buried at Brompton cemetery on 30 July. Sir Christopher Teesdale wrote of him in his memoir for the Royal Artillery Institution: 'He had marvellous self-reliance and perfect fearlessness of responsibility. He trusted his subordinates, but only consulted with them on points of detail. He would walk for hours alone [at Kars], working out plans and ideas in his mind, and, once settled, they were never departed from. Every one knew that an order once given had to be obeyed without comment. Firm as a rock on duty, he had the kindliest, gentlest heart that ever beat.' 



@@@@@


doc= 29562


Williams, William Henry (bap. 1771, d. 1841), physician, son of Richard Williams, a hop seller, and his wife, Alice, was baptized at Dursley in Gloucestershire on 2 April 1771. He was educated at Beverston Castle under Mr Hornidge and received his medical education at the Bristol Infirmary and in London at St Thomas's and Guy's hospitals. He became a surgeon to the East Norfolk militia, and served at home during the Napoleonic wars. In 1795, when the regiment was encamped near Deal Castle, he was appointed the senior of a number of surgeons responsible for the care of several hundred Russian sailors suffering from malignant fever and dysentery. About 1797 he designed a tourniquet of such simplicity and efficiency that it was quickly adopted by the military authorities and named 'Williams's field tourniquet' by the army medical board in the printed directions for its use. This enthusiasm must in part be explained by the cheapness of the device: at 6died it was much less than the 7's'.-12's'. cost of the screw tourniquet then in use. It was ordered by the commander-in-chief, the duke of York, that Williams's tourniquet should be used in every regiment, and that all non-commissioned officers and musicians should be instructed in its use. 
In 1798 Williams entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge; he graduated MB (1803) and MD (1811). In 1801 he had settled at Brook Street, Ipswich, and in 1803 he became physician to the public dispensary, a post he retained until 1824. In 1810 Williams was appointed by Sir Lucas Pepys, physician-general of the army, as head of the South Military Hospital, near Ipswich, then filled with soldiers just returned from the battle of Walcheren, and suffering from fever, ague, and dysentery. On the completion of his service there he received a flattering letter from the army medical board. Williams was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1816 and a fellow on 30 September 1817. He was a fellow of the Linnean Society. 
Williams was the author of a number of practical medical works, including 'Hints on the Ventilation of Army Hospitals and on Regimental Practice' (1798). He continued to live at Ipswich, and died at Sandgate, Kent, where he had gone for health reasons, on 8 November 1841. 


@@@@@


doc= 29563


Williams, William Mattieu (1820-1892), science teacher and industrial chemist, son of Abraham Williams, a Welsh fishmonger working in London, and his wife, Louise, daughter of Gabriel Mattieu, a Swiss refugee, was born in London on 6 February 1820. His father died when he was an infant and his mother married again when he was four. After an elementary education in three schools he was apprenticed, in 1834, to Thomas Street, mathematical and optical instrument maker in Lambeth. Although Williams worked from 7 a.m. until 8 p.m. he found time to attend evening classes in the sciences (including phrenology of which he became a lifelong devotee) at the London Mechanics' Institution in Southampton buildings, Chancery Lane. 
In 1841, on his coming of age, Williams inherited a sum of money from his father, and, his apprenticeship being over, he passed two years at Edinburgh University (though there is no evidence that he took a degree), followed by a similar period walking through Europe, paying his way by working as an artisan. He spent much time in Switzerland, Italy (where he formed a dislike of the Austrian autocratic government), Greece, and Turkey (where he formed a high opinion of the Turks). Back in Britain he returned to Edinburgh to study medicine at the Royal Infirmary, but proved too sensitive to become a surgeon. Reverting to his trade, he established himself as an electrical instrument maker and electrotyper in Hatton Garden, London. He developed a small consultancy dealing with patents and giving advice to railway companies. He also delivered lectures about his continental tour to audiences in different parts of the country, as well as lecturing on other subjects (including phrenology) at the Mechanics' Institution, where he was a member of the management committee. He played a major role in persuading that body to accept William Ellis's offer of money to found a school, which, as the Birkbeck School, opened on 17 July 1848. The immediate success of this school led George Combe (whom Williams had met while in Edinburgh), with the financial aid of Ellis, to found a similar institution in Edinburgh. Williams volunteered to undertake the headmastership, and it was opened on 4 December 1848 under the title of Williams Secular School in the Trades' Hall, Infirmary Street. Experimental science formed an important part of the school's curriculum. Owing to the rapid increase in its numbers the school was relocated in the former anatomical school of Robert Knox at 1 Surgeons' Square. However, the school, and especially its secular nature, attracted considerable criticism to which Williams responded robustly with his pamphlet 'Who should Teach Christianity to Children -- the School Masters or the Clergy?' (1853). 
The school closed in 1854 when Williams became, on the recommendation of Lyon Playfair, master of the science classes in the recently opened Birmingham and Midland Institute. Williams delivered his opening lecture on 17 August 1854 and in 1856 he introduced the institute penny lectures, which were a marked success; he also contributed popular articles on science to 'The Birmingham Journal'. In 1857 he became acquainted with the Italian patriot Felice Orsini whom he instructed in the manufacturing of explosives, some of which Orsini and Pieri used in their attempt to assassinate Napoleon III. Though placed under surveillance by the French secret service, Williams was able to convince the authorities of his innocence in any complicity regarding the attempt. 
On 22 December 1859 Williams married Alice ('b'. 1835/6), eldest daughter of Joseph Baker, surveyor, of Birmingham. They had at least two sons. One, named after George Combe, became a professor of music; the other, Arnold Winhelried, became a doctor. While in Birmingham Williams turned his attention to chemistry, being elected a fellow of the Chemical Society in 1857. In particular he worked on the manufacture of paraffin. This work led to a career change by his becoming, in 1863, an industrial chemist when he was appointed manager of the Leeswood Oil Company, Caergwrle, Flintshire. After the decline of the Welsh oil distilling industry following the discovery of oil wells in America, Williams went to Sheffield in 1868 as chemist to the Atlas Iron Works. In Sheffield he wrote 'The Fuel of the Sun' (1870) in which he advanced a heterodox view of the source of the sun's energy largely unaware of the principles of thermodynamics as they had been worked out since the 1840s, although he did cite Joule's mechanical equivalent of heat. 
In 1870 Williams returned to London to devote his time to scientific writing, teaching (in various schools) and lecturing. Elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1872 he does not seem to have played an active part in its proceedings. He delivered a Friday evening discourse on Count Rumford at the Royal Institution in 1871 and the Cantor lectures of the Society of Arts in 1876 and 1878. His subjects there were 'Iron and steel manufacture' and 'mathematical instruments' respectively. He was manager of the Polytechnic Institution during its last six months of existence at the end of 1881. His writing included scientific articles to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' during the 1880s and books such as 'The Science of Cookery' (1884) and 'The Philosophy of Clothing' (1890). On the death of his step-uncle, Zachariah Watkins, early in 1889, Williams was freed from financial worries, and began what he described as his life work, the 'Vindication of Phrenology'. While revising the proofs he died suddenly of a stroke at his home, The Grange, Neasden, on 28 November 1892; the book was published in 1894. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 29564


Williams, William Peere (1664/5-1736), law reporter, was the only son of Peere Williams (died 1705) of Hoddesdon and his wife, Joanna Oeiles (died 1705). His father was a member of Gray's Inn (admitted 14 August 1635), and clerk of estreats (1652-79); his mother was of Dutch descent. Educated at Trinity College, Oxford (admitted 10 May 1679, aged fourteen), he was admitted to Gray's Inn on 14 September 1680. He was called to the bar on 11 November 1687, subsequently being bencher of his inn (1722), and treasurer (1726-8). 
Williams was counsel in various cases of public importance, for George Seaton, earl of Winton, impeached in 1716 after the Jacobite rising of 1715, and for the duke of Queensberry in his claim to sit in the House of Lords after the Union by virtue of a British peerage. His general practice was in chancery, however, where he acquired much business, and a study has shown that he was one of the most active figures in the court (Lemmings, 291). A frequent client was James Brydges, first duke of Chandos, through whose influence he was elected MP for Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, in the parliament of 1722-7. In 1722 he purchased from Brydges the manor of Northolt, Middlesex, having declined the duke's offer of his Radnorshire and Bishop's Castle estates. Williams amassed a considerable landed property in other counties, and was reported at the time of his death to be worth $150,000. He married on 10 June 1697 Anne (died 1724), second daughter and coheir of Sir George Hutchins, king's sergeant and a commissioner of the great seal (1690-93). Williams died on 10 June 1736 and was buried in the parish church, Broxbourne, Hertfordshire. 
Williams and his wife had four sons and two daughters. His eldest son, Hutchins Williams, was created baronet on 4 April 1747. The reporter's other sons were William Peere Williams, a lawyer, Frederick Williams, rector of Peakirk, Northamptonshire, and George James Williams, wit, familiarly known as 'Gilly'. 
Williams collaborated with William Melmoth in the edition of Thomas Vernon's reports of chancery cases (1726-9), but he did not himself publish his own collection, which was published after his death by his son, William Peere Williams (also of Gray's Inn and bencher from 27 May 1742). His collection of chancery cases was the product of a long professional career, covering the judgments in the court under seven lord chancellors, and the reports have always been regarded as a classical repository of equity jurisprudence in the early eighteenth century. William Peere Williams jun., published the first two volumes in 1740 (second edn, 1746) and the third in 1749, under the title 'Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the High Court of Chancery, and of some Special Cases Adjudged in the Court of King's Bench'. The reason for deferring the publication of the third volume was said in the preface to be the need for further revision and in some cases to supply the final decision from the registrar's decree books. The comparative quality of the third volume has been questioned, but the reports were dedicated to Lord Hardwicke and received his imprimatur, the chancellor contributing his own notes in at least one important case. The whole work has been cited with approval by later judges. The three folio volumes were reprinted in 1768, and their value enhanced by Samuel Compton Cox, who added scholarly notes to the fourth and fifth editions in 1787 and 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 29565


Freeman, William Peere Williams- (1742-1832), naval officer, grandson of William Peere Williams, and son of Frederick Williams (died 1746), prebendary of Peterborough, was born in Peterborough on 6 January 1742. His mother was Mary, daughter of Robert Clavering, bishop of Peterborough, and Mary Freeman, sister of John Cook Freeman of Fawley Court, Buckinghamshire. Williams was educated at Eton College, and in June 1757 his name was entered on the books of the 100-gun 'Royal Sovereign', guardship at Spithead. He first went to sea in August 1759, in Lord Howe's 74-gun 'Magnanime', in which he took part in the battle of Quiberon Bay on 20 November 1759. 
In September 1762 Williams followed Howe to the 80-gun 'Princess Amelia', and then joined the 'Romney' (50 guns) on the Halifax station in August 1763. On 18 September 1764 he was promoted to lieutenant of the 40-gun 'Rainbow' on the Virginia station, and on 26 May 1768 he was made master and commander of the 'Thunder' bomb vessel. He became a post captain on 10 January 1771, with his appointment to command the 'Renown' (50 guns), and moved to the 28-gun 'Active' on 21 March. Shortly after, on 20 June, he married Henrietta Wilts (died 1819), with whom he had two sons, one of whom was also named William Peere Williams. 
Like so many others on that station Williams became sick while taking the 'Active' to the West Indies. Apparently, he used his interest to get his ship sent to Newfoundland; his health did not, however, improve there, and on 11 October Rear-Admiral John Montagu gave him command of the 'Lively' (20 guns), which he brought home and paid off in February 1774. 
Williams's next appointment was on 10 March 1777, as captain of the 36-gun frigate 'Venus', in which he joined Lord Howe's squadron in North America, and he was with Howe at the encounter with D'Estaing's fleet off Rhode Island on 10 August 1778. Perhaps again suffering ill health, on 18 September Williams exchanged with Captain James Ferguson and took Ferguson's 32-gun frigate 'Brune' back to England. 
In April 1780 Williams took command of the 'Flora', a new 36-gun frigate carrying six 18-pounder carronades in addition to her main armament of 18- and 9-pounders. Cruising off Ushant on 10 August, the 'Flora' fell in with a French frigate, the 32-gun 'Nymphe' (Captain du Rumain). 'La Nymphe' was the bigger ship, but the 'Flora' was better armed, and in a hard-fought action which demonstrated the power and utility of the carronade, the 'Flora' had 9 men killed and 17 wounded, while the French lost 55 killed and 81 wounded. A French attempt to board the 'Flora' was repulsed, and Williams's men eventually boarded and took their prize. 
In March 1781 Williams, still in the 'Flora', sailed with George Darby's fleet to the relief of Gibraltar. Returning on 30 May after escorting a convoy to Minorca, and in company with the 'Crescent' (28 guns, Captain Thomas Pakenham), Williams attacked two Dutch vessels off Ceuta, the 'Flora' taking on her equal in the 36-gun 'Castor', and the smaller 'Crescent' engaging the 'Briel'. After a 21/4-hour battle, the 'Castor' struck to Williams's ship, but in the meantime, the 'Crescent' had been forced to strike to her Dutch opponent. The 'Flora', however, came to her assistance and chased off the 'Briel', and the two British vessels, with their prize, set off for England. Unfortunately for them, on 19 June they encountered two French 32-gun frigates, 'Friponne' and 'Gloire'; jury-rigged and with only 300 unwounded men (out of a full complement of 700) spread between his three vessels, Williams was in no condition to take on the French frigates, and chose to escape with the 'Flora', leaving the other two to be captured. On 30 June 1781 Lord Mulgrave described how Williams had done 'everything that courage could wish' but had been 'deficient in seamanship and abilities' which 'one would wish, both from his gallantry and connexions, not to appear publicly' (Lord Mulgrave to earl of Sandwich, NMM, SAN/F/26/116). 
In April 1782 Williams retired to his country estates at Henley-on-Thames and Hoddesdon, adding Freeman to his name in November 1821 as a condition of his inheriting the Fawley Court estate in Buckinghamshire. Assisted in later life by his eponymous son, he amused himself in his retirement by waging an acrimonious and litigious war on his neighbours and tenants over the terms of their tenancies and the condition of their lands. 
Williams-Freeman had continued to progress through the flag ranks, as was the custom, by sheer dint of survival, becoming rear-admiral on 12 April 1794, vice-admiral on 1 June 1795, and admiral on 1 January 1801. On 28 June 1830, on William IV's accession, he was promoted to admiral of the fleet. He died at his home on his Hoddesdon estate on 11 February 1832, and was buried in the family vault at Broxbourne, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 29566


Williams, Zachariah (1668x73-1755), experimental philosopher, was born in Rosemarket, Pembrokeshire, to John Williams and his wife, Margaret. He was educated in medicine, and served as a medical practitioner in south Wales, where he remained until he moved to London in 1726 or 1727. It appears that at some point, probably during his residence in Rosemarket, he married Martha, with whom he had a daughter, Anna Williams, in 1706. While in Wales he proposed operating a coalmine in Carmarthenshire, but the scheme came to nothing. Probably inspired by the rewards offered by the board of longitude set up in 1714, he developed a method for ascertaining longitude using a theoretically derived table of the earth's magnetic variation (declination), in which the angle between geographic north and the direction indicated by a compass needle was calculated for different points of the globe. 
Williams's earliest friend in London was John Rowley, the instrument maker noted for his redesigned orrery. He also met with other influential figures, including Edmond Halley, J. T. Desaguliers, and William Whiston, and his magnetic globe was demonstrated before the Royal Society. Supported by a group of gentlemen subscribers hoping to be repaid by the board of longitude, he submitted his scheme to the Admiralty, which referred it to Sir Isaac Newton. The latter declined on account of his age and the proposal was sent to Samuel Molyneux, later accused by Williams of stealing his plan. 
Despite this backing, Williams's ideas were rejected, and brought no financial reward. He was admitted on 29 September 1729 to the Charterhouse as a 'poor brother pensioner', on the nomination of Sir Robert Walpole. He was extremely friendly with the electrician Stephen Gray, also a member of the Charterhouse, and they exchanged information on magnetism and electricity. William Jones of Nayland, later a Hutchinsonian natural philosopher, was a schoolboy taught by Williams there. Williams continued experimenting, wrote long flattering letters to Admiral Vernon and General Oglethorpe soliciting their patronage, and printed his proposals at his own expense in 1740 and 1745. 
From December 1745 Williams was bedridden, without a nurse, and cared for only by his nearly blind daughter, Anna. The whereabouts of Martha at this time are not known. Father and daughter both sent acrimonious letters to the governors complaining about the Charterhouse officials, against whom they voiced long-standing and partially justified complaints. An order for Williams's expulsion was given on 19 May 1748, one of his offences being that, against the rules, his daughter had lived with him at the Charterhouse for two years. On 23 May he was evicted, many of his possessions, including his mathematical instruments and books, damaged or lost. 
After leaving the Charterhouse, Williams wrote to Samuel Johnson, who continually assisted him and Anna. Johnson studied Williams's theories on ascertaining longitude at sea magnetically, and compiled an account of his studies. This was published under Williams's name in 1755, together with an Italian translation which Johnson induced Giuseppe Baretti to make in order to give Williams's views a foreign circulation. Williams himself sent various letters to Admiral Anson and other Admiralty officials, who referred his appeals to James Bradley, the astronomer royal. Bradley examined Williams's magnetic globe and his tables but concluded that they were not sufficiently reliable to use at sea. Williams also invented a device for desalinating sea water to make it drinkable. 
Although Johnson remained a loyal patron, many people were sceptical of Williams's claims; numerous longitude proposals during this period were mocked for their impracticality. His predictions of the earth's magnetic variation, which were based on an assumption of uniform change, initially tallied with observations but increasingly failed to match its complex fluctuations. Williams was marginalized by most of his contemporaries, and his work had little direct impact on projects to map terrestrial magnetism. In the past, historians were interested in him primarily because of his close relationship with Johnson, but more recently historians of science have increasingly valued the details of his activities for the insight they yield into projectors and communities outside formal institutions such as the Royal Society. Williams's life provides an unusually rich story representing the countless seekers after longitude money that have slipped into oblivion. 
After an illness of eight months, Williams died on 12 July 1755. A few years later, Johnson presented a copy of the Italian version of Williams's investigations to the Bodleian Library. This copy included his handwritten comments on Williams's death and a printed newspaper obituary notice, obviously written by Johnson, in which the writer concluded that Williams was 'evidently worthy to have ended life with better fortune'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29567


Williamson, Sir Adam (1733/4-1798), army officer and colonial governor, was the son of Lieutenant-General George Williamson (1707?-1781), who commanded the Royal Artillery during operations in North America from 1758 to 1760. He was admitted to Westminster School in October 1744, aged ten, became a cadet gunner on 1 January 1748, and entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in 1750. After graduating as a practitioner engineer on 1 January 1753 he went the following year to North America. He served as an engineer in Braddock's expedition to Virginia in 1755 and was wounded during the defeat at Monongahela. On 14 October he was commissioned ensign in the 6th foot. He was at the surrender of Fort William Henry in August 1757, was promoted lieutenant in the 5th foot on 25 September, and was given a staff appointment as lieutenant and engineer-extraordinary on 4 January 1758. In this capacity he served at the capture of Louisburg in July 1758 and the taking of Quebec a year later, when he was wounded again. Having been appointed captain in the 40th foot on 21 April 1760, he distinguished himself during the capture of L'Isle Royale the following August. At the end of the year he accompanied his father to England on leave of absence. 
Williamson was sent back to North America in 1761, and joined the expeditions to the West Indies that captured Martinique in February 1762 and Havana in August. He returned to England in 1763. In 1770 he was promoted major in the 16th foot and engineer-in-ordinary, and later he was transferred to the 61st foot; he was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the army on 12 September 1775. He married at Woolwich on 10 August 1771 Ann Jones, the daughter of Thomas Jones of East Wickham, Kent. As lieutenant-colonel of the 18th Royal Irish regiment, he ceased his engineering duties and returned to active service in North America, where he participated in the battle of Bunker Hill (June 1775). After his return to England in July 1776 he was appointed deputy adjutant-general of the forces in south Britain on 23 December 1778. He achieved promotion to colonel in the army on 15 February 1782 and major-general on 28 April 1790, and became colonel of the 47th foot on 16 July 1790; he transferred to the 72nd highlanders in March 1794. 
In July 1789 Williamson and his wife inherited Avebury Manor from her uncle. Williamson, however, had little time to enjoy his new home, for late in 1790, when war with Spain threatened, he was sent as lieutenant-governor and garrison commander to Jamaica, Britain's most important colony. He replaced the governor following the latter's death in November 1791. Deferential to the colonial assembly and lax in enforcing the laws of trade, he proved popular with the planters. He won praise for his 'mildness' and for maintaining calm after the outbreak of a major slave uprising in nearby St Domingue. Several of its white colonists sought refuge in Jamaica and requested that Britain take over the French colony. Williamson cultivated these contacts, for St Domingue was a source of enormous wealth. Following the outbreak of war in 1793 he received permission to send troops to those areas that would accept a British protectorate. In September there began a tenuous five-year military occupation. Slave owners welcomed the British forces into much of western and southern St Domingue, and plantation production revived. Ultimately, however, their alliance could make little headway against the burgeoning insurrection among the enslaved and free coloured populations. Troops sent from Europe were vastly outnumbered and died quickly from disease. Yet, in the optimism following the capture of Port-au-Prince on 4 June 1794, Williamson was made a knight of the Bath on 18 November and governor of St Domingue, where he arrived on 26 May 1795. 
The governor had to implement an experiment in what later became crown colony government. Reintroducing civil administration into a society torn apart by the French Revolution proved a delicate task. Although Williamson generally had a good word for everyone, his favouring of radical Anglophile colonists over conservative emigres from France was received badly in Whitehall. The occupation, moreover, became notorious for military losses and escalating costs. Yellow fever, inflation, and the guerrilla warfare of the insurgents doomed the expedition. Williamson expanded the use of black soldiers but was unable to reduce the death rate of British troops. Instructed to foster colonial support for British rule, the humane and generous governor spent lavishly, both his own money and the government's. Since he was fluent in French and fond of late-night drinking and story-telling, he was well liked by wealthy colonists, but, indulgent and overworked, he allowed corruption to flourish around him. 
Perceived as a lax administrator and poor judge of men, Williamson was recalled in October 1795; he left the colony on 14 March 1796. His final promotion was as lieutenant-general, on 26 January 1797. He died from the effects of a violent fall at his Avebury home on 21 October 1798 and was buried in the parish church. His wife had predeceased him and in his will he bequeathed Avebury Manor to her nephew Richard Jones. A Haitian hamlet north of Port-au-Prince still bears his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 29568


Williamson, Alexander (1829-1890), missionary, was born on 5 December 1829, at Falkirk, Stirlingshire, studied at Glasgow, and was appointed missionary to China under the London Missionary Society. He was ordained at Glasgow in April 1855, and sailed in the following month for Shanghai, having previously married Isabel, 'nee' Dougall. For two years he took part in missionary work at Shanghai and Pringhu; but, his health failing, he left China on sick leave, and arrived in England on 16 April 1858. His connection with the London Missionary Society terminated soon after his arrival in England. In 1859 he published a treatise on botany in Chinese. After some years spent in Scotland he returned to China as the first agent there of the National Bible Society of Scotland, and arrived at Shanghai in December 1863. He worked for the society only until 1866. He later became secretary of the Society for the Diffusion of Christian and General Knowledge among the Chinese. On a visit to Scotland in 1884 he formed the Chinese Book and Tract Society. 
In 1879 Williamson published a most interesting work, 'Journeys in North China', in which he described the home and region of Confucius. He died at Chefoo (Yantai) on 28 August 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 29569


John Williamson (1751-1818), portrait painter, was born at Ripon, Yorkshire. He was apprenticed to an 'ornamental' painter in Birmingham, married his wife Sarah in 1781, settled in Liverpool 'c'.1783, and continued to reside there, practising as a portrait painter, until his death. Among his best-known works are portraits of the collector William Roscoe (attributed portrait, 'c'.1784; NPG), Sir William Beechey RA, H. Fuseli RA (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), the Revd John Clowes, and Nathan Litherland, the inventor of the patent lever watch. He was a member of the Liverpool Academy, and a constant exhibitor at the local exhibitions. In 1783 he exhibited a portrait at the Royal Academy. His portraits were thought to be correct likenesses and fairly executed. He also painted miniatures, although they were not in the best style of that art. He died on 27 May 1818, probably in Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 29570


Williamson, John Suther (c.1775-1836), army officer, entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 8 August 1791, and was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Artillery on 1 January 1794. His promotions were: lieutenant, 11 March 1794; captain-lieutenant, 12 October 1799; captain, 12 September 1803; brevet major, 4 June 1811; brevet lieutenant-colonel, 13 October 1814; regimental major, 20 December 1814; regimental lieutenant-colonel, 24 March 1817, and colonel, 29 July 1825. 
In June 1795 Williamson served on the coast of France in the expedition to Quiberon Bay, to assist the French royalists. In 1799 he went to the Cape of Good Hope and served in the Cape Frontier War of that year. From there he went to Egypt and the Mediterranean, was at the siege of Ischia in June 1809, commanded the artillery at the capture of four of the Ionian Islands in October of that year, and at the siege and capture of Santa Maura in April 1810. He went to Spain and commanded the artillery at the battle of Castalla, under Sir John Murray, on 12 April 1813; at the siege of Tarragona in June; at the disastrous engagement of Ordal on 12 September; and at the combat on the following day at Villa Franca. He was frequently mentioned in dispatches. 
Williamson returned to England in 1814, and in the following year went to the Netherlands and commanded the artillery of the 3rd division at the battle of Waterloo. He received the Waterloo medal and was made a CB, military division, in 1815. He served with the army of occupation in France until his promotion to regimental lieutenant-colonel, when he returned to England. He was for some time superintendent of the Royal Military Repository, Woolwich, and prepared a new and extensive course of instruction in artillery, which formed the basis of the exercise of heavy ordnance and of all the miscellaneous instructions of the gunner for many years. Williamson died at Woolwich on 26 April 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 29571


Williamson, Sir Joseph (1633-1701), government official, was born on 25 July 1633 and baptized in the parish church of Bridekirk, Cumberland, on 4 August 1633. He was the second surviving son of Joseph Williamson (died 1634), vicar to the parish in 1625, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Bowman. The Williamson family was native to Cumberland and also had connections with Millbeck Hall that lay 2 miles north of Keswick. In 1671 Sir Daniel Fleming noted that this was the 'ancient seat of the Williamsons' (Hughes, 48). 
Williamson was educated locally at St Bees grammar school in Cumberland. He proved bright and reliable enough to secure the patronage of the local member of parliament, Richard Tolson, who took him to London in the late 1640s as his clerk and part-time amanuensis. Through Tolson's interest Williamson was admitted to Westminster School in 1648. Under Dr Richard Busby he learned discipline and hard work, traits prominent in his later character. He was recommended to Gerard Langbaine the elder, provost of Queen's College, Oxford, as a deserving youth from the north country. In September 1650 he entered Queen's as a 'battellor' or 'servitor' to the provost. Williamson's time at Queen's made a great impact upon him and he always proved loyal both to the college and its members. Indeed he was one of the college's most generous benefactors: in his lifetime he sponsored building work, gave it numerous gifts, including a massive silver trumpet used to summon the college to dinner, and founded an Anglo-Saxon lectureship there, ensuring that his protege William Nicolson received the post. Anthony Wood claimed that Williamson was a great friend and benefactor to Queen's men and that Thomas Barlow and Thomas Lamplugh, among others, received bishoprics through his friendship. During his early years there, however, Williamson seems to have lived in some poverty -- a factor which might account for his later ambition and greed, noted by contemporaries, for financial rewards. He graduated BA in February 1654 and MA by diploma in 1657. He then served in France from 1655 to 1658 as a tutor to some young men of quality including Richard Lowther and one of the marquess of Ormond's sons. Williamson's continental sojourn had ended by June 1658 when he returned to Oxford to take up a fellowship at Queen's and an academic career. He had already proved an active and popular tutor with musical tastes and a busy social life. With the Restoration of 1660, however, he gained employment in the new government. 
In July 1660 the king sent the master and fellows a special request for dispensation for Williamson to grant him leave from the college and he left for Whitehall to take up the post of under-secretary to the secretary of state for the south, Sir Edward Nicholas, a post he may have gained with the assistance of Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London. Williamson always retained a sense of obligation to Nicholas for bringing him from Oxford to the centre of power, and he later wrote that he was ever 'sensible... of [the secretary of state's] goodness to me when I was yet young and low in... service' (BL, Egerton MS 2539, fols. 142-3). He also felt it was a sign of divine favour, for 'God', he pointed out, was the 'real author of every good and perfect gift' (ibid.). His motives for taking service in government were the usual mixture of personal ambition, social advancement, and desire for wealth. Certainly Williamson was never slow in taking any financial opportunities that presented themselves, and by 1668 he was rumoured to have an estate of some $40,000 in ready money. 
Williamson's significance grew owing to his 'knowledge of worldly affairs' and also because his new master was 'less and less able to perform his duties of office' ('Lorenzo Magalotti', 44). His subsequent rise as an administrator was rapid and the burden of work in the office fell upon him. He also took every opportunity to widen both his position and his duties, however much administrative drudgery this entailed. In December 1661 he was appointed keeper of the king's library at Whitehall and of the state paper office with a salary of $160 per annum. With Nicholas's replacement in October 1662 by Sir Henry Bennet (from 1663 Lord Arlington) Williamson was widely regarded as the intimate favourite of the old secretary and, according to Lorenzo Magalotti, the first thing Bennet did was to dismiss Williamson at once from the secretariat. However, if this event ever took place, Williamson was immediately reinstated because Bennet soon realized that it was impossible to run the office without Williamson as he had so integrated himself in its work. From that point on Williamson retained the confidence of the new secretary and he remained in his post until 9 September 1674. Lord Craven, writing in 1673, noted that Williamson was one of the 'deserving knights of the age for his experience in both forane and domestique concernes' and that he was 'greatly valued... and in [Arlington's]... highest confidences' (TNA: PRO, SP 81/60/61, fol. 87). 
Williamson proved to be one of the new, more methodical, bureaucrats to emerge after 1660. For some years he was a central cog in the machinery of the secretaries' offices and his influence on those public servants that were his contemporaries may well have been more widespread than is generally thought. His proteges in government included Robert Yard, William Blathwayt, Matthew Prior, William Bridgeman, and James Vernon, who all contributed to the administrative revolution of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century. While little by way of technical innovation can be traced to Williamson, much by way of order and method was imposed on the secretary of state's office: Williamson's 'Shopp [that dealt] with all ye parts of ye Business of my Trade' (Magrath, 1.199). A less cavalier attitude towards paperwork, knowledge of precedents, strict discipline in office practice, division of labour and a systematic order, with a methodical eye for detail and some delegation, were among the elements imposed by Williamson on the working practices of the office. 
The eagerness to control administrative activities also led Williamson into other areas, among them the gathering of intelligence to counter the innumerable plots of the early 1660s and to supply information for the foreign policy decisions of the 1670s. This activity included intercepting the mail at the Post Office, as well as examining and interrogating suspects, and employing spies and informers. Williamson was in effect the 'de facto' head of the Restoration government's intelligence system. In this work too he applied his usual thoroughness, following in the footsteps of earlier intelligence chiefs such as Sir Francis Walsingham, Thomas Scot, and John Thurloe. He shared the fears of the government, writing: 'I find a spirit of malice hath every where insinuated fears & jealousies in to the people, w[hi]ch it must be the care of... prudent men to exorcise & cast out, ere it possesse them too farre' (Magrath, 1.160). The dissemination of official information was also carried out through establishing a manuscript newsletter system run from Williamson's office and the foundation in 1666 of the 'Oxford Gazette' (later the 'London Gazette'). The 'Gazette' had originated with Henry Muddiman and Roger L'Estrange but Williamson soon undercut his rivals, using underhand methods and working on the philosophy that if there had to be newspapers then they should emanate from the government and contain as little illuminating news for the public as possible. His main aim was to take intelligence-gathering into his own hands where it could be of use both for his patron, Arlington, and the state. 
Williamson also acquired a number of offices and perquisites: he was a member and then master (1675-7) of the Clothworkers' Company, commissioner for lotteries in 1665, and a justice of the peace. He received an honorary call to the bar from the Middle Temple in 1664. Even with the patronage of Arlington, however, he found difficulty at first in entering parliament. He failed at Morpeth in October 1666, Preston (1667), and Dartmouth 1667, and his attempt to gain a seat at Appleby, then in the gift of Lady Pembroke, led to the myth of the celebrated but undoubtedly fraudulent rejection allegedly sent to Arlington: 'I have been bullied by a usurper. I have been neglected by a Court, but I will not be dictated to by a subject. Your man shan't stand' (Williamson, 289). The true version, written to Williamson in January 1668, was that she had a 'prior engagement upon me, both for my own grandchildren... and some of my own kindred and friends in this' (ibid.). Williamson eventually found a seat through Arlington's interest in Thetford, being elected on 22 October 1669, for which he sat in all the parliaments from 1669 to 1685. His activities as an MP were important but he was ill at ease with the cut and thrust of debate. Alongside Thomas, Lord Clifford, Williamson was used as one of Arlington's managers of the Commons in the abortive attempt to create a court party in the latter half of the 1660s. At the same time, while Arlington occupied himself with the higher matters of foreign affairs and court politics, Williamson managed the secretary's office with a voluminous correspondence and mountains of paper and thereby grew rich in status and wealth. 
In January 1672 Williamson received the post of clerk of the privy council and on 24 January he was knighted. On 1 March he became an honorary member of Lincoln's Inn. He was prominent in the activities surrounding the declaration of indulgence of March 1672, profitably organizing the distribution of licences for the nonconformist community. At the same time he also organized the intelligence-gathering activities of the regime prior to the outbreak of the third war with the Dutch. With the war going badly for the English, the mediation of Sweden was accepted in the spring of 1673 and a congress between the parties was arranged at Cologne. Williamson was selected to act as one of the plenipotentiaries, and Arlington's voice, in the congress of Cologne. He left England on 17 May 1673 with Sir Leoline Jenkins as his fellow plenipotentiary. Williamson engaged in many diplomatic debates in Cologne and just as many social activities; he was noted for his fondness for dancing into the early hours. One highlight of his stay was his appearance at a masked ball dressed in a green satin robe with silver ornaments and attended by four noblemen. Other than an increase in Williamson's sartorial elegance, for which he was well known in any case, little else was achieved at the congress. He returned from his embassy on 15 April 1674. While on the homeward journey down the Rhine the plenipotentiary's craft was shot at by accident and Williamson came close to being hit, but the rest of his return passed uneventfully. By the time he returned to London arrangements had been made for his promotion to the post of secretary of state. He was appointed to the position and sworn of the privy council on 11 September 1674 at the age of forty-one. 
The negotiations for the post of secretary of state had been prolonged and were part of Arlington's plan to stay in power at court by moving to the post of lord chamberlain and leaving the more exposed political place of secretary of state to a client. Despite Williamson's loyalty Arlington secretly offered the place to Sir William Temple, and only when Temple had refused did Arlington, for the sum of $6000, give up the post to Williamson. Williamson saw it as 'the great business of my life', although in retrospect it may have been a move too far, for Williamson was to be far from happy and often subject to the caprice of the new power at court -- the recently appointed lord treasurer, Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby (TNA: PRO, SP 105/221, pp. 207-8). 
As power passed to Danby, Williamson also began to drift this way and gradually deserted his former patron. In any event, as secretary of state he was no Arlington, and his dominance of office proceedings was never matched by the same self-assurance in the political quicksand of the court. The government was Danby's regime and Williamson soon became a functionary within it. Initially Danby believed that Williamson, as a client of Arlington, had been intriguing against him while in Cologne in 1673 and assumed little trust could be placed in him. In 1677 Lady Danby was attempting to persuade her lord that he 'should not rely on any of my Lord Arlington's renegades' ('Ormonde MSS', 4.385). The lord treasurer was also prone to keep the secretary waiting outside his office for some two hours before admitting him. This could be seen as a calculated snub to a man who became increasingly touchy about such matters. Danby, however, was intent on controlling the Commons and Williamson's many contacts, gained through his extensive correspondence and newsletter system, and organizational skills, were among those used in Danby's attempt to create a court party in the later 1670s. Williamson himself spoke at length for the government in the Commons. It was often believed that his speeches were deliberately dull in order to empty out the Commons and enable the regime to take important votes on supply, but it is equally likely that, as other commentators of the day noted, his oratorical skills were cumbersome and he resorted to unwarranted flattery on inappropriate occasions. Williamson did not follow Danby in all things. The attempt by the lord treasurer to remove his rival Shaftesbury from the scene in 1676 led to Williamson's refusal to sign the warrant that would have sent the earl to the Tower. 
Williamson continued to prevent awkward or inflammatory ideas from reaching the public domain. In 1676, when Milton's last amanuensis, Daniel Skinner, attempted to publish the poet's 'Latin state letters' and 'De doctrina Christiana', Williamson emphatically intervened. The writings of 'that late villain Milton' in Williamson's opinion were subversive, and he seized control of the manuscripts (TNA: PRO, SP 104/66, fol. 120). Skinner was seen as deluded and warned off, while the manuscripts subsequently disappeared into the state paper office to reside there in obscurity until they were rediscovered in 1823. 
Williamson's increased social and political status was confirmed on 30 November 1677 when the Royal Society, of which he had been a fellow since 1663, elected him as its second president, though he was chosen president more for his court connections than any scientific abilities and he rarely attended the society's meetings. He may not, however, have been entirely uninterested in its work: he had undertaken extra tuition in natural philosophy and chemistry from Peter Stael at Oxford in his youth, and in November 1677 Robert Hooke wrote that he had spoken to Williamson of mathematical instruments and algebra and had been shown Sir Joseph's Chinese abacus. Williamson also had interests in literature, heraldry and antiquarian ideas -- his private papers show endless workings out of the ages of the early biblical prophets and kings of Israel. 
In 1678 the so-called Popish Plot engulfed the government, including Williamson. Of Williamson's own view of the plot there is little evidence. The various glimpses that do exist show some scepticism as to its genuineness, but it soon became impolitic, at least in public, to express any real doubts in the plot. He was involved in its investigations at an early stage and took some interest in the mystery surrounding the death of Edmund Godfrey, interviewing in person the coroner who sat on the inquest. Williamson was also in contact with the major informers of the day. Of Israel Tonge, Williamson thought he was merely an eccentric seeking an office in the church. Bedloe's flattery of Williamson that he was one whom the Jesuits 'looked upon... as an enemy' was also treated with coolness ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 3). Of Oates, Williamson generally remained wary, especially after the latter's spectacular rise to power and his predilection for inventing accusations against alleged popish conspirators. In the event the hysteria from the plot soon spilled over into the Commons, and it was there that Williamson had his career wrecked. 
Williamson, like many ministers of the period, was a victim of the fear of Catholics and Irish Catholics in particular. In the course of the crisis it was revealed that some Irish Catholic officers had been given warrants excusing them from taking the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, despite the 'Test Act', and that Williamson had counter-signed these documents as secretary of state. The outraged Commons ignored Williamson's prevarication that such papers had often been brought all in a bundle and that he had counter-signed them in haste. His other claim, that the whole fiasco was the result of the behaviour of the duke of Monmouth who had pressed this course of action upon him, was also ignored. The Commons speedily consigned him to the Tower on 18 November 1678, only for him to be released after a few hours by an angry Charles II. It was then, however, obvious to the monarch that Williamson's political value had declined, especially as Williamson apparently avoided attending the Commons for some time after this incident. This eventually led to his replacement as secretary of state on 20 February 1679 by the earl of Sunderland (but with the assurance that the $6000 Williamson had originally paid for the office would be refunded to him). 
With his involvement in public life temporarily in eclipse, Williamson chose this moment, 12 February 1679, to marry Catherine O'Brien (1640-1702), daughter of George Stuart, ninth seigneur d'Aubigny; she was 'suo jure' Baroness Clifton, and heir to her brother Charles Stuart, third duke of Richmond. It is not clear whether this was a love match, although they had long been acquainted and, given the haste of the marriage, it is possible that they were lovers prior to the death of her husband Henry O'Brien, Lord Ibracken, on 1 October 1678. The disparity in their social status (Catherine being a baroness and related to the king) caused much criticism of the marriage and even gossip that it had caused Williamson's political demise, Danby intending his own son for Catherine. However, this rumour was unlikely and, contrary to the scurrilous report of John Evelyn, the pair seem to have had a reasonably happy marriage. They had no children (although Williamson appears to have had an illegitimate son, Joseph Hornsby, to whom he left his Cumberland estates). The wealthy Williamson subsequently spent some years organizing his wife's indebted estates in England and Ireland. He also took over her debts in 1689 and finally purchased outright his wife's property, Cobham Hall in Kent, in 1696. Williamson was not completely out of royal favour. He voted against exclusion, but was otherwise inactive in those parliaments. A visit to Ireland in 1680 led to his appointment to the Irish privy council and he retained his local influence in Kent. He remained as MP for Thetford in 1685 and spent some money on public buildings there to maintain his interest. Yet under James II his fortunes declined once more. He was dropped from the Irish privy council and refused to support the repeal of the 'Test Act'. Although Williamson did not explicitly welcome the revolution of 1688, and was defeated in the 1689 elections, he did not give up his interest at Thetford, buying a town house there and making other various gifts to the corporation, but in 1690 he was elected for Rochester; he represented the town in three subsequent parliaments, until October 1701, despite being also elected for Thetford in 1695 and 1698. In the 1690 parliament he was classed as a tory and court supporter, sat on several important committees, and was from the outset prominent in the debates of the Commons, holding an essentially tory outlook on events. 
Ill health occasionally marred these years, but the favour of the new king to Williamson was assured in 1691 when William III made an overnight stop at Cobham Hall while on his way to the continent. Williamson's continued support of the court in the Commons naturally followed and there were soon rumours that he was to be appointed lord privy seal, but this never took place. Instead, in 1692 he was elected to the Irish parliament. He was once more sworn as an Irish privy councillor and remained in Ireland until December 1695 as a parliamentary manager. Back in Westminster in January 1696 he continued to support the court in the new session. He also returned to the privy council in November 1696. He then became one of the plenipotentiaries for the peace conference at Rijswijk (Ryswick). He embarked in May 1697 accompanied by his wife, four secretaries and, or so popular rumour had it, six fiddlers. His experience in diplomatic work made him an obvious choice for the king in an era when experienced English diplomats whom William III could trust were few. Although wracked with gout and ill health, Williamson retained the confidence of the king and after the signature of the peace in September 1697 he remained in Europe as ambassador to The Hague. He spent the whole of 1698 abroad, arriving back in England only in July 1699, once more securing his interest at Rochester. In 1700 and 1701 Williamson was frequently unwell and he missed the fierce criticism that fell on the king's ministers over revelations on the partition treaty. By 2 September 1701 he was seriously ill and he finally succumbed at Cobham Hall on 3 October 1701. He was buried on 14 October 1701 in the duke of Richmond's vault in Westminster Abbey. His legacies were extensive: $5000 was bequeathed for the building a free school at Rochester for educating boys in mathematics for use in naval service, and Thetford was given $2000. Queen's College received $6000 and his library, and the Royal Society $200. Nor was his family forgotten and a tangled legacy, particularly after the death of his widow on 3 November 1702, for Joseph Hornsby, complicated the estate's finances. 
The life of Williamson from 1660 onwards was largely public. He was a man of business and affairs who served the Restoration and post-1688 government well. His reputation as an administrator has recently been revised and he was possibly more influential in this area than was once thought. He was also active in the world of intelligence and espionage in an era of plotting and conspiracy, and appears to have had a shrewd eye for intelligence-gathering activities. As a man Williamson gained the reputation for dryness and formality in his public dealings, albeit he was capable of enormous flattery to those he wished to impress. There was equally an unofficial, sociable, side that cared for music and dancing. He remained throughout a shrewd and ambitious man, eager, if not greedy, for wealth and public status. 


@@@@@


doc= 29572


Williamson, Peter (1730-1799), publisher and adventurer, son of James Williamson, crofter, was born at Hirnley in the parish of Aboyne, Aberdeenshire. At the age of ten, while living with an aunt in Aberdeen, he was kidnapped by a merchant and transported to the American plantations, where he was sold for a period of seven years to a fellow countryman in Pennsylvania. After working out his indenture, he was given 200 acres of land on the frontier in Berks county. He married his first wife in 1754 (died 1755), but in the same year his farm was overrun by Indians allied to the French and Williamson was captured. Escaping after four months, he enlisted in the British colonial forces and served along the northern frontier. In 1757 he landed at Plymouth, where he was discharged owing to a wound in one of his hands, and with the sum of 6's'. he set out for Aberdeen. At York he published his memoirs, 'French and Indian Cruelty Exemplified in the Life and Various Vicissitudes of Peter Williamson'. Arriving in Aberdeen in 1758, he was prosecuted for libel by merchants for his account of the kidnapping in which he exposed the role played by local magistrates and businessmen. He was at once convicted, fined, and banished from the city, while his tract, which had passed through several editions in Glasgow, London, and Edinburgh, was ordered to be burnt by the public hangman at the market cross. In response Williamson brought legal action against the magistrates in Aberdeen, and in 1762 was awarded $100 damages by the court of session. He was also successful in a second suit brought in 1765 against the parties engaged in the trade of kidnapping. 
Williamson settled in Edinburgh, where he combined the occupations of bookseller, printer, publisher, inventor, and keeper of a tavern, Indian Peter's Coffee Room, inside the parliament house. In 1773 he issued the first street directory for Edinburgh and in 1776 both wrote and published a periodical similar to 'The Spectator', entitled the 'Scots Spy, or, Critical Observer'. This appeared every Friday and provided readers with local information; it ran initially from 8 March to 30 August, with a second series, the 'New Scots Spy', appearing from 29 August to 14 November 1777. In 1777 Williamson married his second wife, Jean Wilson, mantua maker and seamstress, daughter of John Wilson, an Edinburgh bookseller. The marriage, which produced nine children, ended in a bitter divorce in 1789. About the same time as his marriage, Williamson established a penny postal system in the city; in 1793 the government took over its management and awarded him a pension of $25 per annum. 
In addition to 'French and Indian Cruelty' and the 'Scots Spy', Williamson was author of numerous works of which the most significant are: 'A Brief Account of the War in North America' (1760), 'Travels of Peter Williamson amongst the different nations and tribes of savage Indians in America' (1768), 'The Royal Abdication of Peter Williamson, King of the Mohawks' (n.d.), and 'Proposals for Establishing a Penny Post' (n.d.). Williamson also maintained his publishing business in these years. Among the works that issued from his press were editions of Sir David Lindsay's poems (1776) and of William Meston's 'Mob contra Mob'. He died on 19 January 1799 and was buried in Edinburgh in the old Calton cemetery near the martyrs' monument, though his grave is unmarked. 'The Life and Curious Adventures of Peter Williamson' (a reprint, with additions, of his 'French and Indian Cruelty') was published at Aberdeen in 1801 and proved very popular, running through many editions and appearing also in an abbreviated form as a chapbook. 


@@@@@


doc= 29573


Williamson, Samuel (1792-1840), landscape and marine painter, was the younger son of John Williamson of Liverpool, in which town he was born, and his wife, Sarah. 
His father, 
In 1811 Samuel Williamson had three landscapes hung in the first exhibition of the Liverpool Academy, of which body he was a member. In their later exhibitions as well as at the first exhibition of the Royal Manchester Institution in 1827 and the subsequent annual exhibitions, he was represented by a large number of landscapes and seascapes. He exhibited a landscape at the Royal Academy in 1811. He earned a considerable reputation as a painter of seapieces and landscapes, and was highly esteemed by his fellow townsmen. He is said to have travelled abroad and to have been in Rome in 1818, when he might have encountered John Gibson. On his death, which took place at his home in Benson Street, Liverpool, on 7 June 1840, an obelisk to his memory was erected in St James's cemetery, a lithograph of which, by W. Collingwood, was published. His style, which in its earlier phase demonstrated an awareness of classical and Dutch influences, was distinguished later in the 1820s by a warmer palette and more expressive brushwork. In general, his pictures are well composed, and his later paintings display a certain charm achieved through use of light and colour. There are five oil painting as well as many sketches by him at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. Further examples of his work are to be found at the Williamson Art Gallery, Birkenhead. There are other works in private collections in the district. 


@@@@@


doc= 29574


Williamson, William Crawford (1816-1895), naturalist and palaeobotanist, was born at Huntriss Row, Scarborough on 24 November 1816, the second and only surviving son of John Williamson ('b'. 1784), gardener and first curator of the Scarborough Museum, and Elizabeth Crawford, eldest daughter of a Scottish lapidary and watchmaker who had migrated to Yorkshire when young. In his early boyhood Williamson learned the lapidary's art in his grandfather's workshop, and acquired a good knowledge of field natural history from his father and his father's friends, notably the geologists William Smith (1769-1839), and Smith's nephew John Phillips (1800-1874), who lived for a time in John Williamson's house and later became professor of geology at Oxford. Williamson's schooling, in dame-schools and grammar schools, was frequently interrupted by ill health, and in 1832 he was apprenticed to Thomas Weddell, apothecary of Scarborough. He devoted his free time to natural history, working with a keen group of amateur naturalists in Yorkshire and the north-east. He produced papers on birds, on a new mussel, and on a newly opened tumulus. He contributed to Lindley and Hutton's 'Fossil Flora of Great Britain' (1831), and produced two pioneering papers for the Geological Society analysing strata into smaller 'zones' according to their fossil content. 
Williamson's scientific ability attracted attention, not least from Manchester, to which he was invited in 1835 as museum curator for the Natural History Society. For three years he worked on the museum, and on geological research, mixing with Manchester's devotees of science, including John Dalton (1766-1844). Lecturing on geology helped him raise funds to register as a medical student, first at the proprietary school in Pine Street, Manchester (1838-9), and then at University College, London (from the autumn of 1839). By January 1841 he had qualified licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries and MRCS and set up practice in Manchester, aided by two wealthy friends. In June the following year he married Sophia (died 1872), daughter of the Revd Robert Wood, treasurer to the Wesleyan body; the couple later had a son and a daughter. Before long Williamson had attained a local reputation by operations on squint, also a speciality of another Manchester surgeon, James Braid, with whose work on hypnotism Williamson was associated. He became surgeon to the Chorlton-on-Medlock Dispensary and later established the Manchester Institution for Diseases of the Ear -- prompted by his own ear troubles, he had studied aural surgery in Paris and in London. His medical publications included two papers on chloroform anaesthesia as a treatment for infantile convulsions, in 'The Lancet' in 1853 and in the 'Association Medical Journal' in 1856, a paper on the chorda tympani as a nerve of taste ('Association Medical Journal', 1855, 1009-10), and local publications on scarlet fever and on ear disorders. He continued in general medical practice and as an ear specialist until his seventieth year. On friendly terms with the Wesleyans in Manchester, and for a time a member of that denomination, he was medical attendant to the Wesleyan Theological College, Didsbury from 1864 to 1883, and a member of the committee of management. However, he is perhaps best known for his teaching and research at Owens College. 
At the foundation of Owens College in January 1851 Williamson was appointed professor of 'natural history, anatomy, and physiology', and played a role in the inauguration of evening classes for working men. Over the years, as Owens College developed, Williamson ceded aspects of his teaching to younger staff with narrower and more academic training. In 1872 the (proprietary) Royal School of Medicine became a medical school of Owens College and a chair in geology was created for William Boyd-Dawkins. Thus, Williamson became professor of natural history. A demonstrator, Marcus Hartog, was appointed to assist him in 1877, and in 1880 Milnes-Marshall was appointed to a chair of zoology. Williamson continued as professor of botany until 1892, when, after forty-one years' service, he received the title of emeritus professor, and a year's salary as gratuity. While his lectures to students were well arranged and fluent, as time went by his younger colleagues felt they lacked minuteness of accurate detail and were increasingly dated, in part because Williamson knew little German. 
Williamson's scientific work was immense and his early work was well regarded by contemporaries. His later work, on palaeobotany, was initially little known, partly because of presentational problems. However, towards the end of his life he was recognized as a major pioneer in the study of fossil plants. His early researches on foraminifera led to a Ray Society monograph, in which he described thin-section techniques not previously used for this group, and where he showed that a wide variety of forms, hitherto given specific or generic rank, could be combined in a single individual. His long-overlooked researches on 'Volvox' showed it to be vegetal rather than animal. A very complete study of the wheel animal 'Melicerta', published in 1853, led to his writing the chapter on Rotifera in the third edition of Andrew Pritchard's 'Infusoria' (1861). Between 1840 and 1850, largely from material provided by Sir Philip de Malpas Grey-Egerton, Williamson produced two classic monographs on the histology of teeth, fish scales, and bone, demonstrating the essential identity of teeth and fish scales, and the distinction between bone formed directly in membrane and that preformed in cartilage. The German histologist Kolliker visited Manchester to review these results, and they gained Williamson his fellowship of the Royal Society (1854). 
From about 1854 Williamson returned to the study of fossil plants, including the enigmatic form 'Zamia gigas', called 'Williamsonia' by W. Carruthers. From about 1858, he demonstrated that certain Carboniferous plants combined many of the characteristics of higher flowerless plants (such as horsetails and clubmosses) with the mode of growth seen in modern trees -- the successive deposit of new layers in the outer parts of the stem. These key results were initially little regarded, in part because Williamson's exquisite drawings suffered in transfer to lithographic stone and printing and in part because the papers were poorly organized and the terminology deficient. Some readers felt that they had to conduct their own research among Williamson's illustrations and descriptions. His results were ignored by French palaeobotanists until he collaborated with his demonstrator, Marcus Hartog, to publish a systematic review, in French, in 'Annales des Sciences Naturelles' (1882). By 1890 Renault, Grand'Eury, and Saporta had all largely adopted Williamson's interpretations. From 1876 to his death, Williamson worked on compacted coal, but published little beyond a preliminary note ('British Association Report', 1881). Research in 1885 extended Nathorst's discovery that some fossils supposed to be of animals or plants were merely of animal tracks or tidal currents. 
Williamson never spared expense in the purchase of apparatus or specimens -- a magnificent stigmaria, 'Williamson's folly', became a feature of the university museum. He met with generous help from amateur naturalists, who were proud to help him with specimens they had collected, or sections they had cut. One of his working-class collaborators, James Lomax, came to earn a living from the preparation of palaeobotanical sections. Williamson had originated among such men, and he shared their craft skills. His career, supported by his medical practice, can be seen as falling between those of the 'devotees' of Victorian science -- Lyell, Joule, Darwin -- and the new generation of professional academics, at least one of whom, the botanist Marshall Ward, was his protege. Williamson was averse to speculation and to strident scientific naturalism; he took no part in scientific theory. From the mid-1860s to 1882 Williamson's reputation was low -- his early work had become textbook commonplaces, his revolutionary palaeobotany had yet to be recognized -- but by the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) meeting in Manchester in 1887 he was an honoured member of the cosmopolitan botanists there assembled. In the same year the biology departments of Owens College received magnificent new buildings, the gift of Charles F. Beyer, and the college incorporated the natural history museum in which Williamson had once been curator. He was significantly responsible for developing the collections. His ninth memoir, on the organization of the fossil plants of the coal measures, was given as the Bakerian lecture at the Royal Society and published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. He received the society royal medal in 1874, an honorary degree of LLD of Edinburgh in 1883, the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society in 1890, and a number of foreign honours. 
Williamson did much to encourage scientific interests both among students and among local naturalists. He was a member of the Manchester Amateur Photographic Society and served on the committee which established Manchester's first municipal library. He served as president of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and was for long a member of its council; in 1858 he helped form its microscopical and natural history section in which he remained active. After an illness in 1860 Williamson had settled in the suburban village of Fallowfield, where he grew many rare plants, often used in laboratory teaching at Owens, which provided a small grant towards the expenses. Following the death of his first wife, he married, on 4 August 1874, Annie Copley Heaton, niece of Sir Henry Mitchell of Bradford; there was one son from the marriage, the printmaker John Copley (1875-1950). Spare and erect, with blue-grey eyes deep set in an oval face, Williamson had an educated taste in music, and brought back watercolour sketches from his vacation trips. His artistic facility and his enormous enthusiasm were perhaps best seen in his popular illustrated lectures. Between 1874 and 1890, for example, he gave at least three hundred in connection with the Gilchrist Trust. He wrote a number of articles for the 'London Quarterly Review', published under Wesleyan auspices, and some for the 'Popular Science Review'. He cautiously accepted evolutionary theory, but resented scientific dogmatism and intolerance. 
After his retirement in 1892 Williamson moved to 43 Elms Road, Clapham, London, where he continued working, in collaboration with Dukinfield Henry Scott, at his own house or at the Jodrell Laboratory, Kew. His last publication (in February 1895) was the obituary of his old friend, sometime opponent, and recent convert, the marquis de Saporta. He died at home in Clapham on 23 June 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 29575


Willibald (c.700-787?), bishop of Eichstatt, was the brother of Winnebald and Walburg and was born 'c'.700 in Wessex. The names of the parents are unknown, though twelfth-century tradition gives the Norman 'Richard' as the name of Willibald's father. At the age of five Willibald was entrusted to Abbot Ecgwald at the monastery of Bishop's Waltham, near Winchester. Here he took the tonsure and continued his education in theology and Latin until, aged about twenty, he decided to go on pilgrimage to Rome, a 'peregrinatio pro amore Dei' of the type espoused by Celtic religious. Willibald prevailed upon his brother Winnebald and his father to accompany him, setting off in 720. The father fell ill and died at Lucca; the brothers continued the journey to Rome. After surviving a bout of plague, Willibald left his sickly brother in Rome and departed in 723 for the Holy Land. The journey was long and difficult; in Syria Willibald and his companions were imprisoned by a Muslim governor on suspicion of spying and only released by order of the caliph of Baghdad who respected their religious intentions. 
Willibald arrived in Jerusalem in the summer of 724 and spent several years visiting the places associated with the life of Christ, literally walking in Christ's footsteps. His account of these years contains surprisingly little anthropological or historical information, but it is a valuable source for contemporary pilgrim routes and the eighth-century archaeology of the sacred sites. After his final visit to Jerusalem Willibald narrowly escaped arrest by the citizens of Tyre on suspicion of smuggling balsam; the ruse by which he escaped detection is admiringly recounted. Willibald proceeded to Constantinople in 727, about which he says little. He arrived there in the midst of iconoclasm and, perhaps in consequence, did not remain long. In 729 he returned to Italy, to Monte Cassino, the cradle of Western monasticism, where he was admitted as a monk under Abbot Petronax. He rose rapidly through the order in the ten years he spent there. In 739 he had an audience with Pope Gregory III, to whom he related the story of his travels in the Holy Land. The pope dispatched him, at Boniface's request, to Germany, to join his brother Winnebald in the missionary field. 
Christians had been in Bavaria for a century, but the itinerant nature of the Irish mission had left no institutional structures in place and apostasy was rife. Willibald was ordained by Boniface on his arrival in Germany in 740. He subsequently travelled to Thuringia where he was reunited with Winnebald and was raised to the episcopate in 741. It seems likely that Boniface intended to appoint Willibald to the see at Erfurt, but the new bishop did not remain there. A local landowner in Eichstatt, Suidgar, had promised land to the church and Willibald returned to Bavaria to found a monastery, putting into practice the Benedictine rule he had observed at Monte Cassino. By 762 he is recorded as 'episcopus de monasterio' of Eichstatt. 
Willibald facilitated Winnebald's return to Bavaria to found the monastery at Heidenheim and was present at his brother's deathbed there in 761. In 778 Willibald dictated the story of his youth and travels to the nun Hugeburc at the Heidenheim foundation, now ruled by his sister, Walburg. Hugeburc incorporated Willibald's account into her so-called 'Hodoeporicon', the primary source of information about Willibald's life. Willibald died at Eichstatt on 7 July, probably in 787. He was buried there and was honoured as the founder of the see. The activities of Willibald and his siblings in southern Germany strikingly exemplify the intersection of kinship and spiritual 'familia' upon which the success of the Anglo-Saxon mission on the continent depended. In his lifetime Willibald witnessed the rise of Islam and the East-West schism, 'not as a mere observer, but... as a participant' (Bauch, 17). 


@@@@@


doc= 29576


Willibrord (657/8-739), missionary, archbishop of the Frisians, and abbot of Echternach, was born in the southern Northumbrian kingdom of Deira, the son of Wilgils and an unnamed mother. 
Any account of Willibrord's origins and early life depends entirely on his earliest biographer, Alcuin (735-804), whose life of Willibrord was written 'c'.796 at the behest of Beornred (died 797), archbishop of Sens, abbot of Echternach, and a relative of Willibrord. It is far from objective. Alcuin probably drew on an earlier life of Willibrord written by an Irishman and now lost, but he was also the heir of Willibrord both actually, for he too was a relative (of unknown degree) and the inheritor of Wilgils's monastery in Northumbria, and conceptually, as a Northumbrian who gained an authoritative spiritual stature in the Frankish kingdom and enjoyed the patronage of the Carolingian dynasty. Under the influence of these associations, combined with his aspiration to write classicizing hagiography, Alcuin produced a presentation of Willibrord as an ideal type, the 'aristocratic saint', and one, moreover, who exhibited the spiritual benefits of support from a powerful Carolingian ruler. In his narrative of Willibrord's career on the continent, Alcuin is at variance on several points with earlier sources, principally the brief account by Bede in his 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum'. This was written during Willibrord's lifetime, 'c'.730, but gives no information on the missionary's early life, concentrating on the first years of his continental mission, for which Bede's informant was Acca, who visited Willibrord in company with Wilfrid in 703 or 704 and later became bishop of Hexham. Alcuin's outline of the early life may be trusted in its essentials, since it does not directly bear on the biographer's continental political agenda, and concerns his own family. 
Willibrord was born in late 657 or early in 658. Alcuin's account of the birth includes a typical hagiographical motif in which the child's sanctity is foretold, and a less typical one comparing Willibrord with John the Baptist, preparing the way for one to come (perhaps, in this case, Boniface, or even Charlemagne). In an explicit comparison with the Baptist's father, Zacharias, Wilgils is said to have 'entered upon the state of matrimony for the sole purpose of bringing into the world a child who should benefit many peoples' (Alcuin, 'Life of Willibrord', 4). A more certain indication of Wilgils's ascetic inclination is his later retirement to live an eremitic life in a church he had built between the North Sea and the Humber, dedicated to St Andrew, where he gathered a small band of devout men. Alcuin later came into possession of that church, he says, 'by lawful succession' (ibid., 3). Willibrord's father was therefore a noted religious as well as a landowner, a member of the Deiran aristocracy. 
Apart from his father, two known personalities had a lasting influence on the young Willibrord: the outspoken Northumbrian bishop Wilfrid ('c'.634-709/10), a man highly active in secular life, and his ascetic fellow countryman Ecgberht (639-729). At first sight the characters of these two figures appear to have been contradictory, but they shared a common devotion to the Roman discipline of calculating the date of Easter, while each man occupied a prominent position in a political and religious culture that spanned northern Britain and the Irish Sea. Thus Ecgberht had influential contacts with the kings of Northumbria and of the Picts, as well as with Iona, which he persuaded to adopt the Roman Easter dating about 716. 
It was into this integrated insular religious world that Willibrord was introduced when, according to Alcuin, his father entrusted him, still an infant, to the monastery of Ripon. Although the precise date of Willibrord's oblation is not known, the comment of Wilfrid's biographer Stephen of Ripon, who refers to Willibrord as the (spiritual) son of Wilfrid, indicates that it occurred after the latter had become abbot 'c'.658. Willibrord's entry into Ripon firmly identified him with Wilfrid, and with the brand of Christianity that was then crystallizing around him, one which followed the continental example. The mid-seventh century was a time of friction between Wilfrid's model and a different tradition, centred at Iona and Lindisfarne and practising a different method of Easter dating. Ripon itself had been founded for monks from Lindisfarne who were expelled when Wilfrid took control of the monastery. Ripon thus embodied divisions which the Whitby synod of 664 was subsequently convoked to settle, not entirely successfully. 
Although a mere child in 664, it is possible that Willibrord eventually suffered through his association with his abbot. According to Alcuin, it was at the age of twenty -- that is, in 678 -- that he left Ripon for Ireland. Alcuin ascribes the move to a desire to pursue a more rigorous asceticism, but it may be that Wilfrid's fall from favour with the Northumbrian king Ecgfrith, also in 678, forced him to leave. His choice of destination demonstrates, however, that adherence to the 'Roman' Easter and separation from the Lindisfarne tradition did not preclude a strong association with Irish Christianity. Willibrord's destination, the monastery of Rath Melsigi, plausibly located at Clonmelsh, co. Carlow, reaffirms the broad integration of the spiritual network in which he lived: it was the monastery chosen by Ecgberht when he went into voluntary exile in 664. Willibrord remained there for the next twelve years. 
By an unusual stroke of fortune, it is certain that among the attributes that Willibrord learnt during his monastic education was the ability to write. A sample of his handwriting survives, which serves to introduce the next phase of his life. To the calendar generally named after him (the so-called calendar of St Willibrord), in 728 he added a note in the left-hand margin of the page for the second half of November: 'In the name of the Lord, Clemens Willibrord came across the sea to Francia in the six hundred and ninetieth year from the incarnation of Christ, and in God's name in the six hundred and ninety-fifth year from the incarnation of the Lord, although unworthy, he was ordained bishop in Rome by the apostolic man, the lord pope Sergius. (Wilson, 13)' Writing when he was at least seventy, Willibrord thus commemorated his consecration by the pope in 695, at which he was given the name Clemens. He introduced this note, moreover, by mentioning what he clearly saw as the other most significant event of his life: his arrival in Francia in 690. As Alcuin pointed out, he was then thirty-three, 'the full age of Christ' (Alcuin, 'Life of Willibrord', 6). 
Bede reveals the impulse which drove Willibrord to undertake his journey when he relates how one of the Rath Melsigi community warned Ecgberht against himself embarking on a mission to preach among the pagan Germans. Reluctantly remaining in Ireland, Ecgberht instead dispatched Wihtberht, another Englishman living at Rath Melsigi. Wihtberht missionized in Frisia, but with little success, and returned after two years. Ecgberht then turned to the companion who, according to Bede, was outstandingly eminent both in rank and in merit: Willibrord. In a party totalling twelve, Willibrord set sail for the continent. It is likely that he sailed directly there, as Bede says Ecgberht had planned to do, rather than pausing in Britain on the way. Neither Bede nor Alcuin gives the names of his companions, though the latter reports that some were later martyred, while others became bishops. Swithberht was almost certainly one of them. All attempts to identify the rest have failed for lack of evidence. It is not even certain that Willibrord's company numbered twelve: it may be too symbolically significant a figure to be taken literally. 
Willibrord himself noted that he disembarked 'in Francia'; Alcuin's belief that he had followed Wilfrid and Wihtberht precisely by going first to Frisia was mistaken. Bede is probably more accurate here, relating that the party first sought out Pippin II, the head of the Pippinid (later Carolingian) family, mayor of the Frankish royal palace and effective ruler of the kingdom. Willibrord did not yet have a precise idea of the direction their mission should take. The mission field that Ecgberht had set was very broad, comprising many peoples who, as Bede observes, were 'still practising heathen rites' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 5.9). Bede ascribes the choice of the Frisians as the target of Willibrord's mission to the contemporary political situation: since Pippin II had recently driven the Frisian leader Radbod from 'citerior Fresia', it was natural that he should send Willibrord and his companions there. The extent of Pippin's conquest is unknown: Bede's 'nearer Frisia' implies simply that part of the Low Countries closest to the Frankish lands, probably extending no further north than the lower Maas. For the previous two centuries Frankish control of the region had been marginal at best. The area around Utrecht and Dorestad had fallen under Frisian control by about 670, and paganism was also prevalent in the lands south of the Rhine which nominally fell within the dioceses of Noyon-Tournai and Maastricht, in spite of missionary campaigns by the Frankish bishops Amandus and Eligius, and also by Wilfrid, who arrived in Frisia in 678 after fleeing England. When Willibrord arrived north of the Rhine the population he found there was, to all appearances, uniformly pagan. 
Initially, Willibrord carried his mission forward in those areas, south of the Rhine and under Frankish control, where Christianity already had a foothold. It was a region in which Pippin II himself could aid the work of evangelization, both by offering material favours to potential converts (probably in the form of land: Bede's word is 'beneficia') and by giving the missionaries the protection of his secular authority. Willibrord may not have gone north to this region until some two years after his arrival in Francia, however, for Bede reports that as soon as he moved into his mission field he left it to visit Rome for the first time, and this journey can be dated with some accuracy, to between July 692 and April 693. Having arrived in Francia proper in 690, therefore, his party spent several years there before heading north -- a timespan which Bede compresses, perhaps because, with the English experience in mind, he wanted to emphasize the importance to the mission of papal sanction. Willibrord probably saw the securing of Frankish support as the more essential initial task. His first journey to Rome may very well have been intended to secure the approval of the pope, Sergius I, for his work: Sergius is commemorated in his calendar. Its most practical result, however, were the relics that Willibrord brought back to his mission field to act as foci for the devotion of converts, replacing the pagan idols he expected to destroy. Relics purporting to be those brought back by Willibrord are still preserved at Utrecht and at Echternach. 
Willibrord spent only about two years in the north before he set out for Rome again, this time at the behest of Pippin, to seek consecration from the pope. He was duly ordained on 21 November 695, the eve of the feast of St Cecilia, in whose titular church in Trastevere the ceremony took place (not in St Peter's, as Alcuin thought). Although Willibrord gives himself the title 'bishop' in his calendar, Bede calls him 'archbishop of the Frisians', and he also appears as archbishop in a charter issued in his favour by Charles Martel in 723. The precise nature of the office Willibrord received is unclear. An archbishop invested by the pope, through the bestowal of the pallium, to consecrate other bishops was unknown on the continent at this time. The idea had emerged in the specific context of the English mission. Although no source records Willibrord bearing a pallium, Bede reports that he appointed bishops in his own province, and other sources have him consecrating churches within the purview of existing Frankish bishops, including at Echternach, in the diocese of Trier. These activities hint at a higher status for Willibrord even than the pallium implied. His connections both with Rome and with the Pippinid house cast him as the precursor to Boniface, and the range of his evangelizing activity suggests that his office included an element of the roving 'missionary bishop' that Boniface was to use with such effect after 722. 
Although he roamed widely across the north of the Frankish kingdom and beyond, Willibrord's principal role, at least in the pope's eyes, was that of provincial metropolitan to a single people. In that capacity he could hope for Pippin's support: a papally-appointed archbishop of the Frisians who also benefited from Pippinid patronage within Francia, as Willibrord did, could promote the interests of the Franks, and especially of their mayor, beyond the formal borders of the realm. 
Such an archbishop nevertheless needed a see, and this was established only after a further military victory by Pippin over the Frisians. Bede reports that Pippin gave Willibrord a place in the 'castellum' of Utrecht for his see, a gift which cannot have been made before 695, when he defeated the Frisians at or near Dorestad. However, all that can be said for certain is that Willibrord was established at Utrecht by 703 or 704, when Wilfrid and Acca visited him there on their way to Rome. Next to the 'castellum' Willibrord consecrated an episcopal church in the name of the Saviour; fittingly, since it was also the original dedication both of Christ Church, Canterbury, and of the Lateran basilica (now San Giovanni in Laterano). From the ruined church of St Martin he created a monastery, closely connected to his cathedral. He thus followed Canterbury in linking church and monastery and also because Augustine had found at Canterbury a church of St Martin of Roman origin. Although the interconnectedness of secular and regular clergy also recalls Irish practices, Willibrord's conception of the bishop differed from the Irish in his emphasis on the bishop's pastoral responsibilities. In this he followed Wilfrid. Nevertheless, he set a precedent for Boniface in making monasticism an essential tool of missionizing. This may have been because, around the time that he was setting up his missionary bishopric, he acquired an interest in monasticism in the heart of Francia. 
More than at Utrecht, the continental sources locate Willibrord at the Rhineland monastery of Echternach. This was the focus of Alcuin's remark that 'many began in their zeal for the faith to make over to the man of God their hereditary properties' (Alcuin, 'Vita Willibrordi', 126), though Alcuin himself does not mention Echternach specifically in this context, and has little to say on the abbey at all: a curious omission, given that he wrote his life of Willibrord at the behest of Echternach's abbot. The properties to which Alcuin refers were bestowed through the charters which survive in Echternach's twelfth-century cartulary. Such documents testify to a culture of monastic patronage among the Frankish aristocracy which had been in existence for over a century, but which Willibrord may have reinvigorated to some extent. Echternach was built on land given in 697 or 698 by Irmina, an important aristocratic dowager, the mother of Pippin's wife, Plectrudis. By 706, when Pippin and Plectrudis themselves made an extensive grant to Willibrord, the latter had built a monastery and a church there, dedicated to St Peter and St Paul. In 1944 an allied bomb exposed the church, a rectangular building some 70 feet long, with a nave about 25 feet wide and a square choir. Signs that it may have had a baptistery indicate its pivotal role in the religious life of the surrounding area. It is difficult to separate this from the links which connected the abbey, and Willibrord himself, with the Pippinid or Carolingian family. Echternach was built on the River Sauer, amid the huge complex of estates owned by Plectrudis's family, an important component of the Pippinid power base. Willibrord's appointment as abbot was supported by the bishops of the local diocese of Trier, Basinus and Leotwin, both staunch supporters of Pippin. 
Pippin's sponsorship of Willibrord's activity in his own heartland as well as on the fringes of the kingdom must be seen in the context of widespread monastic patronage by the Pippinid family, particularly in the region of the Maas and the Moselle. When in 706 Pippin and Plectrudis granted a large part of the surrounding area to Echternach, Willibrord entrusted the abbey to the Pippinids' legal and physical protection. In a region dominated by their own family, such protection implied a certain amount of political control. In the same way, at Susteren, near Liege, there was a small monastic house that Plectrudis had bought and which she made over to Willibrord in 714, so that he might turn it into a fully-fledged monastery. Susteren was to remain under the protection of Pippin and Plectrudis, the community allowed the freedom to elect its abbots only on condition that it remain loyal to themselves and their heirs. Nevertheless, charters among those collected at Echternach indicate that Willibrord retained a measure of independence. While the Pippinids referred to Echternach as 'our monastery' and endowed it directly, other benefactors at this time called it Willibrord's monastery, and preferred to give their lands not to the institution, but to the missionary himself. Chief among these were a series of grants by landholders in Toxandria, part of that area to the south of the lower Maas debated between the Frisians and the Franks in the 690s. Although Willibrord passed their lands on to Echternach in his will, the Toxandrian aristocracy gave to the missionary not because he was abbot of Echternach, but because he was the leading representative in their region of the dominant Frankish Christian culture. 
Such patronage clearly followed in the wake of Pippin's conquests, although the Toxandrian donors' support for Willibrord does not necessarily identify them as Pippinid partisans. Two donations that he received from Heden, duke of the Thuringians, later driven from his duchy by Pippin, point to the skill with which Willibrord balanced his role as abbot of a powerful Frankish (not to say Pippinid) monastery with his vocation to appeal to those beyond the frontiers of Christian Francia. Nevertheless, his tenure of the abbacy gave him the status of a Frankish magnate and strengthened an association with Pippinid power that may have been crucial to his success in Frisia. There is no evidence that his establishment at Utrecht in 703 or 704 helped to spread Christianity in the region, despite a reconciliation between Pippin and Radbod, which lasted from 711 until Pippin's death in 714, whereupon Radbod won back control of Utrecht. There is no sign that Willibrord was in Frisia during this period. It was the victory of Pippin's son Charles Martel over his Frankish enemies, followed closely by Radbod's death in 719, that led to the re-establishment of Frankish rule around Utrecht and generated the first surviving grants to Willibrord there. 
Willibrord had already, in 718, received from Charles an estate near Echternach, having around the same time benefited from the patronage of Arnulf, the most important member of the branch of the Pippinid family opposed to Charles; the Anglo-Saxon's political adroitness, or, perhaps, his perceived neutrality, is once again evident. In 716 he had baptized Charles's son Pippin (later Pippin III). The bond thus established, Charles sought to strengthen it as soon as he could. Frankish chronicles report a campaign on his northern frontier in 722; his first grant to Willibrord in the region -- lands around Utrecht -- came on 1 January 723. In the will he drew up in 726, Willibrord calls Charles his 'dominus' and 'senior', a language of vassalage that testifies to the missionary's debt to Charles's political and, no doubt, military support. This enabled him to construct the framework of an ecclesiastical organization in the parts of Frisia that Charles controlled. His first helper in the area was Boniface, who arrived in Frisia for the second time in 719 but left in 721, declining Willibrord's offer to consecrate him a bishop, and went to preach in Hesse. Boniface's letters reveal that Willibrord nevertheless appointed an unnamed assistant, a 'chorbishop', to help him in the Frisian diocese, instituting a clerical grade that was to proliferate over the next hundred years. 
If Willibrord's success as a missionary in Frisia is hard to separate from the victories of Frankish arms, his impact further afield is even more difficult to assess. While Alcuin plays down his role as abbot and magnate, his presentation of Willibrord's missionary work may have been intended to provide a model of gentler methods of conversion than those being practised at his time of writing in the last decades of the eighth century, when the Franks brought Christianity to the Saxons at the point of a sword. Having reported Willibrord's initial dispatch to Frisia by Pippin, Alcuin describes his failure to move Radbod from his paganism, and his decision to turn instead to the Danes. The Danish ruler received Willibrord well, but the missionary again despaired of converting the people, and chose thirty Danish boys, baptized them, and returned with them to Francia. On the way back, a storm drove his party onto an island named after the local god Fosite (either Heligoland or one of the islands close to the north coast of Frisia). There Willibrord baptized people in the sacred spring, and slaughtered the sacred cattle. An incensed Radbod cast lots to select a victim from among the missionaries. The lot did not fall on Willibrord, and another of his party was killed. Preaching before the Frisian leader, Willibrord so amazed Radbod with his fortitude that he was sent back to Pippin with honour. Whether true or not, this tale points to what Alcuin saw as legitimate means of evangelizing: the destruction of shrines and shibboleths, baptism, and preaching to the hostile. For Alcuin, Willibrord's mission began to succeed only after this rite of passage, and then apparently in lands under Pippin's sway. Although he dates the first establishment of the bishopric at Utrecht too late, Alcuin generally confirms the impression of the charter evidence that any successes north of the Rhine came after Charles Martel's conquests there. 
The distractions of evangelization did not prevent Willibrord from establishing at Echternach a centre of manuscript production. The most important early product of this scriptorium was the calendar which usually bears his name (now Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 10837, fols. 34-41). The copy of the Hieronymian martyrology that precedes it (fols. 2-33), and the Easter tables which follow it (fols. 42-3), were produced at the same time. Certainly begun before 709, it has even been suggested that it was started in Ireland and brought to Echternach, perhaps with Willibrord himself. More likely, however, it originated at Echternach as a response to the liturgical needs of the new foundation. Nevertheless, the earliest hands in it wrote insular scripts. Apart from Willibrord's autograph entry, the choice of saints commemorated itself reflects the unique personal profile of the missionary. There are saints of Northumbria and Kent, of Ireland and Rome, of Francia, and especially of the local see of Trier. The appearance of the names of otherwise unknown clerics establishes it as the earliest calendar-type necrologia: that is, a commemorative list of deceased spiritual associates of the monastic community -- the 'familia'. 
To judge from the scripts of the manuscripts associated with the Echternach scriptorium, Willibrord's 'familia' soon included Frankish recruits. As well as the martyrology and calendar, during Willibrord's lifetime or soon after the scriptorium certainly produced the Augsburg gospels (Augsburg, Universitatsbibliothek, MS Cod. I.2.4o.2), the Trier gospels (Trier, Domschatz, MS codex 61), the Maeseyck gospels (Maeseyck, church of St Catherine Tresor, MS s.n. ff. 6-132), and the Freiburg gospel fragment (Freiburg im Breisgau, Universitatsbibliothek, MS Cod. 702). The list of Echternach's probable products at the time includes a text of canon law, a psalter, and some apparently carefully selected biblical commentaries: all essential texts for a pastoral bishop concerned with ecclesiastical discipline and correct doctrine. Some of the scribes were trained in the insular tradition, if not in England or Ireland, revealing Echternach's scriptorium as an important gateway for the Anglo-Saxon and Irish influence that was crucial to the intellectual revival of the second half of the eighth and the ninth century. The Echternach gospels, which share a master scribe with the Durham gospels and were written in Northumbria, eastern Scotland, Iona, or Ireland, are a surviving testament to this link. It is clear, in any case, that Willibrord maintained contact with his native Northumbria throughout his life. Wilfrid and Acca were on their way from Northumbria to Rome when they visited him in 703 or 704; the Northumbrian king and saint Oswald is commemorated in the calendar, and a member of Willibrord's community visited Lindisfarne and regained his health at the tomb of St Cuthbert. From Northumbria too came Beornred, the third abbot of Echternach, who was certainly related to Willibrord, as, indeed, the second abbot, Adalbert, may also have been. 
Although the entry Willibrord made in his calendar in 728 is his last recorded act, he lived on for a further eleven years. He seems already to have made his will in 726, though the extant charter in favour of Echternach may cover only half of his property, the other half going to his bishopric of Utrecht. His whereabouts in these years of retirement are unknown, but it seems likely that, if it had not been before, Echternach then became for him the place of repose that he may have wished it to be. He died there on 7 November 739, aged eighty-one, and was buried in the church that he had built. As well as miracles that occurred within his lifetime, chiefly of the provision of water or wine, Alcuin reports that cures were soon effected at his grave. 
The popularity of Willibrord's cult is evident from the rapid dissemination of Alcuin's biography. Alcuin also wrote a verse life, which adds no historical information to the prose version. Much the same can be said of the prose and verse lives composed between 1102 and 1106 by Thiofrid, abbot of Echternach, and of a third, equally derivative, life, written at Echternach later in the twelfth century. Willibrord's remains had been translated to a new church in 1031; the feast of his translation, on 10 November, probably commemorates the date of his original burial. In the modern era, the celebration of his feast day at Echternach includes a sacred dance, in which the bishops and clergy participate, which dates back at least as far as the sixteenth century. 
Willibrord is the patron saint of the Netherlands and of Luxembourg. He owes his status in the latter to his position as founder and principal saint of Echternach, which continued to benefit from the patronage of the Carolingian house after his death, and became one of the first Carolingian royal monasteries in 751. His influence as a pathfinder for other Anglo-Saxon clerics who settled in continental monasteries in the following hundred years or so, making a crucial contribution to the culture and organization of the church, is unquestionable. His impact on Frisia, the modern Netherlands, is more nebulous. The ecclesiastical structure that he put in place proved ephemeral, but the emergence of Frisian clerics such as Liudger, later bishop of Munster, suggests that he had some success in spreading Christian belief, even though paganism long remained a vital force, especially in the east of Frisia. His mission's apparent reliance on the victories of Pippin II and, especially, of Charles Martel, reveals Willibrord's insinuation of himself and his monastic and evangelizing ideals into the Frankish elite. He won favour, it appears, from every powerful man he encountered. Partly, perhaps, this was because he was an aristocrat himself; his personal ownership of land, attested by some of the Echternach charters, suggests that Alcuin's attempt to paint him as an 'aristocratic saint' was not simply a hagiographical distortion. Willibrord worked with the grain of continental aristocratic society; Boniface, in many ways his successor, often attempted to cut across it. Yet the younger man's success, as both missionary and ecclesiastical reformer, could not have occurred without the elder's subtle but dogged labour. 


@@@@@


doc= 29577


Willis, Browne (1682-1760), antiquary, was born on 14 September 1682 at Blandford St Mary, Dorset, the eldest son of Thomas Willis (1658-1699) of Bletchley, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Alice (1663-1700), daughter of Robert Browne of Blandford and his wife, Alice. 
Willis began his education at the school of the Revd Abraham Freestone at Beachampton, Buckinghamshire, from where he went to Westminster School, which he left in 1700 on the death of his mother. In March 1700 he entered Christ Church, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner and later in the same year was admitted as a student to the Inner Temple, leaving Oxford without taking a degree in 1704. Early influences were Edward Wells, the mathematician and divine and his tutor at Oxford, and William Wotton, the theological scholar, under whom he studied for three years after leaving the university. 
Through his father Willis inherited Whaddon Hall, where he was to live until his death, together with the adjoining manor and advowson of Bletchley. He also owned the manor of Burlton in Burghill, Herefordshire, and his estate was augmented by the dowry of $7000 obtained through his marriage in 1707 to Katharine (1690-1724), only child and heir of Daniel Eliot (died 1702) of Port Eliot, Cornwall, and his wife, Catherine. From 1705 to 1708 Willis served as tory MP for Buckingham, for which he was returned by the casting vote of a man brought from prison for the purpose, but by that time he had already decided to devote his life to antiquarian interests, probably first awakened by his boyhood visits to Westminster Abbey. 
Willis's energies and range as an antiquarian writer were prodigious. Along with his contemporary John Le Neve, of whose work he was often critical, Willis was one of the first antiquaries to base his work on original documents; he was, however, frequently slapdash and inaccurate in his attention to detail. He travelled extensively, visiting every cathedral in England and Wales save Carlisle. This interest in cathedrals and great churches is reflected in his published works, the principal of which are his accounts of the Welsh cathedrals of St David's, Llandaff, St Asaph, and Bangor, printed between 1717 and 1721 (the first two at least partly the work of William Wotton), the two-volume 'History of the Mitred Parliamentary Abbies and Conventual Cathedral Churches' (1718-19) and 'A survey of the cathedrals of York, Durham, Carlisle, Chester, Man, Lichfield, Hereford, Worcester, Gloucester, and Bristol' (also in two volumes) of 1727, supplemented by a further volume covering Lincoln, Ely, Oxford, and Peterborough in 1730. The unsold copies of this work were purchased by the London bookseller Thomas Osborne in 1742 and mischievously reissued as a new edition containing histories of all the cathedrals, an action roundly condemned by Willis. 
Willis's approach to cathedrals was innovative. Others such as John Weever and Sir William Dugdale had written accounts of the country's great churches, particularly their funerary monuments (also a prominent feature of Willis's work), but his devotion to medieval architecture at a time when most scholars were interested only in Greek or Roman architecture was unusual. Willis frequently commented on the condition of the cathedrals he visited: thus of Peterborough he writes: 'I cannot but say that it is ill kept in Repair, and lies very slovenly in the inside, and several windows are stopped up with Bricks, and the glazing in others sadly broken; and the Boards of the Roof of the middle Isle or nave, which with the Cross-Isle is not archt with stone but wainscotted with painted boards [in fact, these ceilings are medieval]... several of them damaged and broken... that scarce any Cathedral in England is any more neglected. (Willis, 'A Survey of the Cathedrals', 3.504)' With Worcester he is much happier, relating that: 'The whole Fabrick is... in excellent Repair, several Thousands of Pounds having been expended of late Years by the Chapter, who are yet generously going on in new casing the outward Walls, which being built of a soft reddish Stone [he notes perceptively] have mouldred. (ibid., 2.628)' The value of Willis's written accounts is increased by the plans and copperplate-engravings of the cathedrals, virtually all of them by the topographical and architectural artist John Harris, among them some of the earlier accurate views of these buildings. 
In these comments on the condition of the cathedrals he visited Browne Willis demonstrates an interest which is not only antiquarian but appears also to express a concern for the proper care and future preservation of these great monuments. To promote this he was active in the revival of the Society of Antiquaries, of which he was a founder member in July 1717, regularly attending meetings and involving himself in its affairs; he was also a member of the Spalding Society. He was awarded the degree of master of arts at Oxford in August 1720 and a doctorate of civil law by the same university in April 1749. 
Willis's legal background is reflected in his 'Notitia parliamentaria, or, An history of the counties, cities, and boroughs in England and Wales' (3 vols., 1715, 1716, and 1750, the first volume reprinted with additions in 1730), while his almost compulsive desire to record the names and dates of ecclesiastical office-holders and the valuation of benefices is revealed by his two editions of John Ecton's 'Thesaurus rerum ecclesiasticarum' (1754, 1763). Willis communicated frequently with other major antiquaries of his day, including William Cole, Andrew Ducarel, Samuel Gale, Thomas Hearne, John Hutchins, Francis Peck, Thomas Tanner, William Thomas, and Francis Wise, making important contributions to several of their published works. Indeed, Willis himself claimed to have persuaded Hutchins to undertake his history of Dorset in 1736 and to have drawn up queries for him to use in its preparation. Between 1713 and 1720 he also corresponded regularly with Dr Arthur Charlett, master of University College, Oxford (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ballard 18). 
Willis's most intensive antiquarian research was on his family's native Buckinghamshire. He first issued queries for information on the county in 1712, and amassed considerable material, much of it drawn from original sources, on its history, principal buildings, and the genealogy and coats of arms of its leading families. Some of this eventually appeared in 'The History and Antiquities of the Town, Hundred, and Deanery of Buckingham' (1755), which like much of his published work was poorly received and displayed his lack of skill at narrative writing, but more was gathered together by William Cole in ten manuscript folio volumes for 'The history of the hundreds of Newport and Cotslow' (BL, Add. MSS 5839, 5840). Yet more, however, remained in note form and, along with similar material on other counties, either formed the collection of manuscripts Willis donated to the Bodleian Library on his death (Bodl. Oxf., MS Willis 1-110) or remained with Cole, after whose death they were deposited in the British Museum. These manuscripts provide a wealth of information on ecclesiastical and other buildings now demolished or altered, and again display Willis's keen attention to architectural detail and eagerness to record buildings from personal observation. Of the former Benedictine nunnery of St Margaret's, Nettleden, in Buckinghamshire, for instance, of which he was originally informed nothing remained above ground, he writes: 'I visited this place; the House seems almost entirely standing, tho it was always small; the parlour and Hall not bad buildings being of Tatenhall (Totternhoe) stone well wrought, behind them stood the church I saw the square of the Tower it was 10 foot high in memory of man. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Willis 34, fol. 40b)' Willis's writings on non-antiquarian subjects, such as the anonymous 'The Whole Duty of Man, Abridged for the Benefit of the Poorer Sort' (1717) and 'To the Patrons of Ecclesiastical Livings' (1752), reflect his other gentlemanly interests, and he also published works on coins and tradesmen's tokens, of which he was an avid collector and cataloguer, donating large numbers to Oxford University, both between 1739 and 1750 and on his death. 
Willis was a notable patron of architecture. Inheriting his father's portion of Whaddon Hall on coming of age in 1703, he immediately embarked on its rebuilding. Further work followed in 1710 when he bought out the co-owner, James Selby, much of the material for this phase of construction apparently coming from the recently built dissenting meeting-house at nearby Fenny Stratford, which Willis had bought and then demolished in order to prevent dissenters from congregating there. He also spent $5000 on the construction of Water Hall in 1711, a large house next to Bletchley church, in which he never lived. As with his antiquarian research, however, Willis's chief architectural interest was ecclesiastical and he enthusiastically raised funds for work to several churches in the area close to his home. His first involvement was in rebuilding the damaged chancel at Little Brickhill in 1703, while in 1704-9 he restored St Mary's, Bletchley, of which he was patron. The work at Bletchley was carried out as a memorial to his parents but characteristically, rather than lavishing money on 'Marble statues or fine Embellishments, whilst the other part of God's house in which they lay wanted both a Requisite Decency and convenience for His Worship' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Willis 2, fol. 99), he repaired the church instead, and his mother and father are directly commemorated only by two simple slabs in the chancel floor. 
It was, however, the complete rebuilding of St Martin's Church, Fenny Stratford, between 1724 and 1730 in memory of his grandfather, the physician Thomas Willis, which gave Willis his 'chiefest and most real worldly comfort and happiness' (will, fol. 223'v'). Here his love of architecture combined with his patronage of the church in a forthright rejection of nonconformity which, as a high Anglican, he despised. Not surprisingly, the architect-builder Edward Wing (replaced by John Simmonds in 1728) was instructed to use the Gothic style, an early example of its type, albeit of a kind that owed more to the medieval past than the playful 'gothick' which was beginning to appear elsewhere at this time. 
At Stony Stratford after a disastrous fire in 1742, where he raised funds for the relief of the townspeople, Willis ensured that $30 was spent on repairing the tower of St Mary Magdalene's Church; this prevented its demolition along with the remains of the rest of the building. Even in the impoverished last decade of his life he contributed $200 in 1752 for repairs to Buckingham church, and in 1756-7 he restored the long-disused church at Bow Brickhill. 
Willis was always keen to protect the rights of the ancient county town, Buckingham, against those of the rapidly expanding Aylesbury, and was disappointed by the townspeople's failure to rebuild on a grander scale after a major fire in 1725. Unsuccessful in his efforts to replace the church spire (the old one had collapsed in 1699), he did, however, succeed in re-establishing the summer assizes in the town, and helped to get the mock-castellated gaol erected in 1748. He also revived the market at Fenny Stratford in 1702. 
Willis was an eccentric, both in appearance and behaviour. This frequently attracted comment, sometimes humorously satirical, occasionally hostile, not only from his fellow antiquaries but from those who met him socially. Many such were as bemused by his clothing as by his antiquarian predilections: in a letter to a friend in 1739 Catherine Talbot, the social correspondent and author, described him as 'the dirtiest creature in the world... his great coat has been transmitted down, I believe, from generation to generation ever since Noah' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.204), and in 1781 Cole recalled that by the 1750s when he first met him his patron had 'more the appearance of a mumping beggar than a gentleman... dressed in an old slouched hat, more brown than black, a weather-beaten large wig, three or four old-fashioned coats, all tied round by a leather belt, and over all an old blue cloak, lined with black fustian, which he told me he had new made when he was elected member for the town of Buckingham about 1707. (ibid., 208)' Despite his strange appearance, unworldliness, bouts of depression, and lapses into self-pity (he frequently chided his antiquarian colleagues for not visiting him more often at Whaddon), Willis was also noted for his tremendous energy, general good humour, modesty, and kindness. Catherine Talbot, putting aside her dismay at his peculiar clothing, readily acknowledged that he had 'one of the honestest hearts in the world' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.204), while even the formality of the eulogium read by Ducarel to the Society of Antiquaries shortly after Willis's death (itself a most unusual step for the fellows to take) fails to conceal the affection in which he was generally held: 'blessed with a most excellent memory... in his friendships none more sincere and hearty; always communicative, and ever ready to assist every studious and inquisitive person' (BL, Add. MS 5830, fol. 202). 
Perhaps inevitably, Willis's relations with his peers were not always so cordial during his lifetime. Contact with Cole, whom he appointed rector of Bletchley in 1753, was frequently strained and his friendship with Hearne was tested not only by the latter's criticism of his work -- Hearne called 'Mitred Parliamentary Abbies' 'a most strange rhapsody and nothing tolerable in it, only what he hath taken from Leland, which, however, he hath strangely mangled and spoiled' ('Remarks', 7.9), a form of hostility which Willis was more than capable of returning -- but by personal jealousy. This may have been brought about by Hearne's visit to Whaddon in May 1716, an event which he referred to as one of the 'happy occurrences of my life' (ibid., 5.217), his pleasure apparently stemming largely from a letter -- 'amongst the choicest Writings that I have' (ibid.) -- which he received from Willis's wife while there (Willis himself was away) and declined to destroy despite the separate entreaties of both Willis and Katharine. 
Willis's own relationship with his wife is difficult to determine; she is scarcely referred to in his letters and there is no eulogy on her memorial at Bletchley, but there is none on that to his parents, and as his own monument at Fenny Stratford is equally plain it would be unwise to read anything into this. It is unlikely, however, that his continual ridicule of the two theological pamphlets she wrote -- 'A letter from a gentlewoman in the country to the lord bishop of Bangor' (1717?), written in response to Benjamin Hoadly's controversial sermon 'The nature of the kingdom, or Church of Christ' (1717), and 'The established Church of England, the true Catholic church' (1718) -- improved their relationship. Of his five sons and five daughters only the twin daughters, Gertrude and Katherine, survived him; all, it seems, despite the generosity of the sums bestowed on his married children, disapproved of his squandering the family's wealth on antiquarian research and church building projects. Relations with his sons were particularly poor, and having 'testified their dislike and aversion to the study which hath been my chief delight and amusement' (will, fol. 225'v'), he left all his printed books and pictures to his elder grandson, Thomas. After several months' illness Willis died on 5 February 1760 at Whaddon Hall, according to the curate and his friend John Gibberd 'with great ease and without the usual agonies of death' (BL, Add. MS 15935, fols. 177-82), and was buried beneath the altar of St Martin's, Fenny Stratford, six days later. 
Willis was one of the major antiquarian scholars of his day but like others of his generation it was not only interest in the medieval past that spurred him on. As high in his churchmanship as in his toryism, he was interested above all in using his studies to restore the glories of the Church of England, of which he was a devoted member and keen proponent of clerical celibacy. He was driven also by a strong sense of local patriotism, his efforts in church building and resurrecting the privileges of Buckingham always being underpinned by his antiquarian research and love of his neighbourhood. 


@@@@@


doc= 29578


Willis, Francis (1718-1807), physician, born on 17 August 1718, was the third son of John Willis, a vicar of Lincoln Cathedral, and his wife, Genevra, daughter of James Darling of Oxford. On 30 May 1734 he matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford. He migrated to St Alban Hall and graduated BA on 21 March 1739, and on 10 February 1741 he proceeded MA from Brasenose College, of which he became a fellow and in due course vice-principal. Agreeing to his father's wishes, he took holy orders, but he had developed a strong leaning towards medicine, studying it even while an undergraduate and attending the lectures of Nathan Alcock, who became a lifelong friend. 
In 1749 Willis married Mary (died 1797), youngest daughter of the Revd John Curtois of Bramston, Lincolnshire, and they took up residence at Dunston in that county. Apparently Willis practised medicine without a licence before Oxford University conferred on him the degrees of BM and DM in 1759. He played an active part in the founding of the Lincoln General Hospital, and was appointed physician there in 1769. For the following six years he regularly attended it twice a week; his successful treatment of several cases of mental derangement resulted in patients being brought to him from great distances. To accommodate them he moved to a larger house at Greatford, near Stamford, and set up a private lunatic asylum, which attracted a superior clientele. Visiting it, Frederick Reynolds noted that 'the unprepared traveller... was astonished to find almost all the surrounding ploughmen, gardeners, threshers, thatchers, and other labourers, attired in black coats, white waistcoats, black silk breeches and stockings, and the head of each 'bien poudree, frisee et arrangee'. These were the doctor's patients. (Reynolds, 154)' George III experienced his first attack of madness in autumn 1788, and as his condition worsened and the physicians-in-ordinary, such as Sir George Baker, proved unable to cope or cure, Willis (then seventy) was called in on 5 December 1788, on the recommendation of Lady Harcourt, whose mother he had treated. Partly because he insisted upon exercising exclusive medical control, Willis encountered bitter opposition from the regular physicians. They regarded him as little better than a quack -- he was, after all, a clergyman and not a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and running a lunatic asylum was still a rather disreputable activity. Others at court were more approving: Fanny Burney described him as 'a man of ten thousand; open, honest, dauntless, light-hearted, innocent, and high-minded' (Barrett, 4.215); while Hannah More called him 'the very image of simplicity, quite a good, plain, old-fashioned country parson' (Roberts, 2.144). 
From the first Willis expressed his confidence that the king would recover if he, the doctor, were allowed to follow his favourite methods of moral management, involving complete physical and psychological domination over his patient. Madness, he believed, was essentially a product of over-excitation; hence the chief priorities were calmness and control. A man of vast faith in his own powers, Willis, with the aid of his eldest son, John, and attendants brought from Greatford, proved fearless in asserting his authority over the king, when necessary using a straitjacket, a gag, and a restraining chair upon his royal patient, along with a quasi-mesmerizing technique of fixing his patient with his eye. The equerry Robert Fulke Greville recorded how he was impressed 'with the proper manner and the imposing stile ['sic'] of the authoritative language which Dr Willis held' ('Diaries', 120). Yet alongside intimidation Willis also recognized the importance of winning the king's trust and co-operation; in due course, he permitted his patient to read Shakespeare and to shave himself and pare his nails with a penknife. The king resented Willis's bullying ways but proved responsive to his optimism. 
By February 1789 the king had largely recovered (it has been argued by Ida Macalpine and Richard Hunter that this was a spontaneous recovery from a bout of porphyria, and had little to do with Willis's therapies; the matter is disputed) and Willis was quick to claim the credit. A grateful Prime Minister Pitt, spared the prospect of a regency, ensured that parliament voted the mad-doctor a pension of $1000 a year for twenty-one years. Willis himself had medallions struck with the inscription: 'Britons Rejoice, Your King's Restored'. 
Achieving fame, Willis was soon called in to treat the queen of Portugal, apparently receiving $20,000 for his ministrations. He then returned to his private practice, building a second madhouse at Shillingthorpe, near Greatford, to accommodate the expanding numbers of his patients. His first wife died on 17 April 1797 and he then married Mrs Storer. Not long afterwards, still practising medicine, Willis died, in his ninetieth year, on 5 December 1807, at Greatford; he was buried there on 13 December, where a monument to his memory was erected by his surviving sons. His second wife also survived him. 
Willis wrote little. 'The case of a shepherd near Lincoln', which was 'published at the request of the Rev. Mr. Willis', appeared in Robert James's 'Dissertation on Fevers and Inflammatory Distempers' (8th edn, 1778, 28-9); Willis also produced 'An account of an extraordinary case of a lady, who swallowed euphorbium', in 'Philosophical Transactions' (51, 1760, 662-9). He belonged to the generation of mad-doctors whose personal influence was greater than their literary fame. Willis was portrayed in Alan Bennett's play 'The Madness of George III' (1991), which was adapted for the cinema as 'The Madness of King George' (1994). 
Willis and his first wife had five sons; of these John (1751-1835) attended George III in 1788, with Willis, and again in 1811 alone; Thomas (1754-1827) was prebendary of Rochester, rector of St George's, Bloomsbury, and of Wateringbury, Kent; Richard (1755-1829) became an admiral in the Royal Navy; and Robert Darling (1760-1821) attended the king during his second attack of madness, and was father of Robert Willis (1800-1875), who became professor of applied mechanics at Cambridge University. 


@@@@@


doc= 29579


Willis, Sir George Harry Smith (1823-1900), army officer, of Stretham Manor, Cambridgeshire, only son of Lieutenant George Brander Willis, Royal Artillery, of Sopley Park, Hampshire, who had served in the Walcheren and Peninsular campaigns, was born at Sopley Park on 11 November 1823. Educated privately he obtained a commission on 23 April 1841 as ensign in the 77th (East Middlesex) regiment, then stationed at Malta. His further commissions were: lieutenant, 30 August 1844; captain, 27 December 1850; brevet major, 12 December 1854; brevet lieutenant-colonel, 6 June 1856; major unattached, 19 December 1856; brevet colonel, 26 June 1862; major-general, 29 May 1875 (antedated to 28 June 1868); lieutenant-general, 8 May 1880; and general, 11 May 1887. 
Willis served with his regiment in the Mediterranean, the West Indies, and North America, and accompanied it to the Crimea in 1854. He was present at the battles of the Alma (20 September), Bulganek and McKenzie's Farm, and Inkerman (5 November), where his regiment distinguished itself, Willis leading the grenadier company in the charge. On 13 April 1855 he was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general on Lord Raglan's staff, and was present at the capture of the Quarries, the mismanaged attack of the Redan on 18 June, the battle of the Chernaya in August, and the fall of Sevastopol on 8 September. On 11 May 1856 he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general to the 4th division until the return of the troops to England. He was mentioned in dispatches, made a member of the Legion d'honneur (fifth class), and received the Mejidiye (fifth class) and brevets of major and lieutenant-colonel. 
After the Crimean War Willis went to Algeria with the French army and returned home in 1857, when he formed the 2nd battalion of the 6th (Warwickshire) regiment, with which he served until his appointment as assistant quartermaster-general at Gibraltar on 25 May 1858. He transferred to Malta as assistant adjutant-general on 20 February 1859. From 22 February 1866 he served for five years as assistant quartermaster-general on the staff of the southern district, was made a CB, military division, on 20 May 1871, and served on the headquarters staff at the War Office as assistant quartermaster-general from 25 August 1873 until his promotion to major-general. 
Willis commanded the northern military district for three years from 1 April 1878. Despite his relative lack of experience of command on active service, in 1882 he was selected to command the 1st division in the Egyptian expedition under Sir Garnet Wolseley. He was in command at the actions of al-Magfar and Tell al-Mahuta, at the capture of Mahsama, and at the second battle of Qassasin on 9 September, and was wounded in the assault of the lines of Tell al-Kebir (13 September). He was mentioned in dispatches, received the thanks of both houses of parliament, was awarded the Osmanieh (second class), and was made a KCB. 
Willis commanded the southern military district with headquarters at Portsmouth from 1 May 1884 until retirement on 11 November 1890. In July of the same year he was appointed colonel of the Devonshire regiment, and in October honorary colonel of the 2nd Hampshire volunteer artillery. He unsuccessfully contested Portsmouth as a Conservative parliamentary candidate in 1892. Decorated with a GCB (25 May 1895), in 1897 he was transferred to the colonelcy of his former corps, the Middlesex regiment. He was a grand officer of the Legion d'honneur and a knight of justice of the order of St John of Jerusalem, and was in receipt of a distinguished service pension. 
Willis married, first, in 1856, Eliza (died 1867), daughter of George Gould Morgan MP, of Brickendonbury, Hertfordshire, and, second, in 1874, Ada Mary, daughter of Sir John Neeld, first baronet, who survived him. He died after a long illness at his residence, Seabank, Bournemouth, on 29 November 1900, and was buried at Sopley, near Christchurch, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 29678


Mary Ann Wilson (1802-1867), who was also his pupil, became his second wife on 9 June 1827. They had one daughter, who married the cellist Alfredo Piatti. Mary Ann Wilson had made her debut as Mandane in Arne's 'Artaxerxes' at Drury Lane in January 1821, and had created a great sensation. Her career was lucrative but short, as her exertions led to a breakdown in her health and the ruin of her voice. Welsh produced two farces at the Lyceum Theatre, an opera, 'Kamskatka', at Covent Garden, and music for several plays. He also wrote several songs, glees, partsongs, and duets. His song 'Harry Bluff' was popular, and his glee 'Hark! 'tis the whistling wind' won a prize in 1813. He published a 'Vocal Instructor' in 1825. He died in Brighton on 31 January 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 29730


Tycho Wing (bap. 1696, d. 1750) was baptized on 9 May 1696; he too practised as a surveyor, and boarded pupils to whom he taught mathematics, surveying, and navigation. He was a friend of the Revd Dr Stukeley, the antiquary, and also served as coroner for Rutland in the years 1727-42. He married Eleanor Peach of Stoke Dry and they had at least four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 30166


Alfred Benjamin Wyon (1837-1884), both of whom trained under their father and at the Royal Academy Schools, took over the firm, reconstituting it as J. S. and A. B. Wyon. Determining who was responsible for their medals can be problematical, for, although some are signed individually, others, including some made after Joseph's death, bear the firm's signature; many were exhibited jointly at the Royal Academy. Joseph Shepherd died on 12 August 1873 at Winchester, Hampshire, leaving a widow, Sarah. Alfred Benjamin died on 4 June 1884 at his home, 23 Belsize Road, Hampstead, leaving a widow, Kate. Their younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 30167


Benjamin Wyon (1802-1858) was also a prolific die-engraver, who received training from his father and his elder brother and at the Royal Academy. Following his father's death in 1830, he was appointed to the post of chief engraver of seals, and took over the family firm. His seals include the great seal of William IV (1831). His medal commemorating the opening of the new London Bridge (1831) was the first of a series issued throughout the remainder of the century by the corporation of the City of London, to which the Wyons made a significant contribution. Later medals include a commemoration of the opening of London's new coal exchange (1849), and a prize medal for the Royal Scottish Academy, for which Sir Joseph Noel Paton provided the design (about 1854). He died on 21 November 1858 at his home, 14 Buckland Crescent, St John's Wood, London. 
A younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 30168


George Wyon (d. 1797), whom he brought with him to Britain, also became a metalworker, and was apprenticed to George II's goldsmith Hemmings. George's first wife, Sarah, gave birth to a child, Ann, who was baptized in London on 13 March 1763. On 2 February 1766 George married his second wife, Ann Christy; their children Thomas and Peter were born the following year, with George and Mary following in 1771 and 1773 respectively; another son, James, was born later. In 1775 the family moved to Birmingham, where George produced designs and models for Matthew Boulton's Soho Manufactory and for the Birmingham Silver Plate Company, and where he also established the family die-engraving business, which was to remain in existence until the 1930s. All four sons learned to engrave dies, the resurgence of private tokens in the late eighteenth century accounting for a good proportion of their work. When their father died, Thomas and Peter, who had married two sisters, Ann and Elizabeth Avery, in 1790 and 1794 respectively, took over the business, which in 1800 they divided into two, with Thomas moving down to London, to open an operation in the capital. 
The earliest medals of 


@@@@@


doc= 30169


Joseph Shepherd Wyon (1836-1873) and 


@@@@@


doc= 30171


Thomas Wyon the younger (1792-1817), trained under his father and the gem-engraver Nathaniel Marchant, and at the Royal Academy Schools. Among his earliest medals were those commemorating the duke of Wellington's victories in Portugal (1810) and the appointment of the prince of Wales as regent (1811). He was not yet twenty when on 20 November 1811 he was appointed probationer engraver at the Royal Mint, and on 13 October 1815 he became chief engraver. He executed dies for coins for various colonies, as well as for George III's German territories and the duke of Wellington's army in France. He was involved in the production of dies for the recoinage of 1816, but his promising career was cut short by his premature death from consumption in 1817. 
His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 30172


Thomas Wyon the elder (1767-1830) belong to 1789. Like many other members of the family, he frequently followed designs produced by other artists: for his medal of Stonehenge (1796) he engraved a design by William Blake, and his portrait of Joseph Hanson (1810), the champion of the weavers' cause, was based on a wax model by Peter Rouw. His medals range from a large piece commemorating the centenary of the 'Act of Union' (1807) to five tiny medallets celebrating the final defeat of Napoleon (1815). He continued also to produce tokens, such as that for John Cooper's cotton mill in Staverton, Wiltshire (1811). In 1816 he was appointed chief engraver of his majesty's seals. 
Thomas Wyon's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 30203


Yeamans, Robert (d. 1643), royalist plotter, came of a numerous Bristol family and was probably closely related to William Yeamans (1578-1632?), a graduate of Balliol College, Oxford, incumbent of St Philip's, Bristol, where he was noted as a puritan and, from 1615 until his death, prebendary of Bristol Cathedral. Robert was a Merchant Venturer and councillor of Bristol, and in 1641-2 served as sheriff. 
Shortly before Bristol was garrisoned for parliament, Yeamans had received a commission from the king to raise troops there. In December 1642 the city was occupied by Colonel Essex, the command falling to Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes in February 1643. In March Yeamans acted belatedly in execution of his commission. He and his fellow Merchant Venturer George Butcher, or Bowcher, conceived a plan for betraying the city into the hands of Prince Rupert. The prince was to bring 4000 horse and 2000 foot to Durdham Down, and the royalists in Bristol, who were estimated at 2000 were to seize the Frome gate and admit Rupert's forces. The plot was to take effect on the night of 7 March 1643; but Fiennes heard of it, and on that day Yeamans and his principal confederates were arrested in his house in Wine Street. On 8 May Yeamans, Butcher, and two others were condemned to death by a court martial as traitors. King Charles made great efforts to save them and Lord Forth threatened to execute a similar number of parliamentary prisoners in his hands. The threat proved useless, and both Yeamans and Butcher were executed. Yeamans was hanged, drawn, and quartered opposite his house on 30 May, and his remains were buried on the same day in Christ Church, Bristol. When Fiennes was himself on trial before a court martial on charges of treason, cowardice, and the improper surrender of Bristol in July 1643, his execution of Yeamans was used against him by his enemies at Westminster such as William Prynne. 
Administration of Yeamans's estate was granted on 7 July to his widow, Anne, said in the royalist accounts to have been a kinswoman also named Yeamans. He allegedly left eight very young children, 'the eldest not able to dresse itself... without helpe' ('Two State Martyrs', 31), and a ninth was born posthumously. The eldest son is said to have been Sir John Yeamans and the second Sir Robert Yeamans, who, like his brother, was created a baronet on 12 January 1665 and died in South Carolina in 1674. But both affiliations are fictitious; Sir John was born in 1611, and Sir Robert was baptized on 19 April 1617, and both were apparently sons of John Yeamans, brewer, of Redcliffe, Bristol, whose will is dated 1645. Many other members of the family are mentioned as taking a prominent part in local affairs in Bristol and Barbados. The only child of the royalist whose relationship to him is established is his daughter Anne, who married Thomas Curtis, the Quaker of Reading, and interceded for George Fox's release in 1660. Other members of the Yeamans family were Quakers, and one of them married Isabel, daughter of Margaret Fell and stepdaughter of Fox. 


@@@@@


doc= 30204


Yeardley, Sir George (bap. 1588, d. 1627), colonial governor, was baptized in St Saviour's, Southwark, on 23 July 1588, the second son of Ralph Yeardley (1549-1603), merchant taylor, and his second wife, Rhoda Marston ('fl'. 1575-1588). About 1605 he went to the Netherlands to serve in the English army under Sir Thomas Gates. On 15 May 1609 he embarked at Woolwich for Virginia, again serving with Gates, who commanded the fleet and bore instructions to act as Virginia's lieutenant-general. Gates was shipwrecked in the Bermudas in the 'Sea Adventure' in an incident that probably inspired Shakespeare's 'Tempest'. The fleet's stragglers, including Yeardley and Gates, finally reached Jamestown in May 1610. 
Yeardley later contrasted the actions of Virginia's early governors with the repressive, quasi-military order imposed in the colony by Marshal Sir Thomas Dale in 1611-16. However, in April 1616, just as Dale was leaving the colony, Yeardley was himself appointed deputy governor of Virginia pending the arrival of Dale's successor. He relaxed constraints on trading relations with the local Native Americans imposed by Dale, whereupon the colony briefly prospered. Samuel Argall's arrival as governor on 15 May 1617 allowed Yeardley to return that summer to England, where he married, on 18 October 1618, Temperance (1581-1630), daughter of Anthony Flowerdieu of Scatton, Norfolk, and Martha Stanley. Exactly a month later he was appointed to serve three years as governor of Virginia, and was knighted by James I during an audience at Newmarket on 24 November. 
Yeardley embarked for Virginia in January 1619 with instructions to abolish martial law, address native relations, and regularize land tenure changes before summoning the first representative assembly in an English colony. He was also charged with reducing the production of tobacco, starting silk, wine, and iron production, and with preparing for large scale immigration organized under patents issued by the Virginia Company's London office. His first duty, however, was to address the alleged abuses of Argall's governorship, which ended on 10 April 1619. He then turned to Sir Thomas Smith's ambition of providing education for the natives within a university or college at Henrico; the Revd Thomas Lorkin was appointed to teach there but could not find adequate buildings within the ruinous settlement. On 30 July 1619 Yeardley summoned Virginia's first assembly but failed to win its loyalty to his reform programme, as his secretary, and the assembly's first speaker, John Pory, recorded. Meanwhile, as the London company lurched towards bankruptcy, Sir Edwin Sandys, its treasurer and a leading representative of the opposing faction within the assembly, gained such effective control of policy and partisans as to make Yeardley's programme nearly impossible to implement. John Rolfe reported that Sandys's initiatives forced Yeardley into conflicts of principle with the tobacco growers, especially after the landing of twenty negro slaves from an armed Dutch ship in 1620. Exasperated by the arrival of 1000 unskilled settlers in 1621 Yeardley resigned the governorship, but retained his responsibilities until Sir Francis Wyatt arrived on 8 November 1621 with a charter granted by James I on 24 July regularizing the assumed powers of Virginia's assembly. 
This allowed Yeardley to attend to salt and tobacco production on the tidewater estates granted to him in 1618. His estate comprised Weymock, and parcels of land called Kouwan (now known as Kickotan) along the Mapsock Creek near Charles City, and others near 'James Cittie' (Jamestown). He also acquired a land grant of 1000 acres at Stanley by the Warwick River. This site, called Hungars, was within the 80,000 acres of Northampton hundred being settled by Sandys' unskilled, hostile partisans. Here Yeardley built new corn and iron mills demonstrating the benefits of diversifying away from tobacco. 
Yeardley continued to serve on the governor's council rendering valuable advice, particularly after the massacre of colonists by Native Americans in 1622. In 1625, after the revocation of the Virginia Company's charter in 1624, thereby making Virginia a royal colony, he was sent by Virginia's convention to report to the privy council in England. On 24 October the privy council accorded him immunity from any action resulting from his reports and analyses of the colony's problems of civil order and its narrow economic base, before reappointing him Virginia's royal governor on 14 March 1626. He departed in the 'Ann', with 'James' as consort, on 19 April 1626, bearing instructions to list each plantation, boat, and colonist, and to make the colony diversify into fruit and corn production or regulated cattle husbandry. During 1627 the privy council sought that he regulate local shipping and open the colony's ports to ships of the Dutch West Indies Company as an extension of the Anglo-Dutch war with France and Spain. Yeardley's half-hearted response reflected the failing health mentioned in his will of 12 October 1627 and its codicil of 29 October. He died on 10 November at James City and was buried in the parish church on 13 November 1627. His will provided that Temperance, as sole executor, should realize all his estate; one third of the proceeds of sale was due to his wife and one third for his eldest son, Argall ('b'. 1619), the rest being for his younger children, Francis ('b'. 1622) and Elizabeth ('b'. 1622). However, the will's instructions were never executed because Yeardley's brother Ralph refused to account for the estate's proceeds with the executor. Temperance went on to marry Francis West, late governor of Virginia, and died in England at Stanfield, Norfolk, in 1630. Argall Yeardley remained at Hungars until 1655; Elizabeth and Francis migrated south after their marriages in 1645 and 1647 as described in Colonel Francis Yeardley's 'Narrative of Excursions into Carolina, 1653-54'. 


