@@@@@


doc= 30205


Yeardley, John (1786-1858), missionary, was the son of Joel and Frances Yeardley, small dairy farmers at Orgreave, near Rotherham, Yorkshire, where he was born on 3 January 1786. He was admitted a member of the Society of Friends in his twentieth year, entered a manufactory in Barnsley, Yorkshire, and in 1809 married Elizabeth, 'nee' Dunn, a convinced Quaker much his senior. He began preaching in 1815, moving from place to place in the northern counties. 
In 1821 Elizabeth Yeardley died, and, led by a persistent 'call', Yeardley decided to settle in Lower Saxony, where a small body of Friends existed. To maintain himself, he arranged to represent some merchants who imported linen yarn, and later on he began bleaching on his own account. His philanthropic work included establishing schools and meetings for the young, and many notable people, including the prince and princess of Prussia, came to hear him preach. In 1824 he accompanied Martha Savory ['see below'], an English Quaker, on a gospel journey up the Rhine from Elberfeld in the north to Wurttemberg, Tubingen, and other German towns, through Switzerland to Congenies in central France, where some Friends were settled. They visited Pastor Fliedner at Kaiserswerth, and all the principal religious and philanthropic institutions on their route. On reaching London they were married at Gracechurch Street meeting on 13 December 1826, soon resuming their missionary work in Pyrmont, Friesland, and Switzerland, and visiting asylums, reformatories, and Moravian schools. 
During a short time spent in England both Yeardley and his wife studied modern Greek in preparation for a visit to the Ionian Islands, for which they started on 21 June 1833. They were warmly received by De Pressense in Paris, and by Professor Ehrmann and Cuvier, the naturalist, at Strasbourg. In Corfu they established a girls' school, as well as a model farm, obtaining from the authorities there a grant of land on which prisoners were permitted to supply the labour. 
After eight years at home, spent in studying languages, in 1842 the Yeardleys returned for the fourth time to France and Germany. In 1850, during a stay in Berlin, they became acquainted with Neander, the historian. Following Martha Yeardley's death in 1851, her husband continued his travels to Norway in 1852, and to southern Russia and Constantinople in 1853. 
In his seventy-second year Yeardley began to study Turkish, and started for the East on 15 June 1858. After some work in Constantinople, and while preparing to visit the interior of Asia Minor, he was smitten with paralysis at Isnik, and was compelled to return to England, where he died on 11 August 1858 at Stamford Hill, London. He was buried nearby at Stoke Newington on the 18th. 
Racy humour, with occasional lapses into his broad native Barnsley dialect, added to his uncompromising directness, did Yeardley good service as a preacher. His achievements in preaching without interpreters in various languages were remarkable, considering that his early education included no Latin. He used tracts largely as a vehicle for spreading the gospel. These, written and sometimes translated by himself, were founded upon incidents and characters met with during his travels. They are catalogued by Smith. 
His second wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 30206


Yearsley, Ann (bap. 1753, d. 1806), poet and writer, was baptized on 15 July 1753 (not 1752 or 1756 as are sometimes given) at St Andrew's Church in Clifton, near Bristol, the daughter of John and Ann Cromartie (died 1784). Contemporary accounts describe Ann's mother as a milkwoman who trained her daughter in the same occupation, leading to Ann's later nicknames of 'the Bristol Milkwoman' and Lactilla. Nothing is known about her father. Ann was taught reading and writing by her mother and her older brother, William, her only sibling. The mother died in March 1784, the brother at some time between 1774 and 1784. 
On 8 June 1774 Ann married John Yearsley ('bap'. 1748, died 1803), described as 'yeoman' in the administration document of his mother's estate in that year; between 1775 and 1790 they had five sons and two daughters. By 1784 John Yearsley had lost yeoman status and was described as 'labourer' in a deed of trust intended to protect his wife's earnings. Contemporary accounts of the family are inconsistent, but the local registers make clear that by the May of that year it comprised the parents and five children. They had fallen into destitution and were rescued from near-starvation by local charitable individuals; one of these, Hannah More, learned of Ann's local reputation as a poet. She organized, by subscription among her literary and wealthy friends, a volume of Yearsley's poetry, 'Poems, on Several Occasions', which was published to considerable acclaim in June 1785, with a 'Prefatory letter', addressed to Elizabeth Montagu, outlining More's version of Yearsley's story. Over one thousand subscribers are listed. Among members of the aristocracy and prominent churchmen are famous names such as Fanny Burney, Henry Dundas, Soame Jenyns, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Anna Seward, Lady (Eglantine) Wallace, Helen Maria Williams, and Horace Walpole. Shortly afterwards, More and Yearsley quarrelled about the profits from the book (about $600), which More, with Montagu, had put in a trust 'lest her Husband shou'd spend it' (letter to Montagu, Montagu MSS, MO 3991). Yearsley thought that there should be no restriction, at least on her use of the interest from the investment. By October 1785 More had reluctantly wound up the trust and Yearsley eventually gained access to the money. Two more editions of the book were published under More's supervision; a fourth was undertaken by a different publisher in 1786 after Yearsley had broken with More. This includes an 'Autobiographical narrative', the author's version of the quarrel, which comprehensively refutes that of More. 
With encouragement and some financial help from Frederick Augustus Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol, and others Yearsley published a second volume of poetry, 'Poems, on Various Subjects', in 1787, which adds the deed of trust to the other prefaces; the subscription list to this work, though shorter, shows some continued support among prominent members of the establishment. Close associates of Hannah More dropped away, and were replaced by the earl of Bristol and members of the Irish peerage, especially the Perceval family. Lady Wallace appears again; a new literary subscriber is 'Mrs. E. Knipe' (Elizabeth). 'Earl Goodwin: an Historical Play' was produced in Bristol and Bath in November 1789 and printed in 1791. In 1795 Yearsley published a four-volume historical novel entitled 'The Royal Captives: a Fragment of Secret History, Copied from an Old Manuscript', and in 1796 'The Rural Lyre: a Volume of Poems'. Subscribers to the latter work include figures of national and international importance, such as Augustus Frederick, son of George III; Henry Dundas, now secretary of war; Georgiana Cavendish, duchess of Devonshire; members of the Esterhazy family; Sir William and Lady Hamilton; Charles Jenkinson, first earl of Liverpool; and, from the literary world, Charlotte Smith. A number of occasional poems and other pieces (for instance, 'A Poem on the Inhumanity of the Slave Trade' and laments for the deaths of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette) appeared between 1788 and 1796. Some of her poems are on topics of local interest, for example, 'Stanzas of woe, addressed from the heart on a bed of illness, to Levi Eames, esq., late mayor of the city of Bristol' (1790) and 'Bristol Elegy' in 'The Rural Lyre'. Her poems were occasionally printed in Bristol newspapers. Twelve manuscript poems appear on the endpapers of a copy of her published poems up to 1788 held by Bristol Public Libraries. From about 1793 she ran a circulating library at the Colonnade, Hotwells. The quarrel had led to a polarization of opinion on the success of this enterprise: supporters of More tended to pronounce it a failure (Thompson, 58-9), while others refer to it as an integral part of Clifton life at the time. 
Engravings of two portraits of Yearsley, both published in 1787, show a strong-featured, serious-looking woman, with dark hair and eyes; in one she is presented in becoming but unpretentious dress, perhaps indicative of her status; in the other she is wearing the characteristic broad-brimmed beaver hat of the Bristol milkwomen. Hannah More described her in a letter of 1784 as 'slender and not ill-made; her face plain, but not disagreeable, her countenance rather pensive than sad, her pronunciation vulgar and provincial' (Hannah More to Mary Hamilton, priv. coll.). In 1837 Joseph Cottle, a Bristol bookseller and literary patron, remembered her as evincing, 'even in her countenance, the unequivocal marks of genius' (Cottle, 48). 
It is probable that Yearsley ceased milk-selling early in her literary career; her writing and her library appear to have furnished her with resources for a relatively comfortable life. A handwritten note on a Bath playbill now in the Harvard Theatre Collection indicates that she received at least $80 from the benefit performances of her play, and Cottle says that she was advanced an unusual $200 for her novel. In 1790 she apprenticed her eldest surviving son, William, to a famous London engraver, Anker Smith, for a premium of 100 guineas. William died in 1799, aged twenty-two; her third surviving son, Charles, also died, probably 'in battle' during the 1790s (Thompson, 61). Her remaining son, John, engaged prosperously in the cloth trade at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, becoming proprietor of the Bridge Mills, its largest steam textile mill (K. H. Rogers, 'Wiltshire and Somerset Woollen Mills', 1976). Thither Yearsley followed him with at least one of her two daughters, probably after the death of her husband in 1803, settling in nearby Melksham. She died there on 6 May 1806; she was buried on 12 May in St Andrew's churchyard at Clifton. Her death was reported in the newspapers of Bristol as that of a prominent person and local worthy. Thompson's description of her as 'outcast, desolate... insane and destitute' at the end of her life (Thompson, 61) is without foundation. 
Contemporary comment is curiously blind to the real content of Yearsley's work. She was regarded as a primitive, rural poet with a special, mysterious gift only bestowed on persons without conventional education. Her poetry is often referred to as 'wild and simple' (J. Evans, 'History of Bristol', 2 vols., 1816, 2.297). Such judgements misrepresent most of her work, which is highly sophisticated. Intense self-analysis often merges with religious and philosophical speculation. Although a number of the poems are concerned with social and political justice, she is a passionate opponent of war and revolution. Cottle is almost alone in his estimate of her as a formidable thinker, referring to her alongside Coleridge, Southey, and Humphrey Davy as one of the 'busy, the aspiring, and the intellectual spirits' who inhabited Bristol during the 1790s (Cottle, xiii). 
Yearsley was also affected by the political reaction of the period which tended to categorize lower-status writers, especially women, as subversive (R. Polewhele, 'The Unsex'd Females', 1798, 20). In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries she was remembered chiefly as the ungrateful recipient of patronage, especially in biographies of Hannah More. Southey, who in 1799 was hoping to include a poem by Yearsley in his 'Annual Anthology', later gave a rather deprecating account of her, only conceding that 'she was no mocking-bird' (R. Southey, 'Attempts in Verse by John Jones, an Old Servant', 1831, 129-30). Since the 1930s her work has been taken more seriously, though her poetry was still described as 'ungainly verse' in 1938 (Tompkins, 58). Latterly her writing has received some serious critical attention; she has also been seen by some as an early feminist and combative champion of the proletariat. Taken as a whole, her 'oeuvre' does not support this view; she seems rather to demonstrate a certain benevolent conservatism which influenced much of the literature of this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 30207


Yearsley, James (1805-1869), ear surgeon, was born at Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, the son of Moses Yearsley ('b'. 1776) and his wife, Jane (died 1848). The family originated from the north country. In 1822 he became apprenticed to Ralph Fletcher of Gloucester, a skilled surgeon and collector of pictures. Yearsley became a student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in 1824, and qualified in 1827 with the diploma of membership of the Royal College of Surgeons, London, and as a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. Later in life he added to these qualifications the licentiateship of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh (1860), and graduated MD at St Andrews University in 1862. After practising for a short time in Cheltenham, he established himself about 1829 as a general practitioner at Ross in Herefordshire. Deciding that this was not to be his future, he studied diseases of the ear in Paris before returning to London in 1837. Here at 15 Savile Row he began to practise as an aural surgeon. In 1838 he founded the Institution for Curing Diseases of the Ear, later the Metropolitan Ear Institution, at 29 Sackville Street, Piccadilly, and in 1846 he became surgeon to the Royal Society of Musicians. The Metropolitan Ear Institution was subsequently renamed the Metropolitan Ear, Nose, and Throat Hospital, the first of its kind in the world. 
Yearsley appreciated the influence of conditions of the nose and throat on the ear. In his book 'Improved Methods of Treating Diseases of the Ear' (1840), he states: 'Almost all diseases of the ear originate in a morbid condition of the mucous membrane of the throat, nose and ear'. Yearsley also observed that he 'suspected an overlapping of the mouths of the Eustachian tubes by the loose mucous membrane', and that 'shortly after excision of a small slip of mucous membrane from underneath the arches of the palate, amendment more or less considerable (in hearing) had taken place'. He was thus close to the discovery of the adenoid, which was made by Hans Wilhelm Meyer (1824-1895) of Copenhagen in 1868. 'Contributions to Aural Surgery' followed in 1841, and in the same year Yearsley published a book on stammering, in which he advocated the use of tonsillectomy, performed with a curved bistoury, as a cure. This claim produced notoriety and was subsequently found to be fallacious. Yearsley later shrewdly confined this operation to cases of deafness due to Eustachian tube obstruction, and endorsed this indication by writing 'A Treatise on Enlarged Tonsils' (1842) and 'On Throat Deafness' (1853). 
In 'The Lancet' of 1 July 1848 Yearsley published an account of his 'artificial tympanum', a small pellet of thin, wet cotton wool placed daily over a dry perforation of the ear drum. He justifiably claimed to be the originator of the artificial tympanum, as Joseph Toynbee did not publish his quite different technique, using a disc of vulcanized indiarubber attached to a fine silver wire, until 1853. There was nevertheless an unfortunate war of words, which persisted with unseemly bitterness, and was later much regretted by both of them. Yearsley returned to the ear with the publication of 'Deafness Practically Illustrated' (1854). Throughout his working life he advocated the use of the Eustachian catheter. 
Yearsley, with Tyler Smith and Forbes Winslow, founded in 1845 the 'Medical Directory', which, by recording the names of all recognized practitioners, was an important step towards the 'Medical Registration Act' of 1858. Yearsley was the originator and proprietor (though not editor) of the 'Medical Circular' (1852), which in 1866 was incorporated with the 'Dublin Medical Press' (1839), founded by Sir William Wilde as 'The Medical Press Circular'. This journal was said not to have achieved its full potential because Yearsley had not correctly judged the mood of the day and relied on a previously popular aggressive approach which was no longer in vogue. He tended to respond to criticism with impatience and intolerance. 
Yearsley married Hanna Eliza (died 1879), one of Ralph Fletcher's daughters, and they had three children. While not having the scientific background of Toynbee, Yearsley is remembered as perhaps the first clinician to practise as an ear, nose, and throat specialist. He died of cancer of the liver on 9 July 1869 at his home in 15 Savile Row, London, and was buried on the 14th in the churchyard at Sutton Bonington, Nottinghamshire, where his eldest son, Ralph, was rector. Yearsley's memory is perpetuated in the annual Yearsley lecture, now held at the Royal College of Surgeons of England, as part of the annual meeting of the British Association of Otorhinolaryngologists. 


@@@@@


doc= 30208


Yeates, Thomas (1768-1839), orientalist and biblical scholar, born on 9 October 1768 at Snow Hill, Holborn, London, was the son of John Yeates, a wood turner, of Snow Hill, and his wife, Jane. He was at first apprenticed to his father but, showing no taste for the trade, was allowed to pursue his studies in Latin and Hebrew, his fondness for which had been noted by his schoolmaster, a Mr Kebble of Shoe Lane. In 1782 the youthful Yeates was appointed secretary to the Society for Constitutional Information, a radical association which numbered William Jones (1746-1794), another oriental scholar, among its members; he was removed from the post in February 1784 after failing to manage the society's finances. Planning to translate the 'New Testament' into biblical Hebrew, he got into communication with the theologian and orientalist Joseph White. Shortly after his appointment as professor of Hebrew at Oxford, White obtained for Yeates a 'Bible' clerkship at All Souls, whence he matriculated on 22 May 1802 but never graduated. Although he laboured for many years at this translation, and received encouragement from the continent as well as in England, the only portion of it ever published was a specimen which appeared in the third annual report of the London Jews' Society. 
From about 1808 to 1815 Yeates was employed by Claudius Buchanan to catalogue and describe the oriental manuscripts brought by him from India; and for much of this period he lived in Cambridge, where the university press published (1812) his 'Collation of an India copy of the Pentateuch'; the copies of this work were presented by the press to Yeates. The catalogue appears to be preserved in manuscript in the Cambridge University Library. Other manuscripts and published writings of Yeates are listed in a detailed bibliography by Jean Carmignac in his introduction to the 1982 reprinting of Yeates's revision of Giovanni Battista Iona's Hebrew gospels. 
Through Buchanan, Yeates obtained some employment from the Bible Society, and superintended their editions of the psalter and the Syriac 'New Testament'. After Buchanan's death he was helped by Thomas Burgess (1756-1837), bishop of St David's, who procured for him the secretaryship of the Royal Society of Literature, and in 1823 the post of assistant in the British Museum's printed book department, where he remained until his death. In 1818 he published a work called 'Indian Church History' (reprinted, 1921), compiled chiefly from Assemani and the reports of Buchanan and Kerr, and containing an account of the Christian churches in the East, with an ultra-conservative history of their origin. In the same year Yeates produced a 'Variation chart of all the navigable oceans and seas between latitude 60 degrees N. and S. from documents, and delineated on a new plan'; and in 1819 a very faulty Syriac grammar, but the first to appear in English. Yeates was also employed by the publishers of Caleb Ashworth's 'Hebrew Grammar' to revise the third and subsequent editions. In 1830 he published 'Remarks on the Bible chronology, being an essay towards reconciling the same with the histories of the eastern nations'; in 1833 'A Dissertation on the Antiquity of the Pyramids'; and in 1835 'Remarks on the History of Ancient Egypt'. His work was judged retrograde and antiquated by the end of the nineteenth century. His astronomical publications involved him in financial difficulties, which the Literary Fund helped him to meet. He was married, but details of his wife are unknown. He died on 7 October 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 30209


Yeats, Grant David (1773-1836), physician, born in Florida, America, was the son of David Yeats, a physician of East Florida. His sister Jane Ellen married Admiral Charles William Paterson (1756-1841). He matriculated from Hertford College, Oxford, on 21 January 1790, and graduated BA on 15 October 1793, MA on 25 May 1796, and BM on 4 May 1797. He graduated DM from Trinity College, Oxford, on 7 June 1814. After graduating BM Yeats spent two winter sessions in Edinburgh and one in London, and then began practising at Bedford, where he helped to establish Bedford General Infirmary, and later the lunatic asylum near the town. He was nominated physician to each of these institutions. His most important work, 'Observations on the Claims of the Moderns to some Discoveries in Chemistry and Physiology', was published in 1798, soon after he had moved to Bedford. In it he called attention to the experiments of John Mayow, whose merits Thomas Beddoes had discovered two years before. 
While at Bedford, Yeats became friends with Samuel Whitbread and John Russell, sixth duke of Bedford. After the duke's nomination to the lord lieutenancy of Ireland, Yeats accompanied him to Dublin, in March 1806, as his private physician. He was incorporated MB at Dublin in 1807. While at Dublin he was instrumental in establishing the Dublin Humane Society, and was made a member of Trinity College, Dublin. On the duke's return to England in 1807 Yeats resumed his position at Bedford. About 1814 he moved to London, where he was admitted a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1814, and a fellow on 30 September 1815. He was Goulstonian lecturer in 1817, censor in 1818, and Croonian lecturer in 1827. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 1 July 1819. 
Yeats married a daughter of the magistrate and writer on political economy Patrick Colquhoun (1745-1820), and he published 'A Biographical Sketch of the Life and Writings of Patrick Colquhoun' in 1818. Yeats died at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 14 November 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 30210


Yeldard, Arthur (c.1526x30-1599), college head, was born in Houghton-Strother-on-Tyne, Northumberland. Nothing is known of his family background or early years, and there is no evidence for Thomas Warton's assertion that he was a chorister of Durham Cathedral and a master of Rotherham College, Yorkshire. Yeldard matriculated as a sizar of Clare College, Cambridge, in 1544. He graduated BA in 1548 and by 1550 had been elected fellow of Pembroke College, where he held office as junior treasurer the following year. Throughout his life Yeldard demonstrated a happy ability to secure the goodwill of influential patrons. He came to the attention of Princess Mary through her chaplain, Francis Mallett, dean of Lincoln, and received from her an annual exhibition. He also secured the position of tutor to Henry and Anthony, the sons of the late Sir Anthony Denny, following their matriculation in November 1552. Yeldard travelled abroad with his charges, and in December 1553 they were at Dilling in Flanders, from where he dedicated a translation of 'Documenta quaedam admonitoria Agapeti Diaconi' in fulsome and grateful terms to Queen Mary. 
Yeldard's most significant patron was Sir Thomas Pope, privy councillor and founder of Trinity College, Oxford. Yeldard's personable and intellectual qualities secured Pope's lasting confidence, and in 1555 Yeldard was admitted the first of the foundation fellows and philosophy lecturer of the new college. Commissions undertaken for Pope included important work on the composition of the college statutes. In July 1557 Yeldard's teaching skills were tested when Pope entrusted him with the tuition of his wayward stepson, John Basford. Yeldard persevered with his reluctant and Latin-resistant pupil and was rewarded by the friendship of the young man's mother, Elizabeth Pope, who in 1559 nominated him to succeed Thomas Slythurst as president of Trinity College. This was by no means an easy position. Pope's sudden death six months previously had left Trinity's finances precarious, while the whole college was scrutinized closely by the parliamentary commissioners of the succeeding decade. Trinity's buildings, erected for the medieval Durham College, needed constant repair. However, Yeldard proved a capable administrator. Undergraduate numbers increased and in the forty years of his presidency he did much to consolidate revenues and fabric alike. As president Yeldard could marry, and he did so, but nothing is known of his wife, except her name, Eleanor. 
Warton included Yeldard among 'the capital scholars of those times', and credited his Latin prose 'with great elegance and perspicuity' (Warton, 390). Few lines survive of his fine Latin verse: eleven elegiac couplets at the end of L. Humphrey's 'Vita Juelli' (1573), eight couplets prefixed to John Case's 'Speculum moralium quaestionum' (1585), and twenty hexameters in Robert Wright's edition of 'Funebria Henrici Unton' (1596). Yeldard proceeded to the degrees of BD in 1563 and DD in 1566. In a wider sphere he served on a number of university committees, notably for the reception of Queen Elizabeth in 1566, when he disputed before her, and on the reform of the statutes in 1576. He was elected vice-chancellor for one year in 1580. Wood relates a libellous pun on Yeldard's name, that having once left England for religious principles he later submitted to the protestant faith 'with yelding voice' (Blakiston, 82). But there is no evidence that Yeldard ever acted against his conscience; indeed, Wood also states that Ralph Kettell 'did always report him to have lived a severe and religious life' (ibid.). In his will Yeldard left six volumes of the 'Centuriae Magdeburgenses' to Trinity College, and everything else to his wife. He died on 1 February 1599, and was buried in the chapel of the college he had served so faithfully. 


@@@@@


doc= 30211


Yelloly, John (1774-1842), physician, was born at Alnwick, Northumberland, on 30 April 1774, the youngest son and sole survivor of the seven children of John Yelloly and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Davison (died 1799). His father died in his infancy and he was brought up by his widowed mother, whose family owned extensive property in the Vale of Whittington, near Alnwick. Yelloly was educated at Alnwick grammar school and the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MD in 1799. His mother died in that year, leaving him a substantial legacy and in 1800 he moved to London where he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians and was physician to the General Dispensary, Aldersgate Street. 
There was dissatisfaction with the Medical Society of London at the beginning of the nineteenth century and on 22 May 1805 a group of members met to discuss the establishment of a new society. The Medical and Chirurgical Society of London was founded on 28 June 1805 with William Saunders as president, Astley Cooper as treasurer, Yelloly and Arthur Aikin as secretaries, and Alexander Marcet as foreign secretary. Their aim was to exchange ideas and practical knowledge, though papers read at the meetings were not discussed. Yelloly was a zealous supporter of the new society, securing its charter and establishing its library. He also contributed articles to its journal. In 1808 he read a paper on a case of paralysis caused by a tumour of the brain. This was published in the first volume of the 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions' in 1809. With Astley Cooper's help he also investigated the distribution of the nervous influence through the spinal cord. When one of the columns of the spinal cord in a dog was divided Yelloly found that paralysis occurred on the same side of the body showing that the nervous action was direct. A second paper on anaesthesia without loss of the power of movement was published in 1812. He was elected FRS on 5 May 1814. 
On 4 August 1806 Yelloly married Sarah (died 1865), only daughter of Samuel Tyssen of Narborough Hall, Norfolk. They lived in Finsbury Square and there were ten children of the marriage. In 1807 Yelloly was appointed physician to the London Hospital, a post he held until 1818, when the poor health of his children made it desirable to live in the country. He therefore resigned from the London Hospital and moved with his family to Carrow Abbey, Norwich. In recognition of his work for the Medical and Chirurgical Society he was granted permission to receive library books from the society at his home in Norwich. In 1827 he made a tour of the Netherlands. 
Yelloly became physician to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital in 1821 and served for eleven years. Norfolk was known for an exceptionally high incidence of bladder stone and the hospital held a large collection of stones taken from patients since 1771. With the surgeon John Green Crosse, Yelloly undertook to study the epidemiology of these stones and to analyse them chemically. The results were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society in 1829-30. Continuing his work on physiology and pathology Yelloly showed in 1835 that vascular fullness of the villous coat of the stomach was not necessarily a sign of disease or inflammation. His work, valuable in its own time, presaged the rapid developments in physiology, pathology, and medical chemistry which followed later in the nineteenth century. Yelloly also maintained his interest in the activities of the Medical and Chirurgical Society which was granted its royal charter in 1834. It was proposed that the name should be changed to the Royal Society of Medicine and Surgery, but Yelloly wrote at once objecting to this and his arguments prevailed with the council so that the change was not made, apart from the addition of the word Royal. Members were to become fellows, the king was to be the first patron, and Yelloly, along with Astley Cooper, were the first members of council. 
Yelloly retired in 1832 and moved to Woodton Hall, near Norwich. A series of misfortunes followed. In 1836 his third son died and in 1838 he lost two daughters on successive days. He moved his family temporarily to the milder climate of Hastings and Dawlish, but in January 1840 he lost his fourth child. Then in April 1840, three days after the marriage of another daughter, he was thrown from his phaeton and received a serious injury to his forehead. Fifteen days later he became paralysed on his right side. He did not fully recover, but in July 1840 he moved to Cavendish Hall, Suffolk, where he gradually regained strength. He visited London in September 1841, but on 28 January 1842 he was seized by paralysis of the left side and was rendered speechless. Gradually losing consciousness, he died at Cavendish Hall on 31 January 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 30212


Yelverton, Barry, first Viscount Avonmore (1736-1805), politician and judge, was born on 28 May 1736, the son and heir of Francis Yelverton (1705-1746) of Blackwater, co. Cork, and Elizabeth Barry (died 1804) of Kilbrin, in the same county. Though, as he later made clear, 'of an English family by the maternal and paternal lines' (O'Connell, 121), Yelverton's family circumstances were straitened. Having been educated by the Revd Charles Egan at Charleville School he obtained a sizarship in 1753 and a scholarship two years later that allowed him to attend Trinity College, Dublin, whence he graduated BA in 1757. Obliged to embrace teaching for some years after his graduation, during which time he acted as usher to Dr Andrew Buck, who ran the well-known Hibernian Academy in North King Street, Dublin, Yelverton's object was to become a lawyer. He entered the Middle Temple in 1759 and took an LLB at Trinity College in 1761. His marriage in July of that year, to Mary Nugent (1733-1802) of Clonlost, co. Westmeath, temporarily eased his financial situation and allowed him to study for the Irish bar, to which he was called in 1764. His rise to eminence in the law was steady rather than meteoric but his knowledge and ability attracted the notice of the then lord chancellor, James Hewitt, first Viscount Lifford, who promoted his appointment as king's counsel in 1772. His emergence as one of the leading lawyers of the day was confirmed when an LLD was conferred on him in 1774. 
Like many of his contemporaries who achieved 'eminence' (Hunt, 53) in the law Yelverton was possessed of political ambitions; he was provided with an opportunity to realize them when he was brought into the Irish parliament for the borough of Donegal by Arthur Saunders Gore, second earl of Arran, in 1774. At the general election two years later Arthur Chichester, fifth earl of Donegal, oversaw his return for the constituency of Carrickfergus. Despite this dependence on patrons Yelverton's political views drew him towards the patriot opposition and he quickly established himself as one of the most able and outspoken voices in the House of Commons with a series of pointed interventions that challenged the administration's policy with respect to the war in the American colonies. Yelverton's own position, as enunciated on 25 November 1775, was that 'the resistance of the Americans is not rebellion' ('Freeman's Journal', 28 Nov 1775), and his pertinacious criticism of the policy of sending troops on the Irish army establishment to fight in America and of the imposition of an embargo on Ireland's freedom to trade as 'arbitrary, illegal and partial' (ibid., 24 Feb 1776) earned him popular applause. He consolidated his reputation as one of the foremost liberal voices of the moment by supporting, in 1778, the repeal of a substantial number of penal laws on the grounds that they were 'disgraceful to humanity' (ibid., 20 June 1778), and, in 1782, by endorsing Henry Grattan's suggestion that further concessions to Catholics would enable Ireland 'to assume the dignity of a nation, and not continue... an insignificant colony' ('Parliamentary Register', 1.287). 
Meanwhile in his capacity as founder of the influential patriot body, the Order of St Patrick (better known by its colloquial name the Monks of the Screw), and as advocate of the tactic of pressurizing the British government by approving a six-month rather than a two-year money bill, Yelverton made an important contribution to the successful campaign in the winter of 1779-80 to secure the removal of the mercantilist restrictions that bound Ireland's freedom to trade. Encouraged, by the popular applause showered on him as a result, to pursue the dilution of the restrictions that bound the Irish parliament's capacity to make law, Yelverton was as active as Henry Grattan in catapulting the matter of legislative independence to the top of the political agenda in the spring of 1780. However, personal as well as strategic calculations ensured that he was not long to sustain this independent role. Though he was one of the country's leading advocates by the early 1780s, the needs of his family, combined with the calculation that constitutional reform was more likely with the support of the Irish administration, caused him to gravitate towards Dublin Castle in the winter of 1781-2. One effect of this was to expose a chasm within the ranks of the patriots between the essentially moderate route to legislative independence identified by Yelverton and the more uncompromising way promoted by Henry Flood. Yelverton was sometimes bested in argument by Flood but he had the satisfaction of knowing that it was his proposal, commonly known as Yelverton's act, for modifying Poynings' law, that wrought one of the main legal changes that gave the Irish parliament legislative independence in 1782. 
Arising out of his preparedness to work with the Irish administration Yelverton was appointed attorney-general by the lord lieutenant, William Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland, in July 1782. This was a key position in the Irish administration, since the attorney-general was traditionally one of its leaders in the Commons. The expectation was that Yelverton would employ his acknowledged oratorical prowess and 'strong understanding' (Sayles, 236) to good effect. However, he was also possessed of 'little knowledge of the world' (ibid.), which proved a major impediment. Thus while he confidently repulsed the attempt by the volunteers to bring about the reform of the representation in November 1783, on the grounds that it was 'inconsistent with the freedom of debate' for the legislature to receive a bill originating with an armed assembly ('Parliamentary Register', 2.226-7), his general management of men and matters left much to be desired, and he was induced to vacate the attorney-generalship for the position of chief baron of the Irish court of exchequer in December 1783. 
Yelverton's elevation to the judicial bench greatly reduced his involvement in, but did not cause him to forsake, the world of politics. He remained a committed whig, and a combination of loyalty and political principle caused him, albeit with some reservations, to support whig efforts to secure an unlimited regency for George, prince of Wales. It was conjectured then that, had this ensued, he would have become lord chancellor. His most important judicial decision in this period came in 1792-3 in the case of 'Maingay v. Gahan', when he ruled unlawful the seizure of a cargo of brandy and wine, valued at $1600, from a ship at Bandon, co. Cork, because of the procedures employed. His ruling, however, was overturned by the court of exchequer chamber, consisting of John FitzGibbon, Viscount Fitzgibbon, and later earl of Clare, lord chancellor; John Scott, earl of Clonmell, chief justice of the king's bench; and Hugh Carleton, Baron Carleton, chief justice of common pleas. 
When in 1794 William Wentworth Fitzwilliam, fourth Earl Fitzwilliam, was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland, Yelverton was again tipped for the seals but he had to make do with a belated elevation to the peerage as Baron Avonmore in June 1795. His firm stand against sedition in the late 1790s, including his role as presiding judge at the trial of William Orr at Carrickfergus in 1797, helped to dispel the shadow of suspicion that had limited his prospects until then. His support for the 'Act of Union' dispelled this still further, for, though he was disappointing when entrusted with business in the House of Lords, he was created Viscount Avonmore in December 1800, despite the opposition of Portland, and he was an unsuccessful aspirant for the seals on the death of Clare in 1802. He died at his home, Fortfield, Rathfarnham, co. Dublin, on 19 August 1805, having served as lord chief baron for just over a quarter of a century, and was buried at Rathfarnham. 
Avonmore was not regarded as a great judge, mainly because of his willingness to rush to judgment, but he did endeavour with some success to ensure that justice was imparted fairly. The preparedness of so many to speak well of him and to estimate his talents highly during his lifetime serves as ample testament to the fact that he was a man of considerable ability who did well in life both for himself and for the three sons and one daughter who survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30213


Yelverton, Sir Christopher (1536/7-1612), judge and speaker of the House of Commons, was the third of five sons of William Yelverton, of Rougham, Norfolk ('b'. in or before 1505, died 1586), lawyer, and his first wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Henry Farmer of East Barsham, Norfolk, and his wife. He had four sisters. He was a member of an East Anglian legal family and was a direct descendant of William Yelverton, judge of the court of king's bench between 1443 and 1471. His father was a member of Gray's Inn and recorder of King's Lynn from 1558 to 1561. Christopher matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1550, but is not recorded as having taken a degree. Two years later he entered Gray's Inn. 
Yelverton had few advantages as a younger son and had to rely on his own abilities as a lawyer to provide himself with a living. His career was advanced greatly by marriage to Margaret ('c'.1544-1611), daughter of Thomas Catesby of Whiston, Northamptonshire, and his wife, on 4 May 1560. They had four sons, including Henry Yelverton (1566-1630), and eight daughters. Catesby ensured his new son-in-law was elected MP for Brackley, Northamptonshire, in 1563. Yelverton was recorder of Northampton from 1568 to 1599 and JP for Northamptonshire from about 1573. This local consequence guaranteed his election for Northampton in 1571 and 1572 and for Northamptonshire in 1593. He was an active MP and sat on many committees. He was also noted for his speeches, including one opposing the sequestration of William Strickland. His career was thriving and by the mid-1570s he was very wealthy. He purchased an estate in Oxfordshire and did not seek election to the parliaments of the 1580s. He had by his own admission enjoyed a lively youth and played an active part in the revels and masques produced at Gray's Inn. He wrote the epilogue to George Gascoigne's 'Jocasta', which was performed there in 1566. Notwithstanding his puritanism in religion, several contemporary diarists record his ribald anecdotes and conversation, and John Manningham hints that he was not averse to enjoying himself in the company of gentlewomen when he was well into his seventies. Yelverton was called to the bar, and elected treasurer of Gray's Inn in 1579 and 1585. He read twice: in 1574 and in 1584, when his subject was the statute of 1540 relating to execution for debt. He was created serjeant-at-law in 1589, served as queen's serjeant from 1598 to 1602, and was judge of the court of queen's (then king's) bench from 1602 to 1612. Yelverton was an excellent technical lawyer and was regarded as a good judge, one of the few to escape criticism by Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary, in his memorandum on the state of the judicial bench in 1603. As queen's serjeant he led the prosecution of those involved in Essex's rebellion in 1601, and he was one of the judges ruling on the 'Postnati case' in 1608. In addition, he had a broader interest in legal culture, passing on to his son a collection of legal manuscripts; and, like many other lawyers of his generation, he made his own reports of cases. These reports remained unpublished and the well-known Yelverton report is by his son Henry Yelverton. Yelverton was a conspicuously successful speaker of the House of Commons in the parliament of 1597, to which Henry Yelverton was also returned, exercising moderation and discretion to defuse tensions between it and the crown. His puritan tendencies were well known. He was an eloquent orator, though his contributions to debates show him to have been as much concerned with careful legal drafting as with rhetorical showmanship, and his conduct as speaker was marked by a lawyerly concern to establish proper procedures for the conduct of the business. 
For all his finesse as speaker Yelverton was a man of considerable toughness. He was appointed second justice at Lancaster in 1598. As justice of the assize on the northern circuit and JP of many northern counties from 1599, he was in the forefront of the common lawyers' attack on the council of the north. Friction developed in 1600, when he snubbed Ralph Eure, third Lord Eure, vice-president, who was sitting with Sir John Savile as justice of gaol delivery. Matters came to a head in 1601 when he required the lord president, Sir Thomas Cecil, second Lord Burghley, to leave the court. Legal opinion was at first behind Yelverton, but in June 1602 he was summoned to the Star Chamber and publicly reprimanded for his conduct. There were more complaints about him but he weathered the criticism. Elizabeth I did not bestow a knighthood on him and it was left to James VI and I to do so. The king was more generous still, making him KB on 23 July 1603. 
Yelverton, despite his complaints about poverty and the expense of providing for such a large family, was very active in the purchase of land in his adopted county of Northamptonshire, spending in excess of $5000 on properties in his lifetime, most of which descended on his death to his heir, Henry Yelverton. His wife predeceased him. He died on 31 October 1612 'of very age' at seventy-five ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', 154), and was buried on 3 November in the church at Easton Maudit, where a monument with his recumbent effigy in robes survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 30214


Yelverton, Sir Henry (1566-1630), judge and politician, was born on 29 June 1566, St Peter's day, as he noted in his will, the eldest of four sons of Sir Christopher Yelverton (1536/7-1612) of Gray's Inn and Easton Maudit, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Margaret Catesby ('c'.1544-1611). Perhaps already having received some education at Oxford, in July 1581 he matriculated with his brother Thomas from a distinctly puritan college, Christ's, Cambridge; he graduated BA from Peterhouse in 1584. It is probably at this point that he began his legal studies at Gray's Inn, although there is no record of this. Thomas and another brother, Christopher, had apparently gained a special admittance on 23 January 1580. Since their father was reader at the inn in 1574 and 1584, and treasurer in 1579 and 1585, it is likely that Henry was granted similar privileges. Henry seems to have been called to the bar on 25 April 1593 and to have become an ancient on 25 May. In Michaelmas 1595 he was a reader at Staple Inn. By about 1600 he had married Mary (died 1625), daughter of Robert Beale (1541-1601), clerk of the council; when in London they lived in Aldersgate Street. 
In 1597, following in his father's footsteps, Yelverton was elected MP for Northampton. As his father was speaker of the Commons in this parliament, he sat on committees for monopolies, the poor, draining the fens, husbandry and tillage, defence, tellers and receivers, and the better execution of judgments. Although in 1599 he succeeded his father as recorder of Northampton, Yelverton did not represent the borough in 1601, but he was returned to the first parliament of James I in 1604. An active speaker and one of the most active committee members, he gained a reputation as an independent man who spoke his mind. While his political principles supported the exercise of the royal prerogative, they also supported the ability of each house of parliament to conduct its affairs without interference. If a house did not confirm its rights, it would lose them and defraud the people. Thus when Sir Francis Goodwin's case came before the Commons on 30 March 1604, Yelverton argued for Goodwin to take his seat in the face of his rejection by the court of chancery and against the wishes of the king. He was applauded for holding that the case belonged to the Commons as a high court of parliament. On 5 April, when James had issued his decision, Yelverton said that the prince's command was like 'the roar of a lion' (Notestein, 75) but, as a working MP, he continued his independent actions. He supported granting the king a subsidy, but gradually, as grievances were handled. He supported the trial of the plotters of the Gunpowder Plot, but with 'due deliberation'. He joined the attack on the abuses of purveyors, and declared that corruption should be 'crushed' ('Diary of Robert Bowyer', 123). When the proposed Scottish union was debated in 1606-7 Yelverton criticized the bill, assessing it as good for Scotland but not for England, and attacking George Hume, the earl of Dunbar, the king's Scottish favourite. As he said in a speech of 7 May 1607, Yelverton saw his allegiance to the law and the English crown, but not to the person of the king; there would be either a perfect union, or no union. 
By this time Yelverton's legal career was well established and his puritan inclinations were visible. A keen patron of preachers, in the early years of the century he attended and took notes on the sermons of Edward Philips at St Olave's, Southwark, and subsequently published thirty-one of them, at his own expense and with a dedication to his father, as 'Certaine Godly and Learned Sermons' (1605). Later he was suspected by Sir Francis Bacon of involvement in the publication of 'The Argument of N. F.' (1607), an attempted vindication of fellow Gray's Inn puritan MP Nicholas Fuller, who had been charged with heresy and schism. Having been reader at the inn that Lent term, Yelverton was said by 'a professed friend and well-wisher' (Prest, 143) to have set his sights on the attorneyship of the court of wards and to be prepared to pay its patron, Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, $1000 for it. On either count, he tried in the three-year hiatus between parliamentary sessions (1607-10) to repair his relations with the king. In January 1610 Lady Arabella Stuart and the earl of Dunfermline helped him gain an audience with James, in which he gave a fully detailed account of each of his positions and his best interpretation of why he advanced them. According to Bacon, Yelverton had now been 'won' to the king's cause ('Works of Francis Bacon', 4.313), a conversion noted also by John Chamberlain on 13 January. Although unsuccessful in gaining the wards office, at some point Yelverton convinced Salisbury that he was not only learned in the law, but also blessed with elocution and sound reason. 
On 23 June 1610 Yelverton brought an important defence to the claim of the crown to levy impositions without a parliamentary grant when he asserted that, since the law of England only extended to the high-water mark, on the seas the king could extract customs duties before allowing goods to land. However, he was generally in favour of commercial enterprise, supporting the enclosure of common lands for increased agrarian production. He also outlined in discussions on the royal prerogative the rights of citizens in royal leases, forfeitures, licences of alienation, fines, and wardship. Active in mediation, he began to serve the crown in legal capacities, acting as a junior member of assize commissions on the home counties circuit in 1610, and the western circuit in 1613. 
Following his father's death on 31 October 1612, Yelverton succeeded to the family estates. One of the richest barristers of the Jacobean era, he came to own considerable property in London, Norfolk, Northamptonshire, and Warwickshire. He was made solicitor-general on 28 October 1613, and knighted on 8 November, according to John Chamberlain for parliamentary services to the king and his ability to survive disgrace. It was said that he attained the office through the patronage of the king's favourite, Sir Robert Carr, shortly after he became earl of Somerset. For three years from 1614 Yelverton was also counsel for the University of Cambridge. He was returned as Northampton's MP in March 1614 after drafting a new charter reincorporating the borough that was enrolled in August; the borough extended his recordership for life in 1618. In the parliament of 1614 he was not active, and abstained from speaking on the crucial question of impositions. He took an official part in the examination of Peacham under torture on 19 January 1615, as well as on 10 March, showing a toughness he was suspected of repeating during the examinations of Sir Thomas Lake in 1619 and Samuel Peacock in 1620. At the same time he joined in signing a certification in favour of the court of chancery in the conflict with Sir Edward Coke on the question of 'praemunire', and supported the king's resolution. When Somerset was indicted for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury in 1615, Yelverton declined to appear against him and took no part in the trial. 
With Bacon's appointment as lord keeper in 1617, James announced that Yelverton would succeed him as attorney-general. The warrant, however, stayed unsigned as the new favourite, the earl of Buckingham, was doubtful of his commitment to the prerogative. Yelverton refused to apply to the earl because he believed that the office concerned the king alone. When Buckingham told Yelverton that his standing would suffer if the attorney-generalship were seen to be conferred without the earl's influence, Yelverton answered that it was not the custom for favourites to meddle with legal appointments. Apparently unoffended, Buckingham took the warrant to the king and returned with it signed on 12 March. Afterwards Yelverton presented James with $4000. The favourite apparently received nothing, but on the other hand Yelverton acted as a mediator in the dispute which arose between Buckingham and members of the Coke family over the marriage of Frances Coke and John Villiers. When dissension over the fate of their daughter finally led Lady Elizabeth Coke to leave her husband, Yelverton alienated Coke by not listening to his arguments to bar his wife from her dower. Yelverton continued to use his position to support godly ministers. The same year he was responsible for the appointment of Richard Sibbes as preacher at Gray's Inn; acknowledgement of his role was made in the dedications of works by Paul Baynes, William Crashawe (preacher at the Temple), Samuel Hieron, and Thomas Gataker. 
Yelverton became a commissioner of patents on 22 April 1618 and was placed on another commission, for the punishment of offenders, on 20 October. In high favour at court, he entertained it 'very bountifully' on 11 September 1619 ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.263). Having previously shown some sympathy to those who infringed the patent for gold and silver thread, since they refused to give an undertaking not to repeat the offences he now sent some of them to the Fleet prison. Apparently still uncertain of the legality of such a move, he signalled that he would release them unless Bacon endorsed his ruling. Using Yelverton's initial opposition to patents, Buckingham then took the opportunity to remove him. The device was Yelverton's penning of the new charter for the City of London. Charged with introducing certain clauses not in the king's warrant, he was summoned to the privy council, which recommended on 16 June 1620 that he be suspended from office and prosecuted in the Star Chamber. Duly suspended on 27 June, a month later he acknowledged his offence in Star Chamber and, although found not guilty of corruption, was sentenced to imprisonment in the Tower during the king's pleasure on 10 November, and fined $1000. Thomas Coventry replaced him as attorney-general early in the new year. 
In spite of his imprisonment Yelverton was returned for Northampton in the parliament that opened on 30 January 1621. Caught up in Bacon's bribery scandal that occupied parliament in February-March, he gained the opprobrium of Buckingham, who saw Yelverton as an agent of his destruction. This worked against Yelverton in the following debates on monopolies, where he was targeted for having imprisoned the gold and silver thread agents, whose wives and children petitioned the king for their release. On the one hand vilified in the Commons by Coke for making false arrests, on the other he was blamed for bad advice by the king, who had jurisdiction of the case transferred to the Lords on 18 April 1621. Yelverton's defence, that he had served the king by passing his patents and defusing opposition in the Commons, caused James to accuse him on 24 April of slander. Yelverton, relying on support from those who wished to use monopolies to attack Buckingham, made a powerful speech in the Lords on 30 April. In the past decade he had avoided conflict with the crown. Now he stood his ground, and blamed the arrests on the duke and his quest for profits, charging that Buckingham 'stood still att the Kinges elbowe ready to hew me downe' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 34). This raised pandemonium in the house, and James had Yelverton seized and recommitted to the Tower. The Lords claimed that this seizure was a breach of their privileges. Petitioning the king, he was returned to the Lords, where his tumultuous trial for 'misdemeanours' ended on 14 May. The following day he was found guilty of impugning the king and slandering Buckingham, and on 16 June he was sentenced to prison with orders to submit to the king and Buckingham, and to pay them 10,000 marks and 5000 marks respectively. Once he had submitted the fines were remitted, and on 18 July Yelverton was released as part of a general pardon. 
In Michaelmas term 1621 Yelverton resumed practice in the king's bench, chancery, and Star Chamber that had occupied him prior to his appointment as attorney-general in 1617. He also returned to sitting on assize circuits. Soon after Charles's accession, on 30 April 1625 he was made serjeant-at-law, and on 10 May he was promoted to judge of the court of common pleas. His wife had died four days earlier. It may have been in these later years as a judge that he prepared his and his father's law reports on the court of king's bench, 1602-12, which were later published in 1661 and 1674. He remained on the bench until his death at Aldersgate Street on 24 January 1630. Buried at Easton Maudit next to his parents, the lawyer described by Roger Wilbraham as 'the old Tribune of the people' ('Diary of Robert Bowyer', 134), had given generously to the poor of London and Easton. In his will dated 19 July 1628, after a vividly personal expression of his faith, Yelverton left his land at Weston, Warwickshire, to his younger son, Robert, who had studied under John Preston at Queens' College, Cambridge, and who was knighted in 1631. The bulk of his estates went to the elder son, Sir Christopher (died 1655), also a former student of Preston, who was knighted in 1623 and made a baronet in 1641, with generous provision for his three sisters, Elizabeth (the wife of Sir Lodowick Dyer), Edith, and Mary. Other beneficiaries included Yelverton's brother, now also Sir Christopher, his nephew Christopher Sherland, and Richard Sibbes. 


@@@@@


doc= 30215


Yelverton, Sir William (d. 1477?), justice, was the son of John Yelverton of Rackheath, Norfolk, recorder of Norwich, and his second wife. She was Elizabeth, the daughter and heir of John Read of Rougham, and by 1410 was married to her second husband, Richard Clere of Stokesby. Although he was the heir to the Read property in Rougham and Bayfield, William followed his father into the legal profession. He entered Gray's Inn and appears in Segar's list of readers. By 1427 he was a JP for Norwich, and from 1433 to 1450 recorder of the city, although, curiously, he sat in the parliaments of 1435 and 1443 for Great Yarmouth. Other Norfolk employers included the duke of Norfolk. Yelverton was called to the coif in 1438, appointed to the western assize circuit in 1439, retained by the duchy of Lancaster from 1440, and by Michaelmas 1442 was a king's serjeant. On 1 July 1443 he was promoted to the court of king's bench. As a crown lawyer he was summoned to the Lords for the parliaments of 1445, and thereafter regularly until 1470-71. In May 1461 Yelverton, by then the senior puisne, had hopes of succeeding the disgraced Sir John Fortescue as chief justice, but John Markham was appointed; however, Markham used his influence to secure for Yelverton a compensating knighthood. Yelverton continued in post until 6 April 1471 when Edward IV, returning after the readeption of Henry VI, chose not to reappoint him. 
Yelverton's deep involvement in East Anglian politics did not always sit easily with the substantial use the crown made of him for judicial and administrative commissions. In 1454 he even found his clerk being arrested in Westminster Hall. The judge is, however, best known for his involvement in the dispute over Sir John Fastolf's will, the central preoccupation of the Paston letters. Sir William had initially been a colleague and friend of John (I) Paston, both on the duke of Norfolk's council and as an adviser, feoffee, and executor to Sir John Fastolf. The two fell out when a will made by the dying Fastolf hugely benefited Paston, and cut out Yelverton and other former trustees and executors. William Yelverton suspected foul play -- he had not, unlike Paston, reached Sir John's bedside -- and he challenged the will in the Canterbury court of audience. Although in 1467 probate was awarded to the Pastons, litigation in chancery (which again Yelverton lost) only reached judgment in 1470-71. Thereafter the families were quickly reconciled, and in 1472 began negotiating a marriage between Yelverton's grandson and John Paston's younger daughter. 
What Yelverton's motives were in the Fastolf affair is not obvious. William Worcester, an erstwhile ally, described him as 'the cursed Norfolk justice' ('Itineraries', 190-91). He certainly had his fair share of acquisitiveness, and if he had been offered 'a frendelyhood' by Paston he might initially have compromised. However, it is also very probable that he felt morally obliged to protest against the subversion of Fastolf's wishes and the placing in jeopardy of the health of Sir John's soul. Sir William's genuine religious sympathy is seen elsewhere. He was especially devoted to the Virgin Mary, shown by his promoting the interests of Walsingham Priory, and he was buried before her image in the chancel of Rougham church. He was also a member of the Guild of St George in Norwich, and was promised an individual mention among the obits in recognition of his role in arbitrating between the guild and the Norwich city authorities. 'Yelverton's mediation' ended fifty years of dispute, by effectively integrating the Guild of St George and a second prominent guild, the Batchery, with the city oligarchy. 
The inscription on Sir William's monumental brass is lost, but is known to have given the day and month of death as 27 March. He appears to have still been alive in November 1476 but was omitted from the Norfolk commission of the peace of 4 May 1478, which makes 1477 the most likely year of death. He bequeathed a significant East Anglian estate to John Yelverton, the son and heir of Sir William's first marriage (before 1421), to Joan, the daughter of Oliver Grose of Sloley. He apparently married twice more, first to Ela, daughter of Sir Robert Brews and thus aunt to Margery Paston, and then to Agnes Campe of Brentwood, Essex, the widow of John Rands of Barking. Agnes survived him and died in 1489. The figures of William and Agnes survive from the monumental brass in Rougham church, and depict the judge in judicial robes and a serjeant's coif, worn incongruously over full armour. 


@@@@@


doc= 30216


Yelverton, William Charles, fourth Viscount Avonmore (1824-1883), army officer and litigant, born on 27 September 1824, was the eldest son of Barry John Yelverton, third Viscount Avonmore (1790-1870), and his second wife, Cecilia (died 1 Feb 1876), eldest daughter of Charles O'Keeffe of Hollybrooke Park, Tipperary. The third viscount's two sons with his first wife died in 1853 and 1860. Yelverton was educated for military service at Woolwich and entered the Royal Artillery. He attained the rank of major, served in the Crimean War, received a medal and clasp for Inkerman and Sevastopol, and was created a knight of the fifth class of the Mejidiye by the Turkish government. 
In March 1861 Yelverton was suspended from all military duties, and on 1 April placed on half pay, as a consequence of his involvement in a scandalous legal case. Between 1859 and 1868 he was involved in litigation regarding his alleged marriage with Maria Theresa Longworth. The couple had met in 1852, and again in 1855 when she was serving as a nurse with the French Sisters of Charity in the Crimea. In April 1857, Yelverton 'performed the ceremony' of marriage, by reading the Church of England service aloud, while in Edinburgh, and they were married by the Roman Catholic rite on 15 August 1857 at Rostrevor in Ireland. The following year, on 26 June, Yelverton married Emily Marianne (died 1909), daughter of Major-General Sir Charles Ashworth, and widow of the naturalist Edward Forbes, at Trinity Chapel, Edinburgh, according to the rites of the Church of England. In 1859, Maria Longworth unsuccessfully sued him for the restoration of conjugal rights; in 1861 a further action was brought in which the validity of the first marriage was the point at issue. The Irish court, in which this action was brought, validated the marriage, but on appeal it was annulled by the Scottish court, which judgment was confirmed by the House of Lords, and upheld through several appeals, the last in 1868. 
Yelverton succeeded his father as fourth viscount on 24 October 1870, and died at Biarritz on 1 April 1883. He was succeeded by his sons, Barry Nugent, fifth viscount (1859-1885), and Algernon William, sixth viscount (1866-1910). Yelverton's marriage episode was reproduced in the novel 'Gentle Blood, or, The Secret Marriage' (1861), by James Roderick O'Flanagan, while Cyrus Redding based the plot of 'A Wife and not a Wife' (1867) on the story of Yelverton's Irish marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 30217


Yeo, Sir James Lucas (1782-1818), naval officer, son of James Yeo (died 21 Jan 1825), formerly agent victualler at Minorca, and his wife (died 13 January 1822) was born at Southampton on 7 October 1782. He was briefly at the Revd Mr Walters's academy at Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire, but when little more than ten, in March 1793, he was entered as a boy volunteer on the 'Windsor Castle', which was going to the Mediterranean as flagship of Rear-Admiral Phillips Cosby, whom he followed to the 'Alcide', returning to England with him at the end of 1794. In the spring of 1795 he joined the 'Orion' with Captain John Thomas Duckworth in the channel, and was shortly afterwards taken by Duckworth to the 'Leviathan', going to Jamaica. On 20 February 1797 Yeo was promoted lieutenant of the 'Albicore' until, early in 1798, after a sharp attack of yellow fever, he was sent home. 
Appointed to the 'Veteran' in the North Sea, and in December 1798 to the 'Charon', going to the Mediterranean, in May 1800 he was moved to the brig 'El Corso' (Commander William Ricketts) and was present at the siege of Genoa. On 26 August 1800 the brig's boats, commanded by Yeo and covered by the cutter 'Pigmy', forced their way into the harbour of Cesenatico in the Adriatic, burnt or sank thirteen merchant vessels, and burnt the piers. In February 1802 Yeo was moved to the 'Genereux', in which he returned to England. In February 1805 he was appointed to the 'Loire' with Captain Frederick Lewis Maitland and commanded her boats on several expeditions, notably in Muros Bay on 4 June, where, after spiking the guns of a small battery, with only 50 men he stormed a closed fort in the town (garrisoned by 250 men, whose governor Yeo killed with his sabre), spiked its guns, and made it possible for the 'Loire' to seize a large privateer and some other vessels lying in the bay. The privateer, unarmed but pierced for 26 guns, was commissioned for the navy under the name of 'Confiance', and Yeo was promoted to command her; his commission was dated 21 June 1805. 
After two years on the Lisbon station Yeo was sent home with dispatches in November 1807 by Sir William Sidney Smith and on 19 December was promoted captain. He was, however, continued in the 'Confiance' and sent back to the Tagus, whence in the following spring he accompanied Smith to Brazil. From Rio de Janeiro he was sent in September 1808 to Para, where he suggested to the governor the practicability of taking Cayenne and French Guiana. The governor gave Yeo such Portuguese as he could add to his force, but when he landed at Cayenne on 7 January 1809 he had in all only 400 men with whom to attack a garrison of 1200 in a strongly fortified position mounting over 200 guns. When five weeks later the place surrendered Yeo found himself with upwards of 1000 prisoners on his hands and no adequate means of securing them. For more than a month, until he received reinforcements, neither Yeo nor any of his force slept out of their clothes. Most were attacked by fever, and Yeo, after being confined to bed for two months with a severe bout of malaria, was obliged to go to England to recover. At Rio the prince regent of Portugal presented him with a valuable diamond ring and nominated him knight commander of St Benedict of Aviz, an order of a semi-religious character; it was said that Yeo was the first protestant admitted. His acceptance of the order was approved by George III, and he was knighted on 17 March 1810; he received a British knighthood on 21 June. 
In 1811 Yeo commanded the frigate 'Southampton' on the Jamaica station, and on 3 February 1812 took the 'Amethyste', a large pirate frigate stolen from the Haitian 'emperor', Christophe, to whom it was restored. On 22 November 1812 he captured the American brig 'Vixen' (14 guns), but on the 27th, returning to Jamaica via the Crooked Island passage through the Bahamas, both the 'Southampton' and its prize were wrecked on an uncharted reef 4 miles off the island of Conception. 
On 19 March 1813 Yeo was appointed commodore and commander-in-chief of the warships on the North American lakes and reached Kingston at the foot of Lake Ontario in the early part of May. Sending subordinate commanders to the other lakes, Yeo focused on Lake Ontario, on whose control the entire British position in Upper Canada depended. By the end of the month he had assembled an efficient squadron of two ships of 24 and 20 guns, with a 14-gun brig and some smaller vessels, and had agreed with Sir George Prevost on an attack on Sackett's Harbour, where the enemy had a couple of large vessels on the stocks. American rumour had Yeo reconnoitring their base in person, disguised as a farmer selling potatoes. On the 27th troops were embarked, but when off the harbour the cautious Prevost refused to land. Two days later he was encouraged to make another attempt. This time the men were landed, had driven out the enemy, and had set fire to the two ships when Prevost's nerve again failed him and he re-embarked, permitting the enemy to reoccupy the port and extinguish the fire. In Prevost's absence Yeo took his squadron up the lake in June, capturing or destroying enemy storeships and depots and reversing the American army's invasion. 
But by the end of July 1813 the larger of the two vessels not burnt at Sackett's Harbour was ready for service. Of 850 tons, mounting twenty-eight long 24-pounders, with a crew of 400 men, she was described as nearly a match for the whole of the British squadron. The American advantage was not only in the possession of this powerful ship, but also in the heavier and more efficient armament of the rest of the squadron; and though in an engagement near Niagara on 10 August Yeo succeeded in cutting off and capturing two of the enemy's schooners, his main ally was the caution of the American commodore. Other partial engagements took place on 11 and 28 September, in the latter of which, the so-called 'Burlington Races', Yeo was obliged to break off action and beat for Kingston. But the American refused close action, relying on his long guns alone, with which he could not obtain any marked success. 
Under a more adventurous commander the American squadron on Lake Erie took full advantage of its superior force and overwhelmed the British squadron on 10 September. During the winter great exertions were made by both parties. Yeo built two large ships at Kingston, and with these added to his squadron embarked a large body of troops and attacked Oswego on 6 May 1814. After a sharp contest the place was carried, and a large quantity of ordnance stores and provisions was captured or destroyed. Yeo then blockaded Sackett's Harbour, where the enemy had also launched two large ships, which they were unable to fit out so long as the stores could be prevented from reaching them. By the end of July he was obliged to raise the blockade, and the Americans with a vastly superior force were able to drive Yeo back to Kingston and blockade him there until September. Yeo's policy was to avoid defeat and maintain his squadron in being while building the 110-gun 'St Lawrence'. When he finally sailed on 15 October it was the Americans' turn to remain in harbour. 
Yeo's position had all along been one of great difficulty, not only in consequence of the Americans' advantages for building and fitting out ships, but still more in consequence of the indisposition of Prevost to co-operate fully. Their differences came to a head after the catastrophe on Lake Champlain occasioned by Prevost's call on the navy for assistance and his neglect to support the squadron ['see 'Walker, James Robertson-]. The case appeared so flagrant that Yeo preferred distinct charges of gross neglect of duty, and though Prevost died before he could be brought to a court martial, the court which tried Walker and the other survivors found that the disaster was 'principally caused' by Prevost's urging the squadron into battle when it was not 'in a proper state to meet the enemy', and by his not co-operating as he had promised. On 2 January 1815 Yeo was made KCB, but overwork and the marsh fever of the Kingston area played on a body debilitated by the malaria contracted in Cayenne, and he returned to Britain in May. Canadians have always regarded him as one of the heroes of the Anglo-American War of 1812-14. 
On 5 June 1815 Yeo was appointed commander-in-chief on the west coast of Africa, with a broad pennant in the 'Inconstant', and special responsibility for the anti-slavery patrol. In October 1817 he moved into the 'Semiramis', in which he went to Jamaica, and sailed thence for England. On the passage, on 21 August 1818, he died 'of general debility'. His body was brought home and buried on 8 September in the garrison chapel at Portsmouth. He was not married. 


@@@@@


doc= 30218


Yeo, Richard (d. 1779), coin- and medal-engraver, produced silver season tickets for entry to Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens. These tickets were sold from 1737 and carried images symbolizing the arts and pleasures to be enjoyed in the gardens. Yeo's signature appears on tickets showing the muses Euterpe and Thalia. Forrer suggests that two other tickets showing the muses Calliope and Erato are by him, as is a ticket showing the sculpture of Hogarth by Roubiliac, which was erected in Vauxhall Gardens in 1738. The tickets were in an ornate rococo style with loops to enable them to be worn; the wearer's name and season number was engraved on the back. 
One of the most important pieces produced by Yeo was the official Culloden medal celebrating the duke of Cumberland's victory at the battle of Culloden in 1746. The medal had an ornamental scroll border in a gently decorated style and incorporated a loop, again to enable it to be worn. Later, another Culloden medal was produced by Yeo for a collector's market. It showed the duke of Cumberland, apparently rendered from life, on the obverse, and on the reverse it carried an image of Rebellion being defied by Hercules, while Britannia stands adjusting her garments. The medal was available in gold, silver, and copper by subscription and was advertised in the 'London Gazette'. In 1745 Yeo had premises in the Strand and lived in lodgings at a Mrs Sutcliff's, a druggist near Craven Street; a year later he is recorded as living in Tavistock Street, Covent Garden. 
Yeo was, from 1749, employed as second engraver at the Royal Mint. In 1768 he called attention to his own great input into the production of the dies and punches for the new coinage under George III, when the chief engraver, John Sigismund Tanner, had been unable to produce very much work owing to the deterioration in his eyesight. Yeo's work was officially acknowledged and recognized by Lord Viscount Chetwynd, the mint-master, who proposed to the Treasury to make Yeo chief engraver on Tanner's death. Yeo became chief engraver of the mint in 1779. 
Yeo's name appears on the establishment papers for the Society of Artists in November 1759, and he exhibited there between 1760 and 1768. He was a director of the Incorporated Society of Artists from 1765 to 1768 and was a founder member of the Royal Academy when it was established in 1768 ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. He showed at the academy's first two exhibitions in 1769 and 1770, when his contributions to the displays included impressions on sealing wax of engraved gems (1769) and a gold proof from a die of a 5-guinea piece (1770). In 1769 the 'Middlesex Journal, or, Chronicle of Liberty' accused the founder members of the Royal Academy, Yeo among them, of being self-seeking cheats who benefited from the royal prerogative for personal reasons rather than being admirable leaders in the arts. 
Yeo's contribution to British coinage includes a series of pattern 5 and 2 guineas between 1768 and 1777 that were never minted for circulation. He produced pattern guineas, half-guineas, and shilling pieces, among them the Northumberland shilling issued to be distributed among the population of Dublin in 1763 when Hugh, earl of Northumberland, became lord lieutenant of Ireland. Only $100 worth of these were issued, according to Grueber. Some of the patterns are kept in the British Museum. Yeo continued to engrave medals and gems, and his 1750 medal for the Academy of Ancient Music, the 1752 Chancellor medal, and the Winchester College prize medals are in the British Museum. He probably produced other society medals, and tickets unsigned by him may still await attribution. He signed his work R. YEO; YEO:F; YEO:FECIT, or R. YEO.F. Of his gems can be mentioned 'Ixion Embracing a Cloud', a portrait bust of Cromwell in amethyst, and a bust of Shakespeare in cornelian. 
After Yeo's death in London, on 3 December 1779, his tools and a small collection of medals were sold at auction. His personal belongings were distributed among his closest friends, servants, and relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 30219


Yeowell, James (1803-1875), antiquary, was born in Clerkenwell, London, on 23 August 1803, the son of James Yeowell (1766/7-1822) and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Webb (1769/70-1847). Little is known about his early life, but he is said to have been employed by the vestry of Shoreditch, and to have worked at indexing and other similar tasks for London booksellers. Soon after the establishment by William John Thoms (1803-1885) of 'Notes and Queries' in 1849, Yeowell became the journal's sub-editor. He held this post for more than twenty years before retiring in September 1872. During this period Yeowell supplied, after painstaking research at the British Museum, the answers which appeared each week under the heading of 'Queries with answers'. While sub-editor of 'Notes and Queries' he also compiled the general indexes to the first three series and, among other indexing work, an index to Agnes Strickland's 'Lives of the Queens of England' (1840-48). 
Aside from compiling indexes, Yeowell wrote 'Chronicles of the Ancient British Church Anterior to the Saxon Era', which first appeared in 1839 in a monthly periodical and then in 1847 as a new edition. He also wrote 'A Literary Antiquary: Memoir of William Oldys, with his Diary Notes from Adversaria and an Account of the London Libraries', which was published in 'Notes and Queries' in 1861 and 1862, and edited the poetry of Sir Thomas Wyatt and the earl of Surrey for the 'Aldine' series (1853). In the following year he assisted Lord Braybrooke with the fourth edition of Samuel Pepys's diary, which was published in 1854. 
On his retirement from 'Notes and Queries' Yeowell was nominated a poor brother at the Charterhouse by the duke of Buccleuch on the suggestion of Thoms. Having lived in Pentonville, near the Sadler's Wells Theatre, and in Barnsbury, Yeowell finally moved to the Charterhouse, where he died on 10 December 1875. He was buried in Highgate cemetery on 14 December. 
Yeowell's books were sold with other collections by Sotheby, Wilkinson and Hodge from 12 to 17 November 1873, and on 19 May 1876. His collections of biographical materials, including newspaper cuttings, excerpts from printed books, manuscript memoranda, and engraved portraits, are in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 30220


Yevele, Henry (d. 1400), master mason, was the most prolific and successful master mason active in late medieval England. The son of Roger and Marion Yevele, he first appears in the documentary record on 3 December 1353, when he purchased the freedom of London; by February 1356 his standing among the city's masons was such that he was chosen as one of a commission of six cutting masons who were to inform the mayor and aldermen about the acts and articles of the craft. The starting point of Yevele's long career as an architect in royal service may have been his partial remodelling or completion of the hall of the Black Prince's manor at Kennington on the Surrey bank of the Thames. This work was carried out under contract between March 1357 and September 1359 at the high cost of $221 4's'. 7died In 1359 Yevele obtained a licence to discharge victuals at Calais, a concession which suggests strongly that he enjoyed the patronage of someone highly favoured at court. Perhaps that patron was Sir John Beauchamp (died 1360) who figures prominently among the beneficiaries of the perpetual chantry established under Yevele's will of 1400. On 23 June 1360 Yevele became 'disposer' of the king's works of masonry in the Palace of Westminster and the Tower of London, for which he received a fee of 1's'. per day, together with an annual robe like those of the sergeants of the household. This office resembled its early fourteenth-century precursors, in that it did not prevent its holder from undertaking other work. Yevele's private practice eventually grew to enormous proportions, although its full extent has undoubtedly been obscured by the low survival rate of documentary evidence outside the king's works organization. 
At Westminster Palace, Yevele was responsible for two essentially utilitarian buildings, the Jewel Tower in the Privy Palace (1365-6) and the clock tower (now destroyed) which stood opposite the north door of Westminster Hall and regulated the sittings of the royal courts of justice there (1366-7). At the Tower of London several minor works, including the vaulting of the thirteenth-century watergate, were performed by Henry's brother Robert. However, the real focus of activity in the king's works at this time was Windsor Castle, and it is telling that the master mason there, John Sponlee (died 1382?), walked in the funeral procession of Queen Philippa in 1369 as an esquire of greater estate, whereas Yevele ranked only as a lesser esquire. During Edward III's reign Yevele's strictly architectural work for the crown was, with one minor exception, confined to London, but his duties impressing masons for royal service took him further afield and he supplied materials to numerous royal building sites in Kent and Surrey as well as in London. 
In March 1378 the administration of the king's works was centralized under a clerk with responsibility for (in theory) all of England. Yevele was confirmed in the position he had held since 1360, but the records relating to individual works show that the geographical scope of his work for the king had expanded in proportion to the increased threat of invasion from France -- a reality reflected in the many references to him as king's chief mason with no distinction of place. He advised on repairs and new works at the castles of Southampton (1378-9), Carisbrooke (1380-85), Winchester (1390-1400), Portchester (1384-5), and on the town walls of Canterbury (1385-6), but it is uncertain to what extent this involved him in major design work. In 1381, 1389, and 1393 Yevele's advice, but almost certainly not his services as a designer, were sought by the great building bishop of Winchester, William Wykeham (died 1404), who had been clerk of works at Windsor Castle from 1356 to 1361. On 29 August 1390 Yevele was made exempt from jury and other forms of service on account of his official duties and 'great age'. 
His advancing years were probably the reason for Yevele's association with the younger architect Stephen Lote ['see below'] in the 1395 contract for the tomb-chest of Richard II's monument in Westminster Abbey. Similar thinking would explain why in 1394, when he took charge of Richard II's greatest architectural project, Westminster Hall, his warden was Walter Walton, an established master mason in his own right. Internally, this most splendid of medieval halls owes much less to Yevele's masonry than to the work of his carpenter colleague, Hugh Herland, but the entrance front facing the outer court is treated with a monumentality unparalleled in medieval hall design. The ecclesiastical character of the front's twin towers, 'welcoming porch', and bands of enniched imagery, is perhaps less likely to have originated with Yevele than with Richard II, for whom artistic patronage was principally a means of asserting the sacral nature of his kingship. Formally, the design typifies Yevele's work as a whole in its great indebtedness to the version of Perpendicular Gothic pioneered by William Ramsey, his most distinguished fourteenth-century predecessor as king's chief mason. 
Yevele's work for other lay patrons belonged to the 1370s and 1380s. For John of Gaunt he carried out in 1375 unspecified works at the Savoy Palace in London and, together with another mason, contracted for the duke's large and very sumptuous canopied tomb in St Paul's Cathedral. For John, third Lord Cobham he furnished the design ('devyse') for a new south aisle at the London parish church of St Dunstan-in-the-East, although he did not take charge of its building. From 1368 he served as one of the two wardens of London Bridge, the city's chief public work, and though the wardenships were purely administrative, it is highly likely that he was the designer of the two-storeyed apsidal chapel of St Thomas which projected eastwards from the middle of the bridge and which was under construction between 1384 and 1397. The chapel possessed a 'table' or handboard containing a summary history of the bridge, which was the source of the statement by the sixteenth-century antiquary John Leland that 'a mason beinge master of the bridge howse', built the chapel at his own expense ('Itinerary', 5.6). This can only refer to Yevele, whose name presumably meant nothing to Leland. Minor benefactions by medieval master masons to the works on which they were engaged are occasionally recorded elsewhere, but donation of an entire building appears to be unparalleled in the European middle ages. 
Assessment of Yevele's contributions to the most ambitious genres of medieval architecture, namely cathedral and monastic churches and their ancillary buildings, is hampered by the disappearance of documented works, and by the lack of written evidence for the authorship of extant buildings which can reasonably be attributed to him on the basis of stylistic and patronage evidence. The works in these categories include a large proportion of the outstanding architectural achievements of the late fourteenth century: the high altar screen of Durham Cathedral (1372-80), shipped in boxes from London to Newcastle; the east and south walks of the cloister of St Albans Abbey (probably begun 'c'.1380), destroyed except for the east processional door leading from the nave; the south transept facade of St Paul's Cathedral (1381-8), also destroyed; and, most important of all, the nave and south cloister walk of Canterbury Cathedral ('c'.1382-1400). At Westminster Abbey, some parts of the existing nave undoubtedly date from Yevele's time as master mason (1387-1400), but the form of the bays had been fixed under the previous architect John Palterton. Opportunities for new design work were confined to the west front, which is notable for its 'welcoming porch' and for its towers, the latter treated as vertically continuous sheets of decorative buttressing, gablets, and tracery. The only other surviving pieces of monastic building definitely by Yevele are architecturally modest: three cell entrances at the London Charterhouse, whose construction Yevele began in 1371, and a large, plain gatehouse built at St Albans Abbey some time between 1362 and 1381. 
Yevele's involvement in tomb design was undoubtedly very extensive. Apart from the two royal monuments mentioned above, his only extant and documented work of this kind is the tomb-chest of the monument to Cardinal Simon Langham (died 1376) in Westminster Abbey, in progress in 1394. Other major tombs whose stonework may be attributed to Yevele include those of the Black Prince in Canterbury Cathedral (begun late 1370s?), Archbishop Simon Sudbury in the same church (begun mid-1380s?), and Edward III in Westminster Abbey (after 1386). Yevele's will reveals that he was the proprietor of a workshop in St Paul's Churchyard which made monumental brasses. The products of this workshop may survive in considerable numbers, but their identification has never been attempted. 
Yevele owned numerous city of London properties besides his own house, which stood on Bridge Street and faced the west front of St Magnus the Martyr by London Bridge. In 1387 he acquired an extensive holding in Southwark, which probably became his main residence after his second marriage. It included two watermills and a chapel. Earlier, in 1378, he had bought a small estate in the Thames-side parishes of Aveley and Wennington in Essex, no doubt principally for recreation, but probably also in part to acquire the prestige of being a landowner. His high standing in the city community is not in doubt. From 'c'.1373 he was a member of the Salve Regina fraternity in St Magnus; in 1383 he was a common councillor for Bridge Ward; and in 1392 he was one of twenty-four 'more substantial' citizens chosen to join the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen to plead the city's case in its dispute with Richard II. Yevele's will, proved on 25 August 1400, makes no mention of children from either of his two marriages, to Margaret, who was dead by 1387, and to Katherine, widow of John Hadde (known as Lightfoot), who lived until 1410. Yevele died on 21 August 1400 and was buried beside his first wife in the lady chapel of St Magnus. In the late sixteenth century his monument still bore an inscription recording his service to Edward III, Richard II, and Henry IV. 




@@@@@


doc= 30221


Yolland, William (1810-1885), army officer and railway inspector, youngest surviving son of John Yolland, agent to the first earl of Morley, and his wife, Priscilla, was born at Merryfield, Plympton St Mary, Devon, on 17 March 1810. Educated at Trueman's mathematical school at Exeter, and by a Mr George Harvey of Plymouth, he passed through the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, and received a commission as second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 12 April 1828. His further commissions were dated: lieutenant, 4 September 1833; second captain, 19 December 1843; first captain, 1 March 1847; brevet major, 20 June 1854; lieutenant-colonel, 13 January 1855; brevet colonel, 13 January 1858. 
After the usual course of professional instruction at Chatham and a short service at Woolwich, Yolland embarked for Canada on 2 August 1831, returning to England in October 1835. He then served at various home stations until his appointment to the Ordnance Survey in May 1838. For the next fifteen years he was employed at the Tower of London, Southampton, Dublin, and Enniskillen, superintending the publication of astronomical observations for the Board of Ordnance and on active survey work, including taking observations from the top of the cross of St Paul's Cathedral. He was also responsible for most of the 6 inch maps of Lancashire and Yorkshire then in course of publication. When the map-room of the Ordnance Survey office in the Tower of London was burnt down in 1841, Yolland moved with the headquarters to Southampton, where he was executive officer and did much valuable work under General Thomas Frederick Colby. He was an associate juror of the Great Exhibition of 1851, class eight. On his leaving Southampton for Ireland in November 1852 the mayor and corporation presented Yolland with an address in acknowledgement of the interest he had taken in the welfare of the town. His pamphlet on geodesy (1852) was used in teaching at Woolwich, and he published several works on surveying. 
In July 1854 Yolland was appointed an inspector of railways under the Board of Trade. In January 1856 he was, in addition, a member of the commission appointed to consider the training of candidates for the scientific corps of the army in view of the abolition of patronage and the substitution of open competition. With his colleagues William Charles Lake and Lieutenant-Colonel William James Smythe of the Royal Artillery, he visited the principal continental countries to examine various possible systems. Yolland strongly advocated the continuance of the system of educating the candidates for the Royal Artillery and Royal Engineers together at Woolwich, while Smythe preferred that the education should be separate and distinct. Lake agreed with Yolland, and the combined system was recommended. 
In 1862 Yolland was a juror of the International Exhibition in London. He retired from the military service on 2 October 1863, retaining his appointment at the Board of Trade. In 1874 he held for a few months the position of superintending engineer of the Ramsgate harbour works. On the retirement in 1877 of Sir Henry Tyler, Yolland became chief inspector of railways, holding the post until his death. It was due to him that the Metropolitan Railway was required to submerge its line between Bishop's Road and Westbourne Park stations under the Great Western main lines near Royal Oak station, instead of crossing them on the level, as they had done for some years. This was a great improvement as regards both safety and convenience, though it was strongly opposed by the Metropolitan Railway Company. 
In 1880 Yolland was appointed a member of the commission which inquired into the Tay Bridge disaster of 28 December 1879, and settled the question of the amount of wind pressure which railway structures should be able to withstand. His colleagues were William Henry Barlow, president of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and Henry Cadogan Rothery, wreck commissioner. In 1881 he was made a companion in the Order of the Bath, civil division, in recognition of his services as a railway commissioner. 
Yolland was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1840, of the Royal Society in 1859, and a member of the Society of Arts in 1860. He belonged to other learned bodies at home and abroad. He was for many years a director of the London and St Katherine's Dock Company. His London residence was at 14 St Stephen's Square. Yolland married at Southampton, on 18 July 1843, Ellen Catherine (died 6 Nov 1864), youngest daughter of Captain Peter Rainier RN, aide-de-camp to William IV, and grandniece of Admiral Peter Rainier; they had five daughters and a son, William, major in the Royal Engineers. Yolland died at Baddesley vicarage, Atherstone, Warwickshire, where he was temporarily residing, on 5 September 1885, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 8 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 30222


Yonge, Charles Duke (1812-1891), classical scholar and historian, was born at Eton College on 30 November 1812, the eldest son of the Revd Charles Yonge (1781-1830), Eton schoolmaster, and Elizabeth (died 1868), daughter of Joseph Lord of Pembroke; his parents had married on 4 December 1810. Yonge's father's family were Devon gentry with a seat at Puslinch, near Coombe, and their most famous ancestor was James Yonge FRS (1647-1721), the naval surgeon and medical writer. In 1746 the Revd John Yonge, his great-grandfather, had married Elizabeth Duke, a coheir to property at Otterton in Devon. Yonge was educated at Eton College ('c'.1823- 'c'.1829) and entered King's College, Cambridge, on 24 February 1831. He left the college exactly three years later, following the rejection of his case for a fellowship, and was admitted to St Mary's Hall, Oxford, on 17 May 1834. There he acquired a cricket blue and graduated BA with a first-class honours in classics in December 1835; he proceeded MA in 1874. 
Until 1866, when he was appointed by the crown to the chair of English literature and history at Queen's College, Belfast, Yonge lived principally in London and worked as a private tutor and a writer. On 15 August 1837 he married Anne, daughter of J. V. Bethell of Hereford, but little is known about his personal circumstances other than that the marriage was childless, and that he was a close friend of an influential kinsman, Sir John Taylor Coleridge, the editor of Blackstone's 'Commentaries' and a justice of the king's bench 1835-58. However, by the time of his appointment at Queen's, Yonge had established a reputation as a prolific classicist and historian. Between 1842 and 1855 he translated eight classical works that were published in Bohn's series of antiquarian, classical, and ecclesiastical texts and was the author of a profusion of exercises in Greek and Latin composition. The first of his principal historical works, 'A History of England from the Earliest Times to the Peace of Paris', was published in 1857 and merited a further edition in 1871. Five other major works appeared in the next ten years: 'Parallel lives of ancient and modern heroes, of Epaminondas and Gustavus Adolphus, Philip of Macedon and Frederick the Great' (1858); 'Life of Field Marshall, the Duke of Wellington' (2 vols., 1860), which was reissued as a single volume in 1891; 'A History of the British Navy from the Earliest Period to the Present Time' (1863); an edited and revised version of 'Taylor's Students' Manual of Modern History' (1866); and 'History of France under the Bourbons' (1866). By the time he was appointed to Queen's he was already at work on the three-volume 'Life and Administration of Robert Banks, Second Earl of Liverpool', which was published in 1868. 
Yonge's professorial duties did not lead to any significant decline in the quantity of publication. His teaching consisted principally of ten lectures each week in the first and second terms -- usually six in English language and literature and the rest in history. Four notebooks of his lectures survive -- one each for English language, English literature, English (and some Irish) history, and French history -- and these suggest that he relied upon his first texts for the remainder of his career. He also supervised essays, one of the first that he set being entitled 'The usefulness or mischief of ambition'. Although he became one of the inner circle of professors who advised the president of the college and at one stage had pretensions to become president himself, there is no evidence that administrative ambitions on his own behalf ever detracted significantly from his teaching and writing. With an average income of about $420, he and his wife lived comfortably -- at one stage in Notting Hill in the leafy suburb to the south of the college -- and he continued to publish. Some of his works, such as his edition of Goldsmith's essays (1882), probably grew out of his teaching of English but the majority were historical. Apart from the life of Lord Liverpool, the most important were a history of the English revolution of 1688 (1874), a two-volume life of Marie Antoinette (1876), which merited two further editions; and 'The Constitutional History of England from 1760 to 1860' (1881), which was designed as a continuation of Hallam's 'History'. It is a mark of Yonge's dedication as a scholar that he continued as professor and author until his death at his home, 12 Elmwood Avenue, Belfast, on 30 November 1891, the day of his seventy-ninth birthday. His two-volume edition of Horace Walpole's letters had been published the year before; and two further works -- one on military commanders and another on Dryden -- appeared in 1892. This brought his total number of separate publications to fifty. He was buried in Drumbeg churchyard, near Belfast. 
Yonge probably had more lasting influence as a classicist than as either a literary or political historian. His translations and exercises appear to have been widely used in universities and schools. But his histories, although some sold well, had little impact on the historical profession. One reason for this is that his principal concern -- to explore the origins and evolution of Britain's liberal constitution and her status as a great power -- became increasingly outmoded. He began his enquiries along these lines in the 'History of England' and most of his subsequent work was devoted to assessing the contributions of different 'commanders, or legislators, or statesmen'. In the case of politicians, for example, his thesis for the period after 1760 is that most of the leading figures had made a contribution to the evolution of a liberal constitution as a result of 'honest and patriotic' motives inspired by their education, an argument which he developed in his studies of Wellington and Liverpool. However, his books were published at a time when a younger generation of historians such as Leckey, Froude, Stubbs, and Freeman were subjecting the triumphalism of 'whig history' such as Yonge's to searching scrutiny. His work therefore received little notice from his peers in the periodicals and journals, and it is significant that he was not elected a fellow of the Royal Historical Society. 
Another reason for the neglect of Yonge's historical works is that there was nothing exceptional in his research methods or his style of writing. He relied primarily on printed sources and wrote with a measured elegance that has the effect of draining the life from a subject. Although few of his books received detailed reviews, one of his life of Lord Liverpool which appeared in the 'Quarterly Review' (1869) concludes with an assessment that might be applied fairly to all of his work: 'His style is not very lively; his research is not very deep; nor does he convey the impression that when undertaking the life of Lord Liverpool he could not with equal readiness have undertaken the life of Confucius. But he deserves praise for the simplicity of his language, the directness of his method, and the moderation of his opinions. ('QR', 206)' 



@@@@@


doc= 30223


Yonge, Sir George, fifth baronet (1732-1812), politician and colonial governor, was the only surviving son of Sir William Yonge, fourth baronet (c.1693-1755), of Colyton, Devon, secretary at war from 1735 to 1746, and his second wife, Anne Howard, the daughter and coheir of Thomas Howard, sixth Baron Howard of Effingham. He attended Eton College between 1742 and 1745 and the University of Leipzig from 1750 to 1752. After a brief period as secretary of the embassy at Turin in 1753, he was returned to parliament the following year as member for Honiton, which he represented continuously (except from 1761 to 1763) in successive parliaments until 1796. The Yonge family interest in Honiton was not strong enough to prevent a series of expensive contested elections in which Yonge is said to have spent enormous sums. An attempt to establish a woollen factory at Ottery St Mary reportedly also drained his finances. On 10 July 1765 he married Elizabeth (died 1833), the daughter and heir of Bourchier Cleeve (1715-1760), of Foot's Cray, Kent, a wealthy London pewterer. 
Yonge described himself as a friend of the Grenville ministry, but in 1764 he voted against the government on general warrants and voted and spoke in favour of the repeal of the cider tax, to which he led opposition in Devon. The old corps whigs saw him as a possible friend, and although he attended the Cockpit meeting of government supporters on 9 January 1765 he was regarded favourably by the Rockingham administration. He was given office in September 1766 under the Chatham ministry as a lord of the Admiralty, and resigned from Grafton's administration in January 1770 'for the honour of Lord Chatham' (Brooke, 674). In opposition he was a prominent speaker against North's American policy, although the content of his speeches was never extraordinary. He returned to office with Rockingham in April 1782 as vice-treasurer for Ireland. Despite his doubts over Yonge's competence, Shelburne made him secretary at war in July 1782; he left office with Shelburne in April 1783 but returned to the same post under William Pitt the younger in December 1783. He remained loyal to Pitt, who nominated him KB in 1788. 
In July 1794, to make room for William Windham, who had joined the administration with the Portland whigs, Yonge was moved to the mastership of the Royal Mint, on the ground that its income was equivalent to that which he had enjoyed as secretary at war. He was troubled by the possibility that this office excluded him from the Commons as a government contractor, and did not stand at the 1796 election. Yonge was now facing severe financial problems; he claimed that his income had fallen well below the $3000 he had expected as master of the mint, and he may have been living in a debtors' sanctuary at Holyrood in Edinburgh when he was offered the post of governor of the Cape in succession to George Macartney, Earl Macartney, at a salary of $4000 a year. He was refused a peerage but was returned to parliament for Old Sarum as a client of the prime minister's cousin Thomas Pitt, second Baron Camelford, to avoid prosecution for debt. 
Yonge was a man of long official experience when he arrived at Cape Town on 9 December 1799, but it was an experience that had no special bearing on his new task; his motives for taking the post were not of the highest, and he was probably too old to fall readily into new lines of thought and conduct. He has been described as 'decidedly the most incompetent man who has ever been at the head of affairs in the colony, though he possessed an amazing amount of self-assurance and pertinacity' (Theal, 62) and as 'corrupt to an extent shocking even to a society well-accustomed to corruption and so gross as to procure his recall within months' (Welsh, 98). His government was incompetent. He quarrelled with General Francis Dundas, the officer in command of the troops, whose authority he attempted to usurp. He also offended the Dutch community by increased taxes -- contrary, it was alleged, to the settlement following Britain's annexation of the colony -- and left the administration of affairs almost entirely in the hands of Mr Blake, his private secretary, and Lieutenant-Colonel Cockburn, his principal aide-de-camp, whose influence and support were believed to be marketable commodities. Yonge was criticized for inattention to the Cape's role in protecting British interests in India; Richard, Marquess Wellesley, governor-general of India, wrote to the secretary of state for war, Henry Dundas, objecting that Yonge was more interested in 'founding theatres and masquerade rooms' (Symonds and Fisher, 665). On 12 October 1800 Dundas told George III that Yonge's conduct at the Cape: 'has in such a variety of particulars been so wild and extravagant as to render it impossible to continue him in that Government without exposing this country to the imputation of being indifferent to the concerns of that most important settlement. ('Later Correspondence of George III', 3.428)' In January 1801 Dundas ordered Yonge home and appointed Francis Dundas acting governor. Yonge wished that the supersession should take place after a short delay, giving him time to wind up affairs; but whether in consequence of private instructions from his uncle, or from personal ill feeling, Francis Dundas insisted on the immediate transfer of authority. Yonge then applied to the commander-in-chief at the Cape, Vice-Admiral Sir Roger Curtis, for a ship of war to take him to St Helena, but this was refused; and Yonge was left, waiting at a hotel, until he could find a passage. He did not arrive in England until towards the end of the year. Meanwhile, in February 1801, he was replaced as MP for Old Sarum. 
The new secretary of state for war in the Addington administration, Robert, Lord Hobart, wrote to Francis Dundas requesting a report on various abuses said to have taken place under Yonge's government. Dundas appointed a commission at Cape Town, which, after hearing evidence, charged Blake and Cockburn with many gross malpractices and Yonge with being more or less cognisant of them. Among numerous scandalous abuses were the creation of new and unnecessary civil and military offices from which Blake and Cockburn drew salaries; the imposition of monopolies in the supply of timber and other trades from which a share of the profit was drawn; and private trading in slaves and personal aggrandizement in the awarding of government contracts, agreed without the knowledge of the Colonial Office. Cockburn denied the charge, and neither he nor Blake was tried. If anything was officially done or said to Yonge, it did not abash him. In July 1802 he was received by George III at Weymouth. It was very likely this friendship which protected him from further action, for the whole matter was allowed to drop; the return of the Cape to the Dutch by the peace of Amiens in 1802 was probably also a factor. Yonge failed to get re-elected for Honiton that year; he was spat on and his wig was set on fire when he tried to administer the bribery oath. Again in financial straits, he wrote to Hobart, claiming payment of his expenses for the journey home, and for the passage, diet, and hotel charges at Cape Town and at St Helena, which seem to have amounted to about $1000. It does not appear these were ever paid, but he was given apartments at Hampton Court and the titular governorship of Tortola in the Virgin Islands in 1806. 
Yonge died at Hampton Court on 25 September 1812. He had no children, and the baronetcy became extinct. The family estates were long sold; by 1789 the estates at Coplestone and Colyton in Devon had gone, and Yonge entertained George III and Queen Charlotte at the second family seat at Escott, but that too was sold in 1794. Yonge's widow continued to reside at Hampton Court, and died there on 7 January 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 30224


Yonge, James (fl. 1405-1434), translator, belonged to an English family settled in Dublin. According to deeds belonging to the parish of St John, Dublin, his family was long associated with that parish. On 16 March 1405 James Yonge, 'clerk, notary public', certified concerning a case of unlawful imprisonment, and again on 28 November 1411, concerning dower rights to a property. On 9 August 1417 he was appointed attorney in a property transaction. From January to October 1423 he was in prison in Trim Castle, Meath. Before the end of October he was moved to Dublin Castle, and was pardoned on 10 May 1425. In the will of John Lytill (probate granted 5 November 1434) he was left 20's'. apparently for acting as executor. Other members of his family also appear in the parish deeds. John Yonge, possibly a brother, is cited as 'clerk, notary public' on 12 November 1411, and William Yonge, 'citizen and butcher', on 8 August 1446. 
Yonge is referred to as 'James Young, or Junius, a Notar-Publick of the City of Dublin' by Sir James Ware, who (in the English version of Ware's 'De scriptoribus Hiberniae' issued by Walter Harris in 1744) credits him with writing ''Monita Politica de bono Regimine', to James, Earl of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (An. 1407) and a 'History of the Pilgrimage of Laurence Rathold, a knight, and Baron of Hungary, to St. Patrick's Purgatory', An. 1411' ('Whole Works', 1.88). Yonge seems to have been working for Ormond, who was deputy lieutenant of Ireland, in some official capacity, and 'Monita politica' is to be identified with the English translation, with extensive alterations and additions, which he made in 1422 at the earl's request, of the French version of the 'Secreta secretorum' (a text erroneously attributed to Aristotle). The translation, which is free, is divided into seventy-two chapters, and includes additional material (mainly comprising chapters 32 and 33) on Irish history, inserted by Yonge, which discloses and affirms his prejudice in favour of the legitimacy of English rule in Ireland. Under the title 'The Governaunce of Prynces, or, Pryvete of Pryveteis', Yonge's translation was published in 1898 by Robert Steele from Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. B.490, one of three extant manuscripts, the other two being LPL, MS 633, and LPL, Carew MS 633. The last of these contains the note: 'This book was written in the time of King Henry V, by John Yonge, servant to James Butler, Earl of Ormond, and dedicated to his said Lord and Master'. In a prefatory note to his edition, Steele rightly describes Yonge's translation as 'perhaps the only lengthy work written in the English of the Pale early in the fifteenth century'. Yonge is also credited with an abridged translation of the 'Expugnatio Hibernica' of Gerald of Wales which precedes 'The Governaunce of Prynces' in the Rawlinson manuscript. 
In 1411 Yonge was commissioned to write an account, in Latin, of the experiences of Laurentius Ratholdus of Paaztho in Hungary, who made the pilgrimage to the cave in Station Island on Lough Derg, Donegal, in 1411; this was edited by Delehaye in 1908, from BL, Royal MS 10 B.ix, which constitutes a copy of Yonge's original narrative, completed in 1461 by a monk named Henry Cranebrook. In this work Yonge refers to himself as 'I James Yonge, imperial notary of the citizens, and least of the scriveners, of the city of Dublin' ('Igitur ego Jacobus Yonge notarius imperialis civium et scriptorum minimus civitatis Dublinensis'; 'Pelerinage', 58-9; J. F. Niermeyer defines 'notarius imperialis' as a 'clerk in the royal chancery'). It is possible that Ratholdus's pilgrimage was a pretext for a secret diplomatic mission. Yonge's account is based on conversations which he had had with Ratholdus, and includes material of his own, containing a description of the island, as well as documents relating to the pilgrimage issued by King Sigismund of Hungary, Nicholas Fleming, archbishop of Armagh, and Matthew, prior of St Patrick's Purgatory. 


@@@@@


doc= 30225


Yonge, James (1647-1721), surgeon and physician, the son of John Yonge (died 1679), surgeon, and his wife, Joanna (1618-1700), daughter of Nicholas Blackaller of Sharpham, Devon, was born at Plymouth on 27 February 1647 and was baptized at St Andrew's 'in the Presbyterian district' of Plymouth on 11 March that year. Able to read and write, at the age of nine he was sent to the Latin school where he was educated under Mr Horsman. 
On 14 February 1658 Yonge was apprenticed to Silvester Richmond, surgeon of the 'Constant Warwick'. He was appointed surgeon's mate to the 'Montague' in 1660 and was present at the bombardment of Algiers in 1662. On his return to England, Yonge was paid off and worked for four months as assistant to an apothecary in Wapping. When Richmond retired Yonge was bound to his father and assisted him until February 1663 when he was sent on a voyage with the 'Reformation' to the cod fisheries in Newfoundland. In February 1664 he joined the 'Robert Bonadventure' as surgeon, visiting west Africa and the Mediterranean. On his second voyage with the ship in December 1665 he was captured by the Dutch and was held as a prisoner of war in Amsterdam until September 1666. Yonge returned to Plymouth where he practised until February 1668, at which time he made a final trip to Newfoundland. 
Yonge settled in Plymouth on his return and eventually built a successful practice. On 28 March 1671 he married Jane (died 1708), daughter of Thomas Crampporne of Buckland Monachorum, Devon; they had three sons and five daughters. Their eldest son, John (1672-1745), was great-grandfather of Charles Duke Yonge (1812-1891). James Yonge became surgeon to the naval hospital at Plymouth and in 1674 was appointed deputy surgeon-general to the navy, 'an office which brought him no inconsiderable accession of emolument' (Munk, 3). He went on to publish papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions' on a bullet in the trachea, gallstones, and on an intestinal concretion. In 1678 Yonge paid a visit to London, during which he met many of the notable figures of the day. The visit led him to write 'Currus triumphalis e terebintho', two letters on the use of turpentine to control haemorrhage. In 1682 he published 'Wounds of the Brain Proved Curable'. 
Yonge, who was a royalist and then a tory, became an influential citizen of Plymouth: he was elected a member of the common council for the borough in 1679, churchwarden of St Andrew's in 1682, and alderman and mayor of Plymouth in 1694. From 1685 to 1689 he was surgeon to Lord Bath's regiment of militia. Yonge made a further visit to London in 1692 after his appointment as surgeon to the new dock at Hamoaze. The trip gave him the opportunity to hear Edward Tyson lecture and to be made a member of the Company of Surgeons. 
In 1702 Yonge became an extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, although he had already been licensed to practise by the bishop of Exeter. He was elected FRS on 3 November 1702. He retired from practice the next year, although he did undertake the embalming of Sir Cloudesley Shovell's body in 1707. 
Yonge's journal, detailing his professional activities and family affairs, was published in 1963. He also wrote on trade with Newfoundland and on the 'Eikon basilike'. Yonge died on 25 July 1721 and was buried in St Andrew's Church, Plymouth, where a monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 30226


Yonge, James (1792-1870), physician, born in Devon, was the fourth son of Duke Yonge (1751/2-1823), vicar of Otterton, Devon, and his wife, Catherina, daughter of Thomas Crawley-Boevey of Flaxley Abbey, Gloucestershire. He was a direct descendant of James Yonge (1647-1721), a naval surgeon and medical writer. The novelist Charlotte Mary Yonge (1823-1901) was his niece. Yonge was briefly at Eton College in 1811, the year he matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, whence he graduated BA on 13 May 1815, MA on 22 October 1817, BM on 8 June 1819, and DM on 20 June 1821. After leaving Oxford he studied at Edinburgh University before moving to London, where he assisted John Abernethy. He was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1822. Yonge moved to Plymouth in 1832 and became physician to the Plymouth Dispensary. In 1840 he went on to become physician to the Devon and East Cornwall Hospital, and he was for many years one of the most prominent physicians in the west of England. He married, in 1820, his cousin Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas Crawley-Boevey, baronet. Yonge died at his home, The Crescent, Plymouth, on 3 January 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 30227


Yonge, John (1466/7-1516), civil lawyer and diplomat, was born at Heyford, Oxfordshire, a manor which belonged to New College, Oxford. Yonge later lived in Rye, Sussex. Nothing is known of his parents. When aged eleven he entered Winchester College as a scholar on 29 September 1478. He became a scholar of New College, Oxford, on 30 January 1484; from 1486 to 1500 he held a fellowship at New College and by 1494 he had taken the BCL degree. He went to Italy for further study. After living and studying in Bologna for some years, he was admitted in 1500 to the University of Ferrara, where he took the degree of DCL. 
Yonge's education in the civil law and his foreign study provided him with the background needed to enter ecclesiastical administration and royal service. For some reason his career progressed slowly. He did not gain an important office until the age of thirty-seven when on 28 January 1504 William Warham, the recently appointed archbishop of Canterbury, made him a commissary in his prerogative court. Warham and Yonge had overlapped as fellows of New College and both were civilians. Later that same year Yonge went on his first diplomatic mission which involved negotiating a mercantile treaty with Archduke Philip of Austria, the ruler of the Low Countries. During 1506 Yonge participated in another mission concerning the terms of Henry VII's engagement to Margaret of Savoy. Meanwhile Yonge began to accumulate a rich collection of sinecures. On 17 March 1503 he acquired the rectory of St Stephen Walbrook, London, which was followed by the rectory of St Mary-le-Bow, London, which he held from 19 March 1505 to May 1514. On 19 February 1506 he became the warden of St John's Hospital in South Weald, Essex, and he was dean of Chichester by August 1507. Archbishop Warham continued to support Yonge and during August 1507 made him his diocesan chancellor and auditor of causes. The culmination of Yonge's success came on 22 January 1508 when Henry VII appointed him as master of the rolls, an office Warham, now lord chancellor, had held from 1494 to 1502. More diplomatic missions quickly followed. During July 1508 he went on a mission to Emperor Maximilian and during the following October he participated with Thomas Wolsey (who reported favourably on Yonge's performance) in the negotiations leading to the treaty of Cambrai. As a final tribute to his confidence in Yonge, in his will dated 10 April 1509 Henry VII named him as one of his executors. 
Apparently recognizing a valuable servant, Henry VIII reappointed Yonge as master of the rolls on 11 June 1509. The king also continued to use him as a diplomat. From early August to 2 October 1511 Yonge travelled in the company of the Spanish ambassador as a special ambassador to Louis XII of France. On this occasion Wolsey judged Yonge to have been ineffectual. Apparently Wolsey's opinion was not yet paramount, since lucrative honours still followed such service. In November 1511 Yonge became a canon of St Paul's and a prebendary of Holborn, and on 11 February 1512 he added the prebendary of Newington in St Paul's, London. From 16 May 1512 to about April 1513 he went on a long mission to the Low Countries accompanied by Sir Thomas Boleyn. They negotiated with the emperor Maximilian, King Ferdinand of Spain, and the pope concerning the activities of the Holy League, their mutual alliance against France. He crossed over to Calais with Henry VIII's invading army on 11 March 1513. The following October he went on a mission concerning a proposed marriage between Henry VIII's sister Mary and Charles of Castile, the future king of Spain and Holy Roman emperor. 
Yonge was obviously perceived as a person on his way up in England. On 1 January 1513 Erasmus dedicated a manuscript copy of his translation of Plutarch's 'De tuenda valetudine' and presented it to him as a new year gift. The edition printed by Richard Pynson of London in August 1513 bore the same dedication. More ecclesiastical offices followed his diplomatic labours. On 4 January 1513 he became dean of Newarke Hospital and College in Leicester, an office he held until December 1515 when he vacated it in return for a pension of $20 per annum. In addition to acquiring more rectories, in 1514 Yonge became a canon of York; he quickly became dean of York and prebendary of Bugthorpe. He also acquired the archdeaconry of Barnstaple. More important, Yonge managed to gain the favourable attention of the rising Thomas Wolsey. When Wolsey became archbishop of York in mid-1514 he made Yonge his suffragan with the title of bishop of Negroponte. 
Yonge appeared to have a bright future. On 4 April 1515 Henry VIII appointed him an envoy to renew the peace with Francis I of France. From there he proceeded to Tournai with a commission from the king authorizing him to organize the administration of that newly conquered city. But Yonge became seriously ill, and on 13 August 1515 Henry VIII gave him permission to return to England. Conscientiously, Yonge delayed his departure until 17 September in order to conclude his assignment. Back in London he died of the sweating sickness on 25 April 1516. Yonge was buried in the Rolls chapel, where an effigy by Pietro Torrigiano marks his tomb. It is probable that he would have climbed even higher in the government and the church if he had not died, prematurely and unmarried at the age of forty-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 30228


Yonge, John (1462/3-1526), bishop and college head, was born at Newton Longville, Buckinghamshire. His father was a tenant of New College, Oxford, and it was there that John went, having attended the college's associated foundation at Winchester College, where he was admitted a scholar on 26 August 1474, aged eleven. In 1480 he went as a scholar to New College, where he graduated BA in 1484-5, MA in 1489, and DTh in 1504. He was a full fellow from 1482 to 1502, and at various times held the offices of first and second bursar and of subwarden. Ordained acolyte on 24 September 1485 and subdeacon on 14 March 1489, he is not recorded as having become a priest, but still held a number of benefices, starting as vicar of Beckley, Oxfordshire, on 2 February 1499. Admitted rector of Birkby, Yorkshire, on 26 January 1503, he became rector of All Hallows, Honey Lane, London, but resigned the latter living on 30 October 1510. On 15 September 1509 he was nominated master of the London hospital of St Thomas of Acon, and by skilful management saved it from closure. He found the hospital over $700 in debt, but during the eight years of his mastership he paid off the debt and spent more than $1430 on repairs. 
Yonge became a close associate of Bishop Richard Fitzjames of London. The two men were among those whom Edmund Dudley before his execution for treason in 1510 named as guardians of his son Jerome, and in 1513 Yonge became Fitzjames's suffragan, with the title of bishop of Gallipoli, under papal authorization issued on 15 April 1513 (at his consecration on 13 June he made his profession of obedience to the archbishop of Heraclea as his titular superior). He was licensed to remain master of St Thomas's, and subsequently secured a papal bull granting the right to appoint future masters to the Mercers' Company. He also obtained a bull (28 February 1515) empowering him to grant indulgences. On 28 March 1514 Yonge was also collated to the archdeaconry of London, and his responsibilities in London diocese grew thereafter as Fitzjames's health failed. In 1519 he was elected prior of the Augustinian house of Shulbred, Sussex, but resigned on 21 March 1521, having obtained a grant of land to the priory. About this time he became prebendary of Wightring in Chichester Cathedral. 
Yonge had retained links with Oxford. In 1517 he and Fitzjames were invited by the university to assume responsibility for the codification of its statutes, and on 13 April 1521 he was elected warden of New College. This position he retained (along with his archdeaconry and Chichester prebend) for the rest of his life. In November 1524 he was admitted to the college's living of Colerne, Wiltshire. He died in Oxford on 28 March 1526 and was buried in New College chapel, where his brass survives (without its head), representing him in episcopal vestments with mitre and crozier. He gave the college a copy of St Augustine's works, published at Basel in 1506. Three Yonges from Newton Longville who were scholars and fellows of New College in the first thirty years of the sixteenth century were presumably his kinsmen. 


@@@@@


doc= 30229


Yonge, Nicholas (d. 1619), music editor, may be identified with the Nicholas Yong of London who was born in Lewes, Sussex, and whose mother's name was Bray. In 1585 he applied for membership of the London waits and doubtless through the influence of his sponsor, Sir Walter Mildmay, gained a place in reversion, though there is no record of his having taken it up. He lived in the parish of St Michael Cornhill, where from 1587 onwards seven of his nine children were baptized. He was admitted lay vicar-choral of St Paul's Cathedral on 16 January 1592, and in the course of Bishop Bancroft's 1598 visitation he gave evidence concerning abuses in the choir during divine service. 
Yonge is best remembered today as the editor of two anthologies of mostly Italian vocal music published, with English texts, as 'Musica transalpina' in 1588 and 1597. The first volume, containing fifty-seven 'madrigals' -- the first recorded English use of the term, and applied here not only to true madrigals, but also to chansons, canzonets, and other forms -- was international in scope. It none the less betrayed a certain local bias: of its eighteen composers, the most liberally represented was Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder, who had lived in England from 1562 to 1578. Yonge also included William Byrd's English setting of Ariosto's 'La verginella', the first stanza of which had appeared in Italian some months earlier in the composer's own 'Psalmes, Sonets & Songs'. In the dedication, addressed to Lord Gilbert Talbot, Yonge suggested that the publication grew out of the need to supply suitable material for friends to sing at daily music meetings in his home. As the repertory provided was mostly Italian, and those unfamiliar with the language either did not participate or did so 'with litle delight', he sought more music in the vernacular. Finding few suitable native compositions, he borrowed English versions of pieces translated by 'a Gentleman', and these and others like them proved so popular that he was eventually persuaded to publish a selection. A third of the pieces were drawn from madrigal anthologies issued in 1583 and 1585 by Pierre Phalese of Antwerp. The success of Yonge's first collection led to its reprinting in 1593 or 1594. His 1597 volume, containing only twenty-four items by eleven composers, was less influential, though six of its lyrics were reset by later composers, a higher proportion than the nine reset from the first volume. 
Yonge's madrigal anthologies are important because they popularized the form in England and laid the foundations for an indigenous madrigal school by providing continental models for Elizabethan composers to imitate. He made his will on 19 October 1619 and was buried at St Michael Cornhill four days later. Probate was granted to his wife, Jane, on 12 November following. 


@@@@@


doc= 30230


Yonge, Sir Thomas (c.1405-1477), justice, was the eldest son of a Welshman, Thomas Yonge, or Mere (died 1427), who was mayor of Bristol in 1411-12 and 1420-21, and represented Bristol in parliament in 1414; his mother was Joan Wotton (died 1429), widow of the wealthy Bristol merchant John Canynges. William Canynges was thus his half-brother. His younger brother, John Yonge, became a prominent London grocer, representing the city in parliament (1455-6) as well as being sheriff in 1455-6 and mayor in 1466-7. Having become a consistent Yorkist, he was knighted by Edward IV after his restoration to the throne, on 20 May 1471. 
Thomas Yonge became a member of the Middle Temple, and built up a practice in Bristol and the south-west of England as well as in London. He was recorder of Bristol by 1441, serving until at least 1462, and he was one of the city's MPs in 1435, 1437, 1439-40, 1442, 1445-6, 1447, 1449, 1449-50, 1450-51, and 1455-6. It may be significant that as late as 1455 the election returns refer to him as 'mercator' (merchant): for much of his career he seems to have had strong links with the commercial worlds of Bristol and London. 
In June 1451 Yonge presented in parliament a petition from his constituents to the effect that the duke of York should be recognized as heir presumptive to the throne. This was part of a wider attack upon the duke of Somerset, whose position was, however, unshaken; parliament was dissolved, and Yonge was committed to the Tower of London. He was released in April 1452, on the general pardon issued after the temporary reconciliation of the two parties. Back in parliament in January 1456 he claimed redress for his arrest and imprisonment, reminding the Commons in his petition that all members: 'ought to have their freedom to speak and say in the house of their assembly as to them is thought convenient or reasonable without any manner of challenge, charge, or punition therefore to be laid to them in any wise. ('RotP', 5.337)' The Commons sent up the bill to the Lords, and the king ordered that the lords of the council should provide a remedy; but no further proceedings in the matter are recorded. 
Yonge was not elected to the strongly royalist parliament that met at Coventry in November 1459, but he was returned for Gloucestershire in 1460 to the parliament that reversed the proceedings at Coventry. It is nevertheless unclear how far he can be called a Yorkist at this time. In 1446 he was retained as legal counsel by Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham, and he continued to serve the duke until at least 1457-8. 
In 1442 Yonge obtained a writ exempting him from appointment as serjeant-at-law, and it was only on 7 November 1463 that he was finally appointed, the day before he was made a king's serjeant. He is described shortly after his appointment as 'arrayed yn a long blue gown ungurd, with a scarlet hode unrolled and j [one] standyng roon [round?] cap of scarlet, as the custom is of sergeantes to go' (B. R. Masters and E. Ralph, eds., 'Church Book of St Ewen's, Bristol, 1454-1584', Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society, Records Section, 5, 1967, 58). In November 1467 he was raised to the bench as justice of the common pleas. He was not, however, removed when Henry VI was restored in October 1470, but lost his position -- perhaps on the grounds of age -- during the rearrangement of the judiciary when Edward IV regained his throne six months later; he was, however, exempted from the operation of the 'Act of Resumption' of 1472-3. Nevertheless, on 29 April 1475, in spite of his advanced age, Yonge was appointed a justice of the king's bench, possibly as a measure to strengthen the latter court during Edward IV's expedition to France of that year. 
He was married, by 1454, to Isabel, daughter of John Burton, a prosperous Bristol merchant. He died on 3 or 4 May 1477 and was buried in the Greyfriars Church, London; his heir was his son Thomas, said to be aged thirty or more, and he also had another son and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30231


Yonge, Walter (bap. 1579, d. 1649), politician and diarist, was baptized on 16 April 1579, the second son and heir of John Yonge (died 1612), of Colyton, and his wife, Alice (died 1631), daughter of Richard Starre of Seaton, Devon. Yonge is thought to have descended from a junior branch of the family of the fifteenth-century judge Thomas Yonge. His immediate forebears came from Berkshire at the end of that century in the person of his great-grandfather and namesake, who bought several manors in east Devon. Yonge's grandfather John married the heir of Colyton. His father was a prominent merchant who engaged in the first trading ventures to Africa. Yonge went to Magdalen College, Oxford, matriculating in 1599, but took no degree. In 1600 he entered the Middle Temple, and was called to the bar, but it is not known how far he practised. On 6 February 1601 he married Jane (died 1655), daughter and coheir of Sir John Peryam of Exeter (and niece of Sir William Peryam, chief baron of the exchequer). They had two sons and a daughter. 
For the first part of his adult life Yonge lived at Upton Helions near Crediton, Devon, but because his elder brother, John, died early he succeeded to Colyton and the family's other manorial holdings on his father's death in 1612. He continued the family practice of purchasing manors, and like his father he was interested in overseas trade. In 1624 he invested in the Dorchester Company, an attempt to combine profit with consolidating godly settlements in New England. Yonge also made a notable contribution to local affairs. In 1625 he bought some land in trust under a charity which bore his name, for the benefit of the poor of Crediton; the charity was still operating 250 years later. Yonge was sheriff of Devon in 1628, and quartermaster-general to the Devon militia in 1635; he served as a JP for the county from 1622 until his death. He produced a manual listing the parliamentary statutes under which the justices worked, with the level of evidence and the penalties prescribed for each offence. In 1642 parliament ordered it to be printed for public use, as 'A Justice of the Peace, his Vade-Mecum'. 
This was Yonge's only published work, but for most of his life he kept a diary (now in the British Library), which is an important historical record. The volumes dating from before the civil war illustrate the growing popular criticism of the royal government. Always apprehensive of 'popish' conspiracy, Yonge became increasingly suspicious of sacramentalist tendencies in the English church. He thought religion should focus on the elucidation of scripture. He was concerned about restrictions on preaching as early as 1606, when he objected to a licensing scheme outlawing independent lecturers, though he also noted parliament's attempts to ameliorate the rules. In 1622 he was dismayed by the government's suppression of anti-Catholic sentiment, and the instructions to ministers to 'preach but once a Sabbath... and only in their own cures'. He was a stern advocate of moral discipline, believing that mixed dancing and stage plays 'tended to the high provocation of God's wrath' ('Diary', 15, 64). He deplored the king's support for Sunday sports, and applauded parliament's opposition to them. 
In the 1620s Yonge's diary was preoccupied with the Thirty Years' War. In January 1621 he cited parliament's declaration urging James I to go to war to recover the palatinate for his daughter, Elizabeth of Bohemia. But later Yonge had to record the sequence of ignominious failures of English armies in their belated interventions, followed by parliament's efforts to impeach the duke of Buckingham in 1626. Yonge is also suggested as the originator of a separate, detailed record of that controversial parliament (BL, Add. MS 22474). War accentuated the problem of finance, and Yonge disapproved of any kind of extra-parliamentary taxation. He believed that the benevolence of 1622 should have been raised 'in a legal course of Parliaments' ('Diary', 61). He absented himself from the commission to implement the forced loan in 1626, and noted the resistance in other counties. He kept reports of the ensuing prosecutions, and indicated his belief that it was the king who was infringing the law. In the 1630s Yonge called the judges who defended ship money 'pro-rege', and those who opposed it 'pro-patria' (diary, BL, Add. MS 35331, fol. 68'v'). 
Yonge had many reasons to stand as an MP when in December 1640 the Long Parliament approved the petition of Honiton in Devon for its electoral rights to be revived. Yonge owned a manor in Honiton parish. And he clearly had a high opinion of parliament's capacities. Puritan and 'country' sympathies may well have influenced the restoration of borough franchises in 1640. Yonge was related to one of the opposition leaders, William Strode, and must have been a welcome recruit in the house. He supported early radical demands for a parliamentary voice in ministerial appointments. On 18 December 1641 he made the 'startling suggestion' that the bill of tonnage and poundage should include a proviso that Sir Henry Vane be retained as treasurer of the navy, against the king's wishes ('Journal', ed. Coates, xxxi). 
Yonge naturally became a parliamentarian in the civil war. He kept a parliamentary diary from September 1642 to December 1645 (BL, Add. MSS 18777-18780). It is a valuable record of the progress of the war and the state of opinion in parliament, but adds little to knowledge of Yonge's own views. He did play a significant part in the settlement of religion. In June 1643 he was one of twenty MPs named to the assembly of divines. He also sat on a subcommittee of sixteen MPs producing draft ordinances from the assembly's work for parliament to consider. In July 1643 he went to Scotland with the English commissioners. It is not clear whether he supported Scottish theocratic presbyterianism, or parliament's preference for a less restrictive, Erastian church. But his faith in the individual analysis of scripture was further revealed when the royalists in Devon captured a 'seditious lecturer' at his house in 1644 (Cliffe, 87). Yonge included detailed reports of sermons in his parliamentary notebooks. A separate collection, 'Reports of sermons in London, 1642-4', is attributed to his second son, Walter (BL, Add. MSS 18781-18782). 
Yonge also specialized in committees on legal matters, and chaired the committee to turn parliament's ordinances into statutes after the war. This was an awkward proposition. But Yonge compiled a notebook of precedents suggesting that parliament held residual authority in the state. And he concluded that because parliament represented the whole kingdom, it could be regarded as the true, binding legislative power, independently of the king. Finally Yonge assisted the parliamentarian cause through his experience in naval affairs and military supply. He became a victualler of the navy after the outbreak of war, and was still acting in that capacity in October 1648. 
Yonge's attitude to the army's purge of parliament in December of that year is uncertain. He had already begun to withdraw from parliamentary activities, and does not appear on the list of secluded members. He died in November 1649, and was buried at Colyton on 26 November. His widow, Jane, was buried there on 17 April 1655. His eldest son, Sir John (1603-1663), was one of the secluded MPs in 1648, and was made a baronet at the Restoration, though the family remained nonconformist in religion. 


@@@@@


doc= 30232


Yonge, Sir William, fourth baronet (c.1693-1755), politician, was born at Colyton, Devon the first son of Sir Walter Yonge, third baronet (bap. 1653, d. 1731), and his second wife, Gwen, the daughter and coheir of Sir Robert Williams. He married Mary, the daughter of Samuel Heathcote of Hackney and the sister of Sir William Heathcote, on 30 July 1716. This marriage, which was childless, ended in an acrimonious divorce in 1724. Yonge secured evidence of his wife's adultery with Colonel Thomas Norton, won a case for damages, and was granted a divorce in the consistory court of the bishop of London and by a special act of parliament which gave him permission to remarry. His second wife, whom he married on 14 April 1729, was Anne, the daughter and coheir of Thomas Howard, sixth Baron Howard of Effingham. The couple had six daughters and two sons, including George Yonge, fifth baronet, later governor of the Cape of Good Hope. 
The Yonge family, who were staunch whigs, owned estates near and in the borough of Honiton. Together with the tory Courtenay family, who were lords of the manor, they dominated the electoral interest of this notoriously venal borough. Yonge was first elected for Honiton in 1715, soon after he came of age, and he represented the borough continuously until 1754, when he surrendered his seat to his son George and took his seat for Tiverton. As well as being elected for Honiton in every general election he was also re-elected in five by-elections required after he had taken office under the crown. Though venal, Honiton was not a pocket borough and it was quite often contested. The franchise originally belonged to all inhabitant householders who paid scot and lot (about 300-400 voters in 1715), but, after a resolution in the House of Commons in 1724, all inhabitant householders were given the vote and the number of electors doubled. Yonge favoured this decision as the leader of the more popular party in the constituency, but he retained his seat by carefully cultivating the voters and spending heavily on his elections. 
A firm whig, Yonge always attached himself to the ministerial party. His first reported speech was in support of the government-sponsored 'Septennial Bill' in 1716. During the split in the whig party in 1717 he supported the earl of Sunderland and was rewarded with a minor place in the commission for stating army debts. In a debate on the South Sea scheme, on 23 March 1720, he was one of the ministerial spokesmen who narrowly secured the rejection of Robert Walpole's motion for protecting holders of government loans by fixing the rate at which they might be converted into South Sea stock. After Sunderland's death in 1722 Yonge quickly attached himself to Walpole, becoming a commissioner of Irish revenue 1723-4 and then a lord of the Treasury in 1724. Thereafter he became one of Walpole's most dependable lieutenants in the Commons. He was particularly active in defending the armed forces raised each year by the ministry and the administration's foreign policy. In 1723 he played a major role in the impeachment of Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, and on 27 May 1725 he was created one of the first knights of the Bath. 
Yonge lost office in 1727, on the accession of George II. According to Lord Hervey, the new king always referred to him as 'Stinking Yonge' and had conceived such an insurmountable dislike to his person and his character that Walpole could not persuade the king to allow him to remain in office. Walpole advised him to 'be patient, not clamorous, to submit, not resent or oppose, to be subservient to the Court in attendance and give the King his assistance as constantly and as assiduously in Parliament as if he was paid for it' (Hervey, 1.35-7). Walpole's advice was heeded and his confidence justified. Yonge was made a lord of the Admiralty in 1728, advanced to a lord of the Treasury in 1730, and served as secretary at war from 1735 to 1746. This last promotion proved that he had overcome the king's aversion to him, because the post gave its holder regular access to the royal closet. 
Yonge amply repaid Walpole's confidence in him. In the Commons he was one of the ministry's most frequent and effective speakers on a very wide range of issues. In addition to his justification of the armed forces, he played a leading role in every major debate when the parliamentary opposition proposed bills designed to reduce crown patronage and the ministry's ability to influence MPs or the electorate. He regularly accused the opposition of pursuing factious policies, of vilifying all the supporters of the ministry including the king and queen, and of undermining the existing balance of the constitution. He repeated these charges in his only pamphlet, 'Sedition and Defamation Display'd' (1731). Lord Hervey added an introductory dedication to this work that subjected William Pulteney and Lord Bolingbroke to scurrilous abuse. Pulteney's printed reply, even more scurrilous and brutal, led to a famous duel between him and Hervey. 
Once the country was at war from 1739, Yonge's burdens increased in weight and importance. As secretary at war he was responsible for recruitment, billeting, the supply of clothes and equipment, convoys, transport, and the care of sick and wounded troops. In parliament it was his primary duty to pilot recruiting bills and army estimates through the Commons. In regularly arguing that Britain must maintain the balance of power in Europe, which meant engaging with French forces on the continent and not merely at sea or in the colonies, he defended the need to employ German mercenaries, to keep Hanoverian troops in British pay, and to maintain a British army in Flanders in wartime. 
When Walpole's long administration at last crumbled in the early 1740s, Yonge remained loyal and was determined that the opposition would not profit from the great man's fall. He worked tirelessly to ensure that the ministry safeguarded its reduced majority by persuading the committee of elections to decide disputed returns from the 1741 general election in the ministry's favour. He continued to fight every disputed election return until defeat in the case of Chippenham convinced Walpole of the need to resign. 
Even then, Yonge defended the minister from every opposition attempt to inquire into abuses. When, in January 1742, Pulteney moved for a secret committee to examine whatever persons and papers the Commons pleased, Walpole rightly saw it as a malicious attack on himself and defied his critics to accuse him in an open and fair manner. In this major debate both sides brought out their best speakers and Pulteney's motion was defeated by only 253 votes to 250, one of the greatest attendances in the Commons ever recorded and the greatest number that had lost a question. Horace Walpole observed: 'When the debate was over, Mr Pultney owned that he had never heard so fine a debate on our side; and said to Sir Robert 'well, no body can do what you can!' 'Yes', replied Sir R[obert], 'Younge did better'' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.299). Yonge repeated his opposition to a committee of inquiry in March 1742, after Walpole's resignation. 
The duke of Newcastle and his brother, Henry Pelham, Walpole's chief lieutenants, urged the king not to give way to the opposition after Walpole's fall, but to reconstruct the ministry on much the same basis as before. The king followed this advice and Yonge remained as secretary at war under the ministry dominated by the Pelham brothers. He served this administration much as he had that of Walpole, defending the ministry's demands for troops and its conduct of war and diplomatic negotiations. He also criticized opposition motions to tax places and pensions, to repeal the 'Septennial Act', and to remove the right of the aldermen of the City of London to veto measures proposed by the more popular common council. 
By 1745 the Pelham administration's control of the Commons was insecure and it had to consider augmenting its strength by bringing into office either Henry Fox or William Pitt, or both. There were rumours as early as December 1744 that Yonge would make way for Pitt, who was anxious to occupy his post. The king, however, deeply resented Pitt's earlier scathing comments on Hanover and so refused to have him in a post which gave him so much access to the royal closet. But by May 1746 the Pelhams were able to reconstruct the ministry. Yonge's ill health provided an excuse to transfer him to the less onerous but more lucrative post of joint vice-treasurer for Ireland. Fox replaced Yonge, and Pitt came in as paymaster-general. 
Although Yonge was no longer such a prominent member of the ministry, he remained a loyal and reliable supporter of its policies. The 1745 Jacobite rising found him once more defending the settlement of 1688-9 and the Hanoverian succession. He was one of the managers of the impeachment of Lord Lovat and also led a committee of inquiry into the suspected Jacobite sympathies of the independent electors of Westminster. In the impeachment of Lovat, in December 1746, he insisted that the aged Jacobite should be denied the support of counsel, but by May 1747 Yonge himself moved a more generous bill to allow those impeached of treason the full benefit of counsel. In February 1751 he appeared in a different light, however, when he proposed that Alexander Murray, a Jacobite involved in raising a mob in the Westminster by-election of 1750, should be committed to Newgate for contempt of the Commons in refusing to receive a reprimand at the bar of the chamber in a kneeling position. 
In his last years in parliament Yonge spoke up in support of Robert Nugent's 'Naturalization Bill' in February 1751, in opposition to Hardwicke's 'Marriage Act' in May 1753, and in support of the repeal of the 'Jewish Naturalization Act' in November of the same year. His last reported speech in the Commons, in December 1753, found him characteristically arguing that parliamentary inquiries into crimes should be used only in the most extreme cases of the abuse of power. The last report of his activities in the house noted his vain efforts in February 1754 to repeal the 'Bribery Act' ahead of the impending general election. In that election he surrendered his seat at Honiton and, with the support of the ministry, was returned for Tiverton. 
Yonge's prime claim to fame as a politician rests on his abilities as a man of business and as one of the most effective speakers on the ministerial side in the Commons. Many contemporaries acknowledged his qualities as a speaker. One report noted that he put forward his arguments 'with great vivacity and address' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 8.409). Lord Hervey claimed that 'he had no wit in private conversation, but was remarkably quick in taking hints to harangue upon in Parliament' (Hervey, 1.36). Lord Chesterfield told his son that 'Sir William Yonge... has, by a glibness of tongue singly, raised himself successively to the best employments of the kingdom' ('Letters', 5.2084). Yonge himself once boasted: 'I never speak but what I dare express my meaning and speak boldly what I mean' ('Parliamentary Diary of Sir Edward Knatchbull', 146). 
The many reports of Yonge's speeches confirm that he was an effective speaker, but his parliamentary talents went beyond this. When Walpole did not care to enter early into a debate himself, he sometimes gave Yonge his notes, when the latter came into the Commons, from which Yonge would speak fluently and effectively, even though he had missed all the preceding discussion. When Walpole was reluctant to support a measure too openly, he deployed Yonge's talents instead. Thus Yonge led the ministerial side in support of the controversial 'Quaker Tithe Bill' in 1736, while other ministers kept silent, and he spoke and voted in May 1737 against the motion to reduce the rate of interest on the national debt, while Walpole baffled the opposition by introducing the measure and then voting against it. On other occasions he deliberately proposed amendments to opposition motions in order to make them more extreme and so ensure their defeat. He did this over the debate on the implementation of the treaty of Seville on 23 February 1731 and in the debate on reducing the rate of interest offered to some public creditors on 14 March 1737. 
In two famous set-piece encounters Yonge's quick wits confounded the opposition just as they seemed to have the moral high ground. In the debate on the size of the land forces on 30 January 1730 William Shippen, a notorious Jacobite sympathizer, vehemently attacked the standing army and hoped that the ministry's proposal did not imply that the king wished to govern like a German tyrant. This reflection on George II stunned the house for several minutes. Yonge was the first to respond by accusing Shippen of an intolerable slur on his majesty and demanding that he explain himself. Shippen's confusion and the opposition's embarrassment enabled Walpole to move the question at once and to secure a handsome majority. A couple of weeks later, in the great debate on the state of the fortifications of Dunkirk, Samuel Sandys tried to embarrass the ministry by suggesting that the journal of the house should be examined to prove that the tories at the end of Anne's reign had then been vigorous in insisting that the French should destroy the fortifications of Dunkirk. Yonge, whose memory was better, promptly seconded his proposal. Unfortunately for the opposition, the journal showed that it was the tories who had tried to evade inquiries into the state of Dunkirk's fortifications: 'This silenced Mr Sands, and made Sir Robert Walpole triumph' ('Egmont Diary', 1.43). 
Yonge's recorded speeches in the Commons reveal a court whig politician whose principles were consistent and whose political ideology was coherent. He was a staunch opponent of Jacobitism, a firm supporter of the Hanoverian succession, and a regular defender of the royal prerogative and the existing balance of the constitution. In matters of religion he was hostile to Catholicism, favoured an established church subordinate to the state, and was ready to concede freedom of conscience to protestant dissenters. In foreign affairs he believed that Britain must try to maintain the balance of power in Europe and should contrive to keep up large armed forces, hire mercenary troops, subsidize European allies, and be ready to wage war in Europe in order to restrict the power of France. To achieve these ends, he was prepared to support the national debt and a substantial standing army, and the taxes necessary to finance both. 
Never an idealist, Yonge consistently maintained that public virtue was in limited supply and the rewarding of friends and supporters was the necessary means to secure a parliamentary majority. He once told the Commons: 'I talk, Sir, of men as they practically are, and not as in theory we may think to make them; for while men are men, I am afraid, we shall find, that ministers will consult their safety, and members will pursue their resentment, even though their country should thereby suffer. (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 13.1086)' In his opinion, virtue and vice existed among ministers and their opponents. Those in office deserved a reasonable reward for the burdens they bore and the services they performed.It may be that Yonge's robust defence of Walpole's political methods, his cynical attitude towards virtue and corruption, and the many lucrative government posts which he held all helped to give him the reputation for personal corruption under which he undoubtedly laboured. It is not clear, however, whether this reputation was fully deserved or not. Lord Chesterfield referred to his 'most sullied, not to say blasted character' ('Letters', 5.2084), while Horace Walpole claimed that 'Sir Robert always said of him, that nothing but Yonge's character could keep down his parts, and nothing but his parts support his character' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.15-16). Lord Hervey admitted that he could not account for Yonge's bad reputation, seeing it as an exception to the common rule that the true merits of a man usually gain their proper reputation with the public: 'for without having done anything that I know of remarkably profligate -- anything out of the common trade of a ductile courtier and a parliamentary tool -- his name was proverbially used to express everything pitiful, corrupt, and contemptible. It is true he was a great liar, but rather a mean than a vicious one. He had always been constant to the same party, was good-natured and good-humoured, never offensive in company, no-body's friend, no body's enemy. (Hervey, 1.35-6)' Yet, as Hervey acknowledged, even Walpole 'caressed him without loving him, and employed him without trusting him' (ibid.). 
As well as being an active politician for forty years, Yonge greatly cherished his reputation as a rhyming wit, though this only served to make him the butt of genuine poets such as Alexander Pope. In 1730 he helped to convert the comedy 'The Jovial Crew' by Richard Brome, first produced in 1641, into a comic opera in three acts. A considerable number of songs were added, most of them attributed to Yonge. The revised work was first performed at Drury Lane on 8 February 1731, was a considerable success, and was performed as late as 1791. In 1749 Yonge also wrote the rather coarse epilogue to Samuel Johnson's 'Irene'. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 28 June 1748, he was awarded an honorary LLD by Cambridge University in 1749. He died following a stroke at his seat at Escott, near Honiton, on 10 August 1755 and was buried on 14 August in the family vault beneath the chancel of Colyton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 30233


York, Sir John (d. 1569), administrator, was the third son of John York and his wife, Katherine Patterdale. His family owed its rise to his great-grandfather 
Richard York's first wife was probably Jane, daughter of Richard Mauleverer of Allerton, Lancashire. They had at least seven sons, including Richard (died 'c'.1508), Christopher, and Thomas, and four daughters. York's second wife, Joan (died in or after 1498), was the widow of both John Dalton and John Whitfield (died 1479). The couple's sons included Adam, William, and John. Sir Richard York died on 25 November 1498. His will is dated 8 April 1498, and was proved on 17 July 1499. He asked to be buried at St John the Evangelist in Ousebridge, Yorkshire. He left all his tenements in Hull to his wife. His will mentions two illegitimate sons, George and Giles York. York's executors were William Senhouse, bishop of Carlisle, Sir Reynold Bray, and his sons, Dr Christopher York, Richard, and William York. His son and heir, Sir Richard York the younger, probably died in 1508 and was buried in St John's Michaelgate in York. The glass in the east window of this building displays a kneeling effigy of Sir Richard York the younger in his surcoat and spurs. He founded a chantry there and was married twice. 
John York's education and early life remain obscure. His family were merchants of the staple in York and also became involved with trading in London and Calais. It is hardly surprising therefore that he is first documented upon his arrival at Calais from Antwerp on 3 September 1535. By about 1542 he had married Anne (died 1575), daughter of Robert Smyth of London. They had eleven sons, including Peter York ('c'.1542-1589), of Gouthwaite in Yorkshire, and Rowland Yorke (d. 1588), soldier and traitor. In 1544 York was appointed assay master to the first mint in the Tower of London. The following year he was transferred to Southwark, Surrey, as under-treasurer of the mint there, recently established in Henry VIII's newly acquired property Suffolk Place. He was added to the commission of the peace for Middlesex on 26 May 1547 and appointed master of the king's woods in the southern parts by August, although he did not start felling trees until autumn 1549. 
The patronage of John Dudley, Viscount Lisle, was certainly a factor in York's placement at the mint. Lisle and York had long shared a mutual interest in lands belonging to the former abbeys of Byland and Fountains in Yorkshire. This close association stood Lisle in good stead. During his dispute with the lord protector, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, Lisle (now earl of Warwick) took up residence at York's house in the parish of St Stephen Walbrook, London, from 6 October 1549. York's motivation for supporting Warwick is difficult to determine but was probably based on his position as a Dudley client and on apathy towards the lord protector's social policies. On 18 January 1550 Warwick himself transferred from his own house at Ely Place to 'the house of a certain sheriff [York], a personage who ranks first in the city of London after the Lord Mayor [Sir Henry Amcotes]. He lodged with the same sheriff after he conducted the intrigue against the Protector, and no doubt his purpose was the same then as now, to have the city on his side. ('CSP Spain', '1550-52', 13)' York was sheriff of London and Middlesex from 1549 to 1550, during which time his influence was considered essential to winning the support of the mayor and common council of London. On 9 October 1549 the London council or confederate lords, led by Warwick, met and dined at Walbrook, where they discussed the actions taken by Somerset to secure several of Edward VI's armouries, as well as rumours that the lord protector planned to 'convey the king out of Windsor and the realm' ('APC', '1547-50', 337). According to Alan Bryson, 'York's role at this juncture was vital; it was he, not Sir Richard Rich, Lord Rich (as the chronicler Charles Wriothesley believed), who 'opened' the request from the London council to the common council for one thousand men' (Bryson, 143). These soldiers were necessary 'for the accomplyshment of their enterprice for the spedye savegarde & conveying of the kinges maiestie out of the handes of the late protector' (CLRO, Repertory 12 (1), fol. 151'v'). On 9 October the common council agreed reluctantly to provide the men. York and other city officials treated the London council as if it were the privy council. That the London councillors met in his home and that he acted as 'chief intermediary' between them and the common council, meant that York became a permanent and prominent client of Warwick's (Bryson, 149). 
York benefited from the king's gratitude. As a reward for his hospitality and loyalty, Edward dined with him at his official residence in Southwark on 17 October and thereupon knighted him. Immediately after his release from the Tower on 6 February 1550 Somerset dined at Walbrook, where Warwick was still in residence, 'without great guard or business' and was then 'enlarged... in sort as doth appear by his recognisance' ('APC', '1547-50', 383-4). The privy council continued to conduct its business from York's house until 8 February. 
The crown's desire to pay off its foreign debt and the resulting debasements of the coinage meant that York had become indispensable as a mint official by 1550. When Sir Martin Bowes was pensioned off from the Tower mint in 1550, York supervised operations there while remaining under-treasurer of the Southwark mint. When the Southwark mint was closed in September 1551, he was appointed under-treasurer of the Tower mint. Despite the end of the war with the French in March 1550 and the mint's efforts to produce very large amounts of coinage, the king's debts continued to mount at an alarming rate. The privy council turned to York to solve the problem. He devised a plan to make a large profit on the Antwerp exchange as well as to bring home quality bullion from abroad for the production of new, finer English coin. The details of the scheme remain obscure, but it is known that in December 1550 York went to Antwerp to speculate with the king's money. Edward noted in his 'Chronicle' that: 'It was agreed that [Sir John York] master of one of the mints at the Tower, should make this bargain with me, viz. to make the profit of silver rising of the bullion that he himself bought, pay all my debts, to the sum of $120,000 or above, and remain accountable for the overplus... to which I should give him $15,000 in prest-money and leave to carry $8,000 overseas to abase the exchange. ('Chronicle', ed. Jordan, 48)' York insisted he could double the money in value each month, but by March 1551 he had suffered losses of at least $4000 of silver bullion. Edward blamed the loss on the treason of certain Englishmen who may have betrayed York's plans to the imperial government. The king hoped to recover the lost sums, but the incident proved too embarrassing, as York and his men were caught red-handed trying to smuggle $4000 in bullion out of Antwerp, for which they were 'sorely frightened and distressed... but have small sympathy from the people who say Mr York deserves it' ('CSP Spain', '1550-52', 264). 
Despite this set-back, the scheme did not fail entirely, and during his time at the mints York brought in large amounts of bullion on which he made a handsome personal profit. In 1551 Sir Nicholas Throckmorton and he were charged with the task of restoring the coinage, and many of the coins issued were stamped with Y, one of York's mint marks. On 21 June 1552 York was pardoned 'for all treasons and offences concerning making and issuing of the king's money', on the condition that he settle his mint accounts for over $9500 'due to the king' ('CPR', '1551-3', 301). York's fortunes were made through his service in the mint, for he was able to claim a remarkably high rate of remuneration for the bullion he supplied. He was considered valuable enough for Somerset to use him as one of his own financial officers and York disbursed $2500 of the duke's money by October 1551. York's principal allegiance, however, remained with Warwick (now duke of Northumberland). This close relationship became a political liability. Already in 1550 Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel, and Anne Seymour, duchess of Somerset, planned to take York prisoner in order to determine whether there had been any embezzlement of royal funds. When Edward died on 6 June 1553, York firmly supported Lady Jane Grey against Princess Mary, with near calamitous results. According to one witness, York was on Leadenhead Street when the proclamation of Mary's accession was read out on 19 July and 'people started running in all directions and crying out'. York, 'hearing this tumult, thought it had another cause. He therefore cried out to the people that it was not true, and though he was on horse-back he escaped alive with difficulty and was taken into the house of Sheriff Garrett [William Garrard], where he was examined.' The witness reported that so many people gathered outside the sheriff's house clamouring for York, that 'he may come to a bad end' ('CSP Spain', '1553', 108). York retreated safely to Walbrook, where his friend the lord mayor George Barne arrested him, on 23 July. On 31 July York joined Northumberland in the Tower, his property having been ordered to be inventoried and sequestrated. 'The Chronicle of Queen Jane' reports that he was freed on 18 October. He had certainly been released by November, when he attended a sermon at St Stephen Walbrook, given by Dr John Feckenham, Mary I's private chaplain and confessor. 
During Mary's reign York conformed outwardly, but focused his energies on trading activities with Germany and the Low Countries, and his investments in Western exploration. In 1555 he was one of the twenty-four assistants of the Company of Merchant Adventurers. When Elizabeth I came to the throne he tried several means of re-entering royal service. Presumably nominated by Sir Ambrose Cave, York was returned as MP for Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, in 1559. He wrote to Sir William Cecil, principal secretary, in October 1560, asking to be restored to his office as under-treasurer, but the post was given to a former comptroller at Southwark, Thomas Fleetwood. York had made an enemy of Sir Thomas Gresham, who had been trying to monopolize the English trade in gunpowder and saltpetre in Antwerp. During Elizabeth's reign Cecil preferred to rely upon Gresham's advice about the coinage, rather than York's. Little else is known of York's last years. As a freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company he contributed a small sum to the building of the Royal Exchange in January 1566. He may have spent the last years of his life caring for his properties in Yorkshire and Kent and enjoying his large family. 
Six of York's sons were still alive when he wrote his will on 6 April 1562: Peter, William, Edmund, Rowland, Edward, and Henry York. His eldest daughter, Anne, married Sir William Hilton, one of the supervisors of his will. Another daughter, Jane, was unmarried at the making of his will and he left her $666 13's'. 4died towards her marriage portion, to be taken from his goods and his 'second cross of diamond' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/51, sig. 4). York's widow, Anne, whom he appointed his sole executor, may have married Robert Paget of London, either before her marriage to York or after York's death, though there is no reference to Paget in her will (dated 9 August 1575), in which she describes herself as a widow. Peter York received the lion's share of the family estates, principally those concentrated in Craven and Nidderdale, Yorkshire. Sir John York's second surviving son, William York, received the manor of Pedderthrope in Yorkshire. The third son, Sir Edmund York, was granted the manor of Steddmeere, Yorkshire. Rowland and Edward York were to share the manor of Rudson or Rudston, Yorkshire, as well as many of their father's household goods and possessions. When Sir John York died in London in January or February 1569, he was a wealthy man as a result of his own expertise in financial matters. He was buried in St Stephen Walbrook. His widow was buried in the same chuch on 21 August 1575. 


@@@@@


doc= 30234


York, William (1686/7-1770), Benedictine monk and vicar apostolic of the western district, was born in London, nothing being known of his parentage. After attending the small school attached to the English Benedictine monastery of St Gregory at Douai he was professed as a monk there in 1704 or 1705. In December 1711 he was ordained priest, and for much of that decade he carried out teaching and other duties connected with the monastery school. He was cellarer at St Gregory's from 1719 to 1720 when, as a critic of the disruptive policies of the then president-general of the English Benedictine congregation, Dom Laurence Fenwick, he was ordered to join the English mission. However, after the 1721 chapter-meeting of the area, or province, concerned with the northern counties and attended by York, the general chapter elected him as prior of St Edmund's, Paris, another of the English Benedictines' continental houses. From 1725 to 1729 York served at Douai as prior of St Gregory's, after which he became secretary to President-General Southcott, an ardent and active Jacobite who was later to combine with the exiled court, and with the Old Pretender himself, in promoting the like-minded York's candidature as a bishop. 
Back in England, in the Benedictines' southern province, York in 1730 was put in charge of its most important mission, that of Bath. Here the monks controlled an old-established and influential foundation, of social as well as religious significance, comprising a chapel cum lodging-house, the Bell Tree, attended by Roman Catholics from all parts of the kingdom, and described by a later incumbent as 'much sought after by visitors for lodgings... and those sometimes of the first distinction, as the Duke of Norfolk and others' (Downside Abbey, MS 252, fol. 17). In this propitious milieu Laurence York won golden opinions both for the eloquence of his preaching and for his social accomplishments: 'a man fit to appear in the best company... exceedingly agreeable to the chief of both Catholic and Protestant nobility that frequent that place' (Scott, 88) -- qualities which enhanced his credentials for episcopal office. 
York's mission field was the western vicariate, one of four extensive districts governed by vicars apostolic (prelates with the titles of bishoprics 'in partibus infidelium') mainly drawn from the secular clergy, though the western bishops had so far been a Benedictine chaplain and preacher to James II, Philip Michael Ellis, and a Franciscan of Jacobite sympathies, Matthew Prichard. It was to the latter that York was appointed coadjutor in 1741 in the teeth of opposition from the other vicars apostolic, who wanted the post filled by a secular priest, but with the energetic backing of Southcott and the Stuart court in order both to consolidate the regulars' hold on the western vicariate and to preserve a Jacobite presence in the Roman Catholic episcopate in England. Their manoeuvres were successful and York was consecrated bishop of Nisibis on 20 August 1741. 
Until 1745 York continued to administer the Bell Tree house, after which he was offered continuing hospitality there, and Bath remained his headquarters, an arrangement which may have afforded to the south-western counties of England a greater degree of pastoral care than that hitherto provided by its Monmouthshire-based vicar apostolic, now a septuagenarian; however, the destruction of the western district archives in 1780 during Bath's Gordon riots renders most earlier episcopal activity undiscoverable. Indeed, the one confirmation traceable to York while coadjutor was in Monmouthshire itself, at Abergavenny, some months after Prichard had given up active duty. This visit occurred in the summer of 1745, when there began a period of eighteen months or so during which the bishop was away from Bath -- an absence attested by himself and by a pair of informers and consistent with an account (Oliver, 55-6) of York's withdrawal from the city for his own safety at the time of the Jacobite rising, acting on the advice of the mayor, to whom had been handed a probably bogus missive thanking York for assistance given or promised to the Jacobite cause and offering him the bishopric of Carlisle in the event of a Stuart restoration. The bishop was still absent from Bath in February 1747, when he wrote to the Roman Congregatio de Propaganda Fide (responsible for missionary territories, including Britain) that for the past eighteen months he had been 'a fugitive from my ordinary residence and have as yet no fixed abode' (Brady, 293), and for part of that time he was to be found at a rural recusant enclave in the Mendips. 
After York's return to Bath the papal bull 'Emanivit nuper', issued in 1745 but delayed in England owing to the 'Forty-Five and its aftermath, presented him with an unwelcome Roman rebuff to the regular clergy in their long-running losing battle against dependence on the vicars apostolic for faculties to exercise their ministry in England -- a dependence strongly resisted, both before and after the bull's promulgation, by the two western bishops, of whom York, however, won commendation from a formidable opponent, Bishop Stonor of the midland district, for his 'just discernment and episcopal mind' (Berington, 420). Bishop Prichard died on 22 May 1750 and was succeeded as vicar apostolic of the western district by Laurence York, with the faculties question still not finally resolved; but three years later it was definitively settled in accordance with the wishes of the secular vicars apostolic by the bull 'Apostolicum ministerium', firmly subjecting the regular clergy to episcopal control and imposing upon them the unrealistic sexennium, requiring them, as a condition of having their faculties renewed, to undergo for three months in every six years the regime of a continental religious house, including a fifteen-day retreat. In Bishop York and his fellow regulars this obligation, reducing their mission force and involving unaffordable expense, aroused suspicion and dismay, and his fears for his district (which was not only poor, but the great majority of whose priests were regulars) were expressed in a letter to the Jesuit provincial lamenting 'our threatened ruin, which must inevitably be the case if the sexennial retreat takes place' (Foley, 5.165). In the event, however, acceptable compromises saved the situation. 
York's pastoral activities are no easier to trace when vicar apostolic than earlier, but confirmation tours eastward and westward of his Bath base are perhaps reflected in register evidence (not plentiful for that period) relating to Marlborough in 1753 and Ugbrooke, Devon, in the following year. By this time the bishop was in his sixties and hoping for the appointment of a coadjutor to assist with his vast vicariate (seven English counties and the whole of Wales) and to pave the way for his own much desired retirement to monastic life, and (for the appointee must be a Benedictine) to continue that order's rule over the western district. Moves to this end had begun shortly after York's accession to the vicariate and, as in his own case, Benedictine and Jacobite backing, including that of the Pretender, still prevailed at Rome against the opposition of the secular vicars apostolic, and it was the internationally esteemed Charles Walmesley who was consecrated, with right of succession, in 1756. He it was he who on 12 March 1764 delivered to the clergy of the western district a tribute prompted by his superior's retirement to his beloved St Gregory's, praising his pastoral solicitude, his piety, and his humanitarianism -- qualities which, with the others already mentioned, combined to fit him well for his vocation. Six years later he died after suffering a paralytic stroke while celebrating mass at St Gregory's. A Bell Tree house document (Williams, 'Post-Reformation Catholicism', 1.176), like the 'Dictionary of National Biography', dates his death 14 April 1770, while other sources have the 20th. He was aged about eighty-three years and was remembered as 'a holy pious prelate... ornament to his house and body' (diary of Thomas Welch). 


@@@@@


doc= 30235


Sir Richard York (1430-1498), administrator. Richard York became a freeman of York by purchase in 1456 and steadily worked his way into positions of increasing status and importance in the city. He was chamberlain from 1459 to 1460, sheriff from 1465 to 1466, and entered the Corpus Christi Guild in 1469. Having been installed as mayor of the staple of Calais in 1467, he was mayor of York from 1469 to 1470 and again from 1482 to 1483. In 1475 he was master of the Merchants' Guild and was made alderman of the city some time before 1487. He survived the accession of Henry VII and was knighted by the king at York in July 1487, after the victory at the battle of Stoke on 16 June, and granted a $20 annuity the following November. York acted as ambassador in France in 1486 and again in 1491. He was returned for the city of York to the parliaments of 1472-5, January 1483, October 1483, 1484, 1485-6, and 1489-90. On 2 January 1487 he treated with the embassy from Maximilian I and went with the embassy to the Hanse on 20 April 1491. 


@@@@@


doc= 30236


Yorke, Rowland (d. 1588), soldier and traitor, was the ninth of eleven sons of Sir John York (d. 1569), administrator, of York and St Stephen Walbrook, London, and his wife, Anne (died 1575), daughter of Robert Smyth of London. His brothers included Peter York ('c'.1542-1589), of Gouthwaite, Yorkshire, a landowner and MP, and he had four sisters. He was said to be 'well borne and of gentle blood' and benefited from his father's close association with John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, until the succession crisis of 1553 (Blandy, 27). The family was restored to favour at the accession of Elizabeth I. Nothing is known of Yorke's early life and education. 
Yorke volunteered in 1572 for Sir Humphrey Gilbert's expedition to the island of South Beveland, important for access to Ter Goes, a major supply town used by the Spanish. Roger Williams's account describes vividly an ambush by the enemy outside Ter Goes, where most who entered with Yorke and himself were slain, leaving those who did survive to crawl through muddy ditches to escape. Yorke probably returned to England in the summer. He embarked from Gravesend, Kent, on 19 March 1573 with George Gascoigne, on a journey in which twenty men drowned; the vessel only managed to stay on course after it ran aground because Yorke and two others took control of the pumps. Having survived the seas, he joined Captain Thomas Morgan's English and Welsh force, sent unofficially to Flushing to aid the Dutch rebels against Philip II. He was initially Morgan's lieutenant but was promoted to lieutenant-colonel when his force was expanded in size. 
In August 1578 Yorke was singled out by the English ambassador to the Netherlands, William Davison, in a letter to William Cecil, Lord Burghley, for his 'great value and reputacion' during the battle of Rijmenam under the command of John Norris ('CSP for.', '1578-9', 115). Yorke lost a horse or two under him, while the Spanish retreated with heavy casualties. He, deservedly confident of his own martial abilities, was not sympathetic to captains whose methods of leadership differed from his own, writing to Davison in October 1578 that he thought some were 'indiscreet and insufficient' (ibid., 223). However, this somewhat arrogant attitude left him open to personal attack. In October 1580 he was indicted for felony, 'unjustly committed', according to William Herle, on false charges ('CSP dom.', '1547-80', 684). Yorke's patron, Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, received further reports during February 1581 that many captains had private quarrels with Yorke and 'begin to bandie against him' ('CSP for.', 'January 1581 - April 1582', 44). In contrast, William Blandy tried to help Yorke's reputation by emphasizing his potential as a general and a governor, describing him as 'bolde of courage, provident in direction, industrious in labour, and quick in execution' (Blandy, 26-7). 
Yorke was certainly industrious on behalf of his own men, and although professing he was 'not a good sekeritary', wrote dispatches to Walsingham about the frequent want of provisions, stressing in November 1581 from Oudenarde that he had only been paid four months out of thirteen ('CSP for.', 'January 1581 - April 1582', 384-5). In June 1582 Walsingham's contacts reported the mutiny of a camp near Bruges after the captains suspected that their commander, Norris, had detained payment. Yorke was named as the 'instrument' through which the French had helped to 'blow the coals' of animosity (ibid., 'May-December 1582', 164). This recalcitrant behaviour made Yorke a potential liability, but was perhaps overlooked by his superiors because of his evident military prowess. 
In March 1584 Yorke was again in difficulties, this time imprisoned in Brussels, accused of conspiring with local Catholics to betray Ghent and Dendermonde to the Spanish. He was only freed in December thanks to the efforts of his brother, Edmund York, in securing letters from Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and Sir Philip Sidney. However, Leicester and Sidney may only have taken action after Walsingham asked them to. The Dutch, who had dealt with their countrymen involved in the incident more ruthlessly, resented this special treatment. They remained deeply suspicious of Yorke's Catholicism. He was witnessed soon after 'frequenting the mass with his beads' ('CSP for.', 'June 1586 - March 1587', 87). 
Yorke did not long remain out of trouble. Now owing a debt to Leicester, who was desperate for experienced officers, Yorke was appointed to the command of the Zutphen sconce, an important gain from the previous year. Leicester had fallen out with Norris and relied instead on Yorke and Sir William Stanley, who was in charge of Deventer. He granted them commissions that allowed them to serve independently of Norris. Norris wrote to Burghley in December 1586, begging that the additional powers be removed because they 'nourished factions'; the garrison of Yorke's sconce was even refusing to muster ('CSP for.', 'June 1586 - March 1587', 266-7). Yorke complained increasingly to the states general during December about their broken promises to supply victuals, while 'the poor miserable subjects of her majesty... now are dying of cold, yea more than two hundred since my comying' ('CSP for.', 'June 1586 - March 1587', 246-7). By early January 1587 it seems that he allowed his troops to extract provisions using force. Norris's grave concerns were proved correct when on 18-19 January Yorke allowed the Spanish into Zutphen, after meeting with Stanley, who had already successfully betrayed his own garrison, using a banquet to lure the council of Deventer away while his troops took the gates. 
The motivation behind Yorke's actions remains the subject of debate. Contemporary opinion, such as that in the work of protestant propaganda 'The estate of English fugitives' ('State Papers and Letters of Sir Ralph Sadler', 2.232-8), believed Yorke and Stanley were Catholic traitors. Yorke was regarded as the more dominant of the two; it was thought that he pressured Stanley to betray his garrison after secret meetings with Francisco Verdugo, the Spanish governor of the province. William Camden also believed Yorke was the one who 'drew Stanley', a soldier who had served with 'singular fidelity and valour' up until that point (Camden, 302). More recent opinion shifts the lead role to Stanley, who led Yorke astray. Charles Wilson refers to Stanley and Yorke as 'the perfect Walrus and Carpenter' (Wilson, 90). Simon Adams believes Yorke to be more personally motivated, out of fear that Norris would return him to the Dutch who were still eager to have him executed for his behaviour in 1584. As Yorke throughout his career comes across as a hothead and troublemaker, it may perhaps be that he was pushed too far by the harsh conditions within the army. Whereas another man might have been more patient, seeing the lack of provisions as unfortunate and widespread, Yorke was increasingly frustrated by the behaviour of fellow officers and his lack of reward for his years fighting for a protestant cause in which he did not really believe. 
Walsingham was informed in March 1587 that Yorke had been seen in Antwerp but was determined only 'to go into Spain or Naples, there to live upon his stipend, out of the stir of these wars' ('CSP for.', 'June 1586 - March 1587', 392). Yorke was unable to retire quietly because the Spanish distrusted him too. It seems likely that he was poisoned at a dinner in the Netherlands in February 1588, the symptoms of which may have been mistaken for the effects of smallpox. Two fellow diners survived to relate how after Yorke's death the Spanish broke into his coffers, taking 'jewels, plate and monie', and also removed 'furniture, armes and horses' willed by him to his nephew, Edmund Yorke (died 1595), who was executed at Tyburn for attempting to assassinate Elizabeth ('State Papers and Letters of Sir Ralph Sadler', 2.238). Rowland Yorke was buried using traditional Catholic rites but the states general exhumed and hanged his remains three years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 30237


Yorke, Charles (1722-1770), lord chancellor, was born on 30 December 1722 in Great Ormond Street, London, the second son of Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke (1690-1764), lord chancellor, and his wife, Margaret Lygon ('c'.1695-1761), the daughter of Charles and Mary Cocks and the widow of John Lygon. Elizabeth Anson (1725-1760) was his sister. It was inevitable that he should be trained as a lawyer and should aim at the highest legal office. His great-uncle Lord Somers had been lord chancellor (1697-1700) and his father held the office from 1737 to 1756. But the pressure of expectations made him irresolute, and, despite shining talents, his career ended in disappointment and tragedy. 
Yorke was sent to Henry Newcome's school at Hackney before entering Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1739. At university he took a major part in the private printing of 'Athenian Letters', purporting to be the comments of a Persian resident in Athens during the Peloponnesian wars. He contributed nearly fifty substantial letters and his brother Philip Yorke, second earl of Hardwicke (1720-1790), the bulk of the remainder: they were printed for the public in 1781 and again in 1798. Having been admitted to the Middle Temple in 1735 at the age of twelve, he joined Lincoln's Inn in 1742 and was called to the bar in 1746. The following year he was given a reversionary sinecure as clerk of the crown in chancery, which he retained for the rest of his life, and was brought into parliament for Reigate, a family seat, when his elder brother, Philip, chose to sit for Cambridgeshire. His debut was impressive. In 1745 he published a defence of one of his father's judgments in 'Considerations of the Law of forfeiture for High Treason', which was reprinted several times, and in his maiden speech in May 1748 he opposed to such effect a private bill sponsored by Lord Gage that, according to Dr Birch, the author abandoned it. In November 1748 he was chosen to second the vote of thanks on the address and earned more applause. By 1750 he was talked of as a possible solicitor-general. In 1751 he played an important part in the debates on the 'Regency Bill'. His reputation at the bar also rose rapidly. He became counsel to the East India Company in 1751 and recorder of Dover and Gloucester on his father's death, and by the early years of George III's reign was earning $7500 per annum. 
By then certain weaknesses had become apparent. Yorke was not in strong health and had a tendency to corpulence and to prolixity of discourse. He suffered also from what his brother Joseph Yorke called the family weakness of 'overthinking everything'. Joseph recommended matrimony as a cure, to give him someone else to worry about, and on 19 May 1755 he married Catherine (died 1759), the daughter and heir of William Freeman of Aspenden, Hertfordshire. They had one son, Philip Yorke (1757-1834), who succeeded his uncle as third earl of Hardwicke. Through his wife Yorke acquired Tittenhanger Park, Hertfordshire. After she died in 1759, he married, on 30 December 1762, Agneta Johnson (1740-1820), the daughter and coheir of Henry Johnson (1698/9-1760), a traveller, of Great Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Laetitia Dowling, but did not become noticeably less irresolute. In 1754 he had been made solicitor-general to the young prince of Wales, an indication of favours to come. When his father retired from the lord chancellorship in 1756, Yorke was made solicitor-general. But his progress faltered the following year when Pitt insisted that his supporter Charles Pratt should be brought into parliament and made attorney-general. The two law officers clashed over Pratt's 'Habeas Corpus Bill' in 1758, and Pratt was henceforth a substantial obstacle to Yorke's advance. 
As solicitor-general, Yorke took part in the prosecutions of Florence Hensey in 1758 for espionage and of Lord Ferrers in 1760 for shooting his steward. His reply in the Commons on 11 December 1761 to Barre, who had attacked the previous ministers for subservience to Hanover, was greatly admired. In January 1762, when Pratt was made chief justice of common pleas, Yorke moved up to become attorney-general. But Newcastle's resignation later that year placed him in an awkward position, since the duke was anxious that his friends, including Hardwicke's sons, should resign with him. Hardwicke replied that his sons were old enough to decide for themselves, and they remained in office. In post, Yorke advised on the Wilkes issue that privilege of parliament did not extend to seditious libel, and was determined to maintain his professional opinion. But Newcastle continued to press him to resign, and on 2 November 1763, in vast agitation, he did so, bursting into tears, according to Grenville, at his audience with the king. He defended his Wilkes opinion in the debate of 24 November, and in February 1764 spoke against general warrants to great applause in the debate. But he soon began to regret his resignation. In December 1763, on a visit to Grenville, he 'spoke rather discontentedly of the exigency of the times, which had (as he called it) 'whirled' him out of so eminent and advantageous a post in the law' ('Grenville Papers', 2.239), and a little later he wrote to Newcastle: 'I do not see my way' (Yorke, 3.560). His elder brother wrote candidly that Yorke should either have resigned when Newcastle did, or not at all: 'by the part he took, neither side felt itself much obliged to him' (Williams, 136). In May 1764 Yorke confided to James Harris that he was in danger of being isolated and hoped for some 'conciliatory scheme', and when the master of the rolls died in November he opened up negotiations with Grenville, either for that position, with a peerage and an increase in salary, or for his old office of attorney-general, now held by Sir Fletcher Norton. He was particularly anxious that it should appear that he had been summoned by the king to his service. Northington, the lord chancellor, found Yorke as usual 'very unexplicit', explaining that he would need to consult Newcastle: 'it makes one sick', added Northington tersely ('Grenville Papers', 2.464). The negotiations broke down, and Yorke settled for a patent of precedency before the solicitor-general, promising in return 'cordial and friendly support to His Majesty's measures' (ibid., 2.469). 'We have lost a man of character', summed up the duke of Cumberland, 'but they have not gained one' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 2.36). 
Yorke was now in the position of supporting Grenville's government while not holding office and spoke in favour of the 'Stamp Act' and the 'Regency Bill'. But by the summer of 1765 Grenville's ministry was in trouble, and the king turned to Lord Rockingham to form a government. Rockingham laid great weight on Yorke's inclusion and offered him his old post of attorney-general, with his elder brother, the new Lord Hardwicke, at the Board of Trade. But Hardwicke, always languid, declined, while Yorke 'made difficulties' (Bateson, 28). Rockingham found him 'not unwilling, but 'timid''. The lord chancellorship in due course was dangled before him, but still Yorke hesitated, for he 'feared too much would be expected of me in Parliament' (Cannon). A three-hour conversation with Norton left the latter nonplussed as to what Yorke had in mind. On 8 August, Whately reported to Grenville: 'Mr Yorke still hesitates. I believe that will be a paragraph in every letter I shall write this summer' ('Grenville Papers', 3.78). Even the archbishop of Canterbury was brought in to see if he could overcome Yorke's scruples. No sooner had Yorke agreed to serve than he began to wonder if he had been wise. The new ministry was not strong and its life expectation was uncertain. Worse, it was pledged to the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' which he had supported only the previous year. The outcome of the second difficulty was a fudge which had important consequences for the American situation. Yorke persuaded Rockingham to accompany repeal by a 'Declaratory Act' which reasserted British sovereignty, a legalistic device which may have assisted the passage of repeal through the Commons, but went down badly in America. Yorke clashed violently with Newcastle, who objected that the 'Declaratory Act' 'would prevent even the repeal from having its effect': Yorke accused the duke of 'insanity', on which Newcastle commented that 'he talked more like a madman than I did' (Thomas, 182). Since the government faced a number of legal issues, Yorke was one of the busiest ministers. In April 1766 he defended the administration's belief that general warrants were illegal 'and kept the field with great acclamation' (Keppel, 1.327). When Grafton resigned the following month, Hardwicke was offered a secretaryship of state, but declined as 'prejudicial to my health', and Yorke in turn also declined, though, as usual, he was promised the lord chancellorship in the future. In any case, the ministry was turned out in July 1766 to make room for the Pitt-Grafton government, and Yorke resigned, complaining that he was 'a man sacrificed to the times' (Cannon). In November 1766 Newcastle described him as 'a very ticklish man... and seems to be much embarrassed what part to take' (ibid.). In the abortive negotiations for a return to office in the summer of 1767, Rockingham suggested that, if Camden (Pratt) retained the lord chancellorship, Yorke could be lord president of the council with a peerage, although Newcastle commented that 'the Yorkes will never be satisfied 'till Charles Yorke has the Great Seal' (Brooke, 171, 176). He was always uncomfortable in opposition and complained that Rockingham's support was too narrow, especially after the Bedford group had defected at the end of 1767 and joined the administration. A more encouraging event was his election in March 1768 as member for the University of Cambridge, where his brother Hardwicke was high steward. 
Rumours during 1769 that Camden was not happy in his position held out further hope, and on 9 January 1770, after Chatham had attacked the very ministry he had himself set up and Camden had joined him, it was resolved to dismiss the lord chancellor as soon as a replacement could be found. Opposition was convinced that the government was tottering: 'the seals would go a-begging', declared Shelburne in the Lords, 'but he hoped there would not be found in the kingdom a wretch so base and mean spirited as to accept of them' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16, 1770, 665). The crisis found Yorke, in Hardwicke's words, 'more irresolute than ever' (Williams, 144). On 12 January Grafton offered the seals to Yorke. Mansfield and the lord chief justice, Wilmot, urged him to take them, Hardwicke and Rockingham not to abandon his friends. Yorke was in violent agitation that the prize he had sought for so long could not be accepted with honour. On the 14th he declined, and he repeated his decision on the 16th. But in an audience with the king on the 17th he was pressed very hard to accept, and consented, taking a peerage as Lord Morden of Cambridgeshire. He subsequently quarrelled violently with his brother, and he died on the 20th in Great Ormond Street. He had held the lord chancellorship, the summit of his life's ambition, for three days, and his peerage had not been sealed. 
The evidence of Yorke's death is confused. Rumours of suicide circulated at once. Horace Walpole, who disliked the Yorkes, insisted that Yorke had 'fallen by his own hand' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 4.53). But he had been in poor health for some time, complaining often of the fatigue of his profession, and the week before his death he wrote to his brother that he was 'hardly fit to stir' (Cannon). The most detailed account was given in a letter from Levett Blackborne, based on a report by a young lady who was a relative of Agneta Yorke, and corroborated in most respects by Agneta Yorke's own narrative: 'He ate voraciously and beyond his usual manner -- which 'latterly' was 'generally too much'. Before the taking away of the cloth, he complained of sickness and indigestion... growing worse, he retired into a back dressing-room, where he was heard retching with vehemence. After some time the family in the parlour was alarmed, and he was carried to bed having, as supposed, broke a blood vessel in vomiting. ('Rutland MSS', 2.313)' His body was taken to Cambridgeshire for burial in the family chapel at Wimpole. His wife and at least two of their three children, Charles Philip Yorke and Joseph Sydney Yorke, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30238


Yorke, Sir Charles (1790-1880), army officer, born on 7 December 1790, was the son of Colonel John Yorke, deputy lieutenant of the Tower of London from 1795 until his death on 26 January 1826, and his wife, Juliana, daughter of John Dodd of Swallowfield, Berkshire. 
Yorke was commissioned as ensign in the 35th foot on 22 January 1807, became lieutenant on 18 February 1808, and on the 25th exchanged to the 52nd foot. He served with that regiment throughout the Peninsular War, being present at Vimeiro, Fuentes de Onoro, Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca, Vitoria, the battles of the Pyrenees, the Nivelle, and Nive, and at Orthez, where he was severely wounded. He was also wounded at Badajoz and the Nivelle. He afterwards received the Peninsular silver medal with ten clasps. He was promoted captain on 24 December 1813. 
At Waterloo, Yorke was extra aide-de-camp to Major-General Adam, who commanded the brigade of which the 52nd formed part. He received the Waterloo medal. He was placed on half pay on 25 February 1816, but was appointed to the 13th foot on 7 August 1817, and exchanged back to the 52nd on 2 July 1818. On 9 June 1825 he was given an unattached majority, and again went on half pay. On 30 November 1826 he was made lieutenant-colonel and inspecting field officer of militia. He became colonel on 23 November 1841, and was assistant quartermaster-general, first at Cork and afterwards at Manchester from 1842 to 1851. 
On 11 November 1851 Yorke was promoted major-general. He was sent to the Cape, and served in the Cape Frontier War of 1852 as second in command under General Cathcart. He was given a reward for distinguished service on 13 July 1853. In May 1854 he succeeded Colonel Airey as military secretary at headquarters in England, and consequently did not serve in the Crimea. As military secretary he was responsible for much of the paperwork at military headquarters in London. 
Yorke was made colonel of the 33rd foot on 27 February 1855, and KCB on 5 February 1856. He became lieutenant-general on 13 February 1859, and was made GCB on 29 June 1860, when he ceased to be military secretary. In that office it is said that, as Lord Fitzroy Somerset had 'softened the asperity of the Iron Duke, Sir C. Yorke neutralised the exuberant kindness of the Duke of Cambridge' (Stocqueler, 250). He was made colonel-commandant of the 2nd battalion of the rifle brigade on 1 April 1863, and became general on 5 September 1865. On 5 April 1875 he was appointed constable of the Tower of London, and on 2 June 1877 he was made field marshal, a reward for competence and long service rather than distinction. He died, unmarried, at his home, 27 South Street, Grosvenor Square, on 20 November 1880, and was buried on the 24th at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30239


Yorke, Charles Philip (1764-1834), politician, born on 12 March 1764, was second son of Charles Yorke (1722-1770), lord chancellor, the first with his second wife, Agneta (1740-1820), the daughter of Henry Johnson of Great Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. A sister, Caroline, later countess of St Germans (died 1818), and Admiral Joseph Sydney Yorke were younger siblings. Yorke was educated at Harrow School (1776-80), was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1780, and matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1781 (MA, 1783). He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1787 and practised unhappily on the western circuit, wintering in Italy in 1788. He was chief justice of Ely from 1789 to 1793. His elder half-brother Philip Yorke became third earl of Hardwicke in May 1790 and vacated his seat for Cambridgeshire, which Yorke then occupied until 1810. Worth under $800 a year, he disliked undue dependence on Hardwicke's bounty. He married, on 1 July 1790, Harriet (1763-1854), daughter of Charles Manningham of Thorpe, Surrey. They had no children. 
Yorke backed Pitt's ministry and partook in legal debate in the Commons, where he moved the address in 1792. He generally supported war with revolutionary France. A Cambridgeshire militia officer from 1792 to 1811 (a colonel from 1806), he persuaded Hardwicke to warn Pitt against peace negotiations. In the 1796 parliament, in which he was often a government teller, he supported wartime taxes, and as a finance committeeman specialized in the dockyards. Pitt did not promote him, but encouraged him to serve his successor, Addington, as secretary at war and privy councillor (20 February 1801). The king praised Yorke's competence. Having declined the navy treasurership and a salary rise, he launched the Royal Military College in June 1801. His army estimates proclaimed wariness of Bonaparte. In 1802 he avoided becoming chief secretary to Hardwicke, the Irish viceroy, and twice rejected the Madras government, believing that India would be won in Europe. 
At the general election of 1802 Yorke survived a contest in Cambridgeshire. He proposed military enlargement, moving the address when war resumed, on 25 May 1803. In June he introduced a reserve army. Following Addington's failure to negotiate a junction with Pitt, he refused the Admiralty or Home Office, with cabinet rank. But Hardwicke dictated his accepting the latter: he did so on 17 August, but regretted switching, and in October threatened resignation, relenting only when Pitt again proved unobtainable. Saddled in debate with defence and Hardwicke's Irish problems, he shared in the ministry's collapse and surrendered his office on 11 May 1804. The king had wished him to remain and to accept the barony of Morden, which he declined for financial reasons. He eschewed hostility towards Pitt's second ministry, despite opposing his 'Additional Force Bill'. Pitt did not appoint him chief secretary, as Hardwicke wished, believing Yorke aspired to cabinet. Disillusioned, he avoided parliament, except to amend Pitt's 'Enlistment Bill' (28 March). He spurned office without peerage and pension. Denied the Admiralty, former colleagues warning Pitt about his irritability, he declined embassy to Russia in September 1805. 
Yorke's predilection for an all-party coalition foundered in 1806. For the king's sake he disliked opposing Grenville's ministry, but criticized its military measures on 3 April. His joining a Pittite rally in July precluded Hardwicke's intercession on his behalf with the new government. In March 1807, when the Pittites parleyed with Grenville, he rejected the governorships of Madras and Jamaica. When the ministry fell over royal opposition to Catholic relief, Hardwicke's commitment to Grenville compromised him. He stayed away in April 1807, when the Portland ministry was censured. He readily rejected Portland's offer of surveyorship of woods and forests, but annoyed Hardwicke by refusing to forswear office and by commendation of the Copenhagen expedition in the ensuing parliament. Subsequently more critical, he nevertheless privately advised the War Office, helped Perceval draft the king's speech for 1809, and defended the duke of York, whom he viewed as a victim of radical conspiracy, on 10 March. Declining the India board (Pitt's last wish for him) in April, he preferred the secretaryship at war, without cabinet rank, but Hardwicke discountenanced his re-admission to office as an isolated recruit. He opposed allegations of ministerial corruption on 5 May, whereupon Hardwicke exacted from him a renunciation of all ambitions for office. Accordingly, he requested a retirement pension on 6 June: Portland offered his, and the king's, regrets. 
Hardwicke offered compensation or consideration of overtures from Portland's successor, Perceval, but Yorke declined the secretaryship at war (with cabinet) and other offices. Hardwicke torpedoed a final offer, on 24 October 1809, of the War Office. In January 1810, following Yorke's defence of the Scheldt (or Walcheren) expedition and denunciation of Sir Francis Burdett, Perceval, with royal approval, offered him the sinecure post of an exchequer tellership at $2700 a year. On 2 February Yorke obtained exclusion of 'strangers' from the Scheldt debate, a device seldom resorted to, and the opposition failed to dislodge him from the committee. These actions led the radical John Gale Jones to dub him an enemy of the people, and Yorke's charging of Jones with breach of privilege led to the latter's imprisonment. Hardwicke, who had approved Yorke's acceptance of a sinecure, dreaded an unsuccessful county contest, and so he withdrew on 16 March. Yorke's brother-in-law Lord Eliot returned him for St Germans on 27 April. Next day, with some reluctance, he accepted the office of first lord of the Admiralty. 
His windows having been smashed by London rioters in April, Yorke denounced petitions against Burdett's imprisonment in June 1810. He threatened resignation when Perceval wooed Canning and Castlereagh, but defended his regency proposals of 2 January 1811. The opposition assailed him on official matters. Unhappy about Perceval's attempt to reduce navy estimates, he distrusted the prince, vowing to resign when regency restrictions expired. He was persuaded to stay but, dismayed by Baltic naval losses, resigned in March 1812, 'really a loss to the public service' according to John Wilson Croker (Jennings, 1.39). Following Perceval's assassination, he thwarted presentation to the regent of the successful motion for a stronger administration on 21 May. He declined, on health grounds, Lord Liverpool's offer of duchy of Lancaster (with cabinet), but promised support. Hardwicke distrusted his request to represent Reigate on the family interest as a non-partisan, and Yorke refused $5000 instead. He then sat for Liskeard, another Eliot borough. His speech against admission of Catholics to parliament, to which he had always been implacably opposed, on 25 February 1813, was published. He deprecated discussion of the princess of Wales's grievances, and in April 1814 thwarted Romilly's attempt to end mutilation of traitors' carcasses, which had been upheld by Yorke's father. His defence of the corn laws and urging suppression of protest provoked another attack on his house in March 1815. Advising Castlereagh on peace-making, and Liverpool on allied military occupation of France, he backed ministers, notably on the 'Aliens Bill' of 1816. His last speech was against Catholic relief, on 9 May 1817. A member of the secret committee on sedition, he voted for suspension of habeas corpus on 23 June. 
Yorke retired from parliament in 1818. A peerage was refused him: he had been heir to Hardwicke since 1810. He declined that autumn to broker junction between Grenvillites and government; he advocated resistance to reform, solid public financing, and government economy. Outside parliament he was a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries (1801) and vice-president of the Royal Society of Literature. With William Martin Leake, he was co-author of 'The Principal Egyptian Monuments in the British Museum' (1827). He died, eight months before Hardwicke, at his home, 28 Bruton Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 13 March 1834. His memorial in Wimpole church, where he was interred on 20 March, was cast from the Plymouth breakwater he had promoted at the Admiralty. 


@@@@@


doc= 30240


Yorke, Charles Philip, fourth earl of Hardwicke (1799-1873), naval officer and politician, eldest son of Sir Joseph Sydney Yorke (1768-1831), naval officer, and his first wife, Elizabeth Weake (died 1812), daughter of James Rattray, was born at Sydney Lodge, Hamble, Hampshire, on 2 April 1799. After three years at Harrow School, he entered the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth in February 1813, and, having passed with credit, was in May 1815 appointed midshipman to the 'Prince', flagship at Spithead. From her he moved to the 'Leviathan', and from there to the 'Queen Charlotte', in which he was present at the bombardment of Algiers. He was then sent to the 'Leander', flagship of Sir David Milne, on the North American station, and on 14 August 1819 was promoted lieutenant of the 'Phaeton'. On 18 May 1822 he was made commander, and in August 1823 was appointed to the 'Alacrity' which he took out to the Mediterranean, where he was engaged in suppressing piracy. On 6 June 1825 he was promoted captain, and from 1828 to 1831 commanded the 'Alligator' in the Mediterranean, mostly in Greek waters. 
Yorke was tory MP for the family seats of Reigate (1831-2), and Cambridgeshire (1832-4). 
On 4 October 1833 Yorke married Susan (1810-1886), sixth daughter of Thomas Henry Liddell, first Baron Ravensworth; among their eight children was Charles Philip Yorke, fifth earl of Hardwicke (1836-1897), father of Albert Edward Yorke, sixth earl of Hardwicke. On the death of his uncle Philip Yorke, third earl of Hardwicke, on 18 November 1834, Yorke succeeded to the title, and became lord lieutenant of Cambridgeshire. In the Peel administration of 1841 he was one of the lords-in-waiting, resigning in 1846 to oppose the repeal of the corn laws. He also served at sea, in command of the Admiralty steam yacht 'Black Eagle', and attended the king of Prussia and tsar of Russia, both of whom he visited in their own capitals. In 1844 Hardwicke commanded the battleship 'St Vincent' for an experimental cruise. In 1848 he took command of the battleship 'Vengeance'. His firm action while stationed at Genoa in April 1849 secured the city for the king of Sardinia, for which service he was decorated. Shortly afterwards he resigned his commission because of his wife's ill health. 
In 1852 Hardwicke became postmaster-general in Lord Derby's brief administration. On 12 January 1854 he reached the rank of rear-admiral, and was placed on the retired list, lacking sufficient sea service as a captain for active duty. Despite this, Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Napier twice requested that he be appointed to the Baltic fleet, but the cabinet refused to restore him to active duty. From 1858 to 1859 Hardwicke served as lord privy seal, and chairman of the royal commission on manning. Although he was a close personal friend of Lord Derby, Hardwicke's ill health precluded service in the 1867 cabinet. He died at Sydney Lodge, Hamble, Hampshire, on 17 September 1873 and was buried at Wimpole, Cambridgeshire, near Royston, on 24 September. 
Hardwicke was admired by all who knew him, as a seaman, a politician and a landowner. He had many virtues, but his direct and honest approach was less successful in politics than it had been at sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 30241


Yorke, Henry Redhead (1772-1813), political writer, seems to have been a native of the West Indies, but was brought up at Little Eaton, near Derby. In 1792, under his paternal name of Redhead, he published a pamphlet against the emancipation of slaves, but speedily changed his views on that subject, and while on a visit to Paris at the end of the same year wrote, but did not publish, a refutation of his pamphlet. In Paris he witnessed the king's appearance before the convention, and was closely connected with the brothers Robert and John Sheares and other members of the British club. He seceded from the club, however, in opposition to an address inviting the convention to liberate Britain from tyranny. This caused him to be denounced as a spy by Robert Rayment, and led to the issue of a warrant for his arrest. Assuming the surname Yorke, he left France and returned to Britain via Switzerland and the Netherlands. 
Yorke's radical sympathies, however, had not diminished. Upon his return he joined the London Corresponding Society and published a letter to John Frost entitled 'These are the Times that Try Men's Souls' (1793). He also joined a radical society at Derby, and in 1793 was sent by it to assist the Sheffield branch of the Society for Constitutional Information. On 7 April 1794 he addressed a large outdoor meeting at Sheffield, during which he was alleged to have exclaimed: 'You behold before you, young as I am, about twenty-two years of age, a man who has been concerned in three revolutions already, who essentially contributed to serve the revolution in America, who contributed to that in Holland, who materially assisted in that of France, and who will continue to cause revolutions all over the world.' He was arrested, and at the York spring assize of 1795 true bills were found against him for conspiracy, sedition, and libel. 
On 23 July 1795 Yorke was tried before Sir Giles Rooke at York for conspiracy, but his co-defendants -- Joseph Gale, printer of the 'Sheffield Register', and Richard Davison, compositor -- had absconded. Yorke, while continuing to advocate parliamentary reform, repudiated the boastful words imputed to him, and declared himself opposed to violence and anarchy. His speech in self-defence, however, was believed to have aided in his conviction. On 27 November 1795 he was sentenced by the king's bench to two years' imprisonment in Dorchester Castle, fined $100, and required to give sureties of good behaviour for seven years. Yorke published a report of his trial in the same year. He does not appear to have been released until March 1798. Meanwhile his opinions had undergone a complete change. 
In a 'Letter to the Reformers' (1798), written in prison, he justified the war with France, and on 3 August 1798, in a private letter to William Wickham, he deplored the fate and condemned the views of the brothers Henry and John Sheares (Castlereagh, 1.258). In 1802 he revisited France and documented his experience in 'Letters from France' (1804), which stressed in contrast the virtues of the British constitution. He wrote letters for twelve months in 'The Star' under the signature of Alfred or Galgacus (these were reprinted in a small volume), was part proprietor of the 'True Briton', and in 1806 was near having a duel with Sir Francis Burdett: both parties were bound over to keep the peace. 
In the meantime Yorke became increasingly interested in the education of loyalist principles. In 1800 he published 'Elements of Civil Knowledge', a guide to the education of children in the virtues of the British state. In 1801 and again in 1810 he issued further statements of support for the constitution via synopses of lectures in London on political and historical subjects. He married, in 1800, the daughter of a man named Andrews, keeper of Dorchester Castle; they had four children. After a long illness, and having relinquished politics, he was induced by Richard Valpy to undertake a new edition and continuation of John Campbell's 'Lives of British Admirals'; but before completing this work, and when about to practise as a barrister (he had been a student of the Inner Temple from 1801), he was again struck down by illness, and died at Chelsea on 28 January 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 30242


Yorke, James (fl. 1640), heraldic writer, was a blacksmith in the city of Lincoln. Nothing is known of his family. He is remembered for his single folio volume, printed at London in 1640, entitled 'The union of honour: containing the armes, matches and issues of the kings, dukes, marquesses and earles of England from the conquest, until... 1640'. A frontispiece, dated 1641, is inscribed to Charles I. This was probably issued with the second part of the book containing the arms of viscounts and barons, together with the gentry of Lincolnshire, which was introduced by Yorke as 'a corollary to my work before'. The book itself is prefaced by a dedicatory epistle to Henry Frederick, son and heir apparent of Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, in which Yorke claimed he was long in 'forging and hammering it to this perfection' and that it was 'a Master-piece, not yet matched by any of my trade'. Dedicatory poems follow from eight of Yorke's friends or countrymen, including the author Richard Brathwaite and the actor and author Thomas Heywood. The text is based on Thomas Milles, John Guillim, Ralph Brooke, and Augustine Vincent, with Yorke claiming responsibility for material between 1622 and 1640. The heraldry in many surviving copies is hand-coloured. Yorke anchors his heraldic presentation of the nobility and gentry in chivalric tradition by appending a list of battles fought by the English, derived from Speed and Stow. 
Yorke's work was admired by contemporaries, not least because of his humble occupation. Thomas Fuller lauded him as: 'an excellent workman in his Profession, insomuch that if Pegasus himself would wear shoes, this man alone is fit to make them. He is a servant as well of Apollo as of Vulcan, turning his stiddy into a studdy. (Fuller, 'Worthies', 2.24)' The 'Union of Honour' retains some interest as a link between Vincent and William Dugdale, and as an affirmation of English social order on the eve of the civil war. Yorke's date of death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 30243


Yorke, Joseph, Baron Dover (1724-1792), diplomatist, was born in London on 24 June 1724, the third son of the celebrated lawyer Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke (1690-1764), and his wife, Margaret Lygon, nee Cocks ('c'.1695-1761). Born into the whig establishment and brought up within it, Yorke's own career became a monument to the passing of this age. In company with his four brothers, he was educated at Dr Newcombe's famous school at Hackney and by a private tutor, Dr Samuel Slater, recommended as 'a good scholar of exemplary character and Whig principles' ('Life and Correspondence of Philip Yorke', 1.102). While his elder brothers Philip Yorke (1720-1790) and Charles Yorke (1722-1770) were destined by family strategy for the law or politics, a military career beckoned for Joe as a younger son. The political correspondent and political manager Elizabeth Anson (1725-1760) was his sister. In April 1741 at the age of sixteen he was commissioned as an ensign in the duke of Cumberland's regiment of guards. The War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48) provided opportunities for aspiring soldiers, and Yorke's own application and abilities, together with the support of George II's favourite son, ensured that he rose rapidly. He served first with the earl of Stair's forces in the Low Countries, took part in the victory at Dettingen (June 1743), was promoted captain, and in 1745 became an aide-de-camp to Cumberland, distinguishing himself in the defeat at French hands at Fontenoy (May 1745). His bravery on this occasion secured a commission as lieutenant-colonel in the 1st regiment of foot guards. On returning with Cumberland's forces to Britain when the Jacobite rising occurred later that year, he was present on the battlefield of Culloden (April 1746), where the Young Pretender was comprehensively defeated. Back on the continent, Yorke witnessed the Marechal de Saxe's great victory at Laufeldt (July 1747). His rising reputation was apparent in his appointment as an aide-de-camp to the king in 1749, a post he retained until 1758. 
Yorke's experiences during the 1740s left him with an enduring and, before long, exaggerated fear of French military power which remained central to his political outlook. Though he had risen swiftly in the army during the war, that career did not offer a path to the political summit which was his goal. In the final stages of the fighting he had made important contacts with members of the Dutch political elite, and he now embarked upon diplomatic service as a route to high office in England. His father, then lord chancellor, and the latter's political confidant the duke of Newcastle, together secured a flying start for the young man. Having been sent to Paris as a member of the peace commission at the end of the War of the Austrian Succession, he remained there after its conclusion and served as secretary of embassy (1749-51) to the new British ambassador, the earl of Albemarle, a post he occupied until October 1751. In December of that year Yorke was parachuted, at the tender age of twenty-seven, into the key mission to the Dutch republic, then second only to France in the hierarchy of British diplomatic appointments. It was to be his only permanent post: he remained at The Hague until December 1780, first as minister-plenipotentiary (1751-61) and then as ambassador after August 1761, in which year he was also awarded a KB. This was the longest period of continuous service at a major post of any eighteenth-century British diplomatist. 
Yorke's nomination was part of a significant reconfiguration of Anglo-Dutch relations. The two countries had been allies since the age of the stadholder-king, William III, who had ruled on both sides of the narrow seas (1689-1702) and had fought against Louis XIV's France in the wars of 1689 to 1714. The Dutch republic had spent its power and especially its fiscal strength in that conflict, and during the 1740s the extent of its political and economic decline, under way for a generation, had finally become evident, particularly to its British ally. Though the stadholderate had been restored in 1747 in the person of William IV (1747-51), the republic could no longer play its traditional role in international relations and especially in Britain's alliance system. The solution sponsored by the leading Orangist statesman Willem Bentinck van Rhoon through his political ally Newcastle was as simple as it was ingenious. Subordinating the weakened Dutch republic to its increasingly powerful British partner, he persuaded London to assume the twin roles of dominant force in the alliance and buttress of the house of Orange. Its fragile domestic position was further weakened shortly before Britain's new representative reached The Hague by William IV's early and unexpected death in autumn 1751. The regency for his young son, the future William V, was headed by his widow, Anna, George II's eldest daughter. 
Yorke's role was to uphold the alliance and the house of Orange which protected it, and this he did throughout the next generation with exemplary diligence but rather less flexibility and intelligence. The changing balance of forces between the two countries made it an unequal partnership, and this first became evident during the Seven Years' War (1756-63). Though the republic had declined economically, it retained a substantial share of colonial and European commerce and was a natural target for France during wartime. Even worse, from a British perspective, the relevant treaties which dated from the seventeenth century gave Dutch merchants a privileged position as neutral traders during Anglo-French hostilities. In 1758 a British naval and privateering offensive against France's Caribbean trade led to the seizure of a number of Dutch ships and provoked a serious diplomatic confrontation. On this occasion a settlement was patched up, as the British government made concessions in order to support the Orangist regime, further weakened by the death of the 'princesse-gouvernante', Anna, at the beginning of 1759. The problems of neutral rights were already apparent, however, and they would loom even larger during the final years of Yorke's mission. 
Hardwicke and Newcastle were leading figures during the 1750s and early 1760s, and their influence ensured that Yorke's star remained in the ascendant. He rejected a posting to Russia in 1754, and was sent on what became a special mission to Frederick the Great between April and June 1758: intended to replace Andrew Mitchell as Britain's representative, he was hurriedly withdrawn when both Prussian and British policy were thrown into reverse. Three years later Yorke was named as one of the three British plenipotentiaries to the abortive peace congress at Augsburg, while in 1763 and again in 1766 he was offered and rejected the post of ambassador to Madrid. Implicit in the offer of an embassy to Spain was both the reduced importance of the Dutch republic within the wider framework of British foreign policy and Yorke's own declining connections at home. 
By the 1760s an entire political generation was passing from the scene: Yorke's father, Hardwicke, died in 1764, Newcastle four years later. However, Yorke retained important connections. The new king, George III, used him secretly for private family diplomacy, most notably in 1766 in an unsuccessful attempt to substitute the king's sister, Louisa, as the stadholder's bride, thereby preventing the marriage of William V to a Hohenzollern princess. That union symbolized the Dutch republic's transition from its traditional British orbit into a new Prussian one. Yet even the king's support could not secure the Paris embassy or a cabinet post for the ambassador, whom he famously described as Britain's 'foreign political watchman at The Hague' ('Correspondence of George III', 4.20). Throughout his mission Yorke was an MP, successively for East Grinstead (1751-61), Dover (1761-74), and Grampound (1774-80). Unlike Horatio Walpole in an earlier generation, however, he played no discernible role in the House of Commons, where he neither spoke nor voted, valuing only the prestige conferred by membership. The ambassador's inability to take on a parliamentary role was the ostensible reason why Lord North did not appoint him to a secretaryship of state in 1778. 
The decline of his political connections at home was one reason why Yorke remained marooned at The Hague throughout the 1760s and 1770s. Another was his difficult personality, which flawed his whole career. The ambassador was a man of few social graces, with a talent which bordered on genius for alienating his friends and antagonizing his opponents. James Boswell, passing through the republic shortly after the Seven Years' War, claimed that 'he seemed so anxious lest people should not know that he was an Ambassador that he held his head very high and spoke very little', styled him a 'buckram knight', and declared that he was 'rendered ridiculous by affected airs' ('Boswell on the Grand Tour', 171). Even a more sympathetic British observer, Sir Nathaniel Wraxall, commented discreetly on Yorke's 'defects of external deportment' and declared that 'his manners and address had in them something formal and ceremonious' (Wraxall, 1.180). Dutch statesmen were considerably less charitable, finding the ambassador proud, overbearing, haughty, and prone to transact official negotiations through threats and demands rather than through the discussions and compromises which were the mainsprings of eighteenth-century diplomacy. 
These shortcomings became particularly important during the final years of Yorke's mission. The outbreak of rebellion in Britain's North American colonies in 1775 once more placed the combustible issue of neutral rights at the top of the diplomatic agenda. At first the moderation exhibited by both governments kept the disputes within bounds. The outbreak of an Anglo-French war within Europe in summer 1778 sharply reduced the scope for compromise, and very soon British seizures of Dutch shipping, now on a wholly new scale, together with the decisions of English prize courts, produced Dutch complaints and reprisals. Yorke's provocative conduct exacerbated matters and further raised the political temperature as the situation deteriorated during 1779-80. He was now openly contemptuous of the Orangist regime and of William V, the unimpressive stadholder at its head. Crucially, he failed to recognize that the authorities at The Hague could not control the republic's commercial provinces, Holland and Zeeland, which had been inflamed by British seizures, and so deliver the concessions which Britain's volatile ambassador was demanding. Yorke's own political ideas had not moved beyond the 1740s and 1750s when he had grown to maturity: automatic opposition to France, support for the republic and the house of Orange. He believed that Dutch politics still revolved around the struggle of Orangists and regents: he failed to appreciate the extent to which the rise of the patriot movement, with its demand for a less oligarchical basis of Dutch political life, was changing the complexion of the republic's politics. Bad history and a worse grasp of present political reality led him to sponsor a desperate solution: a British attack on the republic, intended to revive the stadholderate exactly as the French attacks of 1672 and 1747 had done. His own influence and, more importantly, the threatened Dutch accession to Catherine II's 'armed neutrality', a league of Europe's commercial states, led to the adoption of his plan by his superiors, and on Boxing day 1780 Yorke left The Hague. The Fourth Anglo-Dutch War (1780-84) which followed had the opposite effect to that intended by the ambassador: shattering Dutch defeats further weakened the stadholderate, rather than strengthening it. 
Yorke's final years in England were uneventful. On 23 June 1783 the lifelong bachelor married the Danish Baroness de Stocken, Christiana Boetzelaer ('c'.1714-1793), the elderly widow of a Dutch nobleman, Baron de Boetzelaer, and the daughter of Johan Henrik, Baron de Stocken; they had no children. Throughout his diplomatic career Yorke had received a series of military appointments and promotions, the last of which saw him rise to the rank of general (1777). During the 1780s he again seems to have played an active role in military affairs, while as late as 1787 he was consulted by the Pitt government over its foreign policy. In the following year he was created Baron Dover, a peerage which became extinct upon his death, at Hill Street, Mayfair, on 2 December 1792. 


@@@@@


doc= 30244


Yorke, Sir Joseph Sydney (1768-1831), naval officer, the second son of Charles Yorke (1722-1770) and his second wife, Agneta, 'nee' Johnson (1740-1820), and younger brother of Charles Philip Yorke (1764-1834), was born in London on 6 June 1768. He was educated at Harrow School (1779-80) and entered the navy in 1780. In March 1781 he joined the 'Duke', commanded by Sir Charles Douglas, whom, in December, he followed to the 'Formidable', in which he was present at the action of 12 April 1782 and continued until she was paid off in 1783. The following year he was again with Douglas, in the 'Assistance', and returned home with him in the spring of 1785. He was then in the 'Salisbury', the flagship of Commodore John Elliot, on the Newfoundland station, and in the 'Adamant', with Sir Richard Hughes, at Halifax. On 27 June 1789 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Thisbe' with Captain Samuel Hood (1762-1814), and returned to England at the end of the year. On 19 November 1790 he was promoted commander, and in February 1791 was appointed to the 'Rattlesnake', which he commanded in the channel until his promotion on 4 February 1793 to be captain of the 'Circe', in which, and afterwards in the 'Stag', the 'Jason', and the 'Canada', he served on the home station continuously until the peace of Amiens. On 22 August 1795, while in command of the 'Stag', he captured the Dutch frigate 'Alliandie' off the coast of Norway. This, and other captures, earned him a significant amount of prize money, which he used to build his home, Sydney Lodge, at Southampton. On 29 March 1798 he married Elizabeth Weake (died 1812), the daughter of James Rattray of Atherston, New Brunswick; they had six sons and a daughter. Their eldest son, Charles Philip Yorke, became fourth earl of Hardwicke. 
In August 1803 Yorke was appointed to the 'Prince George' in the channel. He then commanded the 'Barfleur' and the 'Christian VII', also in the channel. In June 1810 he was knighted when acting as proxy for his half-brother Philip Yorke, the third earl of Hardwicke, on his installation as KG. On 31 July 1810 he was promoted rear-admiral, and in the following January, with his flag in the 'Vengeur', he was sent out to Lisbon with reinforcements for the army. These were landed on 4 March, leading Massena to retreat from the lines of Torres Vedras. This was Yorke's last service afloat. 
In July 1810 Yorke joined the Board of Admiralty, where he served under his elder brother Charles Philip Yorke. Although the latter resigned from the government in 1812, Yorke remained at the board, and rose to become first naval lord under Lord Melville in October 1813. He left this post, and the Admiralty borough, in 1818, at the same time that his brother retired from public life. Yorke remained an active tory member of parliament until the end of his life; he opposed Catholic emancipation, although he was prepared to support Canning's ministry. His seat at Reigate (1790-1806, 1818-31) was the family borough; St Germans (1806-10) and West Looe (1812) were nomination boroughs, while Sandwich (1812-18) was an Admiralty borough. 
His first wife having died on 29 January 1812, on 22 May 1813 Yorke married Urania Annie Kington, formerly de Burgh, dowager marchioness of Clanricarde (died 1843), widow of Colonel Peter Kington and of Henry de Burgh, marquess of Clanricarde, and daughter of George Paulet, the twelfth marquess of Winchester; they had no children. On 4 June 1814 he was made vice-admiral, on 2 January 1815 KCB, and on 22 July 1830 admiral. During his later years he lived principally at Sydney Lodge, but he devoted much time to the administration of various charities connected with the naval service. He was also chairman of the Waterloo Bridge Company, in which he took an active role. On 5 May 1831 he was drowned when the small yacht in which he was travelling from Southampton to Portsmouth was struck by lightning in Stokes' Bay. He was survived by his wife. He was interred in the family vault at Wimpole, Cambridgeshire. Yorke's career was dominated by the role of his elder brothers, the third earl of Hardwicke and Charles Philip Yorke, in the factional politics of the period, and his service at the Admiralty was always more political than administrative. 


@@@@@


doc= 30245


Yorke, Philip, first earl of Hardwicke (1690-1764), lord chancellor, was born at Dover, Kent, on 1 December 1690, the only surviving son of Philip Yorke ('bap'. 1651, died 1721), an attorney of Dover, and his wife, Elizabeth (1658/9-1727), the daughter of Richard Gibbon of Dover. He was educated at a school in Bethnal Green, Middlesex, run by a dissenter, Samuel Morland, but left at the age of sixteen to become an articled clerk to a prominent London attorney, Charles Salkeld of Holborn. Mrs Salkend was said to have exploited his dependent status by sending him on grocery errands, until the young man hit upon the deterrent stratagem of charging for coach hire. Charles Salkeld's perception of Yorke's talents soon launched him on the path to fame and fortune. Yorke, ambitious to be a barrister rather than a humble attorney, was entered at the Middle Temple in 1708 and about the same time he may have become tutor to the son of Lord Chief Justice Thomas Parker of king's bench. 
These valuable connections imparted a rocket-like boost to his legal career after Yorke was called to the bar on 6 May 1715. He obtained numerous briefs from attorney friends on the western circuit and enjoyed the praise and tacit patronage of Judge Parker, first in the court of king's bench, and then, when Parker became Lord Chancellor Macclesfield in 1718, in the court of chancery. Yorke's legal connections were further enhanced by his marriage on 16 May 1719 to a widow, Margaret Lygon ('c'.1695-1761), the daughter of the Worcestershire squire and former MP Charles Cocks, for she was niece of the late Lord Somers, a former lord chancellor, and niece by marriage to Sir Joseph Jekyll, master of the rolls. They had five sons and two daughters, all well taken care of by their father, whose initial poverty was doubtless the spur to his success in securing wealth for himself and his progeny. In 1725 he bought for $24,000 the Gloucestershire estate of Hardwicke, where he never lived, and by the 1730s his avarice had won him the nickname Judge Gripus. In 1740 he was able to pay the earl of Oxford $100,000 for the estate of Wimpole in Cambridgeshire. It became the Yorke family home and the basis of an electoral interest in that county, where his local influence was signified by his appointment in 1749 as high steward of Cambridge University. 
Yorke's ability had also attracted the attention of the wealthy duke of Newcastle, a man of his own age, who brought him into parliament at a by-election on 21 April 1719 for his borough of Lewes. At the general election of 1722 Yorke transferred to another of Newcastle's boroughs, Seaford. So began a lifelong friendship, during which, while Newcastle was secretary of state for thirty years from 1724, and then first lord of the Treasury for nearly eight years, Yorke evolved from protege to the duke's chief confidant. His maiden speech, on 4 March 1720 in a debate on what became the 'Irish Declaratory Act' of that year, was his most important constitutional pronouncement in parliament. He argued that the inhabitants of Ireland were either the native Irish, a conquered people, or colonists from Britain. In either case they were subject to the British parliament. Later that month, when the post of solicitor-general fell vacant, Macclesfield secured it for Yorke, then aged twenty-nine and with less than five years at the bar, over the heads of more senior claimants. He was knighted on 11 June 1720 and promoted to attorney-general on 31 January 1724. His legal tasks soon included the successful prosecution of two notorious criminals, Jack Sheppard in 1724 and Jonathan Wild in 1725, and as attorney-general he enjoyed a profitable private practice at the bar. Yorke also did his parliamentary duty by what became the ministry of Sir Robert Walpole. Even the scanty records of the 1720s list him as speaking in every parliamentary session of the decade. He spoke on the South Sea Bubble and was prominent in pushing bills of attainder against Jacobites implicated in the 1722 plot. It was Yorke, too, who in 1723 moved for what became known as the 'Waltham Black Act'. Embarrassment loomed in 1725 when his former patron Lord Macclesfield was accused of corruption. Yorke excused himself from the customary obligation of his office by taking no part in the impeachment proceedings, conduct which incurred criticism, and on 18 March he vainly sought mitigation of the punishment designed for the convicted and disgraced lord chancellor. 
From 1727 onwards, when European war threatened, Yorke was foremost among those who supported in parliamentary debate such unpopular financial and military measures as increased army estimates and Hessian subsidy treaties. On 7 May 1728 he displayed a touch of steel when he took the opposition leader William Pulteney to task for describing as villains all MPs who supported a vote of credit, extracting an apology even before Speaker Onslow ruled the word to be unparliamentary. Attorney-General Yorke strongly backed Walpole over the unpopular 'Excise Bill' of 1733, making a long speech when it was introduced on 14 March. He challenged the opposition propaganda claim that there was a threat to individual liberty and to the constitution, which, he commented sarcastically, did not include customs frauds. 
Later that year a coincidence of vacancies led to a reshuffle of legal posts. Yorke waived precedence to allow Solicitor-General Charles Talbot, whom he had leap-frogged into office in 1720, and who was his superior in equity law, to become lord chancellor. He himself became lord chief justice of king's bench, with a salary enhanced by $2000, a peerage as Baron Hardwicke, and appointment to the privy council. His term as a common-law judge was not marked by any notable decisions, and ended unexpectedly when Lord Talbot died on 14 February 1737, at the age of fifty-one. 
Hardwicke, only five years younger, now claimed the honour he had seemingly forfeited. After a week of bargaining with Walpole, whereby his eldest son, Philip Yorke (later second earl of Hardwicke), was to obtain in 1738 a lucrative life sinecure at the exchequer, Hardwicke took the woolsack on 21 February 1737; he remained lord chancellor for more than nineteen years. It was a demanding multi-function post: Hardwicke was invariably named as one of the lords justices, or regents, during George II's visits to Hanover; he was a member of the cabinet; he acted as 'de facto' speaker of the House of Lords; he was the chief law lord there, hearing appeals from courts in Scotland as well as England; and he presided over the court of chancery. 
Legal historians credit Hardwicke with establishing finally the freedom of his office from bribery and undue influence: it was a mere dozen years since the conviction of Macclesfield. More positively, he became renowned for immense conscientiousness in his desire to do justice. Aware that equity law, which regulated personal and property rights, was said to come from books not brains, he established precedents as the mode of procedure -- often by the 1750s his own precedents. 'Certainty is the mother of repose, and therefore the law aims at certainty' was his maxim (Yorke, 2.423). To that end he mastered every aspect of law, notably learning Roman law to cope with Scottish cases. Nevertheless he was conscious that counsel might on particular points prove more erudite than himself, and he took due note of arguments advanced. 'His pen always moves at the right time', it was said. Hardwicke was never ashamed to alter his opinion, affirming 'I always thought it a much greater reproach to a Judge to continue in his error than to retract it' (Campbell, 5.46). Hardwicke was a well-mannered judge, never interrupting a legal pleading or indulging in sarcastic humour from the privilege of the bench. His rulings were so convincing in balance and erudition that even unsuccessful litigants were usually satisfied that justice had been done. 'When his Lordship pronounced his decrees', said Lord Mansfield, 'wisdom himself might be supposed to speak' (Yorke, 2.529). Hardwicke possessed the advantages of a handsome person, good looks, and a clear, sonorous voice, and his judgments became a public spectacle. 'Multitudes', Lord Camden recalled, 'would flock to hear Lord Hardwicke as to hear Garrick' (Campbell, 5.361). The quality of his decisions greatly increased chancery business, and he enjoys the reputation of being the creator of modern equity law. 
Hardwicke was a more active politician, both in Lords debates and at the heart of cabinet decision making, than most other lord chancellors. In a conversation with Attorney-General Sir Dudley Ryder in 1739, Walpole apparently envisaged him as his successor: 'Lord Hardwicke was one of the greatest men this nation ever bred, and if he himself should drop or quit, the public affairs must fall into his hands, though he seemed very unwilling to accept them'. A year later Walpole sounded Hardwicke directly, and the lord chancellor made it quite clear that he had no wish 'to bear the fatigue' of being prime minister (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54', 2.570). The political role Hardwicke chose for himself was rather that of one of the close inner circle of advisers during the ministries of Henry Pelham and his brother the duke of Newcastle. Twenty years later the courtier Lord Waldegrave wrote that, 'without affecting the name, or parade, of a Minister, Lord Hardwicke also had great weight and authority: he... was consulted on every occasion; and no important measure of government was carried into execution, without his previous consent' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 154). 
The diarist Horace Walpole sought to blacken Hardwicke's reputation for posterity in the belief that he deserted his father as his ministry fell. The parliamentary record demonstrates the contrary. The lord chancellor, unlike the Commons speaker, could take part in debate, leaving his seat on the woolsack to do so. Hardwicke was a better debater in the Lords than in the Commons, where his legalistic style had not always gone down well. Newcastle acknowledged his role in supporting the ministry's effort to avoid a Spanish war in 1739. In February 1741 Hardwicke spoke strongly against the motion by the opposition leader Carteret for Walpole's dismissal; and after Walpole's resignation in February 1742 the lord chancellor was instrumental in procuring the Lords' defeat of a bill designed to give immunity for witnesses against the fallen minister, denouncing the idea as unfair. 
Walpole's reluctance to prosecute the war against Spain, and in effect France also from 1740, had nevertheless distanced him from his colleagues. When he resigned alone, it made sense for Newcastle and Hardwicke to negotiate a coalition ministry headed by Carteret as the man to run the war. Two years later, against the king's wishes, Carteret was forced to resign by the threat of parliamentary defeat, in November 1744. Hardwicke played an important role in this coup. It was he who, at the request of the Pelham brothers, drafted the memorial presented to George II on 1 November that indicted the failure of Carteret's foreign policy. Although Carteret's fall had been cleverly contrived, Hardwicke blandly disclaimed responsibility, telling George II that, by the constitution, 'your ministers, Sir, are only your instruments of government'. The king made the famous retort 'Ministers are the Kings in this country' (Yorke, 1.383). The confrontation of February 1746, when the cabinet ministers tendered their resignations to coerce George II into acceptance of their demands, served to confirm the current political reality, that there was nowhere else for the king to turn. For the decade from 1744 Hardwicke formed with Newcastle and Henry Pelham, who had taken the Treasury in 1743, a triumvirate that controlled the British political scene. Often the lord chancellor was called upon to arbitrate between the two brothers, the duke seeking his support against the power Pelham wielded as leader in the Commons. By 1747 Pelham was clearly 'the premier', as the other two both acknowledged, but he was often overruled by his colleagues, as on the continuation of the war until 1748 and Newcastle's expensive foreign policy thereafter. 
Hardwicke was at the same time following his own personal agenda, to win favour with his sovereign. He did so notably by a speech in 1743 in the House of Lords defending the British hire of Hanoverian soldiers without prior parliamentary approval; he pointed out how ludicrous would have been a formal treaty of the king with himself as elector of Hanover, and lauded the value of the Hanoverian contribution to the war effort. George II doubtless also appreciated the hard line Hardwicke again, as in 1722, took against Jacobites. When invasion threatened in 1744 he insisted on strengthening a clause for forfeiture of estates as the penalty in a 'Treason Bill' for any who corresponded with the exiled house of Stuart. After the rising of 1745 had been defeated, Hardwicke presided as lord high steward at the trial of Jacobite peers, dispensing a justice seldom tempered by mercy: some thought his severity in decreeing death sentences comparable to the 'butchery' of Cumberland on the battlefield. The evidence the trials revealed about the rising caused Hardwicke to insist on punitive and preventative legislation for Scotland. He drafted and pushed through the 'Hereditable Jurisdictions Act' of 1747, abolishing the legal powers of the clan chiefs which had enabled them to raise their men. But the other professed object of lawyer Hardwicke was to provide for Scotland a fairer and less arbitrary system of justice. Further legislation in 1748 banned highland dress, the wearing of the kilt, and the ancient right of clansmen to bear arms, prohibitions widely resented in Scotland as breaches of national tradition. 
Hardwicke's office gave him a distinctive and active role throughout the Pelham ministry. As lord chancellor he was personally involved in the negotiations in 1745 with tories about the new county commissions of the peace they were demanding as the price of their support: a few were issued, without a ban on tories for the first time since 1714, as evidence of the ministry's good faith, before that political rapprochement ended. Hardwicke's position as lord chancellor always gave weight to his advice to his sovereign and colleagues on constitutional matters and to his parliamentary opinions on legislation. When the prince of Wales died in 1751 it was Hardwicke who proposed that his widow be named prospective regent for her young son, and not the king's preferred choice, his second son, the duke of Cumberland, since the duke was highly unpopular: the Pelham brothers and even George II accepted this advice. In that same year Hardwicke gave essential support to the opposition peer Lord Chesterfield's reform of the calendar, even though Newcastle disliked the innovation. In 1753 Hardwicke strongly backed a 'Jewish Naturalization Act', but he accepted its repeal the following year because of the popular outcry. 'However much the people may be misled, yet in a free country I do not think an unpopular measure ought to be obstinately persisted in', he was reported to have told the House of Lords (Campbell, 5.124). 1753 also saw the passage of what became known as Lord Hardwicke's 'Marriage Act', designed to prevent clandestine marriages, a matter of particular concern to the propertied classes. At the time neither prior notice nor parental consent for minors was required for marriage. Hardwicke's measure remedied this situation for England and Wales by ordering banns to be read for three Sundays in the designated church; insisting on previous consent of parents or guardians in the case of minors; and directing that the ceremony be conducted by an Anglican clergyman, a ground of complaint by dissenters and Roman Catholics: Jews and Quakers were exempted. Hardwicke's immense contribution to the English legal system by his judicial decisions was complemented by important legislation. 
Political tranquillity ended with the sudden death of Henry Pelham on 6 March 1754. Hardwicke managed affairs during the days of Newcastle's grief, and now more than ever became the duke's prop: 'My Lord Chancellor, with whom I do everything, and without whom I do nothing' -- so did Newcastle write to William Pitt on 2 April (Campbell, 5.137). The Newcastle ministry of 1754-6 was a time when the duke needed a shoulder on which to lean. He could succeed his brother at the Treasury, but management of the House of Commons was a problem not solved for long, and one rendered impossible by the disasters that marked the beginning of the Seven Years' War in 1756. Pitt's hour had arrived, to be the saviour of his country, but he would not agree to take office in partnership with Newcastle. It was at an interview with Hardwicke in October 1756 that he made this clear. On 19 November the lord chancellor followed his friend out of office, 'much to the regret of all good men, and indeed of the Nation in general', wrote Lord Waldegrave: 'He had been Chancellor near twenty years, and was inferior to few who had gone before him, having executed that high office with Integrity, Diligence, and uncommon Abilities. The Statesman might be no wise equal to the Judge, yet even in that capacity, he had been the chief support of the Duke of Newcastle's Administration. ('Memoirs and Speeches', 185)' Hardwicke had warned Pitt that he would not be able to maintain a ministry without Newcastle's parliamentary strength, and so it proved. Pitt had no defence against royal antipathy, and was dismissed by George II in April 1757. The long and complicated discussions to construct a ministry in which Pitt would conduct the war and Newcastle manage parliament were finally concluded by Hardwicke, 'a proper person to negotiate', thought Lord Waldegrave, 'having great influence over the Duke of Newcastle, as well as some credit with Pitt, without being disagreeable to the King himself' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 207). Hardwicke took care to ensure the return of his son-in-law Lord Anson to the Admiralty, but sacrificed the seniority claim of his son Charles Yorke to be attorney-general to that of Pitt's candidate, Charles Pratt. He himself had no wish to be lord chancellor again, and that post was not filled, the work being done by Sir Robert Henley as lord keeper of the great seal. Although without office, Hardwicke attended cabinet at the request of Newcastle. 
When George II died in 1760 Hardwicke thought of retiring from politics and, alone of the duke's friends, suggested to Newcastle that he should resign the Treasury and do the same -- unwelcome advice for a man to whom politics was the stuff of life. The duke retained his office, only to find his influence passing to Lord Bute, favourite of the new king George III. When he complained to Hardwicke, his old friend made the unhelpful reply on 8 August 1761 that he should have retired at the change of sovereign. Hardwicke, though he refused various offers from the new king, continued to attend cabinet to support Newcastle. Both sided in the majority against Pitt when in October 1761 he made a Spanish war a resigning issue. Early in 1762 Hardwicke supported Newcastle's intention to continue a subsidy to Britain's ally Prussia. When the cabinet decided otherwise Newcastle resigned the Treasury on 7 May 1762, and Hardwicke was no longer summoned to attend cabinet. 
Fearing for the careers of his sons if they were obliged to go into opposition, Hardwicke vainly renewed his pressure on the duke to retire, and was widely thought to have done so himself. By autumn 1762 Newcastle had decided to oppose the peace terms negotiated by the Bute ministry. That was contrary to the advice of Hardwicke, who nevertheless then himself attacked the peace in the Lords debate of 9 December, criticizing the restoration of Cuba and the French sugar islands. Realizing they now faced the prospect of permanent opposition, the still loyal Hardwicke made the wry comment to Newcastle that it was 'a kind of new trade to learn at a late hour' (BL, Add. MS 32948, fols. 1-2). There was not much else to oppose during that parliamentary session, but Hardwicke did make what proved to be his last speech, on 28 March 1763 against a proposed cider tax, unfairly portraying it as a second land tax on the cider counties of western England. 
After George Grenville succeeded Bute as prime minister in April 1763 George III was not satisfied with his new ministry. Contrary to the advice of his cabinet, he insisted in June on Hardwicke being offered the then vacant cabinet post of lord president of the council. Hardwicke refused. The diarist Mrs Grenville noted that he said 'they would never come into office, but as a party and upon a plan concerted with Mr Pitt and the great Whig Lords, as had been practised in the late King's time' ('Grenville Papers', 2.191). When the next month George III negotiated with Pitt for a new ministry, Pitt himself took a similar line, naming Hardwicke for the same post and Newcastle as lord privy seal. The king deemed his proposals unacceptable, and retained the Grenville ministry. The clear divide between administration and opposition that now became evident led Charles Yorke to resign the post of attorney-general he had retained under Bute and Grenville, and the younger Yorkes joined their father in opposition. But Hardwicke's political career was now over. He had always taken care of his health, by diet and exercise, and was said by his son Charles to look fifty when he was seventy. But from September 1763 what Newcastle described in December as 'a most painful and dangerous disease' (Yorke, 3.483) confined him to bed at his London home of Powis House, Great Ormond Street, until his death on 6 March 1764. He was buried at Wimpole parish church on 25 March. 
'Men are apt to mistake, or at least seem to mistake, their own talents', wrote Lord Chesterfield. 'Thus Lord Hardwicke valued himself more on being a great minister of state, which he certainly was not, than on being a great magistrate, which he certainly was' (Campbell, 5.65). Chesterfield thought Hardwicke's 'timidity' as a politician outweighed 'his parts', and he never held responsible office. But historians have added perception of his key role in the Pelham and Newcastle ministries to appreciation of his stature as one of Britain's greatest lawyers. Doubtless as gratifying to Hardwicke as his personal success was the creation of a new wealthy and influential aristocratic dynasty. On 2 April 1754 he acquired the further titles earl of Hardwicke and Viscount Royston; the latter was enjoyed as a courtesy by his eldest son, Philip. Already possessing a lucrative exchequer tellership, Philip was married at the age of twenty to a rich heiress, Lady Jemima Campbell ['see 'Yorke, Jemima] who within a fortnight became Marchioness Grey in her own right. The second son, Charles, guided by his father to success as a lawyer and politician, obtained a chancery sinecure in 1747. This he shared with his brother John, the fourth son, until in 1750 his father obtained another chancery sinecure for John. Hardwicke's application for this provoked the comment from George II that 'My Lord Chancellor is getting every office that falls in the law for his own children' (Yorke, 2.179). The third son, Joseph Yorke (later Baron Dover), enjoyed rapid promotion in his chosen army career; he became a lieutenant-colonel at the age of twenty before turning to diplomacy and beginning a thirty-year spell as British minister at The Hague from 1751. All four were soon MPs, Philip for Cambridgeshire from 1747. The fifth son, James, was from 1774 successively bishop of St David's, Gloucester, and Ely. Hardwicke's elder daughter, Elizabeth ['see 'Anson, Elizabeth, Lady Anson (1725-1760)], married in 1748 the famous Admiral Lord Anson, who as first lord of the Admiralty sat in cabinet with his father-in-law from 1751. His younger daughter, Margaret, in 1749 married Sir Gilbert Heathcote, an extremely wealthy baronet. Hardwicke would have loved Horace Walpole's comment on the Yorkes in 1757: 'The family is very powerful' ('Letters', 4.91). 
As a man Hardwicke commanded admiration rather than affection. There was no lighter side to his character. In later life he stated that he had been too busy in his youth to be a rake. There is no record of any recreations that he enjoyed, and unlike most lord chancellors of the age he failed to use his clerical patronage to assist men of letters. He left no legacy of anecdotes about himself, or of 'bons mots' attributed to him. While his youthful persona was as a man of single-minded ambition, in maturity his image became one of self-importance, even pomposity. Lord Waldegrave commented on 'his usual gravity' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 178). His correspondence shows that he was so conscious of his new aristocratic status that his letters to his eldest son were after 1754 addressed to 'My Dear Lord'. Of his integrity of character there can be no doubt. Despite his notorious desire for money he was never suspected of corruption, and he was a model of sobriety and connubial fidelity. Yet he was not quite a gentleman, in the opinion of Lord Waldegrave: 'He was undoubtedly an excellent Chancellor, and might have been thought a great man, had he been less avaricious, less proud, less unlike a Gentleman, and not so great a politician' (ibid., 154n.). 


@@@@@


doc= 30246


Yorke, Philip, second earl of Hardwicke (1720-1790), politician and writer, eldest son of Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke (1690-1764), and his wife, Margaret Lygon ('c'.1695-1761), daughter of Charles Cocks, MP for Worcester, was born on 9 December 1720. His siblings included Joseph Yorke, Charles Yorke, and Elizabeth Anson. He was educated at Newcome's school, Hackney, and afterwards by private tutors, including Samuel Salter. In 1737 he matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, from which he received the degree of LLD in 1749. In 1738 his father provided him with the sinecure post of teller of the exchequer, which by 1782 was worth $7000 a year. On 22 May 1740 he married Lady Jemima Campbell (1722-1797) ['see 'Yorke, Jemima, suo jure Marchioness Grey], only daughter of John Campbell, third earl of Breadalbane (bap. 1696, d. 1782), who became Marchioness Grey upon the death of her maternal grandfather that same year. They had two daughters: Amabel ['see 'Campbell, Amabel Hume-, suo jure Countess De Grey], who married Alexander, Viscount Polwarth, eldest son of the last earl of Marchmont, in 1772, and Mary Jemima Robinson ['see under 'Yorke, Jemima, suo jure Marchioness Grey], who married the second Baron Grantham in 1780. 
In 1741 Yorke was elected to the House of Commons for Reigate, Surrey, which he continued to represent until 1747. His political career began promisingly, as 'he was chosen to second the address in 1743, to move it in 1744, and to be a manager of Lord Lovat's trial in 1747. He also spoke for the Government on the continuing of British troops to Flanders in January 1744 and on the Hanoverians in April 1746' (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54'). Beyond that, however, he was an infrequent speaker, and his main contribution to the House of Commons was a diary of debates which he kept between December 1743 and April 1745, which has been described as 'the most trustworthy and impartial authority on the parliamentary history of the period' (ibid.). In 1747 Yorke was chosen by the general meeting of the county to stand for Cambridgeshire, where his father's estate of Wimpole and near which his wife's estate of Wrest were situated. During the election, his father advised him on maintaining his health: 'If you find yourself hot and dry, drink negus, I mean wine and warm water. And be sure to take care that your bed and sheets are 'in all places' well aired' (ibid.). In order to ensure his election, his father spent over $2000 treating the constituents, a 'monstrous sum', he later complained, 'for an election without any opposition' (ibid.). 
In 1754 Yorke became Lord Royston when his father was created earl of Hardwicke. He was sworn of the privy council on the accession of George III, and he took his seat in the House of Lords as the earl of Hardwicke upon his father's death in 1764. He was a member (without office) of the first Rockingham administration, and was offered the northern seals upon Grafton's resignation in 1766, but he declined for reasons of ill health. Although his health prevented him from taking an active role in opposition during the Grafton and North administrations, he remained an important figure in whig circles. Party meetings were frequently held at his town house, and he was consulted on key matters, including the arrangements which resulted in the formation of the second Rockingham administration. He also served as lord lieutenant of Cambridgeshire from 1757 and as high steward of the University of Cambridge from 1764 until his death. 
Although Hardwicke continued the family tradition in politics, he was never truly a politician. An ample income, poor health, and intellectual leanings disinclined him from an active public life. Instead, he preferred literary pursuits and collecting historical documents. In 1741 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society and in 1744 fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. While at Cambridge he contributed some English verses to the 'Pietas academiae Cantabrigiensis in funere serenissimae Principis Willelminae Carolinae' (1738), and with his brother Charles wrote the greater portion of the 'Athenian letters, or, The epistolary correspondence of an agent of the king of Persia, residing at Athens during the Peloponnesian War' (1741). The latter work was an academic exercise edited by Thomas Birch, and other contributors included Henry Coventry, John Green, Samuel Salter, Catherine Talbot, Daniel Wray, George Henry Rooke, John Heaston, and John Lawry. The 'Athenian Letters' was printed for private circulation only, with a first edition of only ten copies and a second, which did not appear until 1781, of 100 copies. In 1792 the vogue for historic fiction created by Barthelemy's 'Voyage de jeune Anacharsis en Grece' (1788) led to a pirated edition of the 'Letters' being printed in Dublin, but this was subsequently suppressed and was superseded in 1798 by a new edition that had the imprimatur of the third earl of Hardwicke and was furnished with a geographical index, maps, and engravings. A new edition by Archdeacon Coxe appeared in 1810, and another edition was printed at Basel in 1800. There were also French translations by Villeterque and Christophe, published in Paris in 1803. Hardwicke also edited 'Letters from and to Sir Dudley Carleton, Knt, During his Embassy in Holland' (1757; 2nd edn, 1775; 3rd edn, 1780) and 'Miscellaneous State Papers from 1501 to 1726' (1778). In 1783 he produced 'Walpoliana', a collection of anecdotes about Sir Robert Walpole, and his marginalia were used for the annotations marked 'H' in the Oxford edition of Burnet's 'Own Time' (1823). Hardwicke was a prominent man in intellectual and antiquarian circles, as is evidenced by Horace Walpole's advice to Horace Mann in 1757: 'That family is very powerful; the eldest brother, Lord Royston, is historically curious and political; if, without its appearing too forced, you could at any time send him uncommon letters, papers, manifestoes, and things of that sort, it might do you good service. (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54')' Hardwicke died on 16 May 1790, at his house in St James's Square, London. His seat at Wrest and the appendant estates of the dukes of Kent passed to his daughters. In the absence of a male heir, the title went to his nephew Philip Yorke (1757-1834), eldest son of his brother Charles. Hardwicke's wife died on 11 January 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 30247


Yorke, Philip (1743-1804), genealogist and writer, was born on 30 July 1743 at Erddig, near Wrexham, Denbighshire, the son of Simon Yorke (1696-1767), landowner, and his wife, Dorothy (1717-1787), daughter and heir of Matthew Hutton of Newnham, Hertfordshire. His grandfather, Simon Yorke, was uncle of Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke. His early education was at a preparatory school in Wanstead and at Dr Henry Newcome's private academy in Hackney. After two terms at Eton College, where he met Brownlow Cust, his future brother-in-law, Philip was admitted a fellow commoner of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1762, and was created MA in 1765. He was also admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 4 November 1762 and was called to the bar on 4 July 1767. In 1768 he became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
On 2 July 1770 Yorke married Elizabeth (1749-1779), the daughter of Sir John Cust, and they had two daughters and five sons. Through his wife's interest he obtained a seat in parliament for the Cornish borough of Helston, in the place of a member disqualified by order of the House of Commons (October 1774), and he retained this seat until he retired in 1781. Subsequently he sat for Grantham from 17 January 1792 until 7 January 1793, when he stood down in favour of his son Simon. Although he was something of an amateur actor and was remembered by contemporaries for his talent for conversation, he never spoke in the House of Commons, owing to a 'constitutional diffidence' ('GM', 250). He also captained the Denbighshire regiment of militia, although he seems to have been a somewhat reluctant soldier. 
Although Yorke initially had 'no great respect for the mountain Welsh, great or small' ('DWB', 1111), his attitude began to change after his marriage in 1782 to a Welsh woman, Diana (1748-1805), daughter of Piers Wynne of Dyffryn Aled and widow of Ridgeway Owen Meyrick. The couple had two daughters and four sons. In his later years he turned his attention to Welsh history and genealogy, including his wife's descent from Marchudd, lord of Uwch Dulas. In 1795 he issued seventy copies of his 'Tracts of Powys', a genealogical history of Bleddyn ap Cynfyn, including a refutation of Polydore Virgil's critical views of the ancient Britons. The dedication, to Thomas Pennant of Downing, was dated Erddig, 20 April 1795. An appendix contained interesting letters from Lewis Morris to William Vaughan and others. In a revised and expanded form this work was reissued in 1799 as 'The Royal Tribes of Wales', a valuable brief account of the five regal tribes, with much interesting information on their distinguished descendants. The text owed much to the assistance of the Revd Walter Davies 
(Gwallter Mechain; 1764-1849)
, although the relative contribution of each is now difficult to determine. The illustrative portraits were drawn by J. Allen and engraved by W. Bond. 
Yorke's genealogical works indicate that he at first largely accepted the Welsh origin myth and gave credence to the Trojan roots of the people, but that later he distanced himself from this traditionally held viewpoint. He had the intention of producing a biography of Wales, but he was unable to bring this scheme to fruition. Yorke died on 19 March 1804 at his seat of Erddig Park, Wrexham, and was buried at Marchwiel. He was succeeded by Simon Yorke (1771-1834), his eldest son from his first marriage. 
Although contemporary accounts portrayed him as a rather extravagant country squire, Yorke was a prudent and meticulous landowner and did much to improve his seat of Erddig Park (which passed into the ownership of the National Trust in the twentieth century). Having made the most of his education, he became in later life a fervent Welsh patriot and, despite his English roots, made a learned contribution to the field of Welsh genealogy. 


@@@@@


doc= 30248


Yorke, Philip, third earl of Hardwicke (1757-1834), politician, the eldest son of Charles Yorke (1722-1770), lord chancellor, and his first wife, Catherine Freeman (died 1759), was born in St George's parish, Bloomsbury, London, on 31 May 1757. He was educated at Harrow School (1770-71) and Queens' College, Cambridge, where he received the degree of MA in 1776 and that of LLD in 1811. From 1777 to 1779 he travelled through the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland and kept a journal of his grand tour. Chosen to stand for parliament for Cambridgeshire by his uncle, Philip Yorke, second earl of Hardwicke, he was elected second county member on 14 September 1780 after a very costly election. He represented the constituency until his accession to the peerage as third earl of Hardwicke on his uncle's death, on 16 May 1790. He married, on 24 July 1782, Lady Elizabeth Lindsay (1763-1858), the third daughter of James Lindsay, fifth earl of Balcarres, and his wife, Anne Dalrymple. They had four daughters and two sons. 
In politics Yorke at first followed Fox, but he grew increasingly doubtful of Fox's stance towards the king and by 1785 was giving independent support to Pitt's administration. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in March 1801, and served as the first viceroy in post-union Ireland until the formation of the 'ministry of all the talents' in February 1806. Together with his chief secretary, Charles Abbot, he did much to allay the irritation caused by the union, not least by the reforms he authorized in the Irish offices. He 'proved a very conscientious, at times indeed fussy, viceroy' (McDowell, 53), and became himself a convert to Catholic emancipation, to which cause he steadfastly adhered until its triumph in 1829. To the parliamentary 'Reform Bill' of 1831 he gave a qualified support. 
Hardwicke was a keen patron of the arts and commissioned John Soane, whom he had met in Italy on the grand tour, to make additions to his country house, Wimpole Hall in Cambridgeshire, including the celebrated neo-classical yellow drawing room. He was also FRS and FSA, and a trustee of the British Museum; from 1790 he served as lord lieutenant of Cambridgeshire and from 1806 as high steward of Cambridge University. He was elected KG on 25 November 1803 and installed by proxy, having received the insignia at Dublin on 23 April 1805. He died at Tyttenhanger, Hertfordshire, on 18 November 1834 and was buried on 21 November in the family vault at Wimpole Hall. The title devolved upon his nephew Charles Philip Yorke (1799-1873). 


@@@@@


doc= 30249


Yorke, Philip James (1799-1874), chemist and mineralogist, was born at Ely, Cambridgeshire, on 13 October 1799, the eldest son of Philip Yorke, prebendary of Ely (1770-1817), and his wife, the Hon. Anna Maria (died 1835), daughter of Charles Cocks, first Baron Somers. He was great-grandson on his father's side of the first earl of Hardwicke. He had two younger brothers and six sisters. Educated from about the age of nine at Dr Pearson's school at East Sheen, Surrey, he entered Harrow School in 1810. On leaving Harrow he obtained a commission in the Scots Fusilier Guards (5 May 1814), and remained in that regiment until he sold out on 5 November 1847 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1852 he was appointed colonel of the Herefordshire militia -- a post which he held during the Crimean War and until 1859. 
A keen amateur chemist and mineralogist, Yorke was one of the founder members of the Chemical Society of London in 1841; he was a member of council (1842-3), later became vice-president, and was president in 1853-5. He married, on 27 April 1843, Emily ('b'. 1814?, died 1868), youngest daughter of William Morgan Clifford of Perrystone, Herefordshire; there were no children of the marriage. Living in London by 1834 at the latest, Yorke came into contact with many leading scientists of the time. In 1849 he was elected FRS. He was also active at the Royal Institution, of which he was a manager. 
Yorke's first scientific paper, published in 1834, contained a very careful investigation of the action of lead on water. It showed him to be a skilful chemical analyst. He found among other things that, after long contact with metallic lead, water dissolves one twelve-thousandth part of its own weight of a hydrated oxide of lead (formed by the action of the water and the oxygen dissolved in it). Among the thirteen papers by Yorke listed in the Royal Society catalogue, the most important was a study of the sulphides of sodium and potassium (1849). Other chemical papers were on the brown ore of iron (hydrated ferric oxide) and the quantity of caesium in the water of the hot spring at the Wheal Clifford copper mine in Cornwall. His researches on silica and silicic acid, though inconclusive, suggested the existence of a tetrabasic silicic acid. 
Yorke also made some interesting meteorological observations on the climate of Herefordshire, including a laborious comparison of barometric readings at his house near Ross with those taken at the Royal Society during the same period. He also attempted to determine the relationship between wind direction and barometric pressure. In 1853 he published a translation of 'Aus meinem Leben' by the German general and military historian Baron F. C. F. von Muffling. 
Yorke died at 89 Eaton Place, Pimlico, London, on 14 December 1874, and was buried in London. His death was followed, two days later at the same address, by that of his younger, unmarried sister, Juliana Caroline. 


@@@@@


doc= 30250


Youatt, William (1776-1847), veterinary surgeon, was the son of an Exeter surgeon. Educated for the nonconformist ministry, in 1810 he left Devon, and undertook ministerial and scholastic duties in London. In 1812 or 1813 he joined Delabere Pritchett Blaine (1768-1845) in conducting a veterinary infirmary in Wells Street, Oxford Street. This partnership continued for a little more than twelve years, when the business passed into Youatt's hands. 
In the 1820s there developed a movement among practising veterinary surgeons to reform the London Veterinary College. The main complaints were that the school ignored species other than the horse, and that the governors refused to appoint veterinary surgeons to the board of external examiners, which consisted entirely of medical men with no veterinary experience whatever. Youatt was a leading reformer who devoted his life to the improvement of the profession. 
In 1828 Youatt began a series of lectures and demonstrations to veterinary students at his private infirmary at Nassau Street, which were explicitly designed to include species other than the horse. His ambition was to have veterinary science recognized as a university discipline, and in 1831 he delivered his lectures at the London University (that is, University College); but his health was failing and by November 1833 he could no longer continue. The university course collapsed soon afterwards, but he continued to produce a series of monthly lectures in 'The Veterinarian', a professional monthly, started in 1828 by William Percivall, veterinary surgeon to the 1st Life Guards. Percivall was joined by Youatt as an editor soon after the journal was founded, and it was kept alive in the early years only by Youatt's dogged perseverance, at a time when even Percivall wished to abandon the venture. 
Youatt's connection with 'The Veterinarian' was the beginning of a notable literary career. As editor and author he was a prolific contributor to the journal. An expert on rabies he published in 1830 'On Canine Madness', in which he expounded his firm opinion that rabies was a specific disease spread only by the bite of a rabid animal, and that it could not arise spontaneously. He gave evidence on this to the rabies committee of the House of Commons, but it conflicted with the medical opinion of the day and aroused antagonism. In 1830 he entered into an arrangement with the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge to write a series of handbooks on the various animals of the farm. Five titles appeared in this series between 1831 and 1847. The first, entitled 'The Horse', was the most successful; it included a 'Treatise on draught' by Isambard Kingdom Brunel, though the attribution does not appear in all the editions, of which there were at least a further seven, the last in 1866. Youatt had a strong sense of man's moral responsibility to animals and published these views in 1839 in 'Obligation and Extent of Humanity to Brutes'. His other literary work included the editing of two editions of 'The Complete Grazier' (1833, 1839) and 'British Husbandry' (3 vols., 1834-40). Youatt was one of the original members of the English Agricultural Society when it was founded in 1838, and was placed on the committee of management. Here he did important work in moving and obtaining the appointment of a veterinary committee, of which he was appointed chairman. His objective was to establish a connection between the society and the London Veterinary College to promote the study of the diseases of farm animals. Two other important appointments that he held were as veterinary surgeon to the Zoological Society of London and veterinary surgeon to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
Owing partly to his extensive literary work and partly to attacks of gout, Youatt's practice had devolved more and more on his assistant, Ainsley, on whose death in 1844 the establishment in Nassau Street was broken up. Youatt, though now an eminent elder of the profession, was not a registered member of it. He had attended the London Veterinary College as a mature student in 1813 or thereabouts, but his enthusiasm and his connection with Blaine led to disagreements with the college authorities and he left without a certificate of qualification. However, in 1844 the veterinary reformers achieved their ambition when Queen Victoria granted their petition for the creation of a self-governing body for the profession. In March 1844 the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons was incorporated by royal charter and on 15 May Youatt was awarded his diploma of membership. 
Youatt's missionary zeal aroused ridicule and derision among some practitioners, but the profession as a whole recognized his literary efforts and presented him with a dinner service of plate in 1839 as a mark 'of the high esteem they entertain of his literary labours in veterinary science' ('The Veterinarian', 1839). His supreme contribution was his work on 'The Veterinarian' and the influence that this had on the founding of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. 
Youatt was the father of four daughters. He died by suicide on 9 January 1847 in his seventy-first year and was buried in the churchyard of Old St Pancras. 


@@@@@


doc= 30251


Youll, Henry (fl. 1608), composer, may possibly have been the son of 'Ezekiel Youel of Newark, musician' apprenticed in 1590 for seven years to 'Peter Newcombe of the same town, and song school master'. The only certain information about Youll is contained in the preface of his 'Canzonets to Three Voices' (1608), dedicated to the four sons of 'Edward Bacon Esquire', now all 'in one and the same university'. These must have been Nicholas (1588/9-1658), Philip (1591/2-1635), Nathaniel (1593-1676), and Lionel (1595/6-1678), the sons of Edward Bacon of Shrubland, Suffolk, who had all matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1606. Since Youll, in writing of his madrigals, recalled 'what a solace their company was once to you', it seems possible he had been, or still was, a household musician to the boys' parents. 
Youll was a minor figure. Stylistically he remained committed to the light idioms and forms of the canzonet and ballet acclimatized into English music by Thomas Morley in the 1590s (the last six of the twenty-four compositions in Youll's volume are ballets). But by 1608 such styles had become outmoded, and Youll showed no aptitude in handling the more serious expressive issues now being increasingly favoured by composers, as his one attempt at setting such a lyric, 'Slow, Slow Fresh Fount' from the masque 'Cynthia's Revels' by Ben Jonson, revealed (the suggestion that Youll's music could have been used in the masque itself is implausible). Yet despite his sometimes insecure technique Youll on occasions produced music of a modest charm. 


@@@@@


doc= 30252


Young, Andrew (1807-1889), hymn writer and poet, was born in Edinburgh on 23 April 1807, the second son of David Young, an Edinburgh teacher, and his wife, Margaret Merrilees. He had a brilliant career in the arts and theological classes at Edinburgh University, where he secured Professor John Wilson's (Christopher North's) prize for the best poem on the Scottish highlands. In 1830 he was appointed by the town council of Edinburgh headmaster of Niddrie Street School, where he taught for eleven years; when he started there were 80 pupils and when he left there were 600. 
In 1838 Young wrote his well-known hymn 'There is a happy land', first published in James Gall's 'Sacred Songs', and afterwards copied into hymnbooks throughout the world. The words were written to an Indian air which he heard one night played on the piano by a lady. In 1840 he became head English master of Madras College, St Andrews, from which he retired in 1853 to Edinburgh, where he was until his death superintendent of the Greenside parish sabbath school, being also actively engaged in other philanthropic work. 
Young was twice married. His first wife, Maria Isabella Mivart, whom he married on 20 April 1844, died in 1847. He then married on 7 August 1851 Christina Lothian Allan, niece of Sir William Allan. Many of Young's hymns and poems were contributed to periodicals. A collected edition was published in 1876 as 'The Scottish Highlands and other Poems'. Young was found dead in bed at his home, 22 Elm Row, Edinburgh, on 30 November 1889, and his remains were interred in Rosebank cemetery, Edinburgh. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30253


Anthony Young (bap. 1683, d. 1747), organist and composer, was baptized on 11 February 1683 at St Margaret's, Westminster, the son of Anthony and Elizabeth Young. He was dismissed from the Chapel Royal in 1700 when his voice broke. He is presumed to have been the organist of St Clement Danes, London, by 1707 and was still there in 1743. He subscribed to the Royal Society of Musicians at its formation on 28 August 1739. His 'Suits of Lessons' for harpsichord (1719) are conservative in style. His numerous songs include 'A Collection of New Songs, for One or Two Voices' (1707). He died in London, and was buried on 8 May 1747. 


@@@@@


doc= 30254


Young, Sir Aretas William (1777/8-1835), army officer and colonial governor, entered the earl of Portmore's regiment as an ensign on 3 September 1795, aged seventeen. He purchased a lieutenancy in the 13th foot on 28 November 1795, and a company on 15 September 1796. He served with the 13th in Ireland during the 1798 uprising, and in Egypt in 1801. Between 1804 and 1806 he acted as aide-de-camp to General Henry Edward Fox at Gibraltar and in Sicily. On 17 December 1807 he was promoted major in the 97th, with which he served in the Peninsular campaigns of 1808-10 and 1811, and served at the battles of Vimeiro, Talavera, and Busaco, at Redinha, the taking of Olivenca and the first siege of Badajoz. Whenever the 4th division moved, the light companies were entrusted to his charge, and during a part of the retreat to the lines of the Torres Vedras in 1810, those companies were embodied under his command as a light battalion. 
Depleted, the 97th was ordered to England, and Young was promoted, on 25 January 1813, lieutenant-colonel in the 3rd West India regiment, stationed in Trinidad. With five companies he joined the expedition against Guadeloupe in 1815, and received one of the badges of the order of merit presented by Louis XVIII. After his return to Trinidad he was chosen by Sir James Leith to command the troops in Grenada. On his being ordered back to Trinidad in August 1816, the council of assembly of Grenada presented him with a sword. In 1820, during the absence of Sir Ralph James Woodford, he administered the government of Trinidad for four months, on the termination of which he was requested to continue as a member of the council. During a second absence of Woodford he filled the office of governor for nearly two years, and on his resignation in February 1823 received the thanks of every section of the community. In 1825 the 3rd West India regiment was disbanded, and in January 1826 Young was appointed to the newly created office of his majesty's protector of slaves in Demerara. He retired from the army by sale of his commission on 13 May, with permission to retain the local rank of lieutenant-colonel. On 25 July 1831 he was gazetted lieutenant-governor of Prince Edward Island, Canada, and on 9 July 1834 he was knighted. He married Sarah Cox of Coolcliffe, Wexford; Sir Henry Edward Fox Young was their son. Young died at Government House, Prince Edward Island, on 1 December 1835, and was buried at the new English church. 


@@@@@


doc= 30255


Young, Arthur (1693-1759), Church of England clergyman, was one of two sons of Bartholomew Young (died 12 Aug 1724), landowner, of Bradfield Combust in Suffolk, and his wife, Katharine. He was admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 22 January 1711, graduating LLB in 1716 and proceeding LLD in 1728. In 1719 he was instituted to the rectories of Bradfield Combust and Bradfield St Clare. On 27 June 1746 he was installed a prebendary of Canterbury. In 1748 he was presented to the vicarage of Exning in Suffolk and received a dispensation to hold it with Bradfield St Clare. He was also chaplain to Arthur Onslow, speaker of the House of Commons. He married Anne Lucretia (1706-1785), daughter of John de Cousmaker of Weybridge in Surrey; they had two sons, John and Arthur, and a daughter, Eliza Maria, who married John Tomlinson of East Barnet in Hertfordshire. The elder son, John Young, fellow of Eton College, broke his neck in 1786 while hunting with George III. The younger son was Arthur Young (1741-1820), the renowned agriculturist, who became secretary to the board of agriculture. 
Young was the author of 'An historical dissertation on idolatrous corruptions in religion from the beginning of the world, and of the methods taken by divine providence in reforming them' (2 vols., 1734). This copious text seeks to explain the rise of Judaism and Christianity as divinely instituted religions which were opposed to the error-strewn religions of idolatry. 'A Dissertation on the Gospel Demoniacks' (1760) was published posthumously and had been written much earlier as a response to the reply of Richard Smalbroke, bishop of St David's, to Thomas Woolston's 'Discourse on the Miracles of our Saviour' (1727-9). Young's 'Dissertation' argued for a somewhat naturalistic explanation for both the condition and the cure of the gospel demoniacs, and this seems to have been the principal reason for leaving it to be published posthumously, some time after the earlier controversy to which it was a contribution had died down. 
Young died on 26 June 1759 at Bradfield Combust, where he had inherited from his father an estate of about 200 acres, and where he was buried. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30256


Young, Arthur (1741-1820), agricultural reformer and writer, was born at Whitehall in London on 11 September 1741. He was the younger son of Arthur Young (1693-1759), rector of Bradfield Combust, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and chaplain to Arthur Onslow, speaker of the House of Commons. His mother, Anne Lucretia (1706-1785), daughter of John de Cousmaker, brought her husband so large a dowry as to require that the manor and lands of Bradfield Hall, the small estate which the Youngs had owned since 1672, be settled on herself. 
The youngest of three children, Young was sent to a school at Lavenham which his father had attended. The son later described it as 'that wretched place' where he failed to receive a good grounding in the classics ('Autobiography', 7). In 1758 he left school and was apprenticed to Messrs Robertson, wine merchants of King's Lynn. It was planned that subsequently he should enter the London merchants firm of Messrs Tomlinson, since his sister, Eliza Maria, had married John Tomlinson. However, her early death in childbirth put an end to the scheme. In later life Young greatly regretted not having gone to university (as his elder brother, John, had done), and since he found trade detestable, thought the $400 paid by his father for his apprenticeship wasted. Nevertheless, as an apprentice Young made the most of life in King's Lynn, patronizing its theatre and assembly rooms and cutting a figure at town balls. He had already begun to collect books while at school, and in his spare time produced his first pamphlet, 'The Theatre of the Present War in North America'. It was published in 1758 when he was seventeen, and the publisher paid him in books to the value of $10. The pamphlet received favourable comment from the 'Gentleman's Magazine', but the same journal made severe criticism of his second pamphlet, 'The Present State of Affairs at Home and Abroad'. 
In 1761, having completed his apprenticeship, Young left King's Lynn for London, where he began at his own expense a monthly magazine, the 'Universal Museum'. This he soon abandoned after Samuel Johnson, having declined to write for it, advised him to persuade the booksellers to take it on. Two years later he suffered a haemorrhage of the lung and was sent to the Hotwells, Bristol, to recuperate. There he met Major-General Sir Charles Howard, who offered him a commission in his cavalry regiment, but although Young was willing to accept, the proposal was vetoed by his mother, mainly because of his weak health. 
Young was now twenty-two, and had experience only of trade, which he disliked, and of publishing, in which he had failed. His lack of a university education ruled out the church, and without other prospects he now made the key decision of his life, turning to a career in farming when his mother offered him the tenancy of a farm at Bradfield. He devoted his energies towards gaining a command of agriculture, collecting many books on the subject and reading well-known authors such as Samuel Hartlib, Jethro Tull, H. L. Duhamel du Monceau, and Walter Harte. While farming at Bradfield from 1763 to 1767 Young was again tempted to take up his pen and ventured into his new field with only one year's experience of farming. His letters to the 'Museum Rusticum' were written between October 1764 and April 1765, and concerned such topics as the importance of making experiments, drainage, and the advantages of touring Europe to observe different methods of cultivation, urging the Society of Arts to support the plan. Through these letters Young became acquainted with the Revd Walter Harte, whose 'Essays in Husbandry' had been published in 1764. Harte recommended Young to collect his letters and publish them with further additions as a book, and this was the origin of 'The farmer's letters to the people of England... to which are added Sylvae, or, Occasional tracts on husbandry and rural oeconomics'. Published in 1767 the book supported the bounty on the export of corn and introduced some of his enduring themes: the cultivation of waste lands, enclosure as a preliminary to improvement, and the superiority of large farms. While at Bradfield Young conducted and kept records of numerous experiments which he later incorporated in his 'Elements of Agriculture', a vast work which has never been published. 
On 1 July 1765 Young married Martha Allen (1740-1815), daughter of a wealthy King's Lynn family. They had four children: Mary ('b'. 1766), Elizabeth ('b'. 1767), Arthur ('b'. 1769), and Martha Anne ('b'. 1783) -- Young's favourite, dubbed Bobbin -- but only Mary and Arthur outlived their parents. Young's marriage was happy for the first two years but subsequently his wife came to oppose his all-absorbing interest in agriculture. She accompanied him, however, on his northern tour of 1768 and joined him during his stay in Ireland in 1778. No doubt Young's frequent absences from home, his flirtations, and his expenditure on agricultural tours and experiments contributed to her hostility. She appears to have suffered mental deterioration and her surviving letters reveal confusion of mind and, at one time, an almost pathological dislike of Bradfield. Visitors described violent disputes and quarrels, and how Young treated her overbearing temper with 'calm, easy contempt' ('Early Diary of Frances Burney', 1.114-15). According to a French visitor, Francois de la Rochefoucauld, who was at Bradfield in 1784, Mrs Young was 'hideously swarthy' and looked 'exactly like a devil', tormenting her children and servants and showing ill temper towards visitors (Marchand, 38). Young himself made quite a different impression as extremely good-humoured and never out of spirits, eager to show off his farm and its implements and to share his ideas. Martha Young died in 1815, and Young paid an extraordinary tribute to her memory in a plaque placed in Bradfield church, describing her only as 'the great-granddaughter of John Allen, esq., of Lyng House in the county of Norfolk, the first person, according to the Comte de Boulainvilliers, who there used marl'. 
Late in 1767 Young and his family left Bradfield owing to friction between his wife and his mother. He advertised in the newspapers for a farm, and the journeys of inspection he made at this time formed the basis of his slim volume 'A Six Weeks' Tour through the Southern Counties of England and Wales' (1768). He first took Sampford Hall, a farm of 300 acres in north-western Essex, but was obliged to relinquish it immediately when a relation failed to advance a loan for stocking it. He settled in 1768 at Bradmore Farm, North Mymms, near Hatfield in Hertfordshire. His farming failure there he ascribed to its terrible soil of 'vitriolic gravel', which he mistook on seeing it in an unusually favourable season, but his continuing financial problems also resulted from his spending money on experiments, and his frequent absences for long periods. He thought of emigrating to America but his wife opposed the idea. Instead, he resorted to his pen and based two of his most important books on tours made at this time, one to the northern counties of England, and the other to the eastern counties. In 1773 he took advantage of his proximity to London to become a parliamentary reporter for the 'Morning Post', which meant spending most of the week in London and walking home to his farm at weekends. His pamphlet 'A Letter to Lord Clive', advising his lordship to invest his Indian fortune in becoming an improving landlord, appeared in 1767 and was followed, among lesser works, by 'A Six Months' Tour through the North of England' (4 vols., 1769), 'The Farmer's Guide in Hiring and Stocking Farms' (2 vols., 1770), 'Rural Economy, or, Essays on the Practical Parts of Husbandry' (2 vols., 1770), 'A Course of Experimental Agriculture' (2 vols., 1770), 'The Farmer's Tour through the East of England' (4 vols., 1771), 'The Farmer's Kalendar' (1771; this book went through ten editions in Young's lifetime), 'Observations on the Present State of the Waste Lands of Great Britain' (1773), and 'Political arithmetic. Containing observations on the present state of Great Britain and the principles of her policy in the encouragement of agriculture' (1774). The 'Course of Experimental Agriculture' Young later thought to be immature and unsound, and he bought up and destroyed all the copies he could lay hands on. 
The northern and eastern tours, each covering great areas of the country, have proved valuable historical sources down to the present. Young's procedure was to announce his journey in advance in the newspapers and so meet improving landlords and leading farmers along his route, with the result that much of his material concerned the ideas and experiments they were making. In the middle 1770s Young was also active in the Society of Arts, which in 1765 and 1766 had awarded him prizes for cultivating madder. In 1769 he also won two gold medals for his papers on hogs and coleseed, and in 1773 he was elected chairman of the society's committee on agriculture. Young was also elected FRS. 
While at North Mymms, Young made lifelong friends among the family of Charles Burney, the musician, whom he had first met at King's Lynn. As a widower, Burney had in 1767 married as his second wife Young's sister-in-law, Elizabeth Allen, the widow of Stephen Allen, a King's Lynn merchant. Fanny, one of Burney's daughters, was in later years a frequent visitor to Bradfield and her diary recorded many glimpses of Young's life there. Elizabeth Allen's daughter from her first marriage, Elizabeth Meeke, also became a successful, and prolific, author. 
By 1776 Young felt he needed a new field of interest, and he decided on a visit to Ireland, a project he had been thinking of for some time. Armed with letters of introduction, he travelled widely, returning home in October of that year 'without a shilling' ('Autobiography', 81-2). However, by the following summer he was able to return in the capacity of resident agent to Lord Kingsborough, with responsibility for supervising a huge estate at Michelstown to the north of Cork. He now gave up Bradmore Farm, but his new career proved to be short-lived. He was at Michelstown for only a year, although in that time he set on foot ambitious improvements to the estate. The cause of his leaving the post so quickly is obscure, but he returned to Bradfield on 1 January 1779 to work on his 'A Tour in Ireland' with an annuity of $72 a year in lieu of his arrears of salary. The book appeared in 1780, was well received at the time, and has since become a valuable source as one of the few accounts of conditions in Ireland at this time. Among other subjects Young had much to say on commercial policy and the activities of the Dublin Society; and in addition Young attacked the practice of subletting land to middlemen and made some interesting observations on the living conditions of the poor. 
Farming again at Bradfield, Young was now famous as an agricultural expert in Britain and Europe but his financial situation was little better than before he went to Ireland and he thought again of going to America. However, he settled at Bradfield as the occupier of his mother's home farm and entered into the life of a gentleman farmer, spending each winter in London, when he met his friends and attended parliament, the Royal Society, Society of Arts, and the opera. After his great flurry of books in 1769-74, the nine years from 1775 to 1783 were, for him, remarkably unproductive, seeing only the 'Tour in Ireland' and a pamphlet on building ships for the Royal Navy. Young's financial position improved substantially in the course of the 1780s. An aunt who died in 1782 left him her house, two farms, a horse and carriage, and an annuity of about $150. The aunt indicated that the annuity would have been greater had she not been offended by Young's wife. The death of his mother in 1785 and of his brother in the following year brought him the ownership of the whole Bradfield estate. His brother, the Revd John Young, was thirteen years older than Arthur Young, and was a fellow at Eton College, chaplain to the king, and prebendary of Worcester. He suffered a broken neck in a fall while hunting on a new horse with the king. 
Now well established as master of Bradfield, Young further indulged his taste for agricultural experiments, some of them of a bizarre character. After seeking advice from Joseph Priestley, he attempted to ascertain the value of 'phlogiston' as a food of plants, tried the effects of expelling air from the soil, and attempted to discover whether electricity affected plants. It seems very likely that Young devoted so much of his energy to his experiments, his correspondence, and to making tours and visiting friends, that he had little time to spare for the proper supervision of his farm. This is the impression left by the accounts of distinguished visitors who were drawn by his name to see his farming. While at North Mymms his visitors included Lord Darlington and Prince Massalsky, bishop of Vilna, who inspected his 8 acres of experimental crops, his newly introduced Suffolk swing-plough, and his collection of implements. The celebrated Northumberland breeder George Culley came to Bradfield in 1784 but in his disappointment concluded that 'people that devote their time to writing cannot act or execute; his sheep are scabbed, his cattle ill chose and worse managed, in short he exhibits a sad picture of mismanagement' (Culley MSS, ZCU 1, 18, 44). Disappointment was also expressed in the comments of other expert visitors, for example, John Boys, a large farmer from east Kent, who was at Bradfield in 1793 and was there again the following year in company with John Ellman, the pioneer breeder of the new Southdown sheep. Nevertheless, Boys found much to interest him. He took particular note of Young's novel practice of stall-feeding cattle on chicory, and his great collection of ploughing implements. He noted also Young's cultivated grasses and his sheep, which included the Spanish Merino ram presented to Young in admiration by the king, and his cross-breeding experiments with Southdowns, Norfolks, and Bakewell's New Leicesters. On the second visit to Bradfield, wrote Boys, they joined such a gathering as 'was perhaps never before collected from so great a distance, most of the party coming more than a hundred miles, and one gentleman, Mr Colhoun, to wait upon Mr Young has travelled 170 miles'. The party walked round Young's farm before dinner, and observed his Dishley rams and the 'collection of grasses in his experiment ground'. They saw how Young used only a single pair of oxen, driven by one man, to turn a stiff soil, for which a Sussex or Weald of Kent farmer would have required at least eight oxen, with perhaps a horse or two and two drivers, 'and not plough much more, in a given time, than Mr Young does with his man and a pair of oxen' (Young, 'Annals of Agriculture', 19.89-93; 21.75-7). 
It appears that Young's more rational experiments were of considerable value, and this is borne out by the requests for seed and implements that he received from correspondents. By the 1780s Young's reputation had so grown that numbers of visitors, experts, and students were drawn to Bradfield from all over Europe. He was elected to numerous learned societies at home and abroad. So encouraged, in 1784 he launched his new periodical, 'Annals of Agriculture', a project which he had had in view for some years. It was intended, among other things, to put before the public the views and experience of the foremost agriculturists, but Young was bitterly disappointed in its sales. Although he managed to keep it going for thirty-two years until 1815 and included many of his own tours in it, he was constantly frustrated that it did not achieve a larger circulation than a few hundred copies. An immense amount of labour was involved in editing so large a periodical work and Young was fortunate in being able to call on the assistance of his friend the Revd John Symonds, professor of modern history at Cambridge and a keen experimental farmer, who lived close to Bury St Edmunds and thus within a few miles of Bradfield. Both Symonds and Young were involved in local society, becoming friends of the duke of Grafton, whose mansion at Euston lay to the north of Bury, while at Ickworth, a few miles to the south of the town, a select group of intellectuals, including Young and Symonds, dined regularly with Frederick Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol and bishop of Derry. 
Young was an advocate of vocational forms of education, especially for the sons of landowners. He warmly supported the University of Edinburgh's proposal in 1789 to endow a chair of agriculture, asking: 'Why not a Professor of Agriculture in every University?' (Young, 'Annals of Agriculture', 11.367-8). Holding that a proper understanding of farming could be gained only by practical application, he believed that a gentleman's son should not go to university but be placed with a substantial farmer for a period of ten years -- a shorter span would hardly be sufficient to learn the business properly. However, Young's own son went up to Cambridge in 1789 and was supported there for four years at a cost of $100 a year. Against Young's wishes he took holy orders, but he also showed marked agricultural interests, writing the two reports on Sussex for the board of agriculture, published in 1793 and 1808, and deputizing for his father in making a very prolonged agricultural survey in Russia from 1805 to 1814 for Tsar Alexander. 
Between 1787 and 1790 Young made three lengthy visits to France, Catalonia, and northern Italy, which resulted in his very interesting and most historically valuable book, 'Travels during the years 1787, 1788 and 1789, undertaken more particularly with a view of ascertaining the cultivation, wealth, resources and national prosperity of the kingdom of France'; this work was later generally known as 'Travels in France'. It was published in 1793 and reprinted in various versions in 1889, 1915, and 1929, and appeared in French in 1931. The first tour, made between May and November 1787, covered a route of 2200 miles in France, together with a long excursion into Catalonia. The second journey, between August and October 1788, was the shortest but still extended to as much as 1200 miles through the western provinces of Normandy, Brittany, and Anjou. The third visit, between June 1789 and January 1790, encompassed about 2100 miles in France besides a lengthy journey through northern Italy. The interest of 'Travels in France' is enhanced by the accounts of lands that were for the most part strange to Young and unknown to many of his readers. His commentaries, in consequence, were broad in scope, and in addition to farming, described aspects -- the scenery, roads, inns, manners, and the signs of wealth or poverty -- which in England he would have taken for granted or passed over in a very few words. His visits to France took place in a period which saw the beginnings of the revolution, and this gives his first-hand accounts an importance which is almost as vital now as it was to those who lived through these years. Indeed, historians on both sides of the channel have drawn heavily on Young for his view of France at this critical juncture. 
Young's first journey arose from an invitation from his friend Maximilien de Lazowski, whom he had met at Bradfield. Lazowski was tutor to the sons of the duc de Liaincourt, and he asked Young to join Francois de la Rochefoucauld and himself on a visit to the spa Bagneres de Luchon in the Pyrenees. Proceeding at a leisurely pace of some 30 miles a day, the party left Paris and travelled south via Orleans, Limoges, and Toulouse. Young was all admiration for the roads and he found the inns superior to English ones in food and beds if not in servants: the maids at Souillac, with his usual hyperbole, were 'walking dunghills' (Young, 'Travels in France', 1.36-7). The farming was generally backward and he noted some remarkable signs of poverty. While at Bagneres, Young and Lazowski embarked on a journey across the Pyrenees into Catalonia. Braving precipitous roads and primitive inns, they were relieved to reach the civilization of Barcelona. Their return northwards was along the coast to Perpignan. There they parted, Young to make a lengthy detour to see on his own the regions of Roussillon and Languedoc. He made his way to Bagneres via Montpellier, Nimes, and Carcassonne, enduring heat, flies, and verminous inns. On the return to Paris, Young travelled separately for part of the way in order to see more of the country, riding through Bayonne, Auch, Bordeaux, Tours, and Blois. He spent some time in Paris, which he found more expensive than London, and he stayed also as a guest at the family estate of the duc de Liaincourt. In Paris he was thrilled to meet A. L. Lavoisier, the celebrated chemist, and a number of other scientists. In discussing politics, Young found his acquaintances much in fear of the near approach of national bankruptcy and of revolutionary changes. 
On his second journey in France in 1788 Young went alone and did not revisit Paris. He travelled in simple style on his own horse, with his luggage in a 'cloak-bag' slung behind him. Within a week of starting, his mare began to go blind, but he carried on and brought himself and mare safely back to Bradfield after an absence of three months. Staying at an inn the night after Charles James Fox and a female companion had lodged there, he could not help comparing his blind mare with Fox's post-chaise, waiting-woman, valet, and French courier, 'but I have been doing all my life and he has been talking' (BL, Add. MSS 35126, fol. 427). His route took him through Rouen, Le Havre, Caen, and Cherbourg, where he inspected the harbour improvements and visited a glass factory. Crossing Brittany from Rennes to Brest he was appalled by the poverty: Combourg was 'one of the most brutal filthy places that can be seen' (Young, 'Travels in France', 1.174). The contrasting luxury of Nantes was associated with such a spirit of liberty as to make him think that 'the American Revolution has laid the foundation of another in France, if the government does not take care of itself' (ibid.). He returned via Angers, Le Mans, and Rouen, with an excursion to La Roche Guyon to visit his friends the duc de la Rochefoucauld and the duchesse d'Anville. 
On his third visit to France, Young arrived in Paris in June 1789, and through his friends, the Rochefoucauld-Liaincourt family, he met a number of prominent figures in the rapidly changing political scene including the duc d'Orleans and the Abbe Sieyes. He attended meetings of the third estate and purchased quantities of revolutionary pamphlets (which now form one of the treasures of the Goldsmiths' Library of the University of London). Noting the violent tone of the pamphlets and the speeches he heard, he predicted the coming of a civil war and the creation of a republic. However, he did not forget the main purpose of his visit, and setting out in a purchased one-horse cabriolet, he travelled in a new direction, eastwards towards Strasbourg. As before, he discussed farming matters with acquaintances among the landowners and farmers along the way. The striking differences he found in the working people of France and England Young ascribed, as with much else, to bad government. At Strasbourg he heard the news of the fall of the Bastille, which he recognized as opening the way to either a new constitution or 'inextricable confusions and civil war' (Young, 'Travels in France', 1.293). He witnessed the sack of the city's hotel de ville and was shocked that the troops did not restore order and even joined in the looting. 
The next stage of Young's journey was south-westwards towards Toulon and was made hazardous by peasant uprisings and rumours of outrages and Parisian plots. In one town he found the inhabitants 'very menacing' (Young, 'Travels in France', 1.305), but escaped by making an impromptu speech on the steps of his inn, stating that in England it was the nobility rather than the commoners who bore the brunt of taxation. At Dijon his friends made it possible for him to obtain the passport which had become essential to a traveller, but at Thueyts, south of Clermont Ferrand, he was arrested by armed national guards. His enquiries about the farming had led to the suspicion that he was an agent of the aristocracy, sent to double the taxes. At Toulon he sold his horse and cabriolet as he was told that it would not be practicable to take them into Italy. Consequently, he walked to the border with a peasant woman whose ass he hired for his luggage. 
Young was in Italy from 16 September to 25 December. He found the inns to be generally better than in France, and living far cheaper; but the roads were much poorer while the horses and carriages offered for hire were frightful. Venice was delightfully cheap and he had his own gondolier, but the journey from Venice to Bologna took five days on a barge, the food was disgusting, and he was packed in at night with a dozen other people in a tiny cabin. However, he enjoyed two weeks in Florence with pleasant company and the hospitality of the ambassador, Lord John Augustus Hervey, as well as finding a greater interest there in scientific agriculture than in other Italian cities. By January 1790 he was back in Paris where he was again engrossed by the revolution. He saw the royal family under the watch of the national guard, and attended the national assembly to hear Mirabeau. He also found time to collect more pamphlets and copy some of the public records. 
Young's experiences in France brought about a permanent change in his political views. From being a liberal and a reformer, by 1792 he had become an opponent of the revolution and a conservative in English matters. He was highly critical of the 'ancien regime' but, equally, he attacked the excesses of the revolution, and now he was fearful of the consequences of reform in England, necessary though it was. In France he had seen destitute aristocrats sheltering in inns from the destruction of their chateaux, and he now received the dreadful news of the murder of his friend the duc de la Rochefoucauld, while another friend, the duc de Liaincourt, had taken refuge as an 'emigre' in Bury St Edmunds. What was perhaps his most influential pamphlet, 'The Example of France a Warning to Britain', appeared in 1793 and reflected his changed views. 
In the recent past, however, during the intervals between his French visits, Young's former liberalism had been very evident. He took up the anti-slavery cause and wrote several articles on the subject in the 'Annals', and he also joined Sir Joseph Banks in leading the opposition to a bill intended to strengthen the prohibition on the export of wool. His journeys in England included visits to leading farmers and breeders and he published a long report on Sussex in the 'Annals'. In 1790 he was involved in the agitation over a new corn law, and spent the autumn of that year recovering from a serious illness. Subsequently he was in correspondence with George Washington about farming in Pennsylvania and Virginia; the correspondence was later published as 'Letters from his Excellency George Washington to Arthur Young' (1801). He also made a tour in the midlands, spending several days with Robert Bakewell, the celebrated breeder, followed by a visit to John Ellman. 
A new stage in Young's career began in 1793 with the establishment, with government support, of the board of agriculture. The idea for such a board had originated with William Marshall, the distinguished agricultural writer, who was a critic of Young. The board, however, was dominated by Young's friends, and aided by his shift to conservative views, he was regarded as the most suitable person to be the board's secretary, an appointment bitterly resented by Marshall. The latter's hostility became even greater when the board decided to commission a series of agricultural reports of individual counties, rather than of regions as Marshall advocated. Subsequently Marshall set out to criticize the reports at length, which he did in his 'Review and Abstracts of the Reports to the Board of Agriculture' (1818). 
The first editions of the county reports appeared between 1793 and 1795, followed by fuller revised versions between 1798 and 1817. The reports were uneven in quality and length but constitute nevertheless an invaluable source for farming practices at the end of the eighteenth century and the period of the Napoleonic wars. No fewer than six of the reports were written by Young himself: Suffolk (1794); Lincolnshire (1799); Hertfordshire (1804); Norfolk (1804); Essex (1807); and Oxfordshire (1809). Young's report on Lincolnshire earned him the enmity of Thomas Stone, a well-known surveyor, who had written the first version in 1794 and felt insulted not to have been asked to write the revised report. Stone had suffered a harsh review by Young of an earlier paper, and he now repaid that attack by publishing a damning review of Young's report. 
As secretary to the board of agriculture Young now spent most of the year in London, though he still found time not only to write his county reports and produce the 'Annals' but also to produce further pamphlets, particularly on his proposal for forming a voluntary yeoman cavalry for providing internal defence against a French invasion. He suffered the worst personal blow of his life in 1797 when his favourite daughter, Martha Anne (Bobbin), died from tuberculosis. His second daughter, Elizabeth, had died three years earlier from the same disease, but it was the loss of his youngest daughter that affected him more deeply, especially as he held himself partly to blame for her death. At this time he developed a close friendship with William Wilberforce, and it was under his influence that Young, never previously much interested in religion, experienced a remarkable conversion. From this time until his death, nearly twenty-three years later, his views and interests showed great changes. 
In the past Young had not expressed much sympathy with poverty and suffering, although he had been much moved by the distress he saw in France. He now began to do what he could to help the poor of his neighbourhood, and some of his publications were directly concerned with the problem of rural poverty which had recently been intensified by a rapid growth of population and the high food prices of the war period. He investigated the injurious effects that had followed from many of the enclosures of open fields and commons, and he proposed measures to provide the poor with land, a remedy which he believed would restore their independence. His 1801 pamphlet 'An Inquiry into the Propriety of Applying Wastes to the Maintenance and Support of the Poor' made suggestions of this kind, and his 1804 report on Norfolk included a lengthy section dealing with the effects of enclosure in that county. Similar accounts for other counties also appeared in the 'Annals'. However, his 'Report on Enclosures', edited for the board of agriculture in 1808, was primarily a compilation of the statistics of enclosure and a statement of the arguments for and against it. His last important work for the board was the publication in 1816, under the title 'Agricultural State of the Kingdom', of a digest of the replies received from landowners and farmers to a circular letter requesting information on the effects of the fall in prices and restriction of bank credit which accompanied the end of the Napoleonic wars. 
In 1808 when he was gathering material in Oxfordshire for his last county report, Young first noticed a deterioration in his eyesight. An operation for cataract in 1811 was unsuccessful and he became completely blind. It was in this year that he first met Marianne Francis, who was related to the Burney family. This exceptionally gifted young lady spent much time at Bradfield and kept up a correspondence with Young when not there. She became almost a granddaughter to the aged agriculturist as well as acting as an additional secretary. In her letters from Bradfield she mentioned his kindness in clothing and educating some thirty or forty poor children from the district, and his Sunday services at the hall, attended by tenants and villagers. Young, she said, had become an enthusiast for the steam engine, which he believed would play a central role in the farming of the future. 
Young's last pamphlets, published between 1813 and 1817, concerned the striking changes in agricultural prices which had occurred since the outbreak of the wars, and also dealt with quite different subjects, including selections from the writings of Richard Baxter and Robert Owen. In addition, he still kept up his correspondence with many distinguished figures of the time. Though well into his seventies, he continued to spend long periods in London, continuing his work for the board and visiting friends. He died there on 12 April 1820 at Sackville Street, aged seventy-eight, after a painful illness caused by bladder calculus, and was buried at Bradfield Combust church nine days later. 
Young was not only the best-known agricultural reformer and publicist of his time, with an international reputation, but also a figure of importance in the political and social issues of the day. He had an extraordinary capacity for work, aided by an extremely strong constitution -- at Bradfield he rose at five and took an early morning dip in one of the ponds. In an age of hazardous roads he travelled many thousands of miles, a high proportion of them on horseback or on foot, and he still found energy to write up his day's notes and perhaps some letters in his inn room at night. Some modern historians have criticized his agricultural work and have compared him unfavourably with his rival, William Marshall, but it is often overlooked that their approaches were different: Marshall gave an account of the farming of a region as a whole, while Young was not concerned with presenting a rounded picture of contemporary farming; his interests lay entirely in reporting on new advances and condemning old and inefficient methods. His enthusiasm often led him into hyperbole, but he was realistic in appreciating that farmers would only take up what could be shown to pay. Some of his own experiments were misconceived, but in his day the true factors in plant growth were far from understood. As a pioneering scientific spirit he was very widely respected, and his knowledge, wit, and pleasant personality made him welcome in both aristocratic mansion and modest farmhouse. 
Although he always believed in the primacy of agriculture, Arthur Young also showed interest in the industrial and transport developments of the time, and his tours gave extensive descriptions, for example, of the Bridgewater Canal and Coalbrookdale ironworks. His range of correspondents was enormously broad, including not only his many friends and acquaintances in Europe, and George Washington and Lafayette, but also Joseph Priestley, William Wilberforce, Sir Humphry Davy, Thomas Malthus, James Boswell, William Pitt (1759-1806), and Edmund Burke, as well as scores of landowners and other agricultural figures. He was a man of wide culture, well read, interested in art, architecture, theatre and music, especially opera. There is no doubt that he wrote too much and too quickly, and sometimes with insufficient knowledge of the topic. Nevertheless, much of what he wrote in his vigorous, earthy style has a permanent value for the understanding of the period, most notably his three early tours in England, his books on Ireland and France, and many of his contributions to the 'Annals'. This periodical he probably regarded as his greatest achievement. Less tangible, but perhaps not less significant, was the enthusiasm for improved farming that he inspired among uncounted country people whom he met on his travels. 


@@@@@


doc= 30257


Yong, Bartholomew (bap. 1560, d. 1612), translator, was baptized on 24 August 1560 at St Peter, Cornhill, London, the son of the Gregory (not George, as in some records) Yong (died 1610) from Bedale, Yorkshire, a grocer, and his first wife, Margaret (died 1563). He had three younger sisters, three half-brothers and three half-sisters. The family was Roman Catholic but conformed outwardly to the Elizabethan religious settlement. Bartholomew is first heard of going to Spain in 1578 with Richard Parker, the son of his father's second wife, Susan, and her first husband. Their return to England through France in May 1580 was reported to Walsingham by the ambassador to France, Sir Henry Cobham, who wrote that Bartholomew had 'had conference with the Duchess of Feria, being recommended by a privy token from his uncle' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 1.428). The authorities had ample reason to be suspicious: the uncle was Dr John Young (1514-1581/2), a noted recusant, and the duchess was Jane Dormer, who worked tirelessly for the reversal of the Reformation in Britain. But Yong and Parker were not apprehended on their return. 
Yong then entered the New Inn, London, and won a reputation for skill in French and Spanish by taking part in the plays staged there. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 19 May 1582. There he became a close friend of Edward Banister, a well-known recusant and patron of the arts, who later mentioned him in his will. Banister urged him to translate Jorge de Montemayor's pastoral, 'Diana', which had already been influential in its original Spanish. This he did in 1582-3, adding the continuations by Alonzo Perez and Gaspar del Polo. It is a competent and lively version, despite some clumsiness in the prose. His next translation was 'The Civile Conversation of M. Stephen Guazzo' (1586), an influential manual for the educated person who sought to learn Italian manners and social skills. Yong's English version of Guazzo ranks in importance with 'The Courtyer' and 'Galateo'. It is supposed to have provided models for conversations in Shakespeare's 'Twelfth Night' (Harrison, 135). Encouraged by the success of 'Diana', in 1587 Yong translated Boccaccio's warning on the dangers of unwisely falling in love, as 'Amorous Fiametta'. 
Yong lived in Shire Lane in Temple Bar, a street which disappeared in the mid-nineteenth century to make way for the new law courts. Because of his carelessness with money his father paid him much more 'then I have given or bestowed amongst all the rest of my children' (Harrison, 136) and left him out of the deeds of 1595 and 1597 settling the succession of his property at High Ongar, Essex, and his London house. Little else is known of Yong's circumstances. He was not married, nor did he practise law, nor had he entered his father's business, but he did speculate in land. The most important of these transactions occurred on 7 April 1595, when Bartholomew made over the manor of Chivers in Ongar to Thomas Southwell, John Darcy, Anthony Ashe, and two of Banister's cousins, Robert Awdeley and John Drury. The deed, probably a mortgage designed to raise money, could be voided by the payment of 'any peeces of golde or silver to the value of five shillings or more at or upon the Fontstone of the Temple Church' (Yong, lxiii). In 1598 'Diana' was finally published with a dedication dated from High Ongar to Lady Penelope Rich (Sir Philip Sidney's 'Stella'). Yong died intestate in September 1612 and was buried at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, on 28 September. The administration of his estate was granted to Alexander Holman, the third son of Yong's sister, Jane. On 30 October 1612 Holman went to the Temple Church with 5's'. 6died to reclaim Chivers according to the 1595 agreement, but nobody came to claim the fee. 


@@@@@


doc= 30258


Young, Sir Charles George (1795-1869), herald, was born on 6 April 1795 in the parish of St Mary, Lambeth, the eldest of three children, all sons, of Jonathan Young (1762-1826), a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and his wife, Mary Waring (1778-1845), an illegitimate daughter of Charles Howard, eleventh duke of Norfolk and earl marshal (1746-1815). He was educated at Charterhouse School from 1807 to 1811 and was one of the esquires to Viscount Strangford at his installation as a knight of the Bath 1812. On 23 September 1813 he was appointed Rouge Dragon pursuivant on the nomination of his maternal grandfather, the earl marshal, and he was promoted to the post of York herald on 30 May 1820. He was appointed registrar of the College of Arms on 2 July 1822, an office he resigned upon his appointment on 6 August 1842 as Garter principal king of arms in succession to Sir William Woods. As became the usual custom, he was knighted (27 August) following his appointment. 
Young accompanied ten missions to foreign sovereigns with the Order of the Garter, three when York herald as secretary to the missions to Denmark (1822), Portugal (1823), and France (1825), and seven as Garter and joint commissioner to Saxony (1842), Turkey (1856), Portugal (1858), Prussia (1861), Denmark (1865), Belgium (1866), and Austria (1867). He took an active part in the funerals of George III, George IV, and William IV, the coronations of George IV, William IV, and Queen Victoria, and the marriage of the prince of Wales in 1863. As Garter he was responsible under the earl marshal for the public funeral of the duke of Wellington in 1852. 
Young, who was elected FSA on 21 March 1822 and was created DCL by the University of Oxford on 28 June 1854, married on 2 August 1854 Frances Susannah (died 1876), sister of Sir Astley Paston Cooper, second baronet, and widow of Frederick Tyrrell, but had no children. His will (effects under $60,000) was proved by his brother Henry Young, a solicitor, and the latter's son Francis Young, a barrister-at-law who married Sir Charles's stepdaughter. 
A distinguished scholar and highly competent man of business, Young rescued the finances of the Society of Antiquaries of London as chairman of its finance committee 1846-52. He had a similarly beneficial influence on the College of Arms as registrar for twenty years and Garter king of arms for twenty-seven years, and as one of the committee responsible for planning and building the new record room completed in 1844. In the gallery of the record room a special press contains most of the 922 volumes of his books and papers, which came to the College of Arms on his death in accordance with a memorandum found among his papers. Many are written in his own hand and the collection includes 250 volumes of peerage claims in which he had an extensive practice, 114 of pedigrees, 87 of will abstracts and lists, and 10 relating to precedence, on which he wrote several pamphlets and 'a subject with which no modern writer has dealt with greater scholarship' (Wagner, 'Heralds', 497). 
In 1835 the committee of baronets presented two petitions to the king claiming certain privileges. These were referred to the College of Arms, and the report of October 1835 dismissing the claims was signed by Young as registrar and subsequently privately printed by him with a brief introduction. Young's other privately printed pamphlets included 'The Order of Precedence with Authorities and Remarks' (1851), 'Privy Councillors and their Precedence' (1860), and 'The Lord Lieutenant and High Sheriff and their Precedence' (1860); he also had printed for private circulation 'The Catalogue of the Arundel Manuscripts in the Library of the College of Arms' (1829), which he had employed William Henry Black to prepare. 
Young died of apoplexy at his home, 9 Princes Terrace, Hyde Park Gate, London, on 31 August 1869. He had been ill for some months, and had last attended the monthly chapter meeting of the College of Arms on 1 October 1868. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 6 September 1869. Writing in 'The Herald and Genealogist' John Gough Nichols remarked on the 'uniform kindness and alacrity with which the late Garter had for a very long course of years encouraged and effectually aided his genealogical inquiries' and added that he was 'thoroughly devoted to the best interests of his profession as a branch of our social policy, giving that counsel and advice which on many occasions was required of him by various high Officers of the State in an enlarged and liberal spirit... Though not himself the author of any great work, he was the constant and never failing promoter of the labours of others. His services to Surtees, to Raine, to Hunter and other topographers were important and continual. More particularly he must ever be remembered as the best friend of Sir Harris Nicolas... who acknowledges his aid in nearly every preface of his numerous works.' 



@@@@@


doc= 30259


Young, Charles Mayne (1777-1856), actor, the son of Thomas Young, a surgeon, and his wife, Anna, was born in Fenchurch Street, London, on 10 January 1777. He spent 1786 in Copenhagen with his father's sister Mary, who was married to Professor Muller, a court physician of Denmark, and acquired the friendly patronage subsequently maintained of the royal family of Denmark. On his return he was sent to Eton College, where he remained for three years, and afterwards, in 1791-2, to Merchant Taylors' School. Young's father was apparently a brutal and debauched tyrant who treated his family with great cruelty, and finally abandoned his wife for another woman. The entire family took refuge with an unmarried sister of Anna Young, by whom they were brought up with some difficulty. 
Young became a clerk in a well-known city house, Loughnan & Co. After playing at one or two small theatres as an amateur he appeared under the name Green at Liverpool in 1798 as young Norval in John Home's tragedy 'Douglas'. Emboldened by success, he took his own name, and accepted an engagement in Manchester to play leading business. After acting in Liverpool and Glasgow he made his first appearance in Edinburgh in January 1802 as Doricourt in Hannah Cowley's 'The Belle's Stratagem'. He played during the entire season, and was taken up by Scott, whose friendship he retained, and with whom he stayed more than once. After returning to Liverpool, Young found as his leading lady Julia Ann Grimani, a descendant of the Venetian family of that name, whom he married at St Anne's Church, Liverpool, on 9 March 1805. Grimani had made her stage debut at Bath on 16 April 1800, as Euphrasia in 'The Grecian Daughter'. Following a season or two in Bath, she was at the Haymarket in 1803 and 1804, where she was Mrs Haller in Benjamin Thompson's 'The Stranger', Virginia in James Cobb's 'Paul and Virginia', Miss Richland in Goldsmith's 'The Good-Natured Man', and Miranda in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Busybody'. She died at the reputed age of twenty-one, on 17 July 1806, shortly after giving birth to their only son, and was buried in Prestwich churchyard. 
Young, who had had some share in management in Manchester and elsewhere, after some negotiations with George Colman, went to London in June 1807, and made his first appearance there at the Haymarket, playing Hamlet. He was also seen as Hotspur, Frederick in 'The Poor Gentleman', Petruchio in 'The Taming of the Shrew', Harry Dornton in 'The Road to Ruin', and Rolla in 'Pizarro'. In the two following seasons he was, among other characters, Zanga in 'The Revenge', Leon in 'Rule a Wife and have a Wife', and Falkland in 'The Rivals'. Between 1807 and 1809 he was at Bath, appearing as Hamlet, and other leading characters. 
In November 1808, as the original Daran in Frederick Reynolds's 'The Exile', Young appeared for the first time as a member of the Covent Garden company, then, when the theatre was burnt down, acted at the Haymarket Opera House. With the company he migrated to the other Haymarket house, where he played Othello, Macbeth, and Frederick in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Lover's Vows'. His engagement was to support John Philip Kemble, and on occasion to replace him. After the opening of the new theatre in Covent Garden and the suppression of the O. P. (Old Prices) riots (caused by an increase in the price of seats), when eventually 'Julius Caesar' was produced, Young's Cassius was as good as Kemble's Brutus, and gradually, as Kemble's performances lessened in number, Young became accepted as the leading English tragedian -- until his supremacy was challenged, first by Edmund Kean and then by W. C. Macready. Kean, however, did not appear at Drury Lane until 1814, and by then Young had established himself at Covent Garden in such roles as Antony in 'Antony and Cleopatra', Coriolanus, Iago, Richard III, and Macheath in 'The Beggar's Opera', as well as comic parts, notably Jacques in 'As You Like It' and Prospero in 'The Tempest'. Around this time Young appeared again at Bath, King Lear being his principal role this time. 
In October 1822, as Hamlet, Young made his first appearance at Drury Lane, where he divided the lead with Kean, and supported him as Iago and Clytus. The following season he was back at Covent Garden, where he played Sir Pertinax Macsycophant in Charles Macklin's 'The Man of the World', one of his most successful roles. In the spring of 1826, supported by John M. Vandenhoff, he played an engagement in Edinburgh. He returned to Edinburgh in 1830 and 1831, and made his last appearance there in April 1831. In spite of tempting offers from America, he decided to retire from the stage while still young. His farewell took place on 31 January 1832 as Hamlet. Macready played the Ghost, and Charles Mathews, for that occasion only, Polonius. Young made a speech declaring that his reasons for quitting the stage were that he felt his strength declining and wished to be remembered at his best. After his retirement he lived principally in Brighton, where he died on 29 June 1856. He was buried in the churchyard at Southwick Green, near Brighton. He had one son, the Revd Julian Charles Young, who wrote his biography. 
Young was fond of hunting, and had more than one accident in connection with it. He led a blameless life and was much respected. He was about 5 feet 7 inches in height, had dark eyes and a dark complexion, and was slightly plump. He had an admirable voice and a good presence and favoured the Kemble school of acting. Macready wrote with some emotion on hearing of his death, and said that he and Young disliked but respected each other. Although Young showed some promise as a comic actor, his best parts were said to have been Hamlet, Octavian, Macbeth, Prospero, Cassius, and Daran in 'The Exile'. The memorialist Hester Piozzi speaks of his Lear affecting her almost to hysterics. In several of these parts Young was openly charged with imitating Kemble, but he was a good deal less self-conscious than Kemble, and he did not have the self-content which characterized the Kemble family. William Hazlitt spoke disparagingly of Young as in general a respectable actor, who seldom gratified and seldom offended. Leigh Hunt, who in many respects admired him, condemned him for being habitually incorrect in his words, except in Hamlet, which he is said to have played with 'decent' accuracy. Kean greatly admired him. He had a sort of melodious chanting in delivery, and it was said by some that he was a fine declaimer rather than a fine actor. He had many admirers and friends on the French stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 30260


Young, Edward (bap. 1683, d. 1765), writer, was baptized on 3 July 1683 at Upham near Winchester, the son of Edward Young (1641/2-1705), rector of Upham and later dean of Salisbury, and his wife, Judith (1645-1714). Of the poet's three sisters, only Anne (1684-1714) survived infancy. She married John Harris in 1704, a month after Dean Young had resigned his Winchester fellowship for Harris and helped him become rector of Chiddingfold, Surrey. After the dean died, the poet's mother moved in with her daughter and son-in-law, and Chiddingfold became Young's second home, with Young ever remaining close to Harris and his sons. Young entered Winchester College in January 1695 and remained there until 1702. Under the headmaster William Harris until 1700, the curriculum included translating the classics into English verse. Young was a mediocre scholar, but he may have developed a love of poetry at Winchester, for many of his contemporaries became poets. Also, as Forster notes, a 'striking number' of Young's friends 'turn out to be Wykehamists' (Forster, 16). 
Scoring poorly in the fellowship exam at eighteen, and superannuated at nineteen with an eighth place on the election rolls, Young failed to secure a fellowship at New College but was admitted in October 1702 as gentleman commoner by Dean Young's friend Richard Traffles, the college's warden, who provided the poet lodging to save him expense (Forster, 12-17). After Traffles died in June 1703, Young entered Corpus Christi College as a commoner and lived with Thomas Turner, president of the college and a friend of his father. A year after the dean's death, Young was regularly absent from Corpus Christi and residing in Chiddingfold; then, in the last week of November 1708, he entered All Souls College, having been nominated for a scholarship by the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Tenison, and was elected a law fellow on 2 December 1709. Young graduated bachelor of civil laws (1714) and then doctor in civil laws (1719). All Souls remained his principal residence until 1730, but he spent much time in London and periodically visited his sister's family and his friends' country homes, such as George Bubb Dodington's in Eastbury, Dorset, and Walter Cary's in Sheen, Surrey. During July 1720, when Philip, duke of Wharton, went to Ireland to sell his estates, Young accompanied him, being employed that summer as a Latin tutor to the duke. It was then, while walking with Jonathan Swift, that he heard the dean speak of dying 'like that tree... at top' (ibid., 66). Wharton, having returned to the whig party in 1721, persuaded Young to stand for parliament in Cirencester against Lord Bathurst's candidate, but in the face of public hostility Young left the district without a contest (ibid., 74-7). Young never received annuities pledged by the duke in 1721 and 1722, and his suit for compensations, begun in 1723, brought none for twenty years and only then with legal entanglements until at least 1757 (ibid., 168-71, 306). 
Without any inherited wealth and with only his fellowship for subsistence into his forties, Young long supported himself through literature, writing dedications and poems aimed at preferment, tragedies for benefit nights, and popular poems self-published with copyrights later sold for profit. By early 1711 he had composed what was later revised and published as 'A Poem on the Last Day', 100 lines of which (revised as lines 1-104 of the first edition) were published on 22 March 1711 in the Tory continuation of 'The Tatler', edited by William Harrison, Swift's protege and Young's friend from Winchester. The letter from New College introducing the extract, signed T. L., remarks that Young had 'design'd a Tragedy for the Stage this winter... approved by Five or Six of the best Judges', but rejected by Colley Cibber. Young probably began composing before returning to Oxford, for George Bubb, later Dodington, in a prefatory poem to George Stubbes's 'The Laurel and the Olive' (1710), compared Stubbes's verses for boldness to those of 'nervous Y -- '. Like Harrison and Thomas Tickell, fellow Oxford poets, Young employed his poetical talents and participated in London literary circles in an effort to obtain a post. 
Young's first published poem, 'An Epistle to the Right Honourable the Lord Lansdown', shared with Alexander Pope's 'Windsor Forest' its occasion and dedicatee, but also reflected Young's dramatic aspirations. Appearing on 10 March 1713, the 'Epistle' vilified war and praised the queen's and Bolingbroke's achievement of a peace that 'more than bids the Rage of Battle cease' and allows the cultivation of drama, that 'School of Virtue' in which Britain peacefully triumphs over France. After praising Shakespeare, Young's eulogy turns to Granville's virtues before praising Granville's nephew and lamenting the death of Young's friend Harrison. As Forster notes, Young's justifying his familiarity with 'Granvil's Name' on his acquaintance with the nephew Bevil Granville suggests that Young tutored him during a long absence from Oxford in 1711 (Forster, 28-9). 
Young's first composition of note was the lengthy 'A Poem on the Last Day' (1713), revised in 1715 and reprinted twenty times in the next half-century. In three books and roughly 500 couplets, Young describes the resurrection of the dead, the tortured speech of those awaiting judgment, and the final conflagration. The poem was dedicated to the queen, with mention of a personal debt, which some have supposed an allusion to Anne's being Young's godmother (Jacob, 2.241), though Forster found no support for this relationship (Forster, 5). The poem bears an imprimatur dated 19 May 1713, and was quoted and praised as forthcoming within 'The Guardian' of 9 May 1713, but it did not appear until 14 July. Forster plausibly suggests that the poem was delayed to gain the queen's approval for the dedication and that Young's privately printed 'Epistle to... Bolingbroke Sent with a Poem on the Last Day', dated 'March' in the text and 1714 on the colophon, was presented in manuscript in March 1713 to gain a royal audience (ibid., 34). 
A poem addressed to Bolingbroke reflects Young's acquaintance with Swift, who later claimed to have cured Young of writing triplets, two of which are in the 'Tatler' version of his 'Last Day' but were cut from the first edition. The familiarity of Young's first extant letter to Pope of 8 June 1715, on distributing Oxford copies of Pope's 'Iliad', suggests they had known each other for some time. By now Young had fully secured the assistance of Sir Richard Steele and Joseph Addison, as is evident from Young's prefatory poem to Addison's 'Cato' (7th edn, 1713), Steele's puff of 'A Poem on the Last Day' in 'The Englishman' (29 Oct 1713) and its frequent advertisements therein, and the inclusion of Young's morbid epigram on Michelangelo's painting of the crucifixion in Steele's 'Poetical Miscellanies' (1714), preceded by Thomas Wharton's verses on Young's 'Poem on the Last Day'. Also, Addison permitted Young to inscribe to him 'On the Late Queen's Death, and his Majesty's Accession to the Throne' (September 1714). Young's lines elegizing the queen (ll. 25-137) were reprinted in 'The Loyal Mourner for the Best of Princes' (1716), edited by Charles Oldisworth. 
In May 1714 Young tried his hand at narrative with the 'Force of Religion' (1714), on the martyrdom of Lady Jane Grey, who refuses to convert to Roman Catholicism to save herself, her father, and her husband, though the two plead with her to do so. In February 1719 he published 'A Paraphrase on a Part of the Book of Job', transposing the theophany (chapters 38-41) into pentameter couplets, with special attention to sublime imagery. Always eager for help from fellow poets, Young secured revisions from Addison (the mentor he held in highest esteem) and Tickell in 1717 ('Correspondence', 15). He revised the second and third editions (1719, 1726), and a Dublin edition appeared in 1719. Young retained copyright, enabling him to reprint it in 1748 with Nights 7-9 of 'Night-Thoughts', and, after Andrew Millar bought the copyrights to all four poems in 1749, it continued to appear in collected editions of the 'Night-Thoughts'. In July 1719 Jacob Tonson, who had published Young's 'Paraphrase', brought out Young's 'A Letter to Mr. Tickell' on the death of Addison, part of which presumably was written for a panegyric (1717) that Addison blocked from publication (ibid., 8). Also in 1719 Young contributed complimentary verses addressing the author Joseph Mitchell's 'Lugubres cantus' (1719). Mitchell repaid Young by plagiarizing 'Poem on the Last Day' in his 'Jonah' (1720). Evidently a clubbable wit, Young seems to have been friends with many poets, so it is no wonder that he was one of the first London friends of Scots like David Mallet and James Thomson. 
Young's ambitions in tragedy were met in March 1719 by nine performances at Drury Lane of his 'Busiris, King of Egypt'. Like all his tragedies, 'Busiris' was stridently melodramatic in the fashion of Jacobean drama, and contemporaries both commended and blasted its diction. Young wrote at least two acts of a play on the earl of Essex, about which he corresponded in 1719-20 with Lady Martha Giffard, sister of Sir William Temple, to whom he wrote verses on her niece's illness ('Correspondence', 16-19). His second performed tragedy, 'The Revenge', had only a six-night run in April 1721, but its tale of the vengeful Moor Zanga, a plausible conflation of Iago and Othello and a role sought by tragedians, remained in the repertory throughout the century. 
Beginning in 1724, Young sought a place in the Irish church from Lord Carteret, lord lieutenant of Ireland, making repeated entreaties to Carteret's secretary Thomas Clutterbuck and to Tickell, then secretary to the lords justices of Ireland. This campaign led Young in October 1724 to withdraw his tragedy 'The Brothers' from rehearsal at Drury Lane, for a second time (in March 1724 he withdrew it as unlikely to run well), and to receive deacon's orders at the bishop of Winchester's chapel in Chelsea on 22 December. In March 1725 he became chaplain-in-ordinary to the princess of Wales, to whom he dedicated 'A Vindication of Providence' in November 1727, promptly sending copies to Carteret, Clutterbuck, and Tickell ('Correspondence', 58). Failing in this bid for preferment, perhaps in part owing to Dean Swift's opposing benefices for non-Irish clergy, Young delayed ordination to priesthood until after his appointment as chaplain-in-ordinary to the king (30 April 1728); he was privately ordained at Winchester on 9 June 1728. 
The great achievement of Young's early career came in his seven satires entitled 'The Universal Passion', published in separate folios between January 1725 and February 1728 and revised and collected as 'Love of Fame' with a critical preface in March 1728. These Horatian satires with occasional panegyrics and Juvenalian climaxes for variety broke new poetical ground. Epigrammatic and built of character sketches reminiscent of La Bruyere's, they were the first formal verse satires with a thematic focus to follow Dryden's prescriptions and, especially in the case of satires 5 and 6 on women, influenced Pope's satirical works, particularly his 'Moral Epistles'. Satires 1 and 2 required second folio editions, and all were soon reprinted in Dublin and Edinburgh, and passed through over two dozen editions by 1765, with dedications to the duke of Dorset, Dodington, Spencer Compton, Robert Walpole, and Lady Elizabeth Germain. Their popularity fuelled new editions of Young's other works and made Young, often identified as 'The author of 'The Universal Passion'', one of the four dominant poets of his age (witness Allan Ramsay's 'The Quadruple Alliance' of 1728). The fifth satire in January 1726 ('the Last') concludes with fulsome praise of Walpole and the king -- enough to draw fire from Swift. That panegyric -- and support from Dodington and Princess Caroline -- helped Young receive an annual pension of $200, awarded on 3 May 1726. Walter Chetwynd's transcript of the warrant bears the marginal gloss 'Author of the Universal Passion & such poetical Pieces' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. D.4, no. 96), verifying the 'London Journal''s characterization of the pension as an 'encouragement to poetry' (16 July 1726). Habitually acknowledging favours, on 5 July Young publicly owned his thanks within 'The Instalment', a celebration of Walpole's induction into the Order of the Garter on 26 May. 
After the success of the first five satires, Young brought out an edition of his 'Paraphrase' of 'Job' (1726), in quarto on royal paper, as a specimen for a three-volume subscription work. The same terms appear in newspaper advertisements on 18-21 February 1727: 2 guineas down and another on delivery. Advertised as late as 22 February 1729 in Thomas Worrall's notice for Young's sermon 'An Apology for Princes', the effort was unsuccessful, but reflects Young's ambition and confidence in his literary merit. The three-volume length suggests that Young's closet held much that was never published (perhaps another tragedy) and much that was soon to be published. The latter included Young's prose discourse on the passions as impediments to human felicity, 'A Vindication of Providence, or, True Estimate of Human Life', written by October 1724 and first published in November 1727 in quarto on fine paper by Worrall. The title describes it as 'Preach'd in St. George's Church near Hanover-Square, soon after the late King's Death', but the frequently reprinted work was, at sixty-four quarto pages, too long for a sermon. Young loyally supported the king and whig commercial policies in the odes 'Ocean', published with a prefatory 'Ode to the King' and discourse on lyric poetry (1728), 'Imperium pelagi, or, The Merchant', with a preface on Pindar (1730), and 'Foreign Address' (1735). No critic has thought these works successful enough to resolve the degrees to which Young's persistence in writing six-line stanzas on naval policy arose from patriotic fervour, governmental encouragement, or the aspiration to gain preferment or to domesticate Pindar. Young returned to satire with 'Two Epistles to Mr. Pope: Concerning the Authors of the Age' (1730), a mixture of critical precepts and satiric characters of dunces, thrice reprinted in Dublin in 1730. 
In July 1730, as a benefice from All Souls, Young received the rectory of St Mary's Church, Welwyn, north of London on the York road, a living worth $300 per year. A fortnight later, on 4 August, at St Mary-at-Hill in London, he secretly married Lady Elizabeth Lee (1694-1740), daughter of Lady Charlotte Fitzroy (granddaughter of King Charles II and Lady Castlemaine) and Edward Henry Lee, raised to the earl of Litchfield on his marriage. Lady Elizabeth was the widow of Colonel Francis Henry Lee, her first cousin, who had died in March, and mother of three surviving children: Elizabeth ('b'. 1718), Charles Henry ('b'. 'c'.1720), and Caroline ('b'. 'c'.1727). Settling into Welwyn for life, Young leased Guessens, a large house that was the first home he had had of his own. The marriage was publicly announced in May 1731, and on 20 June 1732 the couple had a son, named Frederick after his godfather, the prince of Wales. None of Young's letters survives for 1731-8, when he was evidently preoccupied with family life. On 24 June 1735 he married his stepdaughter Elizabeth to Henry Temple, elder son of the first Viscount Palmerston. 
To aid the consumptive Elizabeth, the Youngs took her and Temple to southern France, but she died on 8 October 1737 in Lyons and was buried in its protestant cemetery. Young and his wife spent the winter outside Nice, where Young wrote but later lost in transit a discourse complementing his 'Vindication of Providence' (Forster, 154). Apparently ill for some time ('Works', 3.144), Lady Elizabeth died at her brother's London home on 29 January 1740 (Forster, 158). Young had been ill in 1737 following his stepdaughter's death, and in the summer following his wife's death he came close to dying of a fever treated by Dr Richard Mead. Then came the shocking news that Temple, his beloved son-in-law and friend of two decades, had died suddenly on 18 August 1740. Encouraged by Temple, Young had begun to court the fifty-year-old spinster Judith Reynolds of London as a helpmate and mother for Frederick; the nine-month campaign ended in February 1741, ostensibly blocked by Reynolds's brother. 
When Edmund Curll and other copyright holders brought out a two-volume edition of Young's 'Poetical Works' in 1741, his literary career seemed over. Then, pursuing consolation for the loss of his stepdaughter in 1736 and his wife and son-in-law in 1740, Young wrote 'The Complaint, or, Night-Thoughts on Life, Death, and Immortality' (1742-6), arguably the century's greatest long poem. Its nine 'Nights', issued serially in quartos tending to greater length, total nearly 10,000 lines of blank verse. The first of these maintain the quasi-autobiographical fiction of a nocturnal speaker lamenting the loss of child, spouse, and friend and finding Christian consolation. Increasingly the speaker turns to theodicy, Christian apologetics, and conversion. Often addressing an apostate 'adversarius' named Lorenzo, the speaker satirizes worldly infidelity and argues the sublime blessings of Christian salvation through the wonders of the gospels, the human soul, and nature (as in the cosmic voyage in Night 9). The rhetorical manner is frequently dramatic, with much use of apostrophe, question, antithesis, and paradox. With the first Nights immensely popular (Nights 1-5 all quickly required multiple editions), Young was induced to restate copiously and refine his points, overextending the work until its popularity fell off, though recent criticism has focused on these later Nights. Over 100 collected editions of the 'Night-Thoughts' were published in the next five decades, including translations in most European languages, many in German. Its popularity is reflected in the court battle that Alexander Donaldson won in 1771 against London publishers attempting to prevent his editions. Illustrated by Blake and read closely by Wordsworth and Coleridge, the poem remained popular among middle-class readers well into the 1800s. 
More is known about Young after 1740, when he began a correspondence lasting until 1765 with Margaret Cavendish Harley, only daughter of the second earl of Oxford; she was married to William Bentinck, second duke of Portland. Through the duchess Young met or became better acquainted with Mary Granville, then Pendarves, whom the duchess recommended to Young as a spouse (she afterwards married Dr Patrick Delany), and Elizabeth Robinson, later Mrs Montagu, who left vivid testimony to the poet's witty conversation. In her letters the duchess claims the credit for initiating and directing petitions for preferment between 1742 and 1748 and again in 1758, for which Young has been criticized. In January 1744 Young's stepson Charles Lee died of smallpox, and Young was obliged to fight a two-year legal battle against Charles's widow to preserve his son's and stepdaughter's inheritance. 
In July 1748 Young had the joy and sorrow of marrying at Welwyn his beloved stepdaughter Caroline to Major William Haviland: in the autumn she joined her husband with his regiment in Scotland and then travelled with him to Ireland, where she died in November 1749. Late in 1748 Young's household was taken over by Mary Hallows, the spinster daughter of a Hertford rector. With Caroline gone and Frederick away (first at Winchester and then Balliol), and Young himself inattentive to the domestic details, he needed a domestic companion. Reserved and quiet in company, and authoritarian to judge from Frederick's response to her, Mrs Hallows remained Young's companion until his death, supplying him with eyes when he could not read and a steady hand when rheumatism prevented his writing. Between 1746 and 1753 Young was occupied with enlarging Guessens, rebuilding his church's turret, reviving Welwyn spa with new assembly rooms, and founding a charity school. He took pleasure in his daily routines about Guessens and in his visitors, including Speaker Arthur Onslow, the Swiss poet Vincenz Bernhard von Tscharner, Joseph Spence, and Mrs Montagu; many of these have recorded their pleasant visits. He travelled to spas and the homes of friends, and to London for his duties as chaplain and for visits to Samuel Richardson, often related to publications. After Richardson took over printing the quarto 'Night-Thoughts' in June 1744, he sought out Young's advice on 'Clarissa' ('Correspondence', 180). Soon he became Young's most valued friend, printing and helping revise Young's first and corrected editions. 
In March 1748 Young protested against Sir William Bunbury's rumoured efforts to stage 'The Brothers', whose manuscript Young had 'entrusted' to Bunbury and earlier to his uncle Sir Thomas Hanmer ('Correspondence', 317-18). Then on 23 June 1752 Young asked Bunbury to see if Garrick would be 'willing to act [it]... early next Winter', with profits going to 'the Propagation of the Gospell in foreign Parts', whose financial distress had been recently noted by the king (ibid., 382-3). With 'The Revenge' popular in the repertoire, and a cast to include Garrick and George Ann Bellamy, the revival of 'The Brothers' raised high expectations. However, when performed in March 1753, the outmoded tragedy played to shrinking audiences for eight nights, with the last treated as the ninth for the author's benefit; from its profits, Henry Pettit notes, Young recouped only $400 of his $1000 donation to the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge (ibid., 382n.). 
In March 1755 Young published 'The Centaur not Fabulous' in five letters 'addressed to a friend', that is, Richardson, who helped with its revision. Divided into six letters in the first of two revised editions that year, this prose satire and homily was directed at licentious and irreligious contemporaries who, misguided by 'infidel' philosophers like Lord Bolingbroke, resembled the fabled beasts. Here as elsewhere Young stressed human dignity as a bulwark against hedonism and atheism. 
After his collected works were pirated in 1752 and 1755, Young revised for copyright holders those pieces he wished to pass on to posterity, mainly through deletions. This authorized edition (4 vols., 1757), expanded with a fifth volume in 1773 and a sixth in 1778, was often reprinted but in fewer editions than appeared unauthorized. With suggestions from Richardson, to whom it was addressed, Young wrote 'Conjectures on Original Composition' (1759), an exhortative celebration of originality and an assessment of the genius of Shakespeare, Pope, Swift, Dryden, and Addison, ending with an account of Addison's pious death, thus linking literary with moral virtues. In 1761, aged seventy-eight, encouraged by Mrs Montagu, he composed and privately printed 'Resignation', a consolation addressing the widow of Admiral Edward Boscawen. Thoroughly revised and expanded to sixty quarto pages, it was published in May 1762 and reprinted in America, Germany, Ireland, and Scotland within two years. Like 'Night-Thoughts' and 'The Centaur', 'Resignation' seeks to reconcile man to God's ways, but it is marked by Young's most personal and joyous account of providence, and its attack on gloomy freethinking includes an admonition to Voltaire. The poem employs a four-line stanza rhyming 'abcb', with alternating eight and six-syllable lines, which Samuel Johnson applauded for Young's customary 'experiment of a new mode of writing' (Johnson, 'Poets', 396). 
After the death of George II, whom Forster convincingly argues was the 'stumbling block' to Young's preferment (Forster, 333-4), Young was appointed in January 1761 by George III as clerk of the closet to the princess dowager. In his last years Young was plagued with physical deterioration, the misadventures of a son often absent from school and prone to debt, difficulties in retaining his quarrelsome curate John Jones, and the death of dear friends like Richardson. Often accused of lacking common sense, the poet lived free of scandals and feuds and acquired a comfortable fortune, a reputation for both wit and piety, and a legion of friends, whig and tory alike. After a fortnight's illness, Young died at Guessens on Good Friday, 5 April 1765, and was buried in the chancel of St Mary's Church, Welwyn, beside his wife, on 12 April. As Young had repeatedly requested, Mrs Hallows burnt his private papers, including all correspondence and manuscripts but his account book (now lost or destroyed). His will, written on 25 April 1760 and slightly amended in 1762, left $1000 to Mrs Hallows (she had never received payment as his housekeeper), $200 to the Revd Jones, $100 for repairs to 'the Parsonage house, & the Chancell', and smaller sums to servants, his nephew the Revd Richard Harris, and All Souls library. His son Frederick inherited the remainder, estimated at $12,500 (ibid., 375-7), which he spent in ten years, well before his death in 1788. 
Young's 'Love of Fame', 'Night-Thoughts', and 'Conjectures on Original Composition' are still frequently anthologized. These works and his 'Poem on the Last Day' were sufficiently original to inspire imitations and criticism. A copious writer given to experimentation, though sometimes lacking in judgement, Young wrote in various styles but was prone to display an imagination fertile with similitudes, epigrammatic maxims, paradoxes, and antitheses. From the beginning but particularly after years of ministry and personal losses, Young fought a rearguard action against Enlightenment criticism of Christian revelation and teleology. His later works enacted the discovery of the soul's transcendence and of divine providence, promoting an enthusiastic Christianity not unlike that of John Wesley, who twice edited versions of 'Night-Thoughts'. Favourite themes included the paradoxes that humankind triumphs through loss and death and that Christ's redemption of man was too preposterous for 'human ingenuity' to have invented. 
After a century, Young's religious enthusiasm and epigrammatic density cost him readers, and George Eliot's attack in 1857, that Young's place seeking undercut the artistic sincerity he had heralded, blighted his reputation. Although his works were frequently reprinted and translated, Young's place in literary history is anchored to the 'Night-Thoughts' and 'Conjectures', which embodied new sensibilities and notions of literary self-consciousness and imagination. The only major literary figure spanning the reigns of Queen Anne and George III, Young has retained an importance that is also ensured by his friendships with writers as diverse as Pope, Johnson, and Richardson and his contemporaries' admiration, summed up by Johnson's judgment that Young 'was a man of genius and a poet' (Johnson, 'Poets', 399). 


@@@@@


doc= 30261


Young, Sir George (1732-1810), naval officer, was born on 17 June 1732, eldest son of the Revd George Young of Bere Regis in Dorset (one of a family claiming descent from John Yong of Buckhorn Weston, sheriff of Dorset in 1570), and his wife, Eleanor Knowles. He went to sea in 1746 in the 'Namur' with Edward Boscawen, and saw action off the western coasts of Europe. Towards the end of 1747 Boscawen sailed to India where he participated in the siege of Pondicherry. The 'Namur' sank in April 1749, but before this Young had transferred to the East India Company's marine, in which he became midshipman in 1753. Given that he later named his country seat Formosa Place, it is probable that he was then voyaging to China. 
Young re-entered the Royal Navy at the beginning of the Seven Years' War, joining the 'York' under Commander Hugh Pigot in December 1756; he was promoted midshipman in January 1757, participated in the campaigns against Louisbourg and Quebec, and was promoted lieutenant on 3 September 1760. In November 1761 he sailed in the 'Orford' (Captain Marriot Arbuthnot) to the West Indies, where he took part in the campaign against Havana before returning to England in 1763. In the winter Young married Elizabeth Bradshaw (died 1779); they had four children: Lucia ('b'. 1764), Samuel ('b'. 1766), George ('b'. 1767), and Maria ('b'. 1768). Between 1767 and 1772 Young commanded the small Africa squadron and made four voyages down the west coast, after the second of which he seems to have been promoted master and commander. On the fourth voyage he stopped at Tenerife, and brought off a mummy which he presented to the earl of Sandwich, who in turn presented it to Cambridge University. 
In 1777 Young sailed for India in the 'Cormorant', one of the squadron under the command of Sir Edward Vernon. He was promoted post captain on arrival, becoming Vernon's flag captain, and participated in the capture of Pondicherry. Vernon then sent him home with dispatches. He arrived in London in March 1779, to find his wife had died in the previous month. 
Young got married again before the end of the year, to Anne Battie ('b'. 1745?), daughter of the wealthy physician William Battie. This connection made him the brother-in-law of the military engineer John Call, who had married Anne's sister Philadelphia in 1772, and gave him the use of the family's London town house in Great Russell Street. He also added to his wife's land holdings at Cookham in Berkshire, where the couple built Formosa Place in the mid-1780s. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 15 February 1781. Later that year he was appointed commander of the royal yacht 'William and Mary'; he was knighted on 24 August 1781. Command of another yacht, the 'Katherine', followed. These appointments brought him into contact with the prince of Wales, a politically dangerous association at a time when the king was much displeased with his eldest son's profligate ways. At one point his colleague Edward Thompson warned Young privately that he was in danger of losing his command. Young was treasurer to the commissioners of Thames navigation from 1786 to 1794. He became rear-admiral by seniority on 4 July 1794, vice-admiral on 14 February 1799, and admiral on 23 April 1804, but saw no further active service. 
Young was by report a handsome man, socially graceful, and a keen amateur musician. He assisted Sandwich in introducing concerts to London; and he took pride in offering musical entertainments to guests at Formosa Place, where he built a music chamber. He also took an active interest in some of the important social issues of his time. He was a founding shareholder in the Sierra Leone Company, and a member of its first board; and in 1792 he testified to the House of Commons on the evils of the slave trade. 
Young was clearly a person of accomplishment, and a competent naval officer. However, his principal historical significance lies in his support for the colonization of New South Wales. He sent a copy of his scheme (which exists in five versions) to William Pitt the younger. In October 1784 he joined forces with James Mario Matra, who had proposed colonization the previous year, to urge this idea on the administration; and in 1785 John Call added his support. Apart from seeing Botany Bay as a fitting place to which to send convicts and displaced American loyalists, Young thought that a settlement there would offer the East India Company ships a new and safer route to China; and 'suppose we were again involved in a war with Spain, here are ports of shelter and refreshment for our ships, should it be necessary to send any to the South Sea' (TNA: PRO, CO 201/8, fols. 152-3). 
Like Matra and Call, Young was even more attracted by the idea of creating in the south-west Pacific Ocean an alternative source of hemp for the British marine, and thus diminishing Britain's dependence on Russia. He had samples of 'phormium tenax' from New Zealand worked into cordage, and canvas 'which had been worn and tried in the foot or clew of a cutter's mainsail' (priv. coll.). In June 1785 he and Call asked the East India Company for permission to colonize Norfolk Island (where the fibre plant grew prolifically, and where there were as well towering pine trees) 'for the pursuit of further Discoveries -- for the Cultivation of the Flax plant -- & Manufacture of that valuable Material into Cordage -- and for the supplying Masts from thence for Shipping with which it abounds' (BL OIOC, E/1/76, fol. 213). The pair repeated this request to the administration in May 1788 when they asked for the grant of the island in perpetuity. However, by this time Arthur Phillip had occupied it; and the dream of its becoming an emporium of naval stores was already fading. None the less Young's thinking encapsulated the Pitt administration's motives for the colonization. He died at Formosa Place on 28 June 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 30262


Young, George (1777-1848), Presbyterian minister and geologist, was born on 15 July 1777 at a small farmhouse called Croxiedean in the parish of Kirknewton and East Calder, Edinburghshire, and baptized in that parish on 3 August, the son of John Young and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Graham. Having studied under John Playfair at the University of Edinburgh, he graduated with high honours in 1796 and commenced his training in theology with George Lawson at Selkirk. In 1801 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Edinburgh of the associate secession church, and in the summer of 1805 visited Whitby, with which he was to be associated for the rest of his life. In January 1806 he was ordained pastor of the Presbyterian congregation which met at the chapel there in Cliff Lane. He published some sermons, but his earliest substantial work was a defence of evangelical principles against Unitarianism, which was published in 1812, and this was followed five years later by his 'History of Whitby and Streoneshalh Abbey', a topographical and antiquarian account which was a continuation of the work of two other local antiquaries, Francis Gibson FSA and Richard Winter. In addition to providing a historical narrative, Young's account placed the town in its contemporary local context by incorporating statistical information on the demographic, economic, and geographical features of the neighbourhood. In 1819 he graduated MA at Edinburgh University, and in 1824 he produced a more popular topographical guide to his adopted town and its region, 'A Picture of Whitby and its Environs', which was reprinted in 1840, and later used by Elizabeth Gaskell as a background source for 'Sylvia's Lovers'. 
By this time Young had already turned his attention to geology, publishing in 1822 a comprehensive 'Geological survey of the Yorkshire coast: describing the strata and fossils occurring between the Humber and the Tees, from the German ocean to the plain of York', which was copiously illustrated by John Bird. His geological work was committed to 'honour that infinite being whose works are here examined and described' ('Geological Survey', 12), and he accepted the biblical account of the creation and the flood, concluding that his findings did 'not contradict but confirm the sacred scripture' (ibid., 324). He returned to this theme in lectures given to the geological section of the British Association at its meeting in Newcastle upon Tyne, which were published in 1838 as 'Scriptural Geology'. In this book he attacked the theories of Lyell and the pre-Adamites, claiming that the strata did not define periodic levels but were the result of natural upheavals caused by the flood. He was moved to publish a second edition in 1840 to counter the scriptural justification circulating in scientific clerical circles that the biblical flood was confined, as was man, to the Near East and central Asia, thereby allowing for older geological forms in other regions of the earth. 
Young's connection to Whitby also engaged his interest in Captain Cook and the voyages of discovery, and in 1836 he published a selection from Cook's journals and other original sources, which proved popular with readers. He was an honorary member of the Hull and Yorkshire literary and philosophical societies, was active in public life in Whitby, and was a corresponding member of the Wernerian Natural History Society, Edinburgh. He had acquired a DD by 1840, but the award of that degree has not been traced. He married Margaret Hunter of Whitby on 11 April 1826 and died there on 8 May 1848, his wife having predeceased him. His will was proved in August 1848, when his goods, valued at $800, were distributed among his many nieces and nephews, among whom was William Young, the Independent minister at Beverley. 


@@@@@


doc= 30263


George Renny Young (1802-1853), lawyer and politician in Nova Scotia, born on 4 July 1802 in Falkirk, was active in his father's commercial business until 1821, when he began his studies at Pictou Academy. When he graduated in late 1824 he began to publish 'The Novascotian, or, Colonial Herald'; however, he sold this paper to Joseph Howe in December 1827 in order to devote himself to legal studies, principally in Britain. He was admitted to the Nova Scotian bar as an attorney on 22 January 1833 and as a barrister on 22 July 1834. His legal knowledge and capacity for research was superior to that of his brother, and he published eight pamphlets on matters of contemporary public concern, the most notable being 'The British North American Colonies' (1834). During an extended visit to England in 1837-8 he married Jane, the daughter of Thomas Holdsworth Brooking. 


@@@@@


doc= 30264


Young, Sir Henry Edward Fox (1808-1870), colonial governor, the third son of the colonial governor Sir Aretas William Young (1777/8-1835), and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Cox, of Coolcliffe, Wexford, was born on 23 April 1808 at Bradbourne, near Lee, Kent. After being educated at Deane's School, Bromley, he entered the Inner Temple in 1827 but was never called to the bar. In 1830 he went to Trinidad with his father, then to British Guiana as clerk, aide-de-camp, and acting recorder of the chamber of orphans and protector of slaves. 
On 21 November 1833 Young was appointed to be treasurer of St Lucia. He arrived in January 1834 and from August acted as colonial secretary and, helped by his knowledge of French, from November also as second puisne judge. In March 1835 he was promoted to government secretary of British Guiana. On 28 January 1847, on his return to England, Young was appointed lieutenant-governor of the eastern province of Cape Colony and was made CB and given a knighthood. In February 1848 he was offered the governorship of South Australia and returned to England, where, on 15 April 1848, he married Augusta Sophia Marryatt (died 1913). They had two sons and five daughters. The couple set sail for Australia on 27 April, and Young took up his new post in August 1848. 
Young's term of office as governor was marked by a vigorous but extravagant and not altogether judicious policy of development. He carried through the opening of the Murray River to steam navigation, but large sums were wasted trying to remove the bar at its mouth, and in 1854 a railway was built from Goolwa to the coast, although the port site was ill chosen. When the Victoria gold rush drained the colony of labour and money, Young's attempts to divert the stream of gold export to Adelaide and to encourage the discovery of gold in South Australia had some success; but the scarcity of currency led his advisers to fear that gold coin would disappear altogether. They persuaded Young, who was at first sceptical, to pass a measure to make gold bullion legal tender. The extraordinary measure, which was duly passed in January 1853, was short-lived. 
In 1853 Young attempted to alter a bill for a constitution for responsible government. He published the resolutions framed by Sir John Morpherr when council was not sitting and withheld dispatches to have a bill passed keeping a nominated upper house. The resulting outcry saw the bill returned, and Young was censured by the secretary of state. Young was next gazetted to the government of New Zealand, but never took up his appointment, as in January 1855 he was transferred to the government of Tasmania. Here he arrived at a time of great prosperity, but again he was met by the urge for a greater degree of self-government; an act was before the queen in Great Britain, and meanwhile, on 17 July 1855, Young summoned his first council on the old footing. The council appointed a committee to review the findings of the executive council on the convict system and summoned the controller, Dr Hampton, to appear before it. Hampton denied the right of the council to summon him, while Young denied the right of the council to review the executive council's finding and prorogued the council. The Colonial Office upheld the prorogation but found fault with restrictions on the council; the supreme court and privy council found in favour of Hampton. In December 1856 Young met the first parliament under responsible government. However, he soon stood aside from politics to concentrate on the development of the country, which proceeded rapidly during his term of office. In 1857 steps were taken to improve higher education in Tasmania and gas was introduced into Hobart. The beginnings of a railway to Launceston were discussed; the first underwater telegraph cable was laid around the coast in 1858, and in 1860 the foundation of a mining industry was laid and an industrial exhibition was opened at Hobart. The new government house, a symbolic sign of the progress of colonialization, was first occupied by Young. He left the colony for England on 10 December 1861. 
Young, who was a director and chairman of the Australian Mercantile Land and Finance Company from 1866 to 1868, also visited New Zealand on private business in 1866, but spent most of his time in London, where he died of kidney disease on 18 September 1870, at his home, 77 Kensington Gardens Square. A near contemporary described him as of a sanguine and enthusiastic temperament, devoted to what he believed to be his public duty, and usually generous in his judgements, if not always wise. 


@@@@@


doc= 30265


Young, James (1717-1789), naval officer, was born on 15 November 1717 and baptized on 29 November 1717 at St Martin in the Fields, Westminster, one of four sons of William Young ('b'. 1687) of Plymouth, Devon, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Walker. The naval surgeon James Yonge (1647-1721) was his great-uncle. He began his active naval career in the Mediterranean in 1737 as a midshipman on the 'Gloucester'. He was promoted lieutenant on 9 March 1739, and became commander of the 'Salamander' in 1742. On 16 May 1743 he was posted captain of the 'Namur'; shortly afterwards he was in the 'Kennington'. He then moved to the 'Dunkirk', and remained in the Mediterranean until the peace in 1748. He married his first wife, Elizabeth Bolton, in Gibraltar in 1747; they had four daughters, Philippa, Susan, Elizabeth, and Sophia, and one son, William Young (1751-1821), later himself a senior naval officer. In 1752 he was appointed to the 'Jason' and in 1755 to the 'Newark', from which he moved in October to the 'Intrepid', which went out to the Mediterranean in spring 1756 in the squadron commanded by Admiral John Byng. At the battle of Minorca on 20 May 1756 the 'Intrepid' was the last ship of the van division, and in approaching the enemy had her foretopmast shot away. Byng afterwards asserted that this event caused the disorder in the rear division of his fleet, but Young, when examined at Byng's court martial, denied such a result and was supported by other evidence. 
In 1757 Young commanded the 'Burford' in the expedition against Rochefort. In 1759 he was captain of the 'Mars' and on 20 November he flew a commodore's broad pennant in her at the battle of Quiberon Bay. In the following years he commanded small squadrons in the channel, and on 21 October 1762 he was promoted rear-admiral. His first wife having died, at the end of 1762 (the marriage settlement was dated 18 November 1762) he married Sophia, daughter of John Henry Vasmer, merchant; they had two children, James ('b'. 1762), who became rear-admiral of the blue, and Charlotte (died 'c'.1813). He may have had a further son outside marriage, Thomas (1758-1795). On 28 October 1770 Young was made vice-admiral, and in April 1775 he was appointed commander-in-chief on the Leeward Islands station, with his flag in the 'Portland'. 
Young's period of command in the West Indies covered the early years of the American War of Independence, and his small squadron had two main tasks: to cut off the supply of arms and gunpowder to the American rebels, and to protect British trade from attack by American privateers and warships. Young was more successful in the latter task than the former. His efforts to halt the supply of munitions to the Americans were hampered by a lack of fast-sailing cruisers in his squadron and the open assistance given to the Americans by the neutral islands, especially the Dutch at St Eustatius and the French at Martinique. With regard to trade protection, Young had organized a convoy system from the islands to Britain by mid-1776 and his ships had some success against American privateers and warships. In November 1776 an American warship arriving at St Eustatius received the first foreign salute to the flag of the new United States. In retaliation Young imposed a virtual blockade of the neutral Dutch island until he received orders to lift it in early 1777. During Young's command his squadron captured 205 American merchant ships and captured or destroyed seventeen American privateers and warships. 
On 29 January 1778 Young was promoted admiral of the white; his flag was recorded on the 'Aurora' by Bartholomew James at Antigua on 5 February. In July he returned to England. He saw no further service and lived in London, dying there on 24 January 1789. He was buried at St Anne's, Soho, on 2 February 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 30266


Young, James (1811-1883), chemist and philanthropist, was born on 13 July 1811 at Drygate, Glasgow, the eldest son of John Young, a self-employed carpenter, and his wife, Jean Wilson (married on 9 February 1809). Young worked for his father and in 1830 began to attend the evening lectures in chemistry of Professor Thomas Graham, at Anderson's University. By the session of 1831-2 he had become Graham's laboratory assistant. He also became the friend of David Livingstone and Lyon Playfair, made the acquaintance of many sons of industrialists, and in 1834 began giving lectures for Graham to the mechanics' class. He was presented with an inscribed silver watch by this class in 1836 and, when he was about to leave on 28 June 1837 to join Graham at University College, London, he was also given a testimonial. His first scientific paper, dated 4 January 1837 and published in the 'Philosophical Magazine', described a miniature voltaic battery, a modification of Faraday's invention. 
On 21 August 1838 Young married his cousin, Mary Young, and thereafter he began to seek better-paid employment outside academic life. In 1839 he became manager of James Muspratt & Sons at Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire. Muspratt's sons, Sheridan (who had been at Anderson's University) and James, were laboratory students at University College and it was through the latter that an initial offer of $140 per year and a house (Alkali Cottage, St Helens) was made to Young in October 1838. Young was involved in the layout of the plant and became its technical director; his first patent for the production of ammonia (11 November 1841) was an industrial application of his earlier work in Graham's laboratory. Young joined Tennant, Clow & Co. on 12 January 1844 as manager of their Ardwick Bridge chemical works in Manchester. Tennants paid its managerial staff well and allowed them to patent processes, to act as consultants to customers, and to undertake business ventures on their own behalf, provided there was no conflict of interest. Young made improvements to methods of production at a number of their plants. In 1844 he produced a cheaper indigo dye and in 1848 he patented a method of producing sodium and potassium stannate from tinstone. 
Young, a Liberal radical, joined the Manchester branch of the Anti-Corn Law League in 1844 and was so dissatisfied with the politics of the 'Manchester Guardian' that he helped to found the 'Manchester Examiner' (1846) under the editorship of Thomas Ballantyne. A member of the Manchester Mechanics' Institute, he served in 1845 on a committee established by the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society to investigate the Irish potato blight, and compiled its report. Young was elected to the society on 19 October 1847, having already organized a chemical group which became a section. His first paper to the society concerned the health of towns and the need to deodorize cesspools using chloride of manganese. 
On 3 December 1847 Lyon Playfair wrote to Young, telling him of a petroleum spring yielding 300 gallons daily in the Riddings colliery near Alfreton, Derbyshire, on the estate of his brother-in-law, James Oakes. Young visited Riddings in December 1847 and conducted experiments. Thereafter he suggested to Tennants that the firm might refine this petroleum, but they decided that the likely scale of operations was too small. James Oakes then suggested that with his help Young should establish his own refinery, an arrangement to which Tennants agreed. The main customers bought lubricants, and the textile firms soon realized the products' advantages and relative cheapness. Young erroneously thought that the Riddings petroleum had been condensed from the coal and deposited in the strata above. He therefore began to experiment with the dry distillation of coal at various temperatures and, having explored the characteristics of the main oil-bearing coals and shales, he enrolled the crucial patent for this process on 17 October 1850. 
The best material was torbanite, a geological curiosity found in the coal measures near Bathgate and first mined as Boghead coal; Young and his partners, E. W. Binney, a Manchester lawyer, and Edward Meldrum, opened an oilworks in 1851 2 miles from the pithead, having secured an exclusive contract from James Russel & Son, the mineral lessees. The first products were naphtha (used as a solvent) and various lubricants, but by 1855 paraffin for lamps had become most profitable; paraffin wax was not sold until 1856 and in quantity for candles only from 1859. Any attempt to maintain secrecy about production was vitiated by the litigation (1853) brought by the owners of the Torbane Hill estate, Mr and Mrs William Gillespie, against Russels, on the grounds that torbanite was not coal and therefore not included in their lease. Profit margins were discussed in court and were so wide as to encourage patent infringements and competition. Fortunately for Young the Gillespies lost their case, but further legal actions were necessary to sustain the patent. Young was successful in winning costs and damages against Stephen White and others (1854), the Clydesdale Chemical Company (1860-61), John Miller & Co., and William Miller & Co. (1861). The greatest test, which ended in the House of Lords, was the case against Ebenezer Fernie, William Carter, and Joseph Robinson (1862-4), which resulted in costs of $10,000 and damages of $11,422 in Young's favour. 
Yet Young's reluctance to grant licences and the gradual discovery of cheaper but lower-yielding oil shales stimulated the growth of competition; by the time his British patent expired in 1864, there was a Scottish oil mania, and by 1870 ninety-seven firms had been established, most of them since 1859. American petroleum and kerosene firms also used Young's process and after 1862 brought more competition to European markets. Young broke with his partners in 1864 and established a new works at Addiewell before launching Young's Paraffin Light and Mineral Oil Company with a capital of $600,000 (1866). 
By 1870 'Paraffin Young', as he had become known, had retired from business and gradually reduced his shareholding in his limited company. He spent his time on science, leisure, and philanthropy. An active supporter of a channel tunnel, he conducted experiments on the velocity of light, and he was very interested in the practical development of electric light and the telephone. Elected to the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1861) and the Royal Society (1873), he had a fine collection of works on alchemy and the early history of chemistry. A trustee of Anderson's University from 1858, he became a manager and its president (1868-77), endowing the Young chair of technical chemistry and the Young Laboratory, and making many other gifts. Active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science, he was a member of the Chemical Society and its vice-president from 1879 to 1881. The University of St Andrews conferred the degree of LLD upon him in 1879. He gave statues of David Livingstone and Thomas Graham to the city of Glasgow, and despite colour-blindness he was a keen collector of Dutch and Flemish art. He sailed far and wide on his steam yacht, 'Nyanza', and farmed three estates, Limefield (Linlithgowshire), Durris (Kincardineshire), and Kelly (Renfrewshire), where he spent most of his latter years. Young's friendship with Livingstone led to his financial support for Livingstone's second and third expeditions to Zanzibar and for the search expedition. He also brought Livingstone's servants to Britain to clarify details of the last days of the explorer, and he acted as guardian to Livingstone's children. A Presbyterian in religion, he was generally tolerant in his approach to other faiths and gave widely to a range of good causes. He died a widower at Kelly House, Wemyss Bay, Renfrewshire, on 13 May 1883, and was buried at Inverkip cemetery. He was survived by three sons and four daughters and left a gross estate of $165,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 30267


Young, John (1514-1581/2), college head, was a native of Yorkshire. He was elected fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1536, having graduated BA in 1535. He proceeded MA in 1539 and BTh in 1546 and was nominated a fellow of Trinity College in the same year. In June 1549 he took part on the Catholic side in the disputations before Ridley at Cambridge. In 1550 he enjoyed a prominent role in public disputations with Martin Bucer and commenced a series of lectures on the first epistle of 'Timothy', during which he is said to have scorned Bucer and his views. A quarrel ensued between the two men and Young expressed alarm that he was being held up as an opponent of the authorized homily on good works. In 1551 he was accused in February before the privy council of preaching against the religious proceedings of Edward VI; on 25 November and 3 December he took part in the disputations on the sacraments at the houses of William Cecil and Richard Morison, still defending the Catholic tenets. However, it is possible that Young also translated some of Cranmer's polemic into Latin for the benefit of an international audience. 
With the accession of Mary I, Young's support of the Catholic faith was recognized. He was created a doctor of theology at Cambridge in 1553 and incorporated at Oxford in the following year. He was appointed master of Pembroke College, Cambridge, on Ridley's deprivation, and instituted canon of Ely on 12 April 1554. He was vice-chancellor of Cambridge in 1553-5, and in 1555 or 1556 he became regius professor of divinity. As vice-chancellor Young delivered a series of lectures entitled 'Ennarationes Joelis prophetae', dedicated to Cardinal Pole, which are extant in the Bodleian Library. He disputed with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer at Oxford in 1554, and extracts from his 'socratical interrogations' are reproduced by Foxe. Young took an active role in restoring his university to the Catholic faith. At the accession of Elizabeth I he was deprived of his mastership and committed to prison in Wood Street, London, for refusing to take the oath of supremacy. Before 1574 he was transferred to the Marshalsea prison, from where on 13 June that year he was temporarily released on the surety of his brother, Gregory Young. On 28 July 1577 he was transferred to the custody of the dean of Canterbury and on 18 February 1578 he was committed to the queen's bench prison. In 1580 he was moved to Wisbech Castle, where he made his will on the 20 April 1581; it was proved on 6 June 1582. Bequests included 'a Mapp of the whole worlde' to his brother Gregory, and $10 and his books to 'his man' Henry Crosse. 
Referred to by his enemies not as 'Jungus' but as 'Fungus' (Porter, 63), Young is said to have been 'litigious, vain and inconstant' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 1.428) but there is little evidence to support this view. It has been suggested that he was not on amicable terms with the fellows of Pembroke, but this is not supported by the warm commendations he received in letters sent by the fellows to Edmund Grindal inviting Grindal to become master following Young's deprivation. His talent and scholarship have not been disputed. His 'De schismate, sive, De ecclesiasticae unitatis divisione liber unus' was published in eight volumes in Louvain in 1573, and Douai in 1603. A portrait of Young belongs to Cambridge University. 


@@@@@


doc= 30268


Young, John (c.1532-1605), bishop of Rochester, was born in the London parish of St Magnus the Martyr and educated at the Mercers' School. He graduated BA from Cambridge in 1552, doubtless from Pembroke College (whose admission register is lost), since he was elected fellow of Pembroke in 1553. After proceeding MA in 1555, he seems to have remained quietly in Cambridge until Elizabeth's accession. 
Ordained deacon at Ely on 22 March 1562, Young proceeded BTh in 1563, and having resigned his fellowship was collated on 31 August to the city rectory of St Martin Ludgate by Edmund Grindal, bishop of London and former master of Pembroke, whose chaplain he became. On 3 May 1564 Grindal instituted him prebendary of Cadington Major in St Paul's on the presentation of Sir John Mason, ordaining him priest on 25 February 1565, when he was described as MA, born in St Magnus, and aged about thirty-three. On 7 May 1566 he received the prebend of North Muskham in Southwell Minster by letters patent. After Miles Coverdale had resigned the rectory of St Magnus at the height of the vestiarian controversy, Young was collated there (24 September 1566), resigning St Martin Ludgate. 
On 12 July 1567, on Grindal's advice, Young was elected master of Pembroke in succession to John Whitgift. As vice-chancellor in 1568-9 he stoutly resisted the attempts of Archbishop Parker to impose the authority of the ecclesiastical commission on the university. Parker expressed extreme astonishment, but does not seem to have retaliated. 
Young proceeded DTh in 1569, and on 19 August that year, at the petition of Sir William Cecil, received letters patent for the rectory of Little Wilbraham, Cambridgeshire, from the lord keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon, presumably in order to allow him to support the dignity of his mastership. On 20 March 1572 he was granted letters patent for the tenth stall in Westminster Abbey, taking possession on 26 April and preaching at convocation that year. 
Although he seems to have been seldom resident at Pembroke, Young's mastership has always been celebrated for the number of eminent scholars and writers active there during his tenure. Edmund Spenser matriculated in 1569. Lancelot Andrewes, Edward Kirke, Thomas Neville, and Gabriel Harvey were all elected fellows under him. Six letters from Harvey to Young survive in Harvey's letter-book. The most enduring monument to his capacity for securing his subordinates' loyalty is Spenser's portrait of Young as 'faithful Roffy' in 'The Shepherd's Calendar', the name being an affectionate abbreviation of 'Roffensis', his Latin title after 16 March 1578, when he was consecrated bishop of Rochester. 
Retaining his Westminster prebend and the rectory of St Magnus 'in commendam', Young resigned his other promotions and married in 1578 Grace ('nee' Cocke), widow of Thomas Watts, archdeacon of Middlesex, one of Pembroke's most notable benefactors. 
Young was one of a coterie promoted to the bench -- John Aylmer, John Piers, and John Whitgift were the others -- at a time when Sir Christopher Hatton wielded particular influence at court following Elizabeth's suspension of Grindal, now archbishop of Canterbury, for his refusal to suppress the clerical exercises known as prophesyings. All four men were regarded as stern disciplinarians, having little or no sympathy for nonconformity, but while Piers became archbishop of York and Whitgift succeeded Grindal as primate, Young never prospered. He remained at Rochester for twenty-seven years, one of only four out of twenty-two occupants of the see between 1472 and 1629 who were not translated to a wealthier one. 
In 1581, as bishop of London and 'de facto' primate after Grindal's suspension, Aylmer urged Cecil, now Lord Burghley, to promote Young to Norwich for his 'quickness in government' and ability 'to bridle the innovators' (BL, Lansdowne MS 33, fol. 52'r'). Whitgift revived the proposal on his elevation to Canterbury in 1583 without success, but in September 1584 was authorized to offer Young Chichester instead. Young was 'very well content' to abide by Burghley's 'disposition for that matter' (SP12/173/15), but again failed to win promotion. 
At the end of the decade Young was one of those charged with pursuing the authors of the Martin Marprelate tracts in which, like many of his colleagues, he was denigrated as a 'petty pope' and also castigated for presenting himself to a benefice in his gift. Although Martin did not name the benefice, it was presumably this charge that led to the erroneous statement that in 1592 he 'exposed himself to no little animadversion' by presenting himself to the rectory of Wouldham in Kent (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 2.406), a benefice he never, in fact, occupied. 
In 1594, refusing the bishopric of Norwich on the grounds that Edmund Scambler had despoiled the revenues, Young was credited with the remark that 'it was not so easy a seat for an old man since the cushion was taken away' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 2.406). His fastidiousness evidently riled Burghley, who reacted by accusing him of covetousness and of keeping poor hospitality. Young penned an icy letter in his own defence, claiming that he maintained 'as good a table as any in England, excepting that which is prodigal', but pointing out that his income from his see and his 'commendams' was so small that the discharge of his obligations of hospitality left him with only $90 per annum to live on. Nevertheless, he took care to assure Burghley that he would not refuse further preferment if it was 'meet' for him to accept (BL, Lansdowne MS 79, fol. 114'r'). This correspondence hardly leaves room for the tradition that he 'nobly declined' to leave Rochester on the grounds that a man should not leave his wife because she is poor (White, 251-2). 
Although mentioned for the bishopric of Salisbury in 1596-7, Young scarcely surfaces in the official records thereafter. In his will, dated 13 March 1605, he directed that he be buried in a simple tomb in the chancel of Bromley church, with a suitable inscription. His sole bequests were to Grace and their only child, John. Grace received household stuff and the plate which she had brought him from her marriage to Thomas Watts, but no hard cash or life interest in any property. As sole executor John received the residue, being directed to bestow what he felt he could afford on 'poor kinsmen and servants'. 
The will's most arresting feature is what appears to be a specific allusion to his quarrel with Burghley. Given the 'debility' of his 'spiritual living..., which never amounted to above three hundred pounds a year', he observed that the provisions made for his funeral ought to be accounted a 'liberal expense' by anyone 'possessed with an equal and indifferent opinion and not foreprized with a will and conceit of mine wealth and riches, as many, yea too many hath been' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/108, sig. 100, fol. 384'v'). 
Young died at Bromley Palace on 10 April 1605, aged seventy-one, and was duly buried in Bromley church under a brass bearing both his own arms and those of his see, and with a conventionally phrased inscription listing his virtues. For unknown reasons probate of his will was not granted until 22 November 1606. He published a single sermon, and that only to justify himself because 'it was not well taken in part of some of the hearers, where it was spoken' ('A Sermon Preached before the Queenes Maiestie, the Second of March, An. 1575', sig. A1'v'). He also contributed 'Notes upon the booke entituled 'Euangelium regni'' to William Wilkinson's 'Confutation of Certaine Articles Delivered unto the Familye of Love' (1579). 


@@@@@


doc= 30269


Young, John (1746/7-1820), university teacher, was born in Glasgow, the second son of John Young, a cooper in the city. He matriculated from Glasgow University in 1764 and proceeded MA in 1769. He was installed professor of Greek at the university on 9 June 1774 and was noted as a popular teacher with a good sense of humour, and one who deeply enjoyed the Greek language and oratory. He published sparingly but was passionately interested in classical theatre, and greatly admired the acting of Edmund Kean. He was nicknamed Cocky Bung by the students on account of his father's occupation. He married, on 25 September 1780, Jean, daughter of Colin Lamont of Knockdow, in Argyll; they had seven children. His eldest son, John (1781-1852), was for a time chaplain to the East India Company and died rector of Newdigate, Surrey; his fourth son, Charles (1796-1822), was a promising classical scholar who died in Glasgow on 17 December 1822. 
As a professor Young attempted to extend the rights of professors while at the same time guarding his own. About the time of his election he argued with another professor over the house that could have come with his post, but in 1781 he gained accommodation when he was made curator of the college chambers. He objected to moves that would have spared students taking the obligatory examination in Greek before studying logic, as this would have diminished his own income, but he was one of the group of professors who sought to apply to parliament to allow them the right of electing the rector. On the whole he was fairly resistant to change, and maintained his chair even in old age, when he became feebler. He died, aged seventy-three, on 18 November 1820 at The George inn, Glasgow, while taking a bath. He was buried in Glasgow Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 30270


Young, John (1755-1825), mezzotint-engraver, studied under Valentine Green, with whom he remained familiar until the latter's death in 1813. He continued to work with several of the painters who collaborated with Green, notably Benjamin West, John Hoppner, and Johann Gerhard Huck. On 16 July 1784 he married Elizabeth Gibbs, of South Mimms, Hertfordshire. He began to publish his own prints in 1785 and was trading with Pierre-Francois Basan in France before 1788. At this time he lived adjacent to Green at 28 Newman Street, a street that was then home to several leading artists. He moved to Store Street in 1789 and later to Charlotte Street, but remained in this area of Westminster throughout his life. Young executed some eighty portraits after various contemporaries, including several notable portraits of boxers, but was better known for his subject pieces, chiefly after West, Johann Zoffany, and especially Richard Morton Paye and Hoppner, with whom he collaborated frequently. In 1789 he was appointed mezzotint engraver to the prince of Wales, to whom Hoppner was portrait painter. 
In 1813 Young succeeded Green as keeper of the British Institution, an arduous post which he filled until his death with unfailing tact and efficiency, for, as his obituarist recorded, 'he was a friend of artists, and a conciliator where many sore feelings, jealousies and angry passions are constantly generated' ('GM', 95/1, 1825, 466). He was honorary secretary of the Artists' Benevolent Fund from 1810 to 1813, when he transferred his services to the rival body, the Artists' General Benevolent Institution. In later life he published 'Portraits of the Emperors of Turkey from the Foundation of the Monarchy to the Year 1808' (1815), thirty plates printed in colours, with the lives of the emperors in English and French text. He then worked on a series of catalogues, illustrated by his own etchings, of some leading collections of paintings in Britain -- the Grosvenor, Leicester, Miles, Angerstein, and Stafford galleries. He was working on a catalogue of the king's collection at Carlton Palace at the time of his death, after a long illness, at his house at 65 Upper Charlotte Street on 7 March 1825. A sale of his prints and books was held on 25 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 30271


John Young (1773-1837), merchant and writer on agriculture in Nova Scotia, was born near Falkirk on 1 September 1773, the son of William Young, a merchant, and his wife, Janet. He studied at Glasgow University about 1790 before sailing with his wife, Agnes, and their four children to Halifax in April 1814. The British occupation of Calais, Maine, provided him with a profitable market from September 1814 until April 1815 for goods which he had brought from Scotland. In the economic disarray which followed the war Young decided that there would be public support for agricultural reform, and between 1818 and 1821 he published sixty-four letters in the Halifax 'Acadian Recorder' under the pen-name Agricola. Of these, thirty-eight were collected and published in a volume entitled 'Letters of Agricola on the Principles of Vegetation and Tillage'. He advocated improvements in agriculture based on both theoretical scientific knowledge and empirically derived practice. His expectations were realized when a central board of agriculture was established in 1819. Young was named secretary and treasurer, but his desultory performance contributed to the abolition of the board in 1826. He was never an enthusiast for agriculture 'per se'; rather he saw its improvement as a vehicle for his own social elevation. He managed to be elected for Sydney county in 1826 and held this seat until his death, on 6 October 1837, at his home, Willow Park Farm, Halifax. 


@@@@@


doc= 30272


Young, John, Baron Lisgar (1807-1876), politician and colonial administrator, born at Bombay on 31 August 1807, was the eldest son of Sir William Young, first baronet (died 10 March 1848) and his wife, Lucy (died 8 Aug 1856), youngest daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Frederick. His father was a director and large shareholder of the East India Company. Young was educated at Eton College, and matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 13 June 1825, graduating BA in 1829. On 26 January 1829 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn, and in 1834 he was called to the bar, but he never practised. On 5 April 1835 he married Adelaide Annabella, daughter of Edward Tuite Dalton and his wife, Olivia (later Lady Headfort). 
On 19 May 1831 Young was elected as a tory for the county of Cavan, and held the seat until 1855. He was throughout associated with Peel. When Peel took office in 1841 Young was appointed a lord of the Treasury on 16 September, and on 21 May 1844 he became one of the secretaries of the Treasury. On the overthrow of Peel's ministry he resigned office on 7 July 1846. Between 1846 and 1852 he was one of those who favoured integration of the Peelites into a coherent group, and he sometimes represented Peel's views to his followers. He was more inclined to Liberalism than some Peelites. 
Under Lord Aberdeen he became chief secretary for Ireland on 28 December 1852, and was nominated a privy councillor. On 20 March 1855 he resigned the Irish secretaryship on being appointed lord high commissioner of the Ionian Islands, and on 25 March was made a GCMG. He commenced his duties on 13 April 1855, and found himself immediately at variance with the representative assembly, which his predecessor, Sir Henry George Ward, had also found difficult to conciliate. Young was not in sympathy with the desire of the majority of the inhabitants for union with Greece; and in a dispatch to the colonial secretary, Henry Labouchere (afterwards Baron Taunton), dated 10 June 1857, he recommended that Corfu and Paxo should be converted into British colonies, with the consent of their inhabitants. The dispatch was stolen from the Colonial Office and published in the 'Daily News' on 12 November 1858. This misfortune rendered Young's position impossible, and in the same year Gladstone, who had been sent out as high commissioner extraordinary, recommended Young's recall. He gave strong testimony, however, to the mild and conciliatory nature of Young's administration, and recommended that he should be employed elsewhere. Young left Corfu on 25 January 1859, and on 4 February was nominated KCB. 
On 22 March 1861 Young was appointed governor-general and commander-in-chief of New South Wales, in succession to Sir William Thomas Denison. Immediately after his arrival he was persuaded by the premier, Charles Cowper, to endeavour, by nominating fifteen new members, to compel the upper house of New South Wales to pass a measure regulating the allotment of crown lands. Denison, before his departure, had refused to accede to this expedient. Young was reprimanded by the duke of Newcastle, the colonial secretary, but allowed to complete his term. Soon after the end of his term of office, on 24 December 1867, he returned to England, and was created GCB on 13 November 1868. 
Young determined on his return to enter active political life. Inclining to Liberalism, he consulted Gladstone as to a constituency, but found himself in disagreement with the Liberal leader on the question of the ballot. In 1868 the Conservative ministry offered him the governorship of Canada, which several men of their party, including Lord Mayo, had declined, because the Canadian parliament had impaired the dignity of the office by reducing the governor's salary. Young accepted the post, and on 2 January 1869 he was appointed governor-general of Canada and governor of Prince Edward's Island, which was not annexed to the dominion until 1873. He reached Canada towards the end of November, and found the rebellion of Louis Riel in progress. It was not suppressed until September 1870, when Riel fled into the United States. Young played an important role in the transfer to Canada of the Hudson's Bay territory of Rupert's Land and in Manitoba's joining the confederation. He acted, to the mutual irritation of both sides, as broker between the British and Canadian governments about terms for Canada's agreement to the treaty of Washington. His agreement to a Canadian bill for differential duties against American tea and coffee was given without consultation with London and raised the general question of colonial tariffs in British free-trade policy. 
On 26 October 1870 Young was created Baron Lisgar of Lisgar and Baillieborough, co. Cavan. In poor health, he resigned in June 1872, before the end of his term, and he returned to Ireland, leaving behind him in Canada a reputation for ability and sound judgement but in the Gladstone cabinet considerable irritation. He died, childless, at Lisgar House, Baillieborough, on 6 October 1876. His widow later married Sir Francis Charles Fortescue Turville of Bosworth Hall, Leicestershire; she died in 1895. Lisgar had many opportunities and was generously handled by his colleagues. But his career was the least successful of the leading Peelites. 


@@@@@


doc= 30273


Young, John (1811-1878), entrepreneur and politician in Canada, was born at Ayr, Scotland, on 11 March 1811, the son of William Young, a cooper, and Janet Gibson. He finished his education at Ayr Academy in 1824, then taught briefly in the parish school at Colyton, near Ayr, before emigrating to Canada. Having arrived in Upper Canada in 1826 he worked for a merchant in Kingston, and in the early 1830s moved to Montreal to work for a wholesale merchant on the St Lawrence. Initially a clerk, he rose to be partner of the business (1835-40), after which he set up in partnership with Harrison Stephens as a merchant, trading especially with the mid-western United States. In 1846 the partnership broke up, and Young formed a new trading partnership with Benjamin Holmes. He was an enthusiastic advocate of waterways, particularly the construction of the Caughnawaga Canal to link the St Lawrence and Lake Champlain, which he championed ceaselessly but unsuccessfully for thirty years. He was also closely involved with projects to give ice-bound Montreal year-round rail access to the Atlantic via Portland, Maine, and to the Pacific via the American network. Young's economic interests expanded to include milling and telegraph companies. 
Young's enthusiastic belief in free trade, expressed in numerous articles in the 'Canadian Economist', led to his involvement in politics as a Liberal. During the late 1840s he actively supported the Lower Canada Reformers led by Louis-Hyppolyte LaFontaine. Indeed Young was one of only a handful of leading Montreal merchants who did not sign the 1849 annexation manifesto. Rather reluctantly he joined the government as commissioner for public works on 28 October 1851. Because of his commercial experience and ability, his appointment was welcomed even by those who disagreed with his politics. He was elected to the assembly in December 1851 and kept his seat for two parliaments. In office he helped improve communications on the St Lawrence, but resigned from the executive council in 1852 when tariffs and tolls were used to penalize American goods after efforts to agree a reciprocity treaty had failed. In the election of 1854 he opposed his former colleagues and stood for the 'rouge' party. He was elected to represent Montreal, but did not stand in 1857, for reasons which are unclear, and was defeated in 1863. After confederation in 1867 he became an outspoken advocate of a customs union with the United States, and he joined the 'parti national', which was associated with the Liberal Party in Quebec. In 1872 he was elected to represent Montreal, but the following year he chose not to stand. 
Young was particularly influential on the Montreal harbour commission, of which he was a member from 1850 and chairman from 1853. Under him the commission expanded its scope and very substantially improved its facilities and its training of personnel. Young made personal financial gains as the harbour's fortune rose dramatically. His business interests centred chiefly on grain transport and milling, associated with which he owned substantial tracts of land, buildings, and transport facilities. He retired from active business in 1860 to devote more time to his family and to curling. In 1861 he, his wife, and their thirteen children moved to Scotland for two years to give the children a Scottish upbringing. They survived shipwreck on the return journey. 
After his return Young continued active on the harbour commission and the Montreal and later the dominion board of trade: but as a result of debts incurred through speculations he lost his money and the family home was sold. His appeals for a government pension were refused, although he was given a number of patronage places. He died on 12 April 1878 of heart trouble exacerbated by sunstroke and was buried at the expense of the merchants of Montreal. He was one of the foremost Montreal businessmen of his day and left his mark in a number of lasting improvements to the city's transport links. 


@@@@@


doc= 30274


Young, John Radford (1799-1885), mathematician, was born in London in April 1799. Little is known of his background. According to 'Men of the time' his parents were of 'humble' status, and he was 'almost entirely self-educated'. At an early age he became acquainted with Olinthus Gilbert Gregory, who perceived his mathematical ability and assisted him in his studies. In 1823, while holding a post at a private establishment for deaf people in Walworth Road, Young published 'An Elementary Treatise on Algebra', with a dedication to Gregory. Young's prolific output of elementary books contributed to the movement, led by Robert Woodhouse, to disseminate continental methods of mathematical analysis in Britain. Young's works covered subjects which included geometry, trigonometry, calculus, mechanics, equations, mensuration, logarithms, and navigation and nautical astronomy. His 'Elements of Plane and Spherical Trigonometry' (1833) contained an appendix by Thomas Stephens Davies. His 'Rudimentary Treatise on Arithmetic' (1858) reached ten editions. 
In 1833 Young was appointed professor of mathematics at Belfast College. In 1849, on the opening of Queen's College, the presbyterian party which controlled the professorial nominations prevented his reappointment as professor in the new establishment. From that time he devoted himself more completely to the study of mathematical analysis, and made several original discoveries. In 1844 he had discovered and published a proof of Newton's rule for determining the number of imaginary roots in an equation. In 1866 he completed his proof, publishing in the 'Philosophical Magazine' a demonstration of a principle which in his earlier paper he had assumed as axiomatic. His contributions to the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy' included a memoir in 1868 'On the imaginary roots of numerical equations'. In the 1860s, he wrote several theological tracts, such as 'Science Elucidative of Scripture and not Antagonistic to it' (1863). 
Young was married and had at least one child. He died at Peckham on 5 March 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 30275


Young, Matthew (1750-1800), natural philosopher and bishop of Clonfert, was born on 3 October 1750 at Castlerea, co. Roscommon, and was the fourth son of Owen Young and Olivia Maria Bell. He matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 8 July 1766, obtained a scholarship in 1769, and graduated BA (1772), MA (1774), and BD (1782). Young married Anne, daughter of Captain Bennet Cuthbertson; the couple had eleven children. 
Elected fellow in 1775, Young was appointed Donegal lecturer at Trinity College in 1782. Two years later he published, in Dublin and in London, 'An Enquiry into the Principal phaenomena of Sounds and Musical Strings', an endeavour to vindicate Isaac Newton's work on air pulses in 'Principia'. In 1786 he was awarded the degree of DD and he was elected professor of natural philosophy in Trinity College. Young enthusiastically promoted private research at the college. In 1777 he founded a society for the study of Syriac and theology, as well as a philosophical society, the forerunner of the Royal Irish Academy, of which he was a founder member. To the transactions of this body Young contributed several papers, chiefly on scientific subjects, as well as one on ancient Gaelic poetry, in which he took much interest. His 'Ancient Gaelic Poems, Collected in the Highlands of Scotland' appeared in 1787. In 1790 Young published an anonymous tract, 'An enquiry how far the provost of Trinity College, Dublin, is vested with a negative upon the proceedings of the senior fellows'. The question arose from the claim of the provost, John Hely Hutchinson, from which Young himself had suffered, to overrule elections of fellows even against a clear majority of the electors. 
On 2 February 1798 Young was consecrated as bishop of Clonfert, Ireland's poorest diocese, on the recommendation of the lord lieutenant's principal secretary, who considered Young 'the most distinguished literary character in the kingdom'. This was also the opinion of William Bennet, bishop of Cloyne, who described Young as 'the ablest man I have seen in the country, with a keen and logical mind, united to exquisite taste. He has the playfulness and ingenuousness of a schoolboy'. Besides his scientific and theological attainments Young was an amateur landscape painter and an enthusiastic botanist. Following his appointment as bishop of Clonfert he studied Syriac with special reference to an amended version of the 'Psalms' which he had undertaken, and which was printed, but not published, in his lifetime. Young's work remained unfinished at his death from cancer at Whitworth, Lancashire, on 28 November 1800. His remains were brought to Dublin and interred in Trinity College chapel. A more important work in preparation at the time of his death was his 'Method of Prime and Ultimate Ratios, Illustrated by a Comment on the Principia', in Latin; it was never published. Thomas Elrington, bishop of Ferns, published a sermon on Young's death, with biographical details, which appeared in three editions in 1800. A pension of $500 per annum was obtained for Young's widow and children. In 1803 there appeared 'An Analysis of the Principles of Natural Philosophy', a compendium of his lectures given at Trinity. 


@@@@@


doc= 30276


Young, Patrick (1584-1652), librarian and scholar, was born on 29 August 1584 at Seaton, Forfarshire, the fifth son of Sir Peter Young (1544-1628), tutor to James VI of Scotland, and his first wife, Elizabeth Gibb (died 1593). John Young (1585-1654) was his younger brother. He was educated at the University of St Andrews, graduating MA in 1603. 
On the accession of James I, Young accompanied his father south in the train of the king. Initially attached to Bishop George Lloyd of Chester as his librarian, he was incorporated at Oxford in 1605 with the degree of MA. On appointment as deacon he became a chaplain of All Souls College. His sojourn in Oxford not only benefited his development as a Greek scholar as he also developed an interest in history. On his return to London his patron, James Montagu, bishop of Bath and Wells, ensured Young's welfare by obtaining for him a pension of $50 a year in return for occasional work as a secretary for the king. 
Young is best known for his role in the reorganization of the Royal Library, indeed he has been credited with its virtual refoundation, and, in so doing, creating the preconditions for the eventual foundation of the British Museum. Since the petitions for the re-establishment of a royal library by John Dee in 1556, and by Robert Cotton in the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, had fallen on deaf ears, the royal library at St James's Palace at the time of Young's appointment consisted principally of the collections of Henry VII. Faced with only two surviving sixteenth-century library catalogues -- the 1534 collection of Richmond and the 1542 Westminster library catalogue -- not to mention other unlisted royal collections at Greenwich, Hampton Court, and Windsor, Young began a systematic cataloguing of the disparate royal collections. The initiative received an invaluable encouragement with the acquisition by Henry, prince of Wales, of the Lumley collection for his private library in 1609. In 1609 and 1610 Young undertook the construction of a new library building at St James's Palace, and on the death of Henry the prince's vast library became part of the Royal Collection. Young also played an important role in the acquisition of the library of the renowned scholar Isaac Casaubon, travelling to Paris for the purpose in 1617. 
In 1622 Young was ordered 'to make search in all cathedrals for old manuscripts and ancient records, and to bring an inventory of them to His Majesty'. This initiated a programme of compiling useful library catalogues for a number of cathedral libraries, starting with Lichfield, St Paul's, Salisbury, Winchester, and Worcester, and endeavouring to ensure that the works within these libraries would be made known to scholars and that copies of some manuscripts should be placed in the Royal Library. Seven years later Young joined Dr Augustine Lindsell in drawing up an inventory of the Barocci collection of 251 manuscripts for the Bodleian Library, to which was appended a 1628 catalogue of the Greek manuscript collection of Sir Thomas Roe. Young's readiness to collate material from other libraries -- such as his collation about 1619 of the 'Codex Bezae Cantabrigiensis' at Cambridge -- sometimes led to confusion among his contemporaries as to which library he was assigned to, which is evident from Jean Morin's identification of him as the librarian of the university library at Cambridge. 
Young was the recipient of various ecclesiastical and secular honours. His income was augmented in 1613 when he became a prebend of Chester Cathedral and on 9 January 1618 he was made a burgess of Dundee. In 1620, shortly after marrying his wife, Elizabeth, he was allocated the salary of the rectory of Llanynys in Denbighshire, and he was also incorporated as MA at Cambridge. In 1621 he was appointed a prebend of St Paul's and a treasurer of the same cathedral. 1623 witnessed his appointment to a rectorship of Hayes, Middlesex, a position that he held until 1647. By 1624 he had been appointed to the office of Latin secretary by Bishop John Williams. 
As secretary and royal librarian Young acted not only as a vital node in British scholarly networks, but his contacts and reputation extended into continental Europe where he developed long-lasting collections with individual scholars such as Lucas Holstenius (1596-1661). This was sustained by his considerable academic ability, most notably in the field of Greek studies. Young's published works are relatively few in number, but he did much to encourage contemporary authors such as Daniel Heinsius who, though interested in classical scholarship, published works chiefly concerned with biblical scholarship, with Young acting as either his editor or his translator. Young and Thomas Reid worked as translators on James I's 'Serenissimi... principis Jacobi... opera', which had been edited by Young's patron Montagu, and was published in a Latin edition in London in 1619. Young continued to translate works, particularly from Greek to Latin, as his 1637 edition of Nicetas's 'Catena Graecorum patrum in beatum Job collectore Niceta' testifies. This work was followed in 1638 by his edition of a treatise by Bishop Gilbert Foliot, 'Gilberti Foliot episcopi Londinensis, expositio in Canticum'. As early as 1613 he contemplated an edition of the works of Origen and Theodoret, and by 1628 he was entrusted with the task of preparing an edition of the famous Alexandrian codex of the 'Septuagint', which had been presented to the Royal Library. 1633 saw the publication of his 'Clementis ad Corinthios epistola prior. Latine vertit, et notis brevioribus illustravit. P. Junius, Gr.a Lat', at Oxford, (a work by Pope Clement I). Some works appeared only after his death. An edition of his annotations on the Alexandrian manuscript was appended to a 1657 edition of a polyglot 'Bible': 'P. Junii annotationes quas paraverat ad MS Alexandrini editionem, in quibus codicem illum antiquiss. cum textu Hebr... confert'. His comments on and abridgement of Louis Savot's work on the coins of the Roman emperors were published with Leland's 'Collectanea' (vol. 5, 1770 and 1774). 
Young was deprived of his position as royal librarian in 1649 and he retired to the house of his son-in-law, John Atwood, at Broomfield in Essex, where he died on 7 September 1652, leaving two daughters, Elizabeth and Sarah. The true extent of his fame among contemporaries is evident from the many eulogies of him following his death, cited in his chief biography by Thomas Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 30277


Young, Sir Peter (1544-1628), royal tutor and diplomat, was born on 15 August 1544 at Dundee, the second son of John Young ('b'. 1497), burgess of Edinburgh and Dundee, and Margaret, daughter of Walter Scrymgeour of Glasswell. John Young's third son, Alexander, was usher of the king's privy chamber to James VI, and died on 29 December 1603. Peter was educated at Dundee grammar school, and possibly matriculated at St Andrews University since he was designated 'magister' when admitted a burgess of Dundee. From 1562 until 1568 he studied at Geneva under the care of his uncle Henry Scrimgeour, who held the chair of civil law there. Young became acquainted with the theologian Theodore Beza and corresponded with him after returning to Scotland. Other correspondents included the reformer Andrew Melville and the astronomer Tycho Brahe. 
In 1569 the regent of Scotland, James, earl of Moray, appointed Young co-tutor to the infant James VI along with George Buchanan. Young appears to have taken the lead in teaching the king -- who lived at Stirling Castle -- since Buchanan was by now elderly. The teaching day consisted of Isocrates, Plutarch, and the 'New Testament' before breakfast; Livy, Cicero, and a modern historian after breakfast; and, in the afternoon, logic and rhetoric. Young made it his concern to build up the royal library which had been dispersed during the deposition of Queen Mary; he collected or recovered some 600 books consisting of theology, classical authors, modern history, and political theory. He himself donated a 'Bible' and several works by Greek and Latin writers. Young carried himself as a courtier, and according to Sir James Melville of Halhill 'was laith till offend the kyng at any tym, and used him self wairly, as a man that had mynd of his awen weill be keping of his Majestie's favour' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 262). 
In August 1570 Young was presented to a subchantory of Glasgow and the parsonage of Durisdeer in Nithsdale as 'pedagog to oure soverane lord' but was forced to demit since he was not qualified to serve as its minister (Donaldson, 6.164, 505; 7.3). However, he was compensated with revenues from the archbishopric of Glasgow, and in 1579 with the rights to rents from the king's lordship of Torphichen for his service 'in educatioun and instructioun of his hienes... and contenuall attendance and awayting on his majestie almaist ever sen his nativitie' (ibid., 7.341). On 25 October 1577 Young had been appointed maister elemosinare (master almoner) to the king with a yearly pension of $200. He was involved in several scholarly enterprises; in 1574 he served on kirk committees and in 1575 he acted as deputy for Buchanan on the committee for standardizing the teaching of Latin in schools. On 3 January 1577 he and others were granted licence to print works by classical writers and 'ane onomastik, certane select sentences, the catechisme for the young bairns' for fifteen years (ibid., 7.121). During the 1590s Tycho Brahe asked him several times to write a life of Buchanan, but Young excused himself due to a lack of source materials. In 1598 he was appointed to the commission reporting on the state of Scottish universities. 
When Danish ambassadors asked for the redemption of Orkney, Young was sent to Denmark in July 1586. On this occasion he satisfied Frederick II on certain points and began negotiations for a royal marriage. On his return he was admitted to the privy council (7 November 1586); he remained a frequent attender until 1622. In May 1587 he and Sir Patrick Vans of Barnbarroch embarked on a second embassy to Denmark, and avoided the question of Orkney and Shetland by claiming they had no commission from the king to discuss the matter; they then proposed a marriage with the Princess Elizabeth. In 1588 Young returned to Denmark only to discover she had been promised to another, and so Princess Anne was offered instead. The death of Frederick in 1588 delayed negotiations but the queen regent sent Young back to Scotland with a portrait of the princess and he spoke favourably of her to King James. Early in 1589 Young went to Denmark to complete the negotiations, and he was present at the marriage of James VI in Oslo, Norway, in October. 
Throughout the 1590s Young continued to serve James as an ambassador. In 1590 he was sent to the Danish court and presented a portrait of Buchanan to Tycho Brahe. In April 1594 he was ambassador to Denmark and the empire when he gave assurances regarding the quarrel between Queen Anne and Chancellor Thirlstane over her marriage-portion lands. On his return Young brought back Duke Ulric of Mecklenburg, grandfather to Anne, and the duke of Brunswick, her brother-in-law, to attend the baptism of Prince Henry; both were offended because James had not sent a special envoy to each of them, so neither would accompany Young from Leith. In 1595 he was appointed one of the eight octavians charged with managing the king's financial affairs. The following year Young and Lord Ogilvy were sent to Denmark to ask for ships and soldiers for an expedition against the Isles, and the question of support for James's claim to the English throne was discussed. In 1598 James VI sent the bishop of Aberdeen and Young on an embassy to Denmark and the empire with secret instructions to negotiate a league of princes to persuade Elizabeth of England publicly to acknowledge James as her heir. Young and Cunningham were instructed to secure a loan from Christian IV and the German princes for hiring soldiers to press the Scottish claim to England. During this same embassy Young met David Chytraeus, who had published an attack on Queen Mary based on Buchanan's 'Detectio', but persuaded Chytraeus to retract it at the prompting of King James. Young accompanied James to England in 1603; he remained master almoner and in November 1604 was made tutor and 'chief overseer' in the household of Prince Charles. He was knighted on 19 February 1605. 
Young married three times. He and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1593), daughter of John Gibb, a gentleman of the king's bedchamber, had eight sons and four daughters. The fifth son was Patrick Young (d. 1652), royal librarian and editor of some of the writings of King James VI, while the sixth, John Young (1585-1654), was for nearly thirty years dean of Winchester. Young's second wife, Joanna Murray, survived her marriage for only six months, dying in November 1596. In 1600 he married Marjory Nairne of Sandfurd; they had four daughters, and she was still living in 1642. In 1616 Young was appointed titular master of St Cross Hospital, Winchester. He had purchased the estate of Easter Seaton, near Arbroath, Angus (Forfarshire), in 1580, and died there on 7 January 1628 in his eighty-fourth year. He was buried in the vault of St Vigean's Church near Arbroath. 


@@@@@


doc= 30278


Young, Robert (c.1656-1700), forger and false witness, had his criminal career to 1692, mainly as a clerical impostor, traced in unique detail through a dozen aliases by his intended victim Thomas Sprat, bishop of Rochester. Yet even Sprat could not certainly establish his origin. Young in different impostures claimed Chester and Warrington as his birthplace; the Irish bishops investigating his early frauds thought him a Scot; but a king's messenger met his father, a wandering fortune-teller and conjuror (evidently protestant), in Ireland, at Limerick. When imprisoned in 1681 Young mentioned a brother willing to stand bail. Young's spelling and dog-Latin discredit his occasional claims to have attended Enniskillen School and Trinity College, Dublin, or Magdalen College, Oxford. His real education was in counterfeiting handwriting and forging documents. He was tall, swarthy, and long-faced, with straight black hair. 
In 1677 Young tricked John Roan, bishop of Killaloe, by forging certificates of his learning and moral character, into granting him deacon's orders. He then and later forged several letters of ordination for himself from Roan and other Irish bishops. In 1679-80 he held three successive curacies, at Tallogh, co. Waterford, Castlerea, co. Roscommon, and Kildallon, co. Cavan, but soon fled from each for offences including forging bills of exchange, horse-stealing, fathering a bastard, and performing illegal marriages. He himself had in 1675 married Ann Apsly or Yeabsly, a yeoman's daughter of Ards, co. Cork; they had three children (two were dead by 1681). In 1680 (after attempts with other women) he bigamously married Mary Hutt, the daughter of a Cavan innkeeper, for her $150 dowry. By 1681 he was in Cavan gaol awaiting trial for his life for bigamy. Since he might nevertheless genuinely be one of the more demoralized Irish Restoration lower clergy, Francis Marsh, bishop of Kilmore, degraded him from his clerical orders. From gaol Young wrote to both his wives, assuring each with exaggerated protestations that he loved only her, and persuaded them not to appear against him at the assizes. Still detained for unpaid prison fees, he gained release by offering to reveal to Lord Lieutenant Ormond further permutations of the Popish Plot, implicating noblemen and bishops (presumably including his protestant diocesans), but absconded 'en route' for Dublin. 
In 1683 Young fled to England with his second 'wife', Mary. (By one account they had two children, by another five who died.) Having failed to trick Archbishop Sancroft into granting him preferment, Young in mid-1684 forged a charitable recommendation from him, and the couple travelled as brother and sister collecting to ransom 'Mary Green's' husband, a cleric captured by Moorish pirates. They were arrested at Bury St Edmunds, tried as cheats on 6 October 1684, and pilloried. Young had written to Sancroft a long, florid letter containing another false autobiography, expressing hostility to 'discentors... specially that damnable faction of Presbytery' ('State trials', 12.1126), and blaming the forgery on Wright, a non-existent Oxford scrivener, but Sancroft did not recommend him to the judges, and Young vowed revenge. Imprisoned at Bury for a year, he again invented a plot to obtain release, petitioning James II and his parliament in May 1685 offering to discover whig conspirators including ten (unnamed) presbyterian ministers. He vindictively accused of treason a fellow prisoner against whom he and Mary unsuccessfully testified at Ipswich assizes. 
In 1686 Young forged a fresh licence from Sancroft to beg, with which the couple, with new aliases and a new story, solicited successfully until the archbishop, alerted to letters which Young had forged skilfully enough (spelling excepted) to deceive three bishops intimate with him, inserted advertisements warning the charitable against 'Smith' and 'Mrs Jones' in the 'London Gazette' in September-October 1687. During 1688-9 Young, having gained access to the mail at St Albans by corrupting the postmaster and his family, carried out large-scale forgeries of midland merchants' bills of exchange on London, until Mary Young was arrested there presenting one. With the proceeds Young posed at Lichfield as a refugee Irish dean, courted an heiress, and, when Mary inconveniently escaped from prison and arrived, allegedly plotted her murder. However, one of their victims had the couple arrested in December 1689. Tried in London on 15 January 1690 for two forgeries only, they were pilloried again. Young was also fined 200 marks (Mary Young only 20 marks) but, unable to pay, they were still in Newgate two years later. 
Young, seeking release, yet again turned plot-forger. About Christmas 1691 he sent to Archbishop Tillotson forged treasonable letters from important men. Tillotson showed these to King William, but expressed his total disbelief, with which William concurred. Young would need a crisis to obtain a favourable hearing, and accomplices on the outside: the unexplained disgrace of John Churchill, earl of Marlborough, in January 1692 and the French invasion threat that spring inspired him. 
Jacobite and opposition writers hinted that the government ministers sponsored Young's plot, but their surviving private correspondence shows them as genuinely duped. In the paper he left at his execution, Young claimed that a surgeon imprisoned for debt called Henry Pearson had prompted him. A discredited plot-forger, John Capel, in October 1692 warned George Savile, marquess of Halifax, then in opposition, that two allies of Young were preparing to accuse Sprat and Halifax before parliament. Yet both these and Pearson may be as imaginary as scrivener Wright. In the false plots of the 1690s the inventor often initially remained in the background while a younger disciple made the accusations, a pattern compulsory here because Young, in Newgate, could not plausibly claim to have met his 'fellow conspirators'. Young's accomplice, Stephen Blackhead, was a bankrupt tailor turned debt-collector, also tried for a forgery on 15 January 1690 and pilloried and imprisoned in Newgate for a year. He had avoided, by bribery, losing an ear as well; but his gaolbird looks made him an implausible Jacobite go-between to peers and bishops. Captain Lawe, another former fellow prisoner whom Young named as a witness (he himself and Blackhead, convicted forgers, were legally ineligible), never came forward. 
Young's forgeries have disappeared, and Sprat's report is the principal source of information about them. The main one was a Jacobite association. Its promises -- to raise 30,000 men to assist a French invasion, to seize Queen Mary dead or alive -- were as absurd as its style, but the seven signatures were brilliantly forged. Of the victims, Sancroft had retired to his Suffolk birthplace, but Young, experienced in his handwriting, probably still wanted revenge. Giles Willcox, a nonjuring cleric already arrested for treason, might be frightened into becoming another witness. Accusations against the others might please their enemies across the political spectrum. Marlborough, Viscount Cornbury, and Sprat had offended both sides by abrupt changes of allegiance in or after 1688. The earl of Salisbury had turned Catholic to obtain James's favour. The tory London merchant Sir Basil Firebrace was notorious for extortionate avarice. Young obtained answers in their handwriting to letters written under various aliases and pretexts -- ironically, he had Blackhead carry to Sprat a query whether an (imaginary) curate had forged his orders -- and supplemented the association with forged letters from and between Sprat and Marlborough. Though the ease-loving bishop was an unlikely conspirator, he was made the central figure, drafting a declaration for James's invasion, because Young knew his palace at Bromley from a brief 1687 stint as curate at the local almshouses. Young sent Blackhead there again in Sprat's absence to hide the forged association in his study but, denied access there, he concealed it in a flower-pot in the servants' parlour. 
Marlborough's arrest on suspicion on 3 May 1692, when the alarm of French invasion was at its height, led Young, timing his plot to a nicety, to demand a hearing from the cabinet. On 7 May he and Blackhead testified before them and, thanks to the forged Marlborough letters, were taken seriously. Both urged the messengers sent to Bromley to seize Sprat and his papers to search the flowerpots, gaining the affair the nickname the Flowerpot Plot. However, the search, restricted to Sprat's private rooms, fortunately missed the association, and for lack of solid evidence the bishop, after examination and ten days' house arrest in London, was allowed home. 
Meanwhile Young got Blackhead to retrieve the paper, and renewed his accusations. Independently, the government's newest agent, Richard Kingston (later its best anti-Jacobite spy but, like Young, a loose-living clerical impostor), alleged on 1 June that Sprat was deeply implicated in Jacobite pamphleteering. The government freed the Youngs from Newgate on 25 May, a source of later embarrassment. On 10 June (when the victory of La Hogue had ended invasion fears) the privy council confronted Sprat, whose story his servants confirmed, with Blackhead, who finally broke down under interrogation. Young, arrested with him, now produced the association, and Mary Young supported his story. On 13 June, confronted before the council by Blackhead, who confessed everything, and the bishop, Young remained unabashed, accusing them of combining to stifle the plot and even denying that he had advised searching the flowerpots. However, the truth and Sprat's innocence were clear. One indirect beneficiary was Marlborough, bailed on 15 June, whose partisans then and since blamed his imprisonment merely on Young's accusations. 
That autumn Young unsuccessfully tempted yet another former fellow prisoner, Richard Holland, to confirm his story of the association, and somehow arranged for fresh Jacobite forgeries to be hidden under the duchess of Richmond's hall floorboards. As Sprat deduced, had his first accusations succeeded he would have claimed many more victims. 
'Confessed: no; you shall find to your sorrow, all is not confessed yet', snarled Young when Sprat rebuked him; 'a parliament will come, and then you shall hear from me' ('State trials', 12.1081). However, he had miscalculated politically. Marlborough had since late 1691 been intermittently allied with the largely whig parliamentary opposition, who denounced his detention. The false witnesses opposition whigs encouraged were those -- the most dangerous -- who accused government ministers of treason. Instead, the failure to prosecute Young at the October 1692 sessions, and Blackhead's escape from custody, encouraged genuine opposition fears that Young's perjuries might be government-inspired. Sprat began to share them. He had completed a narrative of his deliverance by 1 August, and most of a detailed biography of Young, with documents furnished by Sancroft and the Irish hierarchy, by early autumn, but heavy official pressure had restrained him from publication. Now both parts appeared successively in November. The skilful narrative and ample, damning documentation destroyed Young's credibility for good. 
On 7 February 1693 Young was tried in the king's bench for the forgery. Charles Hatton wrote: 'by impudence [he] far outdid even Dr Oates. He had not a ranting impudence, but a most unparalleled sedate composed impudence, and pretends to be as great a martyr for his zeale for the preservation of the present governmt as Oates did for his for the protestant religion. The jury without stirring from the barre found him guilty. (Thompson, 2.189-90)' He was sentenced to be pilloried three times (he was heavily pelted) and fined $1000, to be imprisoned until he paid it, and meanwhile denied pen, ink, and paper. 
Young remained in the king's bench prison (or, briefly, the Fleet) for nearly six years. The 1696 assassination plot inspired him, like other plot-forgers, to fresh activity, bombarding William and his ministers with miscellaneous accusations, including conspiracies by Sprat to destroy him. But his sting had been drawn: the lords justices, presented with a letter, 'would not so much as hear of such a villain as Rob. Young..., with all indignation' ('Downshire MSS', 1.665). 
In both the Fleet and king's bench prisons Young had resumed his criminal career, now also forging leases while outside accomplices collected the money. After Young had escaped from the king's bench in December 1698, he and Mary, under the aliases John Larkin and Mary Robinson, carried on small-scale swindling of tradesmen. Arrested again, they were tried at the Guildhall sessions on 19 September 1699. He was fined 200 marks and she $30, and they were committed to Newgate until they could pay. 
Young still exploited his skills, getting a prisoner released by counterfeiting both the sheriffs' signatures. He now became involved with coiners, fellow prisoners, intending 'to accuse them, and to Witness against them, in hopes to purchase his liberty' ('London Post', no. 134), since for each conviction the informer received a $40 reward. For once Young was presumably truthful in claiming in his last paper that he had merely watched Daniel Jones coining money within Newgate, where he was arrested in the act on 14 March 1700. The calendar of prisoners for the April sessions listed Daniel and Mary Jones (the coincidence with Mary Young's frequent alias was evidently mere coincidence) to be tried for high treason for coining; 'Larkin' and 'Mary Robinson' merely had their former orders as convicts continued. However, in tackling a class of criminal accustomed to survive by unscrupulously framing colleagues, Young was again out of his depth. Probably the Joneses turned the tables by making clear to the authorities his real identity, for on 12 April he was convicted of coining, while they, as mere accessories, and another couple, the Iversons, were the witnesses. Young was executed at Tyburn on 19 April 1700, apparently penitent. He left a paper, supplementing Sprat's account of his life (since he lacked time to write, as he wanted, a full confession), admitting that the 1692 plot was forged, largely confessing his part in it, and mentioning his main swindles and accomplices since. Four months later, Mary 'Robinson' was discharged from Newgate. 


@@@@@


doc= 30279


Young, Robert (1822-1888), philologist and translator, son of George Young, manager of a flour mill, and Jean Dudgeon, was born in Edinburgh or in East Lothian on 10 September 1822; his father died when Robert was a child. After education at private schools, he was apprenticed to the printing trade and set up as a printer and bookseller on his own account in 1847. During his apprenticeship he used his spare time to study Hebrew and other oriental languages, and also interested himself in religious work; for three years he was connected with Thomas Chalmers's territorial church sabbath school in the deprived district of West Port, Edinburgh. He published a variety of works of oriental grammar and translation, which chiefly focused upon the study of the 'Old Testament' in its ancient versions. His first production was an edition with translation of Maimonides's 613 precepts. In 1856 he married, and until 1861 he was literary missionary and superintendent of the mission press at Surat; during this time in India he added Gujarati to his linguistic portfolio, which already included Gaelic and Finnish, in addition to the Romance and Teutonic languages. From 1864 to 1874 he conducted the Missionary Institute in Edinburgh, and in 1867 he visited the most important cities in the United States. 
The best-known of Young's works is his 'Analytical Concordance to the Bible' (1st edn, 1879), which went through many editions, and more than a century later remained in print in two American editions and one British. Young said that the object of his 'Concordance', as Tyndale said of his 'New Testament', was that every 'ploughboy' should know more of the scriptures than the 'ancients'. He maintained that the main feature of the 'Concordance' was the analytical arrangement of each English word under its original in Hebrew or Greek, with the literal meaning being given in each case. This enabled the reader to distinguish differences which were frequently obscured in the English 'Bible' and which could not be ascertained from the 'Concordance' produced by Alexander Cruden in 1737. 
In 1871 Young stood unsuccessfully for the Hebrew chair at St Andrews University. Most of his life was passed in Edinburgh, where he died at The Grange, on 14 October 1888, leaving two sons and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30280


Young, Thomas (1507-1568), archbishop of York, was born at Hodgeston, near Lamphey, Pembrokeshire, the son of John Young and Eleanor, his wife. He was a student at Broadgates Hall, Oxford, graduating BA in 1529 and MA in 1533. 
According to a later report of John Philpott, Young had studied civil law for some years before taking holy orders. He was appointed principal of his hall in 1542 and resigned in 1546. By this time he had become vicar of Llanfihangel Castle, Cardiganshire (1541), and in close succession rector of Hodgeston and Nashwith-Upton (1542) and prebendary of Trallong in the collegiate church of Abergwili, near Carmarthen (1545). In 1542 he became precentor of St David's, entering into residence in 1547, though his time in the cathedral was marked by an acrimonious dispute with the new bishop and later Marian martyr, Robert Ferrar. On his appointment in 1548 Ferrar accused Young and the chancellor, Roland Meyrick, of having despoiled the see during the vacancy; the two men were alleged to have made away with crosses, chalices, and other plate to the value of 500 marks or more. Both were dismissed and promptly drew up counter-articles against their bishop, who in turn mounted a vigorous defence. It is uncertain whether this case had reached any conclusion by the time of Edward VI's death on 6 July 1553. Later that year Bishop Ferrar was arrested and imprisoned because of his protestant opinions; following the passage of the appropriate legislation he became one of the first of the Marian martyrs. Young is said to have visited him in prison and asked his forgiveness for the unseemly wrangle in St David's. 
On Mary's accession Young was at least prepared boldly to aver his own protestantism. He was one of the six protestant divines who defended the faith at the convocation of 1553, as John Philpott records. This made him a marked man, and he soon after elected to join the exile abroad; though not apparently without attempting to secure some continuing benefit from his Welsh benefices by leasing his prebend at Lampeter to George Lee, a Calais merchant and brother to his close friend Thomas Lee. Like others leaving the country, Young attempted to obscure his intentions by antedating the lease, a common enough stratagem, but in this case unavailing. Little was previously known of this phase of his life, but documents which came to light in Germany in the 1990s confirm that he spent the entirety of Mary's reign in Emden, the most northerly of the exile congregations. Indeed he played a far more prominent role in the affairs of the church there than was formerly recognized. Also, the church had more members (about 100) and was better organized: it met for services three times a week and followed a church order and discipline modelled on John a Lasco's church order for the London stranger church, the 'Forma ac Ratio'. Young served as one of the two ministers, alongside John Scory, former bishop of Rochester; he enrolled as a citizen of Emden on 5 November 1555. They were assisted in the care of the congregation by six elders and nine deacons. Both ministers were of a stubborn and disputatious temper, and this was reflected in a bitter dispute with one of their own members, John Dowley. Dowley had taken offence that the congregation had moved its services from the normal place of worship close to a house infected by the plague. When he pursued the matter, the ministers denounced him in open church. Young, who was described in the proceedings as well trained in English jurisprudence, took a particularly prominent part against him. The case was appealed by Dowley to the local town community, which, perhaps inflamed by the refusal of the English ministers to appear and answer, essentially ruled in Dowley's favour. 
On the death of Mary, Young swiftly returned to England. With a chequered and not particularly successful career behind him he was not initially marked out for high office; his gradual but inexorable rise to one of the greatest prizes of the new church hierarchy is among the most fascinating tales of the Elizabethan settlement. He was not on Cecil's early lists of those intended for episcopal positions, but refusals on the part of some of the leading candidates, together with the queen's aversion to any taint of Genevan influence, opened the path to higher things. Young certainly proved himself an able courtier. Named to both the Canterbury visitation and the western circuit (the Welsh dioceses and Hereford and Worcester), he demonstrated his zeal for the new settlement with a long, arduous summer ensuring its enforcement. By the autumn he was earmarked for a return to St David's, but now as bishop. He was elected on 6 December 1559, confirmed on 18 January following, and consecrated at Lambeth three days later. On 23 March he obtained the restitution of his temporalities. But Young did not have to content himself with the modest Welsh see for long. In the matter of the temporalities he had secured the good offices of Lord Robert Dudley, and this proved to be an enduring alliance. Archbishop Parker too became a generous patron. Already in April 1560 he had written to hint to Young that he might expect 'other places... more honourable and more profitable' than St David's (Bruce and Perowne, 114). 
Meanwhile the new establishment's failure to provide for the northern province was becoming ever more scandalous and urgent. When consideration turned in the summer of 1560 to filling the vacant positions Parker was quick to nominate Young: 'if you would have a lawyer at York, the Bishop of St David's, Dr Young, is both witty, prudent, and temperate, and man-like' (Bruce and Perowne, 123). With such an endorsement and the support of the new court favourite, Dudley, Young's success was assured. He was elected archbishop on 27 January 1561 and confirmed on 5 February, and received restoration of his temporalities on 4 March. Even here he was marked by conspicuous signs of royal favour, being assessed for the first fruit due to the crown on a careful survey which set them at the modest figure of $1449 (against an assessment in the 'valor ecclesiasticus' of $2036). This was at pains to point out that a figure of $130 13's'. 7died had been abated by royal warrant because of the queen's 'favourable consideration' of Young himself. 
Once established in the northern province Young was notable for an absence of crusading zeal. The puritan Thomas Wood singled him out as one of the most infamous of the non-preaching bishops. A fairer assessment might regard him as pragmatic, rather than negligent. The north country was notoriously conservative, and he had few supporters for a campaign for active evangelism, even in the limited urban centres of his diocese. In the 1564 survey of religious opinions demanded by the government Young was able to return only two of York's thirteen aldermen as favourers of religion. It may have been that a more active policy might simply have provoked a more adverse reaction. Arguably, the limited popular support for the rising of the northern earls in 1569 may be considered the ultimate test of his pragmatic policies. 
In truth Young was first and foremost a royal agent and administrator. In 1564 he was named president of the council of the north, a signal mark of royal confidence, for which he received a stipend of $666 13's'. 4died per annum. In the large questions of ecclesiastical politics he offered Parker strong support, at the same time continuing assiduously to cultivate his relationship with Dudley. In the controversy over clerical dress in 1566 Young stoutly upheld Parker's 'Advertisements' with none of the apparent misgivings of several of his fellow bishops, smoothly assuring the queen that her firmness would be 'a very great comfort to many good subjects that now stand amazed and discouraged' (Collinson, 73). The obligation to Dudley proved increasingly burdensome, since the royal favourite was not slow to exploit his position with former clients upon whom he had special claims. A series of disadvantageous land transactions was the result. Towards the end of his life Young was bold enough to refuse the earl a requested loan of $1000 on the grounds that he was too poor, only to be compromised by the discovery of a shipload of lead from the roof of York palace hall which he had consigned for sale in London. 
The management of the archiepiscopal estates perforce absorbed a great deal of Young's attention in the northern counties. Always the supplicant in his relationship with Dudley, locally the tables were turned, and Young was the recipient of useful favours from compliant local powers. In 1565 he was given an exceptionally long lease on a city moat and rampart (useful grazing ground) by York city council, so that he should 'contynewe good and gracyouse lord to this city' (Palliser, 265). The archbishop responded by inviting a mayor of York, Robert Paycok, to act as godfather to his son George. Young was an assiduous steward of the interests of his family, having provided his elder son, Thomas, to the prebend of Barnby in 1561, when the boy was only sixteen. Local opinion would hardly have censured him for this: later in the century Archbishop Sandys was far more energetic in the pursuit of offices for a larger family. A more serious charge was that he abused his office and from motives of personal gain sometimes advanced men who were scarcely favourable to the Reformation. One protege, Sir John Constable, was removed from the council of the north in 1567, only a year after Young had supported his appointment, on the grounds of his untrustworthy reputation in matters of religion. Venal or not, the archbishop seems to have been a more than capable manager of his lands and flocks. An inventory of his goods at the time of his death records that he had corn in stock to the value of $113 and livestock worth $324, including a flock of over 800 sheep. Indeed he seems to have been exceptionally successful in husbanding the meagre assets of his northern see. The account of his administrator reveals an inventory of goods worth $2657 and good debts of over $1000. Part of this capital was realized by the questionable practice of lending money at interest, though he was not alone among his fellow bishops in resorting to this. 
There is also more than a hint that in his capacity as president of the northern council Young exploited his position as judge for private gain. His successor as president, the third earl of Sussex, made short shrift of cases that Young had unaccountably allowed to linger in the court; though the extent to which this might have been attributable to his failing powers in old age rather than to deliberate corruption is difficult to determine. Certainly in early 1567 he was provided with a suffragan (Richard Barnes, chancellor of York, who became bishop of Nottingham) because of his age. 
Young died at Sheffield on 26 June 1568 and was buried in York Minster. He married twice. His first wife (forename unknown) was a daughter of George Constantine, registrar of St David's and subsequently a fellow exile with Young in Emden. Following her death he married Jane, daughter of Thomas Kynaston of Estwick, Staffordshire; she was the mother of his son George, who was later knighted. 


@@@@@


doc= 30281


Young, Thomas (c.1587-1655), Church of England clergyman and college head, was probably born in Luncarty, Perthshire, about 1587, if the age at death recorded on his memorial at Stowmarket is accurate. He was the son of William Young (died 1625), who served as minister of several parishes in Perthshire (Pitcairne, Auchtergaven, and Redgorton as well as Luncarty), and his wife, Janet Glas. He had a sister, Janet, who later married John Crookshanks, eventually William Young's successor at Luncarty. Thomas attended the grammar school at Perth before matriculating at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1602. He graduated MA in July 1606, one of eighteen students designated in the college registers as being of the poorer class. That year his father, a vocal presbyterian, opposed the introduction into Scotland of a powerful episcopate backed by the crown. 
During the next seven years Young may have pursued ministerial training on the continent before moving to London. Comments in Thomas Gataker's 'Londinatis cinnus, sive, Adversaria miscellanea' (1651) and Simeon Ashe's 'Gray Hayres Crowned with Grace' (1655) indicate that Young lived with and worked as assistant to Gataker at Rotherhithe, Surrey, some time after the latter became rector there in 1611. But Young apparently also maintained ties with Scotland. In 1614 he was appointed to the vicarage of Resolis in Ross, a living he held until 1649, largely as a non-resident. Two other records connect him to the parish (he witnessed charters for the bishop of Ross in 1618 and 1635) and confirm that Young became a pluralist early in his ministerial career; he remained one until the last years of his life. Over the next four decades he can be found on several occasions travelling between England and Scotland, presumably to fulfil responsibilities in each location. 
In either 1617 or 1618 Young became the tutor of the future poet John Milton, probably because Gataker recommended him to his good friend Richard Stock, the Milton family's rector at All Hallows, Bread Street. Details concerning the actual arrangement are ambiguous (it is unclear where the instruction took place) and further compounded by evidence linking Young during this time to Rotherhithe and parishes in Essex and Hertfordshire (Ware). Some time before April 1620 Young's instruction of Milton ended with his appointment as chaplain to the English Merchant Adventurers in Hamburg. Parish registers record his presence there from this month, together with his wife, Rebecca, whom he had married at an unknown date, and about whom little is known. 
It is not clear whether Young's departure from England was for religious, economic or other reasons. However his eight-year ministry in Hamburg was successful and he referred to it in his writings with fondness. On 24 March 1621 Joseph Mead wrote to Sir Martin Stuteville that Young was invited to preach in front of Frederick V, the exiled king of Bohemia, and had received a chain of gold for his efforts. Perhaps mindful that he would eventually have to return to England, Young maintained relations with notable individuals like Mead and the royal librarian Patrick Young by writing letters and making periodic visits to London and Cambridge. Two letters and a verse epistle, 'Elegia quarta', from his former pupil testify to the affection and respect Milton and Young continued to have for each other through the 1620s. Milton praised his tutor as 'a pastor illustrious for his honor of the primitive faith and well instructed how to feed the sheep that love Christ'; this was a man under whose guidance Milton 'first visited the Aonian retreats and the sacred lawns of the twin-peaked mountains' ('Elegia quarta', ed. M. Hughes, 1957, 26-7). Their mutual regard is also illustrated by their exchange of presents: a Hebrew 'Bible' (now lost) to Milton; a copy of Thomas Cranmer's 'Reformatio legum ecclesiasticarum' to Young. 
On 27 March 1628 Young returned to England and was instituted to the living of St Peter and St Mary, Stowmarket, Suffolk. This parish was his permanent home for the rest of his life, although he lived elsewhere for extended periods of time. For the next seven years (1628-35) he remained largely in residence, as evidenced by his signature of the parish vestry accounts and his participation in the combination lecture at Mendlesham. However, from 1638 his signature ceased and the church controversies resulting from the reform policies of Archbishop William Laud increasingly took Young to London. By 1635 he had begun work on his principal work, 'Dies dominica', a sabbatarian apology and effective attack on the 'Book of Sports', published anonymously in 1639. By 1640 he was meeting with puritan clergy and may have joined William Spurstowe and others in the gatherings which met at the house of Edmund Calamy, minister of St Mary Aldermanbury. Following the publication by Bishop Joseph Hall of 'Episcopacie by Divine Right' (1640) and 'An Humble Remonstrance to the High Court of Parliament' (1641) Young, with Spurstowe, Calamy, Stephen Marshall, and Matthew Newcomen, writing under the name Smectymnuus, launched an attack on 'the prelaticall church'. In 'An Answer to... an Humble Remonstrance' (1641) the group, apparently led by Young, argued for the parity of bishops and presbyters in scripture and for the antiquity of church government by ruling elders rather than bishops. When Hall defended his position, they replied with 'A Vindication of the Answer' (1641). Their cause was supported by Milton who contributed five anti-prelatical tracts of his own in 1641 and 1642, the most overtly supportive entitled 'An Apology for Smectymnuus'. While the exchange contained much reasoned argument, it was also characterized by some strong and abusive language which, together with the distinctive acronym, ensured that the episode remained fresh in the popular mind for some time afterwards. In 1647 the poet John Cleveland poked fun in the verse 'Smectymnuus, or, The clus divines', while 'Smectymnuus redivivus', stating the ministers' own case, was reissued as late as 1680. 
The outbreak of the civil war kept Young in London. In 1643 the earl of Manchester appointed him to the parish of St James's, Duke's Place, and during the same year he was nominated to represent Suffolk in the Westminster assembly of divines. Young was among the more active members, arguing the presbyterian position from the outset, and was among those deputed to negotiate with the Scottish commissioners. He also signed the anti-Independent, anti-sectarian pamphlet 'Certain Considerations' (1643). In February 1644 he delivered a fast-day sermon to parliament, published as 'Hope's Encouragement' (1644). While remaining active in the assembly until its regular sessions petered out in 1648, on 12 April 1644 Young was installed as master of Jesus College, Cambridge. Here he did not hesitate to use his position to secure appointments for his sons Thomas, Roger, and Henry. He proceeded DD in 1649, but, suspected of writing a remonstrance against the engagement, and refusing to take it, he was ejected from Jesus College on 1 January 1651. He returned to Stowmarket where his wife was buried that April. His signature on the vestry accounts resumed in 1652, although his activities from that point remain unclear. He died at Stowmarket on 28 November 1655, and was buried in the parish church on 1 December; Simeon Ashe's funeral sermon was published as 'Gray Hayres Crowned with Grace' (1655). In his will, drawn up on 27 September 1653 and proved on 31 January 1656, Young left to his son and executor Roger land in Suffolk, which had been placed in the hands of trustees, Francis Bacon of Ipswich, John Hale of Mildenhall, Anthony Bedingfield of London, and John Haynard of Stowmarket. Other beneficiaries included his son Henry, his grandchildren Elizabeth and John Torell, and the poor of Stowmarket. 


@@@@@


doc= 30282


Young, Thomas (1773-1829), physician and natural philosopher, was born on 13 June 1773 at Milverton, Somerset, the eldest of ten children of Thomas Young, cloth merchant and banker, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Robert Davis of Minehead, Somerset, and his wife, Hannah Brocklesby. Both parents were active and strict members of the Society of Friends who impressed Quaker values on their son. 
Young's early years were spent at the home of his maternal grandfather, who encouraged his education and introduced him to classical literature. After a short stay at a 'miserable boarding-school' (Peacock, 4) he moved in 1782 to a school in Compton Abbas, Dorset -- presumably a Friends' school -- run by a Mr Thompson. There he studied Latin, Greek, mathematics, and natural philosophy, and one of the ushers also taught him various mechanical skills. Although Young's formal schooling lasted some six years it is clear that he was partially, if not largely, self-taught. Leaving the school in 1787 he joined the household of the Quaker banker David Barclay at Youngsbury, Hertfordshire. Here Young became the tutor and companion to Barclay's grandson Hudson Gurney, who was only two years his junior. They were later joined at Youngsbury by John Hodgkin, a Quaker tutor who was likewise an accomplished classical scholar. 
With the encouragement of his mother's uncle Dr Richard Brocklesby, who had tended him during an extended illness, Young decided to pursue the career of a physician. Moving to London he attended the medical school founded by William Hunter and, in 1793, entered St Bartholomew's Hospital. During this period he attended lectures delivered by many of the key men on the London medical circuit including John Hunter, William Cumberland Cruikshank, James Edward Smith, and Matthew Baillie. In 1794 he also attended chemical lectures at the home of Bryan Higgins and gained some familiarity with experimental techniques that Higgins encouraged in his students. Moreover, through Brocklesby the young Quaker was introduced to many of the leading lights of London society. With his developing interest in science and his eye on a successful medical career he was drawn towards the Royal Society of London. Before his twentieth birthday he presented his first paper to the society and was elected in June 1794, his election being supported by Brocklesby and fifteen others including several medical men of high standing. 
Young has sometimes been hailed as a child prodigy who, by the age of sixteen, had not only mastered Latin and Greek but also possessed a good working knowledge of several other languages and gained a firm background in the sciences. He clearly possessed considerable mental abilities, while his Quaker upbringing encouraged the habit of hard work and proscribed frivolous activities. So effective was his training that later in life he claimed never to have wasted a single day. While his academic interests were also encouraged by his parents and teachers they would not have supported his growing enthusiasm for both music and dancing. Membership of the Quaker community also stood in the way of his career. In the heady life of London the socially ambitious Young cast off the distinctive dress and modes of address accepted by his parents. When he moved to Edinburgh in October 1794 a certificate slowly followed from the Westminster monthly meeting passing responsibility to the Edinburgh Friends, and another certificate was subsequently issued by the Edinburgh monthly meeting after he left the city. However, Young had probably forsaken many of his parents' religious principles by the time he arrived in Edinburgh. Quaker bureaucracy appears not to have been particularly efficient since it was only in February 1798 that he was formally disowned. The appropriate minute noted that Young had 'attended places of public diversion' (RS Friends, Lond., 'Dictionary of Quaker biography'). Indeed by the time he arrived in Edinburgh, if not before, he frequented the theatre and took lessons in dancing and playing the flute. When interviewed by a deputation from the Westminster meeting-house he evinced no remorse about his conduct, but 'by his own acknowledgement [was] estranged from us in principle and practice' (ibid.). He subsequently became a member of the Church of England. 
Two other events deserve notice. The death of Young's kinsman Richard Brocklesby in 1797 provided him with a comfortable living. He inherited Brocklesby's London house, his library, pictures, and a sum of $10,000. Additional income was subsequently derived from his medical practice, his various scientific, medical, and civic appointments, and from his numerous literary ventures. One further source of income was the $500 per annum he received between 1824 and 1829 from the Palladian Insurance Company as its physician and inspector of calculations. The second event was his marriage on 14 June 1804 to Eliza (1785-1859), second daughter of James Primrose Maxwell, who was related to the aristocratic Maxwells of Calderwood. Through this marriage, which was childless, Young further strengthened his position within the London establishment. 
Meanwhile, between 1794 and 1799, Young's pursuit of a medical education had taken him to universities in three countries. The medical school at Edinburgh was still in its heyday and attracted large numbers of students, including many from dissenting backgrounds. Here he attended lectures spanning materia medica (Francis Home), chemistry (Joseph Black), and anatomy and surgery (Alexander Monro secundus). Although Young recognized the quality of medical education in Edinburgh his comments on his lecturers were less than generous. Yet he continued his classical studies, was a voracious reader, and improved his dancing and flute playing. After touring Scotland in the summer of 1795 he enrolled at the University of Gottingen, which he appears to have found more intellectually challenging than Edinburgh. Not only did he attend lectures on various branches of medicine but also on history and natural philosophy. He even found time for twice-weekly lessons in drawing, riding, dancing, and playing the clavichord. Before he departed from Gottingen he submitted his dissertation, entitled 'De corporis humani viribus conservatricibus', and graduated doctor of physic in July 1796. 
It is not clear why Young subsequently decided to continue his education at Cambridge. Regulations relating to the admission of fellows of the Royal College of Physicians had recently changed and Young, having spent but one year at both Edinburgh and Gottingen, may not have been eligible for a fellowship. He may therefore have decided to seek a Cambridge degree. Having passed six terms in residence at Emmanuel College (1797-9), he gained his MB in 1803. However, he appears to have spent as much time as possible in London. Setting up practice in Welbeck Street as soon as he left Cambridge, Young tried to make a name for himself in affluent London circles. Despite his dedication to medicine, his practice developed slowly. In 1808 he obtained his MD from Cambridge, the earliest date under the university's regulations. 
During the next few years Young's career progressed rapidly. In 1808 he also obtained the coveted fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians and delivered the Croonian lecture, entitled 'The function of the heart and arteries' at the Royal Society. In 1810-11 he delivered two courses of medical lectures at the Middlesex Hospital. Then, early in 1811, he was appointed physician at St George's Hospital, a position he held until his death. As well as his hospital practice and his private one, he spent most summers in Worthing where he tended his patients on their vacations. Young was probably reasonably effective as a physician but he did not possess a congenial bedside manner and experienced difficulty in attracting patients. By temperament he was more inclined to literary and scientific studies than to being a practising physician. It is perhaps fitting that one of his main contributions to medicine was his carefully compiled 'Introduction to Medical Literature' (1813; second edition, 1823) in which he provided a detailed taxonomy of diseases. In both 1813 and 1823 he served as one of the censors of the Royal College of Physicians, where he delivered an endowed Croonian lecture in 1822-3. 
Although Young's medical career started slowly it enabled him to devote a considerable amount of time to studying various scientific subjects. While still a student in London he read to the Royal Society a paper postulating that the eye's ability to accommodate to objects at various distances was due to the deformation of its crystalline lens. This conclusion was subsequently supported in his more carefully argued Bakerian lecture for 1800, entitled 'The mechanism of the eye'. The propagation of sound provided another early research topic. Although he first engaged with the subject in his Gottingen dissertation, he subsequently developed it in a series of papers in which he sought to account for various acoustical phenomena in terms of the vibration of particles composing the medium of transmission. In particular, he explained 'beats' as resulting from the mechanical effect of two vibrations. His main contribution to this topic, which was read before the Royal Society in January 1800, contained a concluding section in which he explored the analogy between sound and light. Here we find his initial attempt to articulate a wave theory of light on the assumption that light is also a vibratory motion; for Young, light was a longitudinal vibration of particles composing a ubiquitous ether. 
Young's immersion in physical optics must be related to an important two-year diversion to his career. The Royal Institution, which had been founded by Count Rumford and others in 1799, appointed him to its professorship of natural philosophy in July 1801. With a salary of $300 and rooms at the institution he became superintendent of the house and editor of its journals. Yet the most challenging aspect of his appointment was the preparation of an extensive course on natural philosophy which he delivered on two occasions; fifty lectures in 1802 and sixty in 1803. His lectures were not very well received since he pitched their content far above the capabilities of his audience. However, in preparing these courses, which covered mechanics, hydrodynamics, astronomy, and physics, he was forced to analyse critically a wide range of topics and in many areas he made small but significant innovations. The lectures were subsequently published as 'A Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy and the Mechanical Arts' (2 vols., 1807; revised by P. Kelland, 2 vols., 1845), and were dedicated to Thomas Grenville. Here, for example, we find the definition of the modulus of elasticity that has become associated with Young's name. One major theme linking several of these lectures was his attempt to construct a unified natural philosophy based on a ubiquitous ether. In this he developed some of the queries added to the 1717 edition of Newton's 'Opticks'. However, in contrast to Newton he suggested that ether was attracted to gross bodies so as to form atmospheres around them. Although somewhat successful in explaining thermal, electrical, magnetic, and optical phenomena by this ether density hypothesis, he soon abandoned it, and it did not appear in the published version of his lectures. 
The majority of Young's contemporaries followed Newton in accepting that light consists of small particles emitted from luminous sources at high speeds and in rejecting all theories that attributed light to a vibration in the ubiquitous ether. As noted above, in his acoustical paper of 1800 Young explored the analogy between light and sound and here he followed Leonhard Euler in propounding a vibratory theory in which the perceived colour of light depends on the frequency of the vibrating ether, such that the longest wavelengths correspond to the red end of the visible spectrum. Here he also attempted to show that the standard arguments against wave theories carried little weight. In November 1801 he presented to the Royal Society a more sustained defence of wave optics. In this Bakerian lecture entitled 'On the theory of light and colours' he sought to extend the theory's explanatory power by integrating it with his ether density hypothesis. One significant innovation was the application to optics of the principle of interference which he had developed in his work on acoustics. He envisaged two nearly parallel light rays meeting so that the ether particle at that point would undertake a combination of the two vibratory motions; depending on the phase relationship, this might result in either constructive or destructive interference. In this and two subsequent publications he showed how this two-ray account of interference could explain such phenomena as the colours of thin plates and those seen when a fibre is held close to the eye. Only in the published 'Lectures' of 1807 did he apply his principle of interference to the two-slit experiment which has become associated with his name. 
Young's early attempts at framing a wave theory suffered from internal contradictions. Few took either his theory or his notion of interference seriously, and we have to wait a decade and a half for Augustin Fresnel's far more complete and mathematically sophisticated articulation of wave interference which helped to convince many of the superiority of a wave theory of light. In the meantime Young made several minor contributions to the explanation of polarization and double refraction that Etienne Malus, David Brewster, Francois Arago, and Fresnel were rapidly developing. In 1817 Young sought to extend the scope of the wave theory by suggesting that polarization might be explained on the assumption that light is a transverse vibration of the ether particles. In contrast to Fresnel's far more incisive pronouncements on this issue Young remained rather uncertain and even pointed out in 1823 the awkward implication that transverse vibrations required the luminiferous ether to be 'not only highly elastic, but [also] absolutely solid!!!' ('Works of Thomas Young', 1855, 1.415) 
In his 1801 Bakerian lecture Young also laid the basis of his theory of colour sensation. In rejecting the view, often attributed to Newton, that each ray of light corresponded to one of seven distinct spectral colours, Young conceived the visible spectrum as continuous. Moreover, a continuous spectrum seemed also to undermine the theory that required each point on the retina to contain a vast number of receptors, each tuned to a different frequency. Instead he proposed that colour vision could be explained if there were just three types of receptor, according to the three principal colours -- red, yellow, and blue. He subsequently modified this theory in his published 'Lectures' and in his 1817 article on 'Chromatics'. In his mature theory he postulated just three types of receptor, corresponding to the colours red, green, and violet. He claimed that this was the simplest theory and that any intermediate frequency, or colour, of light would affect more than one receptor. Thus yellow light would affect equally the green and red receptors, while white light would have an equal effect on all three. Hermann von Helmholtz subsequently rediscovered the three-colour theory, which is now generally known as the Young-Helmholtz theory. 
Although Young is often remembered for advancing theories especially in optics, it should be remembered that much of his literary output was far less innovative. As a man of considerable erudition and an inveterate reader and writer, Young participated in many literary ventures, contributing at various times and on a variety of subjects, to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the 'British Magazine', the 'Imperial Magazine', the 'Journal of the Royal Institution', the 'Quarterly Review', Brande's 'Philosophical Review', and the 'Nautical Almanac' (which he edited from 1818). He also contributed over sixty anonymous articles to a supplement of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' edited by Mcvey Napier. Many of these were biographies -- including those of Richard Porson and Lagrange -- but others dealt with technological and scientific subjects. Although some of these articles were highly derivative, others show Young's ability to draw out and develop his own understanding of a complex subject. Perhaps the most innovative were his articles on 'Egypt', 'Tides', and 'Chromatics'. 
Young played an active role in the affairs of the Royal Society, being its foreign secretary for a quarter of a century beginning in 1804 and a regular attender at council meetings. For much of this time he served under the presidency of Joseph Banks and he readily identified with Banks's vision of the society as a club for gentlemen interested in science. Satisfied with the current system of patronage he was generally viewed as a reactionary who rejected any interference by the government and manifested no sympathy for the increasingly vocal group of fellows who sought to reform the society along meritocratic lines. On several occasions he travelled on the continent, where he met such leading savants as Laplace, Arago, and Humboldt. In 1827 he was honoured by being elected one of the eight foreign members of the Paris Academie des Sciences. 
Young's extensive network of connections through the Royal Society enabled him to play a significant role on several committees charged with pursuing investigations into matters of civic concern. In 1814 he became a member of a committee charged with investigating the risk of introducing gas light in London. Two years later he was appointed secretary of the commission charged with ascertaining the length of the seconds pendulum; subsequently he became secretary to a parliamentary commission on the subject. His involvement with the Admiralty was even more extensive. He examined new methods of ship construction and submitted a report to the Royal Society in 1814 which was generally deemed too theoretical to be of practical use. 
Four years later Young was appointed superintendent of the 'Nautical Almanac' and secretary of the board of longitude. These two positions were among the few salaried scientific posts in England, and from them he received $400 per annum. However, his work for the Admiralty also led to controversy with a number of astronomers, especially Francis Baily and James South, who considered that under Young's direction the 'Almanac' was overzealous in satisfying the needs of navigators to the neglect of its traditional astronomical functions. Moreover, his critics charged that the 'Almanac' contained a significant number of errors. Partly in response to such criticism the Admiralty disbanded the board of longitude in 1828 and replaced it by a scientific advisory committee to which Michael Faraday, Edward Sabine, and Young were appointed. 
Having shown an early and prodigious interest in languages Young's attention was drawn to the Rosetta stone and to the initial attempts made to decipher both the demotic and the hieroglyphic inscriptions. His first communication on this subject was presented to the Society of Antiquaries in 1814 and over the next few years he published several pieces on the subject, including an article on 'Egypt' that appeared in an 1819 supplement to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. Young proceeded on the assumption that the demotic, hieroglyphic, and Greek inscriptions on the Rosetta stone were rough inter-translations and that some of the demotic characters had been derived from the hieroglyphic. Further evidence was gleaned from other Egyptian texts that he was able to consult. Personal names offered a particularly fruitful line for initial investigation. He assumed that each pictorial character possessed a phonetic value such that the hieroglyphs within each cartouche contained such names as Ptolemaios and Birenike. In his article on 'Egypt' he was able to identify approximately 200 separate hieroglyphic signs and at the time of his death was completing his 'Rudiments of an Egyptian dictionary in the ancient enchorial character' which subsequently appeared as an appendix to Henry Tattam's 'A Compendious Grammar of the Egyptian Language' (1830). Young's contributions to the study of ancient Egyptian languages have sometimes been compared unfavourably with those of Jean Francois Champollion. Although his interventions were perhaps less intense than Champollion's he made a number of original and insightful innovations, especially in the mid-1810s. 
Although Young was raised in a dissenting household he subsequently sought to set aside the Quakerism of his childhood and to align himself with the religious, scientific, and medical establishment. In this he was largely successful. Given to caution he was increasingly viewed as a conservative. Living in a period when the social elite was under attack both at home and abroad, Young never wavered in his defence of the 'status quo' and he remained mindful of his position as an English gentleman. Socially he mixed with other gentlemen of the scientific and medical elite. Although he was widely admired for his knowledge and intellectual achievements most of his acquaintances found him rather stiff and experienced difficulty in establishing close friendships. He was certainly highly intelligent but he appears to have lacked the discipline and insight necessary to pursue topics in great depth. He was most comfortable writing on subjects where he could organize the views of others in original ways. 
After visiting Geneva in 1828 Young's health began to fail. Progressive heart disease slowed him considerably, as with increasing difficulty he sought to complete his Egyptian dictionary. On 10 May 1829 he died at his home in Park Square, London, and six days later he was buried in his wife's family vault at Farnborough, Kent. Subsequently his widow pressed for a more public recognition of her husband's achievements; these were celebrated on a plaque erected in Westminster Abbey, close to the spot where Newton was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 30283


Young, William (d. 1662), composer and viol player, was among several English musicians who gained distinction while working abroad. His English origins are unknown and documentation of his employment is sparse. Anthony Wood notes him as 'a great violist, bred in Rome, spent several years there' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D 19(4), fol. 138'r'), which, if true, suggests that he may have been a Roman Catholic, out of tune with the puritan regime at home. By 1652 he had found employment in the household of Archduke Ferdinand Karl of Austria, count of Innsbruck (previously a governor of the Netherlands before moving to Innsbruck in 1646). He is presumed to have married; several children were born to the couple in Innsbruck and perhaps died in infancy. 
Between February and May 1652 Young was among several hundred people who travelled with the archduke at carnival time to the Italian cities of Mantua, Parma, Modena, Florence, and Ferrara; on the ship he is recorded as playing 'auf der geigen'. An unnamed English musician, evidently Young, was rewarded with 100 ducats on 28 March 1654 by Emperor Ferdinand III: the reason is not indicated, but Young certainly performed for him. On 3 April following he received expenses of 64 florins after visiting Regensburg, where a new theatre had been built for opera, with the master of the chamber music, Marc' Antonio Cesti. 
Young's skill as a player was acknowledged by many, including Queen Kristina of Sweden, who heard him at Innsbruck in 1655. On 26 February 1656 the English traveller Robert Bargrave 'went to receive a most pleasing enterteinment of Musique from Mr William Young, Groome of the bed-chamber and cheife Violist to the Archduke, espetially on an Octo-cordal Viall, of his own Invention, apted for the Lira way of playing, farr beyond those with six strings only... (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C.799, fol. 180)' Young was also praised by Jean Rousseau in his 'Traite de la viole' (1687). 
Young published two fine collections of sonatas and suites in three, four, and five parts (Innsbruck, 1653), and three parts (Innsbruck, 1659), which mix continental (Italian and German) and English traits, both in scoring and in structure; his use of the term 'sonata' is one of the first known by an Englishman. There are many first-rate compositions by him for one and two bass or lyra viols, most of them quite demanding in technique. Young travelled to England on 26 August 1660, perhaps with a view to obtaining a place at Charles II's court, but he soon returned to Innsbruck, where he died on 23 April 1662; he was buried at the Jakobikirche there. 
A whole dynasty of musical Youngs flourished in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 30284


Young, Sir William, second baronet (1749-1815), colonial governor and politician, born at Charlton in Kent in December 1749, was the eldest son of Sir William Young, first baronet (1724/5-1788), governor of Dominica, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1729-1801), the only child of Brook Taylor. In 1767 he was entered at Clare College, Cambridge, but, some difference arising, he was removed and matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 26 November 1768. He later travelled in France, Italy, and Sicily and published an account of part of his travels. He gained some fame for a work he published in 1777 entitled 'The spirit of Athens, being a political and philosophical investigation of the history of that republic'. On 12 August that year, at St George the Martyr, Queen's Square, London, he married Sarah (died 1791), the daughter and coheir of Charles Lawrence and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Mihil. They had four sons and two daughters. Young married, secondly, on 22 April 1793 at St George, Hanover Square, London, Barbara (died 1830), the daughter of Colonel Richard Talbot and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' O'Reilly, later 'suo jure' Baroness Talbot of Malahide. 
In 1782 Young was deputed by the proprietors of the colony of Tobago to negotiate their interests in the French court after the preliminaries of peace with France and the United States had been agreed. Two years later he was returned to parliament for St Mawes, Cornwall. He retained this seat until 1806, when he was returned for the town of Buckingham. He was a follower of William Pitt until 1801, when he joined the ranks of his patron, Lord Grenville. Young was a frequent speaker in the House of Commons on a variety of topics, including poor-law reform, income tax, military affairs, the slave trade, union with Ireland, foreign and colonial policy, and parliamentary reform. In 1786 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and in 1791 a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was secretary to the Association for Promoting the Discovery of the Interior Parts of Africa. In 1807 he was appointed governor of Tobago, a post which he retained until his death in January 1815. 
At the death of his father in 1788 Young inherited four sugar plantations -- one in Antigua, two in St Vincent, and one in Tobago -- and a total of 896 African slaves. He also inherited his father's debts, amounting to approximately $110,000. On 30 October 1791 he embarked on a voyage to the West Indies which he later wrote about under the title 'A tour through the several islands of Barbadoes, St Vincent, Tobago, and Grenada, in the years 1791 and 1792'. It was first published in 1801 as an appendix to the second edition of 'An Historical Survey of the Island of Saint Domingo' by Bryan Edwards, the whole work being edited by Young. He undertook this tour to save his plantations from bankruptcy, which he eventually failed to do, and to gain information about slavery and the sugar industry of the West Indies which would support his agenda in parliament to gain votes for an alternative to the campaign led by William Wilberforce and his allies, who worked persistently and with widespread public support for abolition of the slave trade. On his tour of the islands Young said he was greeted wholeheartedly by his slaves, and he reciprocated by granting them extra holidays and gifts of herrings and rum, holding balls in the great house, and at Christmas feasting, drinking, dancing, and exchanging gifts. He was pleased that he discovered little evidence of harsh treatment of his and other planters' slaves. In all of the islands he visited he was observant of the methods of feeding, housing, clothing, disciplining, providing medical care, and religious instruction of the slaves. 
After returning to his seat in parliament Young drew upon his recent experience in the West Indies to argue that, by ameliorating the condition of the slaves, their numbers would increase by natural propagation and, in time, the trade from Africa to the islands would die a natural death without intervention by act of parliament. However, Young's reform plans were naive and utopian, and Wilberforce and his allies finally succeeded in getting the necessary votes to abolish the British transatlantic slave trade. 
Young was the author of works on a variety of subjects, including 'The rights of Englishmen, or, The British constitution of government compared with that of a democratic republic' (1793); 'The West Indian Commonplace Book' (1807); 'Considerations on Poorhouses and Workhouses: their Pernicious Tendency' (1796); and 'Instructions for the Armed Yeomanry' (1797). He died on 10 January 1815 at Government House, Tobago. 


@@@@@


doc= 30285


Young, Sir William (1751-1821), naval officer, was born on 16 August 1751, the eldest of five children of James Young (1717-1789), naval officer, and his first wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bolton (died before 1762). He also had a half-brother and a half-sister. He was descended from a long-established Devon family, the Yonges of Puslinch. A quarrel between brothers in the late seventeenth century (about Charles I's execution) changed the spelling of the name of the branch of the family from which William Young was descended. He entered the navy in April 1761 as captain's servant to Mark Milbanke in the 'Guernsey' (50 guns). In December 1762 he was moved to the 'Wasp' (8 guns), a two-masted sloop, but in October 1764 he returned to the 'Guernsey', now under Commodore Hugh Palliser. Young passed his examination on 10 January 1769 and was promoted lieutenant, at Plymouth, into the 'Nautilus' (16 guns) on 12 November 1770. On 21 May 1771 he was made fourth lieutenant in the 'Trident' (64 guns), Sir Peter Denis's flagship in the Mediterranean. Nearly four years later, on 23 January 1775, he became third lieutenant in the 'Portland' (50 guns), flagship of Vice-Admiral James Young at the Leeward Islands. The American War of Independence now speeded promotion and on 10 May 1777 Young was given command of the sloop 'Snake'. This was confirmed on 23 September 1778 and the same day he was promoted captain of the 'Hind' (24 guns). He served in her until 15 April 1782, when he moved to the 'Ambuscade' (32 guns) until the peace in 1783. Peacetime employment was always uncertain but Young possessed sufficient influence and merit to command the 'Perseverance' (36 guns) from October 1787, and the 'Crescent' (36 guns) from 10 May until November 1790. 
On 31 January 1793 Young was appointed to the 'Fortitude' (74 guns) before going to the Mediterranean in Lord Hood's fleet, and taking part in the occupation of Toulon. After its evacuation, in December 1793 Hood determined to gain a base in Corsica. Based at Porto Ferrajo, in Elba, he detached a small squadron, under Commodore Linzee, of three ships of the line and two frigates, escorting troops under Major-General Dundas, to Mortella Bay in Corsica. The squadron arrived on 7 February 1794, and next day two of the ships, the 'Fortitude' and 'Juno' (32 guns), were part of a combined attempt to take a small tower on a promontory in Mortella Bay, immediately south of Pointe de la Mortella, on the north-west Corsican coast. This was necessary if the bay was to be safe as an anchorage. But the well-placed tower, though possessed of only one 24-pounder gun, was too strong for the ships to destroy. Instead they suffered heavy losses. After a bombardment of over two hours the 'Fortitude' had been set on fire by red-hot shot and forced to retreat with six men killed and fifty-six wounded. The tower was taken only by guns from a commanding position above, on shore. This incident prompted an exaggerated belief in the strength of such towers and numbers were built on the south coast of England as an anti-invasion device, under the name 'martello towers'. 
Young was in the inconclusive actions between the British and French fleets of 14 March 1794 and 13 July 1795 off Hyeres and returned to England with a convoy in the autumn. He had been awarded the honorary rank of colonel of marines on 4 July 1794 and was promoted rear-admiral of the white on 1 June 1795. From 20 November of that year until 19 February 1801 he was a member of the Board of Admiralty. As such he was one of the committee of conciliation which visited Portsmouth in April 1797 during the Spithead mutiny. Although Young took an orthodox view of these events his letters to Captain Charles Morice Pole reveal some sympathy with the seamen's grievances and an attempt to try to influence seamen's views by allowing the calculated conversations of officers, contrasting the situation of British with the wretched state of French seamen, to be deliberately overheard. But Young was shocked by the 'total want of confidence the seamen have shewn in their officers, a circumstance so new that I never remember to have heard of anything like it' (Young to Pole, 8 May 1797). He thought many officers showed 'a sad want of energy and of particular attention to duty which the government of large bodies of men requires especially in these times and an absent or indifferent man can produce incalculable mischief' (Young to Pole, 22 June 1797) and while at the Admiralty he strove to improve conditions and tighten discipline. He was made vice-admiral of the blue on 14 February 1799 and vice-admiral of the white on 1 January 1801. Admiral Sir William Hotham, who had earlier served with him, thought Young, while at the Admiralty, 'diligent in application, clear in method and generally informed' (Stirling, 1.59'n') and Young's letters bear this out. 
On 23 April 1804 Young was promoted vice-admiral of the red and a few weeks later, on 18 May, he was appointed commander-in-chief at Plymouth, a position he held until 1807. Here he was accused by Lord Cochrane of excessive greed for prize money, but as commander-in-chief Young's claims to issue orders to warships sailing from Plymouth accorded with naval practice and the issue of prize money caused frequent bitter disputes between naval officers. Young was promoted admiral of the blue on 9 November 1805 but the ill health and tiredness he mentions in his letters in the autumn of 1806 probably explain his unemployment in the following years. In July 1809 he was the senior admiral at the board of the court martial on James, Lord Gambier. Lord Cochrane accused Young of undue bias in Gambier's favour but Cochrane himself was hardly impartial. He had already clashed with Young over prize money and when elected MP for Westminster in 1807 had accused Young of inefficiency in fitting out ships at Plymouth. During the court martial Young objected to Cochrane's discursive answers and attempted detailed explanations of his actions, but he seems to have been no more hostile than other members of the board. 
Young was promoted admiral of the white on 31 July 1810 and in the spring of 1811 he was appointed to command of the North Sea Fleet, arriving at the Downs on 26 April and immediately hoisting his flag in the 'Christian VII' (83 guns). So unexpected was the appointment that he told Sir Thomas Foley that he had 'everything to get as if I had never been afloat' (Young to Foley, 6 April 1811). The squadron he took over was in a high state of order though short of men. Charles Philip Yorke, first lord of the Admiralty, expressed the administration's complete confidence in Young's ability and zeal to blockade the Scheldt and the whole of the Dutch and north German coast, enforcing the orders in council against Napoleon's empire and preventing all neutral trade with the enemy. It was an arduous and unpleasant task. Young faced the problems of all commanders of blockading forces, constantly cruising, always needing more ships as bad weather took its toll, concerned about regular supplies of food and water. Moreover the Admiralty's ready granting of trading licences made for difficulties with neutrals and, though Young hoped the French could be lured out of Flushing and engaged in a battle which would destroy them, he was disappointed. 
Lord Keith's appointment to command the Channel Fleet in February 1812 offended Young. He considered his position as senior admiral undermined and the hoped for command of the 'Great Fleet of England, the Fleet on which the safety, perhaps the existence of the Country might depend', an object 'worthy of any man's ambition' (Young to C. P. Yorke, 25 Feb 1812), had been lost to him. He resigned, but on Yorke's persuasion resumed his command until the end of the war. On 28 July 1814 he was invested KB, and following the reconstruction of the Order of the Bath he became GCB on 2 January 1815. In 1819 he was appointed vice-admiral of the United Kingdom. His heath in these last years was not good; in November 1818 he was at Bath. He died, unmarried, at his house in Queen Anne Street, London, on 25 October 1821 after a short illness. 
Young never took part in a major fleet action, though the difficult and important blockade in the North Sea, in the last years of the French wars, was well performed and praiseworthy. Most of his professional life was passed in administration, at the Admiralty or at Plymouth. He was a conventional upholder and representative of the existing naval social order, though aware of the need for some reform and having some sympathy with seamen's grievances. He was unsympathetic to Cochrane's radicalism and insubordinate attitude to superior officers, and admirers of Cochrane, like Captain Marryat who portrayed him as Sir Hurricane Humbug, have treated him harshly. Yet Sir William Hotham thought his manners 'tho' rather formal and cold, were those of a perfect gentleman, while he had the most punctilious sense of integrity' (Stirling, 1.58-9), and Young's personal letters reveal a more agreeable nature than his critics have allowed. 


@@@@@


doc= 30286


Young, Sir William (1799-1887), politician and lawyer in Nova Scotia, was born on 8 September 1799 at Falkirk, the son of John Young and his wife, Agnes Renny, the daughter of George Renny of Falkirk. His father 
William Young's career had an early start. He later claimed to have studied at the University of Glasgow before his family emigrated when he was fourteen. When his father was trading in Calais, William acted as his agent in Halifax; he also acted as his father's agent in New York from June until October 1815. In late 1815 he and James Cogswell became partners in an auction and commission business which probably continued until he entered into an indenture of apprenticeship with the legal firm of Charles Rufus and Samuel Prescott Fairbanks. This indenture ended acrimoniously when C. R. Fairbanks in 1823 accused William of having revealed Fairbanks's campaign strategy to John Young, who had unsuccessfully contested a Halifax by-election against him. 
Having been admitted to the bar as an attorney in 1825 and as a barrister in 1826, Young established a flourishing private law practice in Halifax. In spite of a poor technical knowledge of law, he was a very effective advocate in the court room. Although he was an adherent to the Church of Scotland, on 30 August 1830 he married Anne (1803/4-1883), the daughter of Michael Tobin, a prominent Irish Roman Catholic merchant in Halifax. They had no children. In 1834 Young established a legal and insurance partnership with his brother George Renny. 
In the 1832 general election William Young was returned for Cape Breton county, only to be unseated by the legislature on the grounds that a riot during the election had been organized by his brother George. William was successful in the 1836 general election as a supporter of the Reform Party, but his reputation for being overly ambitious and engaging in sharp practice meant that he did not advance as rapidly as his talents warranted. Nevertheless, he was part of a delegation of four which held constitutional discussions with Lord Durham at Quebec, and in 1839 he was one of two representatives sent to Britain to argue the case of the assembly before the British government. In 1842 he was appointed to the executive council and in 1844 became speaker of the house. 
William Young was joined in the assembly in 1843 by his brother George, who was elected for Pictou, and they subsequently became involved in promoting the Halifax to Quebec railway. Following the 1847 general election George entered the new Reform ministry. However, George's continued support of his own Quebec railway project, rather than the ministry's own scheme, contributed to his breaking with the government in 1851. A further contributing factor was his poor deteriorating physical and mental health. He did not stand for re-election in 1851 and died in Halifax on 30 June 1853. 
William Young remained as speaker of the assembly until April 1854, when, partly because there were no other prominent contenders, he became attorney-general and leader of the government. His government was brought down on 18 February 1857 after having alienated Roman Catholics, which was ironic considering that Young represented a riding that had a large Catholic population. In the 1859 general election Young was elected in the protestant county of Cumberland, his party managed to gain a fragile majority in the assembly, and he returned to office as premier in February the following year. 
When Chief Justice Haliburton died on 16 July 1860, Young gained the office which he had long wanted. Although he served from August 1860 until 1881, his judgments were not particularly distinguished. Displaying a sense of civic duty, however, he became a generous benefactor to the city and Dalhousie University. In addition to numerous gifts made during his lifetime, he bequeathed $200,000 out of his total estate of $350,000 to a variety of causes. In 1869, perhaps as a reward for his support of confederation, he was awarded a KB. He died in Halifax on 8 May 1887. 
Although William Young became both premier and chief justice of Nova Scotia, he did not make a particularly positive contribution to the public life of his time. Moreover, his unrelenting and calculating pursuit of self-interest throughout his public career, similar to that of his father John and his brother George, was frequently disruptive and did nothing to alleviate the highly polemical and partisan nature of politics in this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 30287


Younge, Richard (fl. 1636-1673), religious writer, was a member of the Young family who held land in Roxwell in Essex; otherwise nothing more is known of his family background and parentage. He moved to London and settled first in Moorgate, then moved out east to Stratford in Essex and finally south of the river to Newington Causeway. In one work he described himself as 'gentleman' (Younge, 'Englands Unthankfulness', 1653, title page) but in 1646 George Thomason thought he was a grocer (it is not clear whether by this he meant Younge's occupation or his livery company). 
Younge devoted much of his time to writing short moralistic and evangelical tracts and publishing them, often at his own expense. He was moderately well versed in the classics, and had read in the fathers as well as many current works, and was able to imitate a variety of literary genres, such as dialogues, 'characters', open letters, allegories, commonplaces, and devotional verse, as well as write short treatises and compose prayers. He sometimes called himself R. Junius, probably a play on his surname, or Florilegus, referring to his technique of picking the best flowers from 'the choicest authors ancient and modern' and arranging them in attractive 'nosegays' to catch readers' attention ('A Soveraigne Antidote Against All Griefe', 1647, title page; 'A Christian Library', 1655, sig. 2'r'). He was regarded as sufficiently orthodox to receive the imprimatur of both the episcopalian authorities in the late 1630s and the 1660s, and the parliamentarian and Commonwealth authorities in the 1640s and 1650s. Some of his works also bear flattering epistles from a variety of leading clergy of the day, such as Daniel Featley, Thomas Goodwin, Edmund Calamy, and Richard Baxter. By the Restoration, Younge was hostile to the sects but loyal to Charles II, and it was for 'the common good' of all unregenerate people that he posed as the 'impartial monitor' warning of the penalties of sin and the need to repent at once ('The Cure of Misprision', 1646, title page; 'The Peoples Impartiall and Compassionate Monitor', 1659, title page). 
Younge wrote and published over fifty works between 1636 and 1673: the exact number is hard to pin down since he reworked the content or changed the titles of many of his earlier works. He admitted frankly that he published as fast as the material came from his pen, with little planning. If a work was too long he persuaded the printer to cram text onto the final page in smaller typeface, or promised to complete his argument in a later work; if it was too short he provided a filler from his own or others' work. The contents of his composite works were also rarely as promised in the contents, and vary from copy to copy. 
To maximize the impact of his works, especially among those with limited literacy and funds, Younge opted for simple messages and colourful language, long print runs, and constantly referred to where his other publications could be obtained. His habit of selling works at below cost price, or lending copies (on deposit of 2died), or even giving them away, did not endear him to regular booksellers, and to circulate his works he had to use his own house, or inns, or the premises of friendly members of the trade, such as James Crump, a bookbinder in Well Yard, St Bartholomew by the Exchange. Several works were sufficiently popular to be reprinted more than once, and of his 'Serious and Pathetical Description of Heaven and Hell' (1658) Younge claimed that a hundred copies a day were being 'fetcht' (p. 37). Copies were also sent to America, and his 'Short and Sure Way to Grace and Salvation' was translated into German in 1704. 
About a quarter of Younge's works were indictments of drinking, swearing, keeping evil company, covetousness, and ambition, and the evil consequences these had for England. 'Englands Unthankfulness Striving with Gods Goodness' was said to have reached its fourth edition by 1643; 'A Hopefull Way to Cure that Horrid Sinne of Swearing' was his best-selling title between about 1643 and 1659; 'The Blemish of Government', written on behalf of 'the sober party in three nations' contained an appeal to stamp out drunkenness directed in 1655 to the protector and in 1664 to Charles II ('The Blemish of Government', 1656, title page; 'A Sovereign Antidote', 1664, 7). He returned to similar material in 'An Account of the Four Late Judgements' on England in the years 1665-7. Other works stressed the importance of hearing good sermons, the need for knowledge of God's word, and for the rich to help the poor, but a higher proportion was devoted to spiritual matters, often reflecting high Calvinist emphases. Early works on the benefits of affliction such as 'The Victory of Patience' (1636) and 'A Counterpoyson, or, Soverain Antidote Against All Griefe' (1641) gave way to later emphases on the need for introspective 'trying' of the heart and conversion, as in three works first published in 1658: 'A Short and Sure Way to Grace and Salvation', 'An Experimental Index of the Heart', and 'Preparation to Conversion'. 
In the 1660s, when the cost of paper and printing rose, Younge was forced to admit that his works could 'no longer be given or sold to loss', and he was becoming tired and disillusioned. If men did not think his books 'worth penny a sheet, I shall not think them worth my labour', and so 'farewell printing, welcome rest, and a retired life' (R. Younge, 'An Account of the Four Late Judgements', 1667, sig. D2'r'). But the response must have encouraged him to carry on, and by 1671 copies were again being given away 'to many that desire but will not buy' (R. Younge, 'A Sparke of Divine Light', 1671, 24). The limited number of repeat editions after 1673, and reference in a 1674 reprint to the 'late' author, suggest that by then death had finally removed Younge's drive to publish. 
It is striking that new editions of three of Younge's later works were taken up and 'printed at the charge of Christs-Hospital' on at least six occasions between 1674 and 1776, presumably for distribution among its residents. Younge had successfully anticipated the tactics of the charitable societies and evangelical organizations of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but a full study of his life and works is awaited. 


@@@@@


doc= 30288


Younger, Elizabeth (1699-1762), actress and dancer, was born on 2 September 1699, the daughter of James Younger, a soldier, and his wife, Margaret Keith (died 1713). Both her parents were born in Scotland. Her elder sister was the actress and dancer Margaret Bicknell. Elizabeth Younger began her acting career as a child: she probably appeared as Princess Elizabeth in John Banks's 'Vertue Betray'd, or, Anna Bullen', to which she also spoke the epilogue, at Drury Lane on 27 March 1706. She was first cited in the bills on 29 January 1711, when she took the part of Lightning in George Villiers's 'The Rehearsal', again at Drury Lane. For the 1712 summer season she appeared with a company of child actors at the playhouse in St Martin's Lane, where her roles included Cherry in George Farquhar's 'The Stratagem' and Miranda in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Busy Body'. 
On 30 September 1712 Elizabeth Younger joined the adult company at Drury Lane, playing Rose in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer'. During her first season her appearances were few, perhaps partly because of the death of her mother, who was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 11 February 1713. On 3 May 1714 she was billed as a dancer in a Saraband and a Jig, 'being the first time of her Dancing alone on the Stage'. In her early years on the stage she played a variety of supporting parts; in the 1714-15 season her roles included Philadelphia in Thomas Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow' and Flora in Colley Cibber's 'She Would and She Would Not'. On 23 February 1715 she created the role of Joyce in John Gay's farce 'The What d'ye Call it', and Sir Richard Steele took notice of her, for on 28 May 1715 she spoke the prologue at the opening of his 'Censorium' at York Buildings. During the 1715-16 season she took over some of the roles of her sister Mrs Bicknell, including Dol Mavis in Ben Jonson's 'The Silent Woman' and Lucy in Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko'. She was absent from the stage during the early months of 1719, when her illegitimate daughter Charlotte (by an unknown father) was probably born. 
It was only when her sister died in 1723 that Mrs Younger was able to take on more important roles. From Mrs Bicknell she inherited Charlotte in 'Oroonoko' and Silvia in 'The Recruiting Officer'. She was similarly restricted to supporting roles as a dancer for, although her repertory encompassed both serious and comic dances, she was billed irregularly in the entr'actes. Her most popular dance was 'Tollet's Ground', which she performed with her sister; a 'Turkish Dance' choreographed by Anthony L'Abbe, which she performed with the French dancer Denoyer, was published in notation in the mid-1720s in 'A New Collection of Dances'. She also danced supporting roles in afterpieces, appearing as Thalia in John Weaver's innovative dramatic entertainment of dancing 'The Loves of Mars and Venus' in 1717 and as Ceres in John Thurmond's pantomime 'Harlequin Doctor Faustus' in 1723. 
After an absence during the 1724-5 season Elizabeth Younger returned to the stage at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 4 October 1725 as Margery Pinchwife in William Wycherley's 'The Country Wife'. She immediately became one of John Rich's leading actresses; during her first season with his company she played such roles as Helena in Aphra Behn's 'The Rover', Desdemona in 'Othello', Cordelia in Nahum Tate's version of 'King Lear', and Miranda in 'The Busy Body'. She was also able to create new roles, such as Myrtilla in Gay's revised version of 'The Wife of Bath' (1730) and Hermione in Lewis Theobald's 'Orestes' (1731). She played the part of Millamant in William Congreve's 'The Way of the World' when Rich opened his new theatre in Covent Garden on 7 December 1732. Although she did not dance in the entr'actes at Lincoln's Inn Fields, she danced frequently in pantomimes. She appeared as the Miller's Wife in 'The Necromancer' (1725), and subsequently took the role of Colombine in 'Apollo and Daphne' (1726), 'The Rape of Proserpine' (1727), and 'Perseus and Andromeda' (1730). 
A later commentator, Thomas Davies, described both her strengths and her weaknesses in his 'Dramatic Miscellanies' (1784): 'Mrs Younger... was an actress much followed in this [Belinda in Congreve's 'The Old Bachelor'] and many other comic characters, especially the Country Wife. But Mrs Younger was a general actress, and sometimes appeared in tragedy, though, I think, not to advantage.' At the end of the 1733-4 season Mrs Younger retired from the stage. Following her retirement she married John Finch (1692?-1763), the third son of Daniel Finch, sixth earl of Winchilsea, although the date and place of their marriage are unknown. Their daughter Elizabeth (born before the marriage of her parents) married a John Mason of Greenwich on 2 June 1757. Elizabeth Younger died on 24 November 1762. 


@@@@@


doc= 30289


Younger, John (1785-1860), writer and shoemaker, the youngest of the six children of William Younger, a shoemaker from the Scottish borders, and his wife, Jean Henderson, was born at Longnewton in the parish of Ancrum, Roxburghshire, on 5 July 1785. He had little formal schooling and from the age of nine worked at his father's trade. The poverty of his youth drove him to excel in poaching and angling. When conditions began to improve he married (9 August 1811) Agnes Riddle (died 1856), and settled at St Boswells, some 3 miles from Longnewton, as the village shoemaker. 
Having bought a copy of Burns for 6died at St Boswells fair, Younger determined to try his own hand at poetry, although he did not publish anything until 'Thoughts as they Rise' in 1834. He also wrote on angling, publishing 'River angling for salmon and trout, more particularly as practised in the Tweed and its tributaries' (1840), which was highly praised by 'The Field' for its 'practical' value. 
Although he was contemptuous of working-class movements, Younger despised the rich, a feeling possibly accentuated by the growing imposition by riparian owners of restrictions on who could fish their waters. He loathed the 'baronial hall'. He had little time for classical Scottish literature, and regarded Sir Walter Scott with especial abomination. He dismissed the 'Waverley novels' as 'old piper stories', 'dwarf and witch tales', and monstrous caricatures of Scottish manners. He was as keen an observer of men as of fish, and he became known as the 'Tweedside Gnostic', as well as being courted as the most proficient Scottish angler. His essay of 1847, 'The temporal advantage of the Sabbath... in relation to the working classes' (published in 1851 as 'The Light of the Week'), for which he was awarded a prize of $15, presented to him by Lord Shaftesbury at a ceremony in London, was illuminated by vivid illustrations. 
About 1849 Younger was appointed village postmaster, but the routine work proved beyond his patience, and in January 1856 he threw up the post and returned to cobbling. He died at St Boswells, very poor, but honest and industrious to the last, on 18 June 1860, and was buried in St Boswells kirkyard beside his wife, Nannie, whom he had often celebrated in his writings. He left some rich materials for a memoir of himself, to which he had given the title 'Obscurities in private life developed, or, Robinson Crusoe untravelled'. These were recast into an 'Autobiography of John Younger', and published at Kelso in 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 30290


Sir George Udny Yule (1813-1886), was a distinguished Indian civilian and a famous 'shikari'. During the 1857 conflict, with a corps of mounted European volunteers, he was responsible throughout the division of Bhagalpur, keeping open the navigation of the Ganges, while preventing communication between the rebels in East and West Bihar. He subsequently served as chief commissioner of Oudh, as resident at Hyderabad, and finally on the governor-general's council, from which he retired in 1869. In 1862 he married Henrietta Peach, daughter of Captain Robert Boileau Pemberton. Yule was created KCSI and CB before his death in 1886. The statistician George Udny Yule (1871-1951) was his son. Major William Yule's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 30291


Yule, Sir Henry (1820-1889), geographer, born on 1 May 1820 at Inveresk, near Edinburgh, was the youngest son of Major William Yule (1764-1839) and Elizabeth Paterson (died 'c'.1827) of Braehead in Ayrshire. The Yule family had for several generations been tenant farmers at Dirleton in East Lothian. Their name was reputed to be of Scandinavian origin. Through his service in the East India Company, Major William Yule gained some knowledge of oriental literature. He retired from India in 1806, and his valuable collection of Persian and Arabic manuscripts was subsequently presented to the British Museum. In 1832 he had privately printed a lithographed edition of the 'Apothegms of Ali, the Son of Abu Talib', in Arabic, with an old Persian version and an English translation. 
All three of Major William Yule's sons were to follow him to India. The eldest son, 
Henry Yule was educated at the high school in Edinburgh, and later became a pupil of Henry Parr Hamilton, subsequently the dean of Salisbury, and James Challis, who was afterwards appointed as the Plumian professor at Cambridge. His fellow pupils at this time included John Mason Neale and Harvey Goodwin, later bishop of Carlisle. Goodwin later recalled that Yule's intellectual development had been extraordinary for his age, noting in particular that he had 'showed much more liking for Greek plays and for German than for mathematics, though he had considerable geometrical ingenuity' (Trotter, xliv). After a brief and unrewarding spell at University College, London, Yule decided to pursue a career in the army rather than in the law, as his father had originally intended. In 1837 he joined the East India Company's Military College, at Addiscombe, and having passed out at the head of the college in 1838, he spent a year training at the headquarters of the Royal Engineers at Chatham. In 1840 he was appointed to the Bengal Engineers. His first assignment in India was in the Kasia hills, a remote region on the north-east frontier of Bengal inhabited by people of Mongolian descent. Although the official objective of this mission (to establish means of transporting local coal to the plains) was unsuccessful, Yule's fascination with the Kasia led him to publish two accounts of the region and its people. 
In 1843 Yule took leave from India to marry his cousin Anna Maria (died 1875), daughter of General Martin White of the Bengal army. She initially joined him in India, but was soon forced to return to Britain because of ill health. For six years Yule served with men such as Robert Napier, William Baker, and Richard Strachey in the restoration and development of the Mughal irrigation system in the North-Western Provinces. In addition to his role in the organization of extensive engineering works, he was also involved in an official inquiry into the relationship between irrigation and public health in the area of the proposed Ganges Canal. During this period, he also saw active service in the Anglo-Sikh wars of 1845-6 and 1848-9. He then took extended leave, returning to Edinburgh to live with his wife for three years. During this period he lectured at the Scottish Military Academy and published an authoritative volume on fortification (1851), which was translated into French in 1858. Other publications, illustrating his diverse interests at this time, included a polemical defence of the role of the navy in the suppression of the east African slave trade (1850), and an article on Tibet for 'Blackwood's Magazine'. 
A few weeks after the birth of his only child, Amy, in 1852, Yule returned to service in Bengal. Having fulfilled various tasks, including reports on the relatively inaccessible country between Aracan and Burma, and on the defences of Singapore, he was appointed under-secretary to the newly formed department of public works, with particular responsibility for the development of the railway system. His work on the railways was interrupted by an appointment in 1855 as secretary to Colonel Arthur Phayre's mission to Burma, which resulted in Yule's first widely acclaimed publication, 'A Narrative of the Mission... to... Ava' (1858), illustrated by his own sketches. His ordinary duties were considerably augmented by the violent conflict of 1857, which led to a large influx of troops into India. While his relations with the governors-general during this period (Dalhousie and Canning) appear to have been close, Yule seems to have become increasingly disenchanted with his work in India and in 1862 he retired from the army for good. Canning's death in the same year reduced his chances of securing an official appointment in London, but through the influence of Sir Roderick Murchison he was in 1863 created CB. 
After spending some time in Switzerland, Tuscany, and Savoy (where he met John Ruskin), Yule and his family eventually settled at Palermo, in Sicily. The location suited his wife, by now an invalid, and also provided ample opportunities for further study in the richly stocked public libraries. Two publications for the Hakluyt Society ('Mirabilia descripta: the Wonders of the East' (1863), a translation from the Latin of Friar Jordanus's fourteenth-century narrative, and 'Cathay and the Way Thither' (1866), a substantial compendium of extracts from other travellers) established his reputation as a scholar of medieval European literature on the East. But it was his new edition of the 'Travels of Marco Polo', published in 1871 (for which he was awarded the gold medal of the Italian Geographical Society and the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society), which secured him lasting fame. This two-volume work, long in gestation, represented the fruit not only of his own extensive researches in Palermo, Venice, Florence, Paris, and London, but also of extensive correspondence with scholars throughout the world, including Cristoforo Negri (founder of the Italian Geographical Society) and George Perkins Marsh. It has long been considered an authoritative, if somewhat voluminous, source on Marco Polo's travels. 
Yule returned to England in 1875, following the death of his first wife, and soon afterwards was appointed to the Council of India, on which he continued to serve until shortly before his death. During the years which followed the publication of his 'magnum opus', an enlarged edition of which appeared in 1875, Yule was considered to be one of the leading authorities on the historical geography of central Asia in general and the history of medieval travel writing in particular. Some contemporaries even compared central Asia before Yule to central Africa before Livingstone. Yule's pioneering and meticulous scholarship was certainly unrivalled, perhaps extravagant. He had an encyclopaedic memory, and, as his daughter later observed, he was always restless away from his books. He was president of the Hakluyt Society (1877-89) and of the Asiatic Society (1885-7), and, late in his life, became a vice-president of the Royal Geographical Society (1887-9). He would probably have become president of this last society earlier in his career, were it not for his protest against its decision in 1878 to provide a formal welcome for Henry Morton Stanley, whose violent methods of exploration in central Africa had attracted considerable criticism. Yule's protest, in which he was joined by the young H. M. Hyndman, led to his resignation from the council. In this, and in other matters, his characteristic integrity was combined with a single-mindedness which could strain even the closest of his friendships. 
Yule's edition of Marco Polo was succeeded by several other scholarly works, including a fine essay on the topography of the Upper Oxus region (for a new edition of John Wood's 'Journey to the Oxus', 1872), and introductions to Nikolay Przhevalsky's 'Mongolia' (1876) and Captain William Gill's account of the vast river system originating in eastern Tibet, 'The River of Golden Sand' (1880). During the last fifteen years of his life, he devoted his energies to a range of works, including a series of astute biographical notices (mainly for the 'Royal Engineers' Journal') and a number of geographical entries for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. His last major publication was a three-volume edition of the 'Diary of Sir William Hedges' (1887) for the Hakluyt Society, a work which provides considerable insight into the working of the East India Company, and much else besides. However, Yule's reputation rests less on these scholarly writings than on his authorship (with A. C. Burnell) of an extraordinary glossary of Anglo-Indian colloquial words and phrases, published under the felicitous title 'Hobson-Jobson', in 1886. This encyclopaedic work, which has been reprinted several times since, provides modern historians with a unique view of the everyday language of British officers in colonial India. Yule was fascinated by the complex history of the incorporation of Hindustani, Bengali, and other Indian terms into English usage, and his rendering of this history in the form of an idiosyncratic yet highly engaging glossary has proved, perhaps ironically, to be his most enduring literary contribution. 
Yule's second marriage in 1877 to Mary Wilhelmina Skipwith, daughter of Fulwar Skipwith of the Bengal civil service, was cut short by her death on 26 April 1881. He received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh in 1884, served as a royal commissioner for the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886, and was created KCSI in 1889. He died at his residence 3 Pen-y-Wern Road, Earls Court, London on 30 December 1889, and was buried on 3 January 1890 at Tunbridge Wells. Shortly before his death he received the news that he had been nominated as a corresponding member of the Institut de France. His reply, dictated through his daughter, was composed with characteristic grace and economy: 'Reddo gratias, Illustrissimi Domini, ob honores tanto nimios quanto immeritos. Mihi robora deficiunt, vita collabitur, accipiatis voluntatem pro facto. Cum corde pleno et gratissimo moriturus vos, illustrissimi domini, saluto. Yule' (Yule, lxx-lxxi). While his obituarists treated these noble words as a fitting epitaph, a no less telling assessment of Yule's singular character is to be found in Clements Markham's manuscript history of the Royal Geographical Society, where it is recorded that: 'Sir Henry Yule was a linguist and an accomplished scholar. He was deeply versed in historical geography. He loved intricate research and wandering into the bye paths of history... Tyranny and cruelty aroused his scorn and indignation, and he made a strong protest against H. M. Stanley's methods. Next to cruelty what aroused his anger most was the neglect of an author to make an index to his work. (Markham, 461)' 



@@@@@


doc= 30292


Robert Yule (1817-1857), published a treatise 'On Cavalry Movements' (1856) as well as some minor writings in prose and verse. After much active service in Persia and Afghanistan he fell near Delhi while leading his regiment, the 9th lancers, during the Indian mutiny. 


@@@@@


doc= 30293


Zaehnsdorf, Joseph (1814-1886), bookbinder, the son of Gottlieb Zaehnsdorf, a furrier, was born in Pest, Hungary, on 27 February 1814 and educated at the grammar school in that city. He was apprenticed for four years to Kupp, a bookbinder of Stuttgart, where he served a fifth year before working as a journeyman with bookbinders in Vienna, Zurich, Freiburg, Baden-Baden, and Paris. This experience broadened his knowledge of his craft and familiarized him with several languages. He moved to London in 1837 and lodged at 6 Frith Street with his brother Charles, a manufacturing jeweller, and found employment with Westley & Co. of Blackfriars. He was one of the union men who were dismissed in 1839 during the dispute between the employers and the men's trade society. He then worked for John Mackenzie, regarded as one of London's finest bookbinders, until establishing his own firm, probably in 1842 although various dates were given on the firm's later publicity material. The address of this first bindery is unknown; Zaehnsdorf moved frequently during his early years and shared many of his premises with other tradesmen, but always kept within the Covent Garden area of London. 
Zaehnsdorf was living at 4 Gough Street when he married Ellen, daughter of William Donovan, a tailor, on 11 January 1845; she died in 1848 and on 10 July 1849 he married Ann, daughter of William Mahoney, an engineer. Their only son, Joseph William, was born on 1 June 1853 at 72 Drury Lane, their then home. Zaehnsdorf took British nationality on 15 September 1855. His financial stability would seem to have been assured by 1858 when he leased 30 Brydges Street from the Bedford estate, adding in 1873 a showroom and residence at 14 York Street. By 1861 he had been appointed 'bookbinder to the King of Hanover', and became a member of the Society of Arts. His fine bindings, exhibited at the major international exhibitions, gained him honourable mention at the 1862 London exhibition, and medals at the Anglo-French Working Class Exhibition at Crystal Palace and at Dublin, both in 1865, and at Paris, 1867, Vienna, 1873, and the London Universal Exhibition of 1874 where he set up a bookbinding workshop to demonstrate his craft to the visitor. His bindings were highly esteemed for their artistic taste and for their craftsmanship, and examples are to be found in major libraries and the great English collections. 
Zaehnsdorf came into conflict with the unions in 1872 over his employment of numerous low-paid German workmen, and his reaction, which was to place an advertisement in the 'Clerkenwell News' for non-union labour, led nineteen of his men to resign under union instructions. His son, Joseph William, was educated in England, then at St Omer in France before being apprenticed to a bookbinder in Cologne, but this apprenticeship was cut short by the Franco-Prussian War and he returned to Britain in 1870, taking full control of the firm from 1882. After a painful and protracted illness Joseph Zaehnsdorf died at his home, 14 York Street, on 7 November 1886. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. On that occasion one of his workmen delivered a eulogy (reported in the 'British and Colonial Printer and Stationer', 23 December 1886) praising him as: 'a businessman of high and unimpeachable character, upright and straightforward in all his transactions,... strict and particular with regard to our work, but this strictness always tempered by good humour and kind-heartedness and these... were his shining virtues. His advice, his experience, what is more, his purse, were always ready and open to assist any one of us deserving of it.' The firm of Zaehnsdorf continued to operate from its premises in Bermondsey, south London, until it was merged in 1983 with the rival London binders Sangorski and Sutcliffe, established in 1901 by Francis Sangorski and George Sutcliffe. In this form the new company traded initially as SSZ Ltd and, in the twenty-first century, as Sangorski and Sutcliffe. 


@@@@@


doc= 30294


Zerffi, George Gustavus (1820-1892), writer on art and history, was probably born in Buda, Hungary, the son of Julius Stephan Zerffi, an editor and translator. George Zerffi edited the 'Ungar' newspaper in Pest, and took part in the 1848 revolution, serving as a captain in the revolutionary army. In 1849 he moved to England, where he was naturalized. For sixteen years he acted as a well-paid member of a network of secret agents organized by the Austrian foreign ministry. His targets were members of the Hungarian, and other, emigre communities in London, as well as English-based revolutionaries including Karl Marx, with whom Zerffi was in touch in 1852-3. Some years later he was employed by the Department of Science and Art at the South Kensington Museum (Victoria and Albert Museum), and in 1868 was appointed a lecturer at the National Art Training School. He lectured on historic ornament, and published a revised version of his lectures under the title 'Historical art studies' in 'Building News' (1872-6). 'A manual of the historical development of art... with special reference to architecture, sculpture, painting, and ornament' appeared in 1876 and went to three editions. 
Zerffi was also interested in the philosophy of history, publishing 'The Science of History' (1879), a work written for Japanese scholars according to instructions prepared by K. Suyematz of Japan. He planned a general work on similar lines, entitled 'Studies in the Science of General History', two volumes of which -- dealing with ancient and medieval history -- came out in 1887 and 1889. He was a member of the council of the Royal Historical Society, for many years, and its chairman between 1880 and 1885; he was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Zerffi was a popular lecturer and an active member of the British secularist movement. He published many of his lectures delivered to the Sunday Lecture Society, including 'Natural Phenomena and their Influence on Different Religious Systems' (1873), 'Dogma and Science' (1876), and 'Long and Short Chronologists, or, Egypt from a Religious, Social, and Historical Point of View' (1878). His English version of Goethe's 'Faust', with critical notes, was published in 1859. 'Spiritualism and Animal Magnetism' appeared in 1871, and 'Immanuel Kant in his Relation to Modern History' in 1875. Zerffi died from pneumonia on 28 January 1892 at his home, 2 Albert Villas, Chiswick High Road, Acton, leaving a widow, Josephine, and a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 30295


Zincke, Christian Frederick (1684?-1767), miniature painter, was born in Dresden, probably in 1684 (other accounts say 1683 or 1685). His father, Christian Zincke (died 1719), and his grandfather, Paul Zincke (1608-1678), were Dresden goldsmiths. Having learned enamelling and attended the drawing-school in Dresden conducted by Heinrich Christoph Fehling, he was invited to England either in 1704 or 1706 by Charles Boit, the leading practitioner of enamel portraiture. Boit had started a very large enamel commemorating the victory of Blenheim, and Zincke worked on this uncompleted project. He soon became proficient enough to form his own practice. On 4 November 1718 he married Elizabeth Tanton at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. Their son, Christian Zincke, was baptized on 27 January 1724 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London. 
The earliest known signed work by Zincke is an enamel miniature of Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, based on a painting by Sir Godfrey Kneller and dated 1711 (Royal Collection). After Boit fled to France in 1714 to avoid his creditors Zincke enjoyed a near monopoly of enamel portraiture in England. The accession of George II in 1727 consolidated his position at court. The king, who usually hated sitting to painters, enjoyed Zincke's company and admired his portraits. Zincke was also patronized by Frederick, prince of Wales, who in 1732 made him his cabinet painter. He was complaining of eye strain in 1725, and in 1742 raised his price for an enamel from 20 guineas to 30, to reduce the demand for his work. He had effectively retired by about 1746 and at that time moved from Covent Garden to South Lambeth. 
Vertue recorded in 1726 that Zincke 'has had more persons of distinction daily sitting to him than any other painter living' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.30). Although he copied other portraits he preferred to paint sitters 'ad vivum'. His earlier works embody the staid qualities of Kneller and Michael Dahl, but his later miniatures have a more relaxed air. His handling at its best is exquisite. Horace Walpole owned one of his finest enamels, now in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Once regarded as a portrait of the poet Abraham Cowley, it is copied from a painting of an Arcadian shepherd by Sir Peter Lely. Shortly before he retired he made a remarkable portrait of Sir Robert Walpole (priv. coll.; another version in the Royal Collection). He was not always truthful in his images. George II asked him to paint Queen Caroline as if she were twenty-eight when she actually was forty-nine, and the queen urged him to make the king look twenty-four years younger. The similarity of his female portraits is satirized in a poem of 1740 describing a visit of Venus, Juno, and Minerva to Zincke's studio, during which each goddess takes a portrait of the poet's mistress Chloe to be her own. 
The Royal Collection contains many enamels by Zincke of George II, Caroline of Ansbach, and Frederick, prince of Wales, and their other children. The numerous family portraits he made for Edward Harley, earl of Oxford, became part of the Portland collection at Welbeck Abbey, Nottinghamshire. There are many examples of his work in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and other collections. 
Zincke, who was short in stature, was not made vain by his success. When Philip Mercier tried to prevent him making an 'ad vivum' portrait of the prince of Wales, leading to a bitter quarrel, Zincke was clearly in the right, and he seems to have been a well-loved character. The fact that he got on well with both George II and the prince of Wales testifies to his amenable temperament. An abstemious man, he generally drank port, though when Prince Frederick prophesied that Zincke would celebrate the treaty of Vienna in 1731 by getting drunk, he agreed that he would indulge himself in claret. On 25 May 1748 he married his second wife, Elizabeth Bothmar (died 1772), at St George's, Hanover Square, London. A double portrait of him and his first wife was engraved in mezzotint after Hans Hysing by John Faber. 
The portrait of Zincke drawn in 1752 by his friend William Hoare is an exceptionally informal representation of an artist at work; it shows him in retirement painting his daughter's portrait at a standard miniaturist's desk. Zincke died on 24 March 1767 at South Lambeth, Surrey; he was survived by his second wife. One of his sons was appointed to the six clerks office, chancery. A grandson, Paul Francis Zincke (died 1830), attained notoriety as a faker of Shakespeare portraits; one of them, the 'Bellows' portrait, belonged to the French actor Francois-Joseph Talma. 


@@@@@


doc= 30296


Zincke, Foster Barham (1817-1893), author, was born on 5 January 1817, at Eardley, a sugar estate in Jamaica, the third son of Frederick Burt Zincke, of Jamaica and his wife, a Miss Lawrence, a descendant of Henry Lawrence, president of Cromwell's council. He was fourth in descent from Christian Frederick Zincke, the German miniature and enamel painter. He passed most of his childhood on the sugar estate, living a free outdoor life. He returned to England with his mother to enter Bedford grammar school in 1828, where he developed a particular interest in geography. He matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 5 March 1835, graduating BA on 18 May 1839. With his once wealthy family in financial difficulty after the emancipation of the slaves, his godmothers paid for him to attend university and he afterwards had to support himself. He was ordained in 1840 and became curate of Andover in 1840 and of Wherstead and Freston near Ipswich in 1841. He was appointed vicar there in 1847 and remained there for the rest of his life, despite being offered good livings and headships of schools and colleges elsewhere. He published a work on extempore preaching (1866, American edition 1867) after becoming aware of how ill his bookish sermons suited his unlettered congregation. He also began to contribute to 'Fraser's Magazine' and the 'Quarterly Review' and in 1852 published 'Some Thoughts about the School of the Future' in which he criticized the system of education of English universities and public schools. Shortly afterwards he was appointed one of the queen's chaplains, through the influence of Prince Albert with whom he had discussed educational matters. 
Zincke loved travel. In September 1853 he visited Ireland and became convinced that the distress there was due largely to English misrule, particularly by absent exploitative landlords. In 1867-8 he visited the USA and gave an appreciative view of the country in 'Last Winter in the United States' (1868). A visit to Egypt was recorded in print (1871) and he published three books on travel in Switzerland (1873, 1874, and 1875). 
On 30 May 1865 Zincke married at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London, Caroline Octavia, Lady Stevenson, daughter of Joseph Seymour Biscoe and widow of Zincke's cousin, Sir William Stevenson; they had no children. In 1885 Zincke energetically supported his stepson Francis Seymour Stevenson who stood successfully for election as a Liberal MP. From then on Zincke took an active part in local politics and wrote many pamphlets expressing radical and humane views. His 'The Plough and the Dollar, or, The Englishry of a Century Hence' (1883) was an interesting exercise in speculation, involving him in correspondence with Gladstone. He continued to write on various other themes, including a local history of Wherstead (1887 and 1893) and in 1891 published an autobiography, which, like all his works, whatever their ostensible theme, contained thoughtful comments on the condition of life and how it could be improved. He died at Wherstead vicarage on 23 August 1893 and was buried in the churchyard there on 26 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 30297


Zoffany, Johan Joseph (1733-1810), portrait painter, was born on 13 March 1733 near Frankfurt am Main, Germany, and baptized on 15 March at St Bartholomew's Cathedral, Frankfurt, the son of Anton Franz Zauffaly (1699-1771), court cabinet-maker and architect to Alexander Ferdinand, prince of Thurn and Taxis, and his wife, Anna Ursula Dreiling ('bap'. 1704, died 1779). The family soon moved to Regensburg with the prince and the young Johan was brought up in the circle of the court. 
In 1747 with the encouragement of his mother, Zoffany was apprenticed to Martin Speer ('c'.1702-1765), a local painter who worked in the late baroque style, but becoming impatient for the wider world Zoffany followed that essential means to self-improvement for an aspiring artist and in 1750 took himself to Rome. There he studied under Agostino Masucci, a fashionable painter of the classicist tradition whose pupils had included Pompeo Batoni and Gavin Hamilton. He attended the Accademia del Nudo, founded in 1754 on the Capitoline, placing himself under the German painter Anton Raphael Mengs, who taught drawing from the life and introduced Zoffany to the circles of nascent neo-classicism. 
About 1757 after a second visit to Rome, Zoffany returned again to Germany to become court painter to Johann Philipp von Walderdorf, elector of Trier, who commissioned paintings and frescoes to decorate rooms in the Residenz at Trier and a chapel in the castle of Ehrenbreitstein at Koblenz. With the possible exception of 'Venus Marina' and 'Venus and Adonis' (1760; Musee des Beaux-Arts, Bordeaux), which may have been painted for the bedroom of the Residenz, none of these works is known to have survived, but a few studies in chalk and in oils (British Museum, London, and City of Manchester Art Gallery), in which the heroic baroque is modified into rococo prettiness, perhaps indicate their style. 
At the same time Zoffany painted a number of ambitious mythological and historical pictures that were overlaid by a baroque emphasis more theatrical than convincing where movement and emotion are expressed in accentuated gestures to illustrate the story: 'The Sacrifice of Iphigenia' (1758; Mittelrhein Museum, Koblenz) and 'Odysseus Seizing Andromache's Son Astyanax' (ex Christies, 18 November 1988) showing a greater realism enhanced by a smooth finish and a relatively dark tonality typical of the German version of the international style. A still life (1760; Museum der Stadt, Trier) is a further example of the eclecticism of style which German court painters liable to be called on to paint works of every kind were required to master. 
Towards the end of the 1750s Zoffany married Anthonie Theophista Juliane Eiselein (died 'c'.1771/2), the daughter of a 'Hofkammerrat' (court councillor) of Wurzburg, and making use of her dowry he left the confined life of the electoral court for the greater artistic horizons of London. Arriving there towards the end of 1760 he had difficulty in establishing himself, at first painting decorative scenes on clockfaces for Stephen Rimbault, a leading clockmaker, and then working as a drapery painter to Benjamin Wilson. From Wilson's studio he was rescued by the great actor David Garrick who commissioned Zoffany to paint informal scenes of his domestic life at his villa at Hampton -- 'Mr and Mrs Garrick by the Shakespeare Temple at Hampton', 'A View in Hampton Garden with Mr and Mrs Garrick Taking Tea' (1762; priv. coll.). 
The many portraits of himself in various roles that Garrick subsequently commissioned began with 'The Farmer's Return' (1762; priv. coll.). This picture showed Zoffany's remarkable ability to paint lively figures in vivid interaction, to catch a fleeting expression, and to portray a likeness, and laid the foundation of his future reputation. It was exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1762 and was received with many accolades in the press. Setting up his own studio in Covent Garden, Zoffany painted many such pictures, which became known as theatrical conversations and were essentially publicity pictures, of Garrick, his friends, and his rivals. So pleased were the actors who were his subjects that Zoffany was commissioned to paint one or more versions of the same composition by others acting in the scene. Further publicity came for actors and artist from the large and handsome mezzotints that were immediately made from many of these theatrical conversation pieces. He painted Garrick with Mrs Cibber in 'Venice Preserv'd' (1762-3; priv. coll.), in 'The Provok'd Wife' (1763-5; Wolverhampton Art Gallery), in 'Lethe' (1766; Birmingham City Museums and Art Gallery), with Mrs Pritchard in 'Macbeth' (1768; priv. coll.), and to great acclaim as Abel Drugger in Ben Jonson's 'The Alchemist' (1770; priv. coll.). Zoffany received many commissions to paint other actors in favourite roles, thus leaving vivid illustrations of one of the most brilliant periods in English theatrical history. Mrs Abington in 'The Way to Keep Him' (1768; National Trust, Egremont Collection, Petworth House, Sussex), Charles Macklin as Shylock in 'The Merchant of Venice' ('c'.1768; Tate collection), Samuel Foote in 'The Devil upon Two Sticks' ('c'.1768-9; priv. coll.), and Thomas King and Mrs Baddeley in 'The Clandestine Marriage' (1769-70; Garrick Club, London), painted by order of George III, demonstrate Zoffany's success in transporting the spectator back to the theatre. 
Through Garrick, Zoffany was introduced to the notice of the earl of Bute, prime minister to the young George III, for whom he painted a portrait of his eldest son, Lord Mountstuart (1763-4; priv. coll.) wearing fashionable masquerade dress and the two companion paintings of Lord Bute's younger sons and daughters (1763-4; priv. coll.), posed with the artful naturalness of motif that marks Zoffany's early success as a painter of the family or conversation piece. Zoffany was soon taken up by the circle of Scottish politicians who surrounded Bute and quickly entered into the spirit of a new informality in group portraiture, developing the family piece -- a genre which was well established but unfashionable in Germany -- into a lively composition in which natural actions are intertwined into a unity of responding gestures in a tightly composed group set in a context at once decorative and evocative of the lives of the sitters. Zoffany rendered the draperies and accessories of his sitters in a suavely rococo manner with a smoothness of finish and warm tone, painting the lustrous satins and intricate lace with skilful fidelity. His imitative skill was equally to the fore in his depiction of furnishings and interior settings, of still life, paintings, and sculptures. His musical sitters hold and play their instruments using the correct fingering, reflecting his own knowledge and enthusiasm, while his genuine sympathy with children is reflected in the imaginative amusements with which he animates their poses. 
Among the commissions the Scottish connection brought Zoffany were the splendid full-length portrait of 'Mrs Oswald' (1764; National Gallery, London), the conversation piece of 'John, 3rd Duke of Atholl and his Family' (1765-7), the duke and duchess with their seven children grouped informally beside the Tay in the grounds of their seat at Dunkeld, painted to fit the overmantel of the great drawing-room at Blair Castle. Zoffany's receipt for this picture specifies that he charged 20 guineas a figure. He also painted a powerful full-length portrait of Andrew Drummond (1766; Drummond's Bank, London), the founder of Drummond's Bank where Zoffany himself opened an account in 1765. In 'Sir Lawrence Dundas with his Grandson' (1769-70; priv. coll.) Zoffany shows Dundas in the library of his London house newly remodelled by Adam; this is a documented example of how an interior which apparently reproduces an actual room is a most artful painter's composition showing Sir Lawrence as a connoisseur of the arts. 
Probably through Bute, Zoffany obtained the patronage of George III and Queen Charlotte. His charming conversation piece of Queen Charlotte at her dressing table with her two eldest sons (1764; Royal Collection) marks the beginning of the informal royal conversation piece as a genre and is one of Zoffany's most elaborately contrived and perfectly finished works. Until he went to Florence in 1772 at Queen Charlotte's command, Zoffany continued to paint a number of conversation pieces and graciously informal portraits of the royal family capturing one of the characteristic expressions of eighteenth-century monarchy, one that he was later to employ for the family of the empress Maria Theresa. 
Perhaps one reason why Zoffany made himself so acceptable at court was that he spoke German, for a number of the intimate court servants were Germans, with whom Charlotte, a German princess, evidently felt herself at ease. Zoffany seems never to have mastered English perfectly -- his one surviving autograph letter is largely written in a rather incorrect and slightly Germanized Italian. His accent and his broken English -- his third language after Italian -- are remarked on in several English memoirs. But he came to identify himself with England and was granted denization on 3 April 1772. 
Zoffany also painted charming small single portraits or groups of two sitters, such as the 'Reverend Randall Burroughes and his Son Ellis' (1769; Louvre Museum, Paris) in which he invents the setting: propped on a chair which can be identified as Zoffany's sitter's chair is Zoffany's own copy of 'Perspective of Architecture' (1761) by his friend and neighbour Joshua Kirby. The set properties of eighteenth-century portraiture with curtain, column, books, and pose of 'Mr Gawler's Cousin' (Yale U. CBA) is redeemed by the animation of the figure -- seated on the same sitter's chair -- and by the lustrous finish and brilliant colour. Under the influence of Reynolds's conception of the portrait as a historical painting Zoffany composed the life-size portrait of Henry Knight of Tythegston with his three children (1770; NMG Wales) linked in an inventive and lively manner in which the eye is carefully led round the sitters. 
In the later 1760s Zoffany began painting genre pictures. Some, like the 'Caritas Romana' ('c'.1769; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne) and 'The Beggars on the Road to Stanmore' ('c'.1769-70; priv. coll.), painted for his banker, Andrew Drummond, are pleasing exercises in the prevailing sensibility, while in the highly finished picture 'John Cuff and an Assistant' (1772; Royal Collection), painted in the Dutch manner, the still-life details of the optician's workshop are rendered with a sympathetic precision and fidelity that was distasteful to English connoisseurs of high art. 
From 1762 Zoffany had exhibited at the Society of Artists but resigned in 1769 shortly after the establishment of the Royal Academy to which George III nominated him on a footing equal to the founding members ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. Probably for the king he painted his famous group portrait 'The Academicians of the Royal Academy' (1771-2; Royal Collection) which made a sensation when it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1772. 
In spite of his success at court and his prominence as an academician Zoffany felt restless and in 1771 arranged to go with Sir Joseph Banks, accompanying as an artist Captain Cook's second voyage to the South Seas, but the accommodation proving inadequate he withdrew. 
Mrs Zoffany later related: 'Being, however, in an unsettled state, having given up his house & business, and displeased many of his patrons by leaving their pictures in an unfinished state, He determined to revisit Italy. Upon declaring this intention to Her Majesty, she patronised Him, and procured him letters of introduction to the principal persons there, with a present of $300 for His Journey and an order to paint for Her, the Florence Gallery, which he executed & recd for it a thousand pounds. (J. Farington, MS notebooks, 4 fols., 41-3 (A), cited in Millar, 'Zoffany and his Tribuna', 37-9)' This commission from Queen Charlotte became a new turning point in Zoffany's life and in his artistic career. 
The Tribuna of the Uffizi in Florence housed the finest paintings, antique sculptures, and works of art of the Medici collections and was famous throughout Europe. Neither Queen Charlotte nor George III could hope to visit Italy to see and admire its riches of ancient and modern art and Zoffany's picture was to be a painted substitute. In order to paint his picture, which was largely executed in the Tribuna itself, Zoffany needed special facilities which, since this was a royal commission, were granted without difficulty by the grand duke Pietro Leopoldo. Zoffany began work on the picture shortly after his arrival in Florence in August 1772, and continued to add to it until at least the end of 1777. The arrangement of the pictures hanging on the walls and of the statues and objects differs from their actual disposition in the Tribuna in the 1770s for he had leave to have brought into the Tribuna works from other parts of the gallery and from the Pitti Palace. Zoffany captured the culminating artistic experience of the grand tour in his 'Tribuna of the Uffizi' (Royal Collection), a technical 'tour de force' with its accurate imitation of the manner of the different painters and of the textures of the works of art he copied. Following the tradition of pictures of galleries small figures as spectators were to be included, but Zoffany's portraits of English travellers on their grand tour were an innovation. 
Zoffany was secretly followed to Florence by a young girl of humble origins whom he had made pregnant. Finding that his first wife, who had returned homesick to Germany, had died, about 1772/1773 he married Mary Thomas ('c'.1755-1832) in Florence after the birth there of a son. The self-portraits he painted while living in Italy (Uffizi, Florence, and Galleria di Parma), confessional and penitential in mood, reflect the conflicting drives tempting the painter from the pursuit of his art. 
While living in Florence, Zoffany joined the English colony, finding a patron in Earl Cowper who had been settled there since 1759. He painted a fine and vigorous portrait of Lord Cowper, of his fiancee, Hannah Anne Gore, playing a hurdy-gurdy (both priv. coll.), and a conversation piece of Lord Cowper with the Gore family (1775; Yale U. CBA) in which he figured the cultivated life of the family and an allegory of the forthcoming marriage. 
Zoffany also found favour at the grand-ducal court of Pietro Leopoldo, son of the empress Maria Theresa, from whom he received commissions for family pictures like those he had painted for George III and Queen Charlotte. The intimate charm of his English portraits was tempered with pomp and ceremony in keeping with Habsburg formality for the portrait of the young Archduke Francis (1775) and in the life-size group of the whole grand-ducal family (1776) (both Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna) painted against a background of the courtyard of the Pitti Palace. Zoffany took this portrait in a specially constructed carriage to Vienna where he completed it and was rewarded by the empress on 4 December 1776 with the title of baron of the Holy Roman empire. Honoured by his fellow artists during his stay in Italy, Zoffany was elected to the academies of Florence, Bologna, Cortona, and Parma. 
Having moved in May 1778 to the duchy of Parma ruled by Ferdinand of Bourbon Parma whose wife was a Habsburg archduchess, he painted a group of the four grandchildren of Maria Theresa (1778; Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna), one of his most charming formal compositions of children with their playthings set against the trappings of their princely rank. In a vivacious composition of the celebrations at the 'scartocchiata' (or maize harvest) (1778; Galleria di Parma) and a 'Florentine Fruit Stall' ('c'.1777; Tate collection) Zoffany's feelings for Italian life are painted with the affectionate observation that he introduced into the landscapes, prospects, and plants in the backgrounds of his Italian portraits. 
Zoffany arrived back in London late in 1779 to disappointment and long wrangles over his picture of the Tribuna with the king and queen who were displeased with the groups of Englishmen introduced into the picture; there was now no more hope of royal commissions. But in this second short period in England from 1779 to 1783 Zoffany painted two of his most important pictures, 'The Sharp Family' (1779-81; NPG) and, as a gift for his friend, 'Charles Townley in his Library' (1781-3; Towneley Hall Art Gallery and Museums), the most neo-classical in feeling and colour of his paintings and a vivid record of a circle of collectors whose enthusiasm for the antique was important for the development of neo-classical taste. As in 'The Tribuna', Zoffany did not paint a straightforward view of the library but brought into his composition marbles displayed in other parts of the house. 
Although at the height of his powers, Zoffany cannot have been too busy during these years for he painted a most accomplished life-size 'Self-Portrait with his Daughter and Two Friends' ('c'.1782; Yale U. CBA). Adapting the principles of the no longer fashionable small conversation piece to a larger scale he produced a glittering double portrait, 'John Wilkes and his Daughter Polly' (NPG). However his long absence had cost him his vogue as a portrait painter. He appears to have been living in too extravagant a style, buying in 1780 a house at Strand on the Green where he clothed his servants in liveries of scarlet, gold, and blue, the colours of his new arms as a baron. He now took the desperate step of resolving to restore his fortune in Bengal. 
Zoffany sailed for India in March 1783 and arrived at Calcutta on 15 September. He was well recommended and immediately taken up by the governor, Warren Hastings. In India, Zoffany painted both small conversation pieces of English families, some conventional, others with Indian attendants and Indianized settings such as 'Colonel Blair and his Family' (1786; ex Sothebys, 18 March 1981), and life-size swagger portraits whose brilliance of colour and Indian features celebrate the exotic years of their sitters' lives, 'General Norman Macleod of Macleod' and 'Sarah, Wife of Norman Macleod' (1787; priv. coll.). He responded to the Indian scene with genuine delight, making drawings of the landscape, crumbling buildings, and twisted trees. 
In May 1784 Hastings summoned Zoffany to Lucknow, the capital of Oudh, to paint a portrait of the nawab vizier Asaf ud-Daula (India Office Library and Records, BL). In Lucknow, where Zoffany was to reside for much of his time in Bengal, he painted his most brilliant pictures of European life in India and of Indian princes and notables. There he made friends with the Swiss colonel Anthony Polier and the Frenchman General Claude Martin, both cultivated men who had entered the nawab's service. In one of his finest Indian works Zoffany has shown himself painting with these two friends, who are engaged with pictures and oriental manuscripts (Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta). The other side of life in Lucknow is illustrated in 'Colonel Mordaunt's Cock Fight' (1784-6; Tate collection), an unforgettable image of a moment when Indians and Europeans mingled on the easiest of terms at the court of a Muslim prince, which he painted for Warren Hastings. 
As a token of his gratitude for the kindness and patronage he had received in Bengal, Zoffany presented in 1787 an altarpiece of the last supper to the new Anglican church of St John's in Calcutta. He also became a member of the newly founded Asiatic Society of Bengal. Zoffany left India in January 1789, with his fortune made. He continued to use drawings made in India for pictures painted after his return to England, such as the 'Death of the Royal Tiger' (Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta) and 'Hyderbeg's Embassy to Lord Cornwallis' (exh. RA, 1796; Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta). 
The Europe to which he returned was the Europe of the French Revolution and Zoffany's easy-going eighteenth-century liberalism was shocked by the Parisian massacres of 1792 into horrified reaction. In 'The Plundering of the King's Cellar' (exh. RA, 1794; Wadsworth Atheneum), his painting of the populace sacking the Tuileries, Zoffany depicted the scene of wanton brutality with dramatic force. In contrast to this and other similar compositions Zoffany painted two altarpieces for his local parish churches at Brentford and Chiswick, but his powers began to fail and he exhibited in 1800 for the last time at the Royal Academy. 
Zoffany's later years were saddened by senile decay and on 11 November 1810 he died at Strand on the Green; he was buried on 17 November in Kew parish church, Surrey. His widow held a sale on 9-10 May 1811 of his unsold and unfinished pictures, his collections of books and prints, together with the armour and oriental curiosities he had brought back from his travels; any drawings, letters, notebooks or accounts she may have kept were burnt after she died of cholera in 1832. From the 1920s attempts have been made to increase Zoffany's 'oeuvre' by adding a substantial number of controversial attributions. More recently, his work has also attracted speculative publications on the subject matter of his compositions. 


@@@@@


doc= 30298


Zouch, Henry (1725?-1795), magistrate and writer on the poor, was the eldest surviving son of Charles Zouch (died 1754), the vicar of Sandal Magna, near Wakefield, Yorkshire, and Dorothy, 'nee' Norton (1695/6-1760); he was the brother of Thomas Zouch. Henry was educated at Wakefield School and was admitted as pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1743, where he graduated BA in 1746 and MA in 1750. In 1754 he took over his father's old parish of Sandal Magna, where he served as vicar until 1789. He was also rector for the parishes of Swillington and Tankersley and chaplain to the marchioness of Rockingham. He married Elizabeth (died 1796), the daughter and heir of William Spinke of Wakefield, but they remained childless. 
A minor poet, scholar, and keen antiquarian, Zouch is best known for his work as a social reformer. He was a long-serving active magistrate and chairman of the quarter sessions in the West Riding of Yorkshire. From this experience stemmed his interest in the reform of the poor laws, the administration of justice, and, especially, the improvement of the manners and morals of the common people. The West Riding of Yorkshire in the late eighteenth century was ill-famed for its robust and independent plebeian culture. To this Zouch reacted with concern and great reforming zeal, but rather less sympathy and understanding of the significance of the customary culture of the poor. Traditional customs of the manufacturing districts included dog-fighting, street-football, and the holding of riotous wakes and village fairs. The godly complained of disruption to the sabbath while manufacturers bemoaned lost days of work. Zouch saw all these things as breeding grounds for crime, vice, and immorality and, along with others of his generation, he sought to regenerate the old campaign for the reformation of manners. He promoted Sunday schools to instil good habits in the young, called for the suppression of village feasts, and urged magistrates and other authority figures to take a more active role in the superintendence of their subordinates. He was also concerned at what appeared to be a crime wave following a rash of poaching and nocturnal crime. Making a strong connection between crime and poverty, immorality and vice, he battled against unlicensed drinking houses, brothels, and other unofficial meeting-places. His dislike of popular entertainments and suspicion of theatrical and musical performances went even so far as proscribing the performance of oratorios in church. 
In the 1780s a broad-based national movement of like-minded contemporaries emerged to combat vice among the lower orders, and Zouch was to play a leading role as an organizer and as a publicist. Next to William Wilberforce, Zouch emerged as a key figure in the Proclamation Society (the Society for the Suppression of Vice and Prophaneness), which set out to enforce royal proclamations against vice and immorality dating from the 1690s. This movement agitated outside of the church for a general reformation of conduct among the high and the low by setting worthy examples of leadership and moral seriousness. Zouch was the West Riding delegate to the national convention of magistrates that met in London in 1790 to confer with the Proclamation Society on the best means to improve police and prisons. A follower of John Howard on penal reform, Zouch reorganized the county gaol at Wakefield and sought to improve the administration of justice by example and precept. Although he was not an original thinker, his written works reached a wide audience and carried some influence. These combined an interest in the Enlightenment battle to reform and modernize criminal justice, along with respect for the ancient tradition of English law. His 'Hints Respecting the Public Police' (1786) made ten recommendations ranging from the formation of private associations for the prosecution of felons to the promotion of Sunday schools. Henry Zouch died on 17 June 1795 and was buried in his garden at Sandal on 21 June, a final wish that sealed his reputation for eccentricity. His wife died in the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 30299


Zouch, Thomas (1737-1815), biographer and Church of England clergyman, was born in the rectory at Sandal Magna, near Wakefield, Yorkshire, on 12 September 1737, the second son of Charles Zouch (died 1754), vicar of Sandal Magna, and his wife, Dorothy (1695/6-1760), daughter of Gervase Norton of Wakefield. His early years seem to have been happy, and he remained deeply attached to Yorkshire and particularly to the country around Sandal Magna throughout his life. Zouch began his studies at home where, under his father's tutelage, he developed a solid grounding in Latin and Greek, before attending Wakefield's free grammar school, which counted Richard Bentley and John Radcliffe among its alumni. There he was taught by Benjamin Wilson and John Clarke, both masters of the school. Much later in life Zouch published a biography of Clarke, celebrating him as the model of 'the good schoolmaster', one who, though exacting in the teaching of ancient literatures, still 'accommodated himself with equal affability and kindness to all' (Zouch, 'Works', 2.14). In part, Zouch writes his own life in writing Clarke's, a life happily passed in the study of antiquity and the defence of England's ecclesiastical constitution. 
It was to Clarke's college, Trinity, Cambridge, that Zouch proceeded at the relatively advanced age of eighteen, being admitted pensioner on 8 July 1756. Zouch's academic career was without a doubt brilliant, and he garnered many awards and honours in his thirteen years at Trinity. Within a year he became a scholar of the college -- a welcome saving, since his father had now been dead three years. In 1760 he won one of two university-wide Craven scholarships, worth $20 per annum, and graduated BA, with the distinction of second wrangler. He was ordained a deacon and stayed at Trinity, winning two prizes of 15 guineas each in the annual members' Latin essay competition: in 1762 he came second among the middle bachelors and in 1763 first among the seniors, in the latter case for a lively satirical essay on Rousseau's account of the origins of society. Zouch showed diligence in performing the drudgery reserved for junior fellows -- including, it seems, writing college verses in Greek for Michael Lort, professor of Greek, who had little taste for such tiresome exercises -- and he was rewarded with considerable responsibility. He held various college appointments and offices -- minor fellow (1762), major fellow (1764), 'sublector primus' (1765), 'lector linguae Latinae' (1768). His main income in these years was from teaching: as assistant tutor to Thomas Postlethwaite he earned $60 per annum, and he took on several private pupils. He also contributed verses in Latin and English to various university collections celebrating state occasions, and his much admired poem 'Crucifixion' won the Seatonian prize in 1765. When the master of Trinity, Robert Smith, died in 1768, Zouch was chosen to deliver the Latin funeral oration. But he was already experiencing bouts of deafness, a condition from which he suffered for the rest of his life. These attacks became so severe that he often could not hear the responses to the psalms, and once began a sermon while the organ was still playing. Deafness was not readily compatible with the largely oratorical world of Cambridge teaching and ceremony, and Zouch sought more secluded employment in a university living. In recognition of his services he was instituted in 1770 to the rectory of Wycliffe, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, where he was to live for the next twenty-three years. 
After an initial contest with the local Roman Catholic landholders who had the patronage of Wycliffe and who objected to the university's nomination, Zouch settled down in his early thirties to what was promising to be a relatively quiet and undemanding clerical life. On 9 July 1772 he married Isabella (died 1803), daughter of John Emerson, rector of Winston, co. Durham. To supplement his income he took in pupils from the local gentry, three at a time, but his duties left him ample time to study, and he devoted himself to ancient and modern literature, and to the antiquities and botany of his home county; in particular he began gathering information towards a comprehensive biographical dictionary of Yorkshire worthies, a project he never completed. This middle period of Zouch's life was uneventful, almost reclusive. In 1780 he became, at the encouragement of his more politically active elder brother Henry Zouch, a member of the Yorkshire Association, and undoubtedly he sympathized with that society's protest against recent royal excesses and its call for moderate electoral reform, but he never attended a meeting and soon let his membership lapse. Similarly, although he had gained sufficient repute as a botanist to be elected fellow of the Linnean Society when it first met in 1788, he never communicated any of his discoveries or specimens to that body. 
Zouch might well have lived his life in this modest retirement but for the energetic interference of two powerful friends. The first was Richard Pepper Arden (1745-1804), later Baron Alvanley, who had been one of Zouch's private pupils at Trinity. From Cambridge, Pepper Arden had gone to Lincoln's Inn, where he shared a staircase with William Pitt, before proceeding on a brilliant legal and political career, ultimately serving Pitt as solicitor-general and attorney-general. Zouch's second well-wisher was the younger William Lowther. Zouch's sister Anne had married Sir William Lowther, rector of Swillington and third cousin to the unsavoury James Lowther, earl of Lonsdale (1736-1802), the support of whose extensive and powerful political machine was much valued by Pitt. Their eldest son, William, was chosen by the childless earl as heir to his enormous wealth. William had been tutored by Zouch at Wycliffe, and the two remained close throughout Zouch's life. A more ambitious (and, possibly, a healthier) cleric than Zouch might have made more of two such patrons as Pepper Arden and Lowther, but then no doubt he was sought out for his solidity rather than his brilliance as a theologian or energy as an administrator of the church. In any case his first sinecures came thanks to Pepper Arden, who made Zouch his chaplain when he became master of the rolls in 1788, and who secured for him the deputy commissary of the archdeaconry of Richmond. Then Pitt, who at the behest of the Lowthers had been seeking out a richer living for Zouch for some time, was able in the king's name to bestow the rectory of Scrayingham in the East Riding of Yorkshire in 1793. When Zouch's brother Henry died in 1795 Zouch inherited the family estate at Sandal Magna, where he went to live in 1796, establishing a curate at Scrayingham. From 1799 to 1805 Zouch was a governor of Wakefield school, and he also founded an endowed school at Sandal Magna. Pitt remained active on Zouch's behalf, proposing him in 1798 for the mastership of Trinity College (a post that went to William Mansel, bishop of Bristol) and finally securing Zouch a lucrative place as canon and prebendary of Durham Cathedral in 1805, upon which occasion Zouch took the degree of doctor of divinity. 
It was during these latter years at Sandal Magna that Zouch began publishing. Apart from sermons and a few tracts on biblical prophecy, Zouch concentrated his energy on biography. He wrote and circulated privately several brief accounts of pious and eminent Yorkshiremen, but is chiefly remembered for his more substantial lives of Izaak Walton and Sir Philip Sidney. Zouch's first publication on Walton was an edition of the rare 1680 tract 'Love and Truth in Two Modest and Peaceable Letters' (1795), followed by a splendid edition, dedicated to Pepper Arden, of Walton's 'Lives of Donne, Wotton, Hooker, Herbert and Sanderson' (1796), fully annotated and introduced with Zouch's own life of Walton. Here Zouch casts Walton as the exemplary Londoner, fully conversant with the world but unwavering in his attachment to church and crown, one who adopts a 'mild spirit of moderation' in a troubled age (p. xlix). If Zouch models in Walton the long-suffering protestant citizen, he finds in Sidney the perfect protestant knight. 'The Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Sir Philip Sydney' (1808), dedicated to Zouch's nephew William Lowther, now earl of Lonsdale, is a response in part to the unflattering character given to Sidney by Horace Walpole. Zouch depicts late sixteenth-century Europe as a Gothic world of seductive Jesuits and brutal Catholic princes, all bent upon the genocide of protestants. Sidney as diplomat and soldier stands alone amid these dangers in his 'uniform zeal for the reformed religion' (Zouch, 'Memoirs of Sir Philip Sydney', 91). Like so many writing in the wake of the French Revolution, Zouch is most concerned with shoring up British social and religious hierarchies and promoting political order. Although he can be credited with much original archival research on both Walton and Sidney, in general he practises the same improving biographical method he found at work in Walton's 'Lives', presenting 'examples of men strictly and faithfully discharging their professional duties' with the overall aim of invigorating his reader's 'efforts to excel in moral worth' (Walton, 'Lives', ed. Zouch, ix). Zouch did not move in literary circles, but his biographies were widely read. Robert Southey, visiting his brother at Durham in the summer of 1809, made a point of dining with Zouch. And in 1805 Zouch admired (and corrected) some of Wordsworth's poetry, passed on to him in manuscript by Lonsdale; Zouch complained that 'the terms 'green' and 'bowers' are used too often' ('Lonsdale MSS', 154). 
In 1807 Zouch was offered the bishopric of Carlisle, but he declined on determining that Carlisle was not worth more than the livings he had in hand. His health was not good and there was little financial incentive to move. Isabella had died in 1803, and on 25 August 1808 Zouch married Margaret (1743-1833), second daughter of William Brooke of Dodworth, Yorkshire. Neither marriage produced any children. Zouch died at Sandal Magna on 17 December 1815 and was buried there on 23 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 30300


Zouche, Alan de la (d. 1270), administrator and soldier, was one of Henry III's trusted supporters and servants. His grandfather, also called Alan, had arrived in England from Brittany in the 1170s, and had founded the family's fortunes in England by his marriage to the heiress Alice de Belmeis, thereby securing extensive estates including Tong (Shropshire), Ashby (Leicestershire), and North Molton (Devon). A junior branch of the family was established in Northamptonshire by Eudo de la Zouche (d. 1279) ['see under 'Zouche family]. Alan succeeded his father, Roger, in 1238, and was soon active in the service of Henry III: in 1242 he was one of those who effected the capture of the notorious outlaw William de Marisco on Lundy island, and in 1242-3 he saw military service in Gascony. His first taste of high office came in 1250 when he was appointed justice of the county of Chester and the Four Cantrefs (the district of north Wales east of the River Conwy). He paid 1000 marks for the post, allegedly outbidding the current holder of the office. He flaunted the wealth he raised from the district, and boasted that the whole of Wales was now reduced to obedience. But his high-handed and insensitive behaviour provoked royal investigation, and fuelled the resentment in the area against the English, which led to the violent overthrow of English rule in 1256. By then Zouche had entered the service of the Lord Edward (who had been given the royal lands in Wales, Ireland, and Chester in February 1254), and acted as his justiciar in Ireland from June 1256 to October 1258. 
With the onset of civil discord in England in June 1258, Zouche was given ample opportunity to display his unflinching loyalty to the king. His closeness to Henry III during these years is indicated by the fact that he is described at various times between October 1261 and January 1263 as steward of the royal household. He was also given important posts in the country: sheriff of Northamptonshire (1261-4), justice of the forests south of the Trent (from June 1261), and constable of Rockingham Castle (1261-4) and Northampton Castle (1261-3). His Welsh experience prompted the king to dispatch him to guard the Welsh marches against Llywelyn ap Gruffudd in December 1262. Two events in December 1263 showed the measure of the king's confidence in him: on 12 December he was one of the barons chosen on the king's side to submit all points in the political dispute to the arbitration of Louis of France; and on 24 December he was given custody of the counties of Devon, Somerset, and Dorset as a military lieutenant. Taken prisoner at the battle of Lewes (14 May 1264), Zouche escaped to Lewes Priory, where he disguised himself as a monk, but he was recaptured and imprisoned. In the aftermath of the king's victory at Evesham (4 August 1265) he played an important part in the pacification of the country: he was one of the twelve arbitrators appointed to arrange the terms of the surrender of Kenilworth Castle in 1266, and was one of the justices appointed to hear the pleas of the disinherited. The reward for his loyalty included handsome gifts and appointment to the important and lucrative post of warden of London and constable of the Tower from June 1267 to April 1268. 
During 1270 Zouche became involved in a dispute with John de Warenne (died 1304), almost certainly over the manors of Ashby and Chadston in Northamptonshire. The manors had been forfeited by their owner, David Ashby, for his support for Simon de Montfort and granted to Zouche; but Warenne, as the guardian of Ashby's granddaughter, also had an interest in them. During an altercation in Westminster Hall on 1 July 1270 Warenne and his men assaulted Zouche and his son in the presence of the royal justice and the chancellor. Zouche suffered wounds from which he died on 10 August 1270. Warenne was forced to perform public acts of contrition for the assault and to offer a fine of 10,000 marks to the king. 
Zouche was a benefactor of the knights templars and of the Cistercian abbey of Buildwas in Shropshire. He married, before 1242, Helen, one of the daughters and coheirs of Roger de Quincy, earl of Winchester, and in 1267 secured her share of the Quincy estates. He was succeeded by his son Roger la Zouche (died 1285); his widow died on 20 August 1296. 


@@@@@


doc= 30301


Zouche, Edward la, eleventh Baron Zouche (1556-1625), landowner, was born on 6 June 1556, at Harringworth, Northamptonshire, the only son of George la Zouche, tenth Baron Zouche of Harringworth ('c'.1526-1569), landowner, and his wife, Margaret (died in or after 1569), daughter and coheir of William Welby of Molton, Lincolnshire. He succeeded as eleventh Lord Zouche on the death of his father on 30 June 1569. The main estates were concentrated in Northamptonshire. As a minor, Zouche became the ward of Sir William Cecil, principal secretary, who entrusted his education to John Whitgift, master of Trinity College, Cambridge. Zouche matriculated there in Easter 1570, and gained an MA in 1571. 
Zouche was summoned to parliament on 2 April 1571, but as a minor he did not take his seat for some years. Subsequently he said 'the greatest evil hath been the fond spending of my time in my youth' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/239, fol. 156'r'). In 1575 he quarrelled with Roger North, second Baron North, and on 12 February 1576 both peers were summoned before the privy council and bound over to keep the peace. He married his cousin Eleanor (died 1611), daughter of Sir John Zouche of Codnor, Derbyshire, and his wife, Eleanor, about 1578. Relations with his wife were not cordial and the couple were estranged in 1582. He put her away without an allowance and was sued in the ecclesiastical court for support. Sentenced to pay $2 10's'. per week, he refused, was excommunicated, and went abroad before returning to abide by the orders of the court. According to Sir John Holles, while Lady Zouche was 'oft dangerously sick... he [Lord Zouche] never disbursed a penny, and now dead she might have rotted in her chamber as he would have buried her' ('Portland MSS', 9.83-4). The couple had two daughters, Elizabeth (died 1617) and Mary (died 1652). 
While abroad, Zouche became interested in diplomatic service, perhaps when he travelled in Scotland. He was appointed one of the peers to try Mary, queen of Scots, at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, in 1586, and in the following year he returned to the continent, partly to qualify himself for public service, and partly to advance and enrich his education. He went by sea to Hamburg in March 1587, and then to Heidelberg and Frankfurt. In April 1588 he was at Basel, and in 1590 at Altdorf he met Sir Henry Wotton, with whom he corresponded frequently. In August 1591 Zouche was living in Vienna. He then proceeded to Verona, but in 1593 returned to England. 
Zouche's diplomatic career was launched on 22 December 1593, when he was sent as envoy-extraordinary to James VI of Scotland to protest against his leniency towards George Gordon, first marquess of Huntly, Francis Hay, ninth earl of Erroll, and William Douglas, tenth earl of Angus, who were known to be in league with Spain, and to inform him that Elizabeth I would resist with military force the landing of any Spanish troops in Scotland. He had an audience with James on 15 January 1594, urging him to take vigorous action against the Spanish faction in Scotland. Unsuccessful, he asked to be sent home. Returning in the following April, he had no better success. In June 1598 Zouche was sent on a commercial mission to Denmark with Sir Christopher Perkins, who had served several times as envoy to the Danish court and was selected to accompany him. 
These missions did nothing to restore Zouche's private fortunes, and in December 1599 he begged Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary, for a public office. The result was an appointment in August 1600 to a place where he could 'live cheaply' ('Salisbury MSS', 9.302), the island of Guernsey, where he acted as deputy governor. He seems to have enjoyed life there and patronized Thomas Cartwright. His tenure, however, was short-lived. In June 1602 he was appointed president of the council of Wales and the marches, probably through Cecil's influence. 
Zouche arrived at Ludlow on 13 August, sorry to leave the warmer Channel Islands. The situation in the marches was disordered and he set out to resolve the defects of the council and the court. His task was made more difficult because of the entrenched interests of the officials, who 'resented the intrusion of a lay nobleman' (Williams, 304). Shocked at the state of affairs, he wrote that Wales and the border shires were 'stuffed with Papists' ('Salisbury MSS', 15.17). Trying to take control of the region at the expense of local interests, he exercised his authority 'soe muche that his jurisdiction is allready brought in question' (Manningham, 95). Later, John Chamberlain wrote that 'Lord Zouche plays 'rex' in Wales... with the council and justices, as also with the poor Welchmen' ('CSP dom.', '1601-3', 249). Zouche continued in office under James, who made him grants of land worth $80 a year in 1604, and continued to reward him in subsequent years. 
Zouche was sworn of the privy council on 11 May 1603, shortly after James first arrived in London. He served on various commissions over the next twenty years. The most prominent dealt with France, in July 1610, the treasury, in June 1612, Flushing and Brill, in May 1616, abuses in the treasury, in July 1618, ecclesiastical causes, in April 1620, and defective land titles, in June 1622. He was one of the first councillors for the Virginia Company, from May 1609, and the New England Company, from November 1620, and was sworn of the Scottish privy council in June 1617. Lady Zouche died early in 1611 and was buried at Heanor, Derbyshire, on 3 April. By October of that year Zouche had married Sarah ('c'.1566-1629), daughter of Sir James Harrington of Exton, Rutland, and his wife, Lucy, and widow of Sir George Kingsmill, justice of the common pleas, and of Francis Hastings, Baron Hastings. 
After the death of the earl of Salisbury (Cecil) in 1612, Zouche supported anti-Spanish interests among the English privy council against the king's favourite, Robert Carr, earl of Somerset. The distinguished botanist Mathias de L'Obel, a guest in Zouche's household, learned, through his friend Dr John Nasmith, James's chief surgeon, of attempts to poison Somerset's secretary, Sir Thomas Overbury. Zouche was caught up in the resulting court intrigue. His friendship with Thomas Egerton, Baron Ellesmere, lord chancellor, and George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, allowed the anti-Spanish interests at court and in the privy council to discover the plot and oust the Spanish faction from the king's favour. Appointed a commissioner in September 1615 to assist Sir Edward Coke, chief justice of the king's bench, in his investigation of the affair, it was said that Zouche was chosen because he was 'a man void of all partiality' (Molyneaux, 75). 
Zouche was also engaged in these years in his new position as lord warden of the Cinque Ports. He was appointed in July 1615 at the nomination of Abbot, who promoted him to thwart Somerset's nominee on behalf of the pro-Spanish interests. The Cinque Port burgesses (or 'barons') elected to the House of Commons for the seven ports were under the patronage of the lord warden as constable of Dover Castle and sheriff for the ports. The growing economic decay of the ports increased Zouche's patronage in parliament and at court because the interests of, and therefore the ability of, the burgesses to interfere were diminishing too, which enabled him to extract greater electoral influence. Zouche became very successful in obtaining the placement of his nominees. As lord warden from 1615 to 1624, in the elections of 1621 and 1624 he placed twenty of the twenty-eight seats in the face of pressure from George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, and the boroughs, the highest number ever obtained in the early Stuart period. His success was due in part to his strong advocacy of the independence and privileges of the port towns. He maintained a steady correspondence, promoting their custumals, economic interests, Dover harbour, and the channel passage. When these were challenged at court in 1621, he defended them vigorously. His relationship with the port towns, however, was reciprocal: he did not interfere with their business nor demand control of their votes in the Commons. He held the wardenship of the Cinque Ports until 17 July 1624, when ill health and Buckingham's persuasions, reinforced by a grant of $1000 and a pension of $500, induced him to resign the office, which was bestowed upon the duke himself. 
Zouche's major intellectual interests were history, literature, and mathematics. His literary friends included Sir Henry Wotton, Ben Jonson, and William Browne. Wotton, a lifelong friend, collected books, manuscripts, and paintings for him as well as reports on news and life on the continent. Zouche's cousin Richard Zouche dedicated to him 'The Dove, or, Passages of Cosmography' (1613). Claude Holyband dedicated 'A Dictionaire French and English' (1593) to him and he was also the dedicatee of the first part of William Browne's 'Britannia's Pastorals' (1613). 
The reduction of Zouche's wealth and patrimony was due largely to his passion for horticulture. He spent considerable sums on gardens, cultivating a 'physic-garden' in Hackney, Middlesex, and was a friend of the herbalist John Gerard. L'Obel superintended this garden, accompanied Zouche on his embassy to Denmark in 1598, and dedicated to him his 'Pharmaceuticam officinam animadversiones' (1605). Zouche spent most of his later years at Bramshill House, Hampshire, where he styled himself 'Lord Souch, Saint Maure and Cantelupe' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/146, sig. 101). Besides designing the house, he also designed the gardens. A keen collector of shrubs and trees, he imported Scottish firs. His garden at Hackney was full of plants which he obtained on his foreign travels in the 1580s and 1590s. 
It was at Bramshill that Abbot accidentally shot and killed Zouche's warden Peter Hawkins in July 1621, mistaking him for a deer. Abbot was there to consecrate the new chapel. A royal commission found Hawkins's death was the result of accidental homicide, and Abbot was granted a dispensation. Despite this, the archbishop's career was effectively over, paving the way for William Laud. The event marked the waning influence of the anti-Spanish interests on the privy council and the subsequent political decline of Zouche. None the less, he maintained his ties with Edward Russell, third earl of Bedford, William Stanley, sixth earl of Derby, William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, and Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton, because of his lineage, offices, politics, and religion. His religious zeal for the protestant faith was exhibited in his will. 
Zouche's closest relation was Sir Edward Zouche, who was known as Edmund and was the son of John Zouche of Ansty, Wiltshire. He was the main benefactor of Zouche's will, and called 'the son of him I loved best in life (except the lord Grey of Wilton)' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/146, sig. 101). Lady Zouche had to employ lawyers to secure her share of the estate. Zouche's lifelong estate steward and servant, William Randolph (father of Thomas Randolph, poet and dramatist, and half-brother of William Randolph, the Virginia colonist) benefited also. 
Zouche died on 18 August 1625 at Bramshill, and was buried the next day in the family vault at Eversley, Hampshire. The fact that this vault was connected with Zouche's wine cellar provoked from Jonson the lines: '
Wherever I die, oh, here may I lie, 

Along by my good Lord Zouche, 

That when I am dry, to the tap I may hie, 

And so back again to my couch. 
(Herford, Simpson, and Simpson, 8.444)' Lady Zouche married Sir Thomas Edmondes on 11 September 1626. Since Zouche did not have any sons his baronies fell into abeyance between the heirs of his daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30302


Zouche, Richard (1590-1661), civil lawyer, the son of Francis Zouche, lord of the manor of Anstey, Wiltshire, and, reputedly, of Philippa, sixth daughter of George Ludlow of Hill Deverel, Wiltshire, was born at Anstey. He was the great-grandson of the eighth Baron Zouche of Harringworth. 
Zouche was elected a scholar of Winchester College in 1601 and, in 1607, a scholar of New College, Oxford, where in 1609 he became a fellow. He graduated BCL in 1614 and in January 1618, unusually, since he had not yet taken his doctorate, was admitted to Doctors' Commons. On 8 April 1619 he took the degree of DCL and on 30 April was admitted an advocate of the court of arches. In 1620 he succeeded his teacher John Budden as regius professor of civil law at Oxford and held the chair until his death. In 1621 and again in 1624 he was elected MP for Hythe, through the patronage of his cousin Edward, eleventh Baron Zouche, lord warden of the Cinque Ports, and in a 'Bill on Penal Statutes', he sought a proviso for the Cinque Ports. 
It was probably in 1622 that Zouche married Sarah, daughter of John Hart, a proctor in Doctors' Commons, and sister of Dr Richard Hart, a fellow civilian; they had six children. Having to resign his fellowship on marriage, Zouche became a fellow-commoner of Wadham College until in 1625 he was appointed principal of St Alban Hall. He acted as assessor, or judge, of the vice-chancellor's court, which followed the civil law, and took part in the Laudian codification of the university statutes (1629-33). In 1632 he became chancellor of the Oxford diocese and was a prebendary of Salisbury. From 1626 to 1634 he was a member of the high court of delegates. Having practised in admiralty cases for many years, he was made commissioner for piracy in London, Hampshire, and Dorset and in 1641 was appointed judge of the high court of admiralty, but was removed during the civil war. 
Since Zouche was royalist in sympathy, his practice suffered during the civil war and he spent his time mainly in Oxford. Indeed, when he left London for Oxford in 1643 without paying the parliamentary subsidy, the furniture of his chambers in Doctors' Commons was confiscated by way of distress. He negotiated on behalf of the royalist forces in Oxford on their surrender in 1646. The articles allowed him and other royalists to compound for their estates without taking the covenant, and in November he was permitted to compound for interests in land at Harefield near Uxbridge, Ascott in Oxfordshire, and at Doctors' Commons at one-tenth of their value, namely $333. In 1647 he was one of those who drafted the reasons given by the University of Oxford for rejecting the solemn league and covenant. Zouche must have made some accommodation with the Commonwealth, for in 1648 he was permitted by the parliamentary visitors to retain his academic offices and his son Richard was restored to a demyship at Magdalen College of which he had been deprived. Later Zouche became a member of the mixed commission of common lawyers and civilians set up to investigate the charge of murder against the Portuguese ambassador's brother, Don Pantaleone Sa, who was condemned and executed in 1654. Three years later Zouche published a justification of the commissioners' view that an ambassador's exemption from prosecution does not extend to a member of his suite: 'Solutio quaestionis veteris et novae, sive, De legati delinquentis judice competente', which was published at Oxford in 1657, at Cologne in 1662, at Berlin in 1669, and translated into German at Jena in 1717. 
Zouche was a candidate for election as the keeper of the archives of the university in 1658 and in support of his case prepared a manuscript collection of the privileges of the University of Oxford, of which there is a transcript in St John's College Library, but he was defeated, possibly as a result of sharp practice, by Dr John Wallis. 
On becoming professor Zouche embarked on a systematic survey of the whole field of law in a series of short books intended for students of the civil law and published between 1629 and 1650. He explains the whole scheme in the preface to the last of the series, the famous textbook on international law. 
It begins with 'Elementa jurisprudentiae', published at Oxford in 1629 and 1636, at Leiden in 1652 and 1653, and at The Hague in 1665, which is illustrated by maxims, definitions, and general rules, taken exclusively from the texts of the civil law, and divided, as were most of his writings, into substantive law ('jus') and civil procedure ('judicium'). In the 'Elementa' his purpose was to show the foundations of law and procedure for a community in general. The aim of jurisprudence is the enforcement of justice, and the principles of justice are derived from natural law, the law of nations, and civil law. They apply to the human communities that exist between private individuals, between sovereign and subject, between persons in special relationships, and between one sovereign and another. Of the means by which justice is applied to these relationships, the most important is 'judicium', legal procedure. 
After mapping out the field of law Zouche came to the law of these various communities, his emphasis being on the laws applicable in England, which were of practical importance to civilians, ecclesiastical law, military law, maritime law, and international law. The largest community is that which subsists between one private person and another and between private persons and princes ('Descriptio juris et judicii temporalis, secundum consuetudines feudales et Normannicas', 1636, reprinted in R. Moket, 'Tractatus de politeia ecclesiae Anglicanae', 1683). The sequence continued with five short monographs devoted to special communities: feudal law, based on the customs of Milan and Normandy; ecclesiastical law, essentially Anglican canon law; sacred law, which is concerned with religion and pious causes; military law, concerned with military service in war and peace and with the law of nobility; and maritime law, concerned with navigation and commerce. Finally he came to international law: 'Juris et judicii fecialis, sive, Juris inter gentes et quaestionum de eodem explicatio', printed at Oxford in 1650, at Leiden in 1651, at The Hague in 1659, at Mainz in 1661, and translated into German as 'Allgemeines Volkerrecht' at Frankfurt in 1666; it was edited, with an English translation, by T. E. Holland in 'The Classics of International Law' (2 vols., 1911). Because of the paucity of sources in this area of law, Zouche says that he found it necessary to consult other authors, in particular Alberico Gentili and Hugo Grotius. His method was to set out first those propositions of law as to which there was little doubt (part 1) and then, where the matter appeared to be controversial, to treat the law as a set of open questions, with arguments both ways (part 2). In this pioneering work Zouche was one of the first writers to treat international law systematically as a whole, and essentially as a law that applied in time of peace. He treated war as a means of enforcing the rights that arose from status, from ownership, from duty or from wrongdoing in time of peace. He adopted an empirical and positivist approach, not based on natural law or religion, and drew his examples both from classical antiquity and from recent European history. He argued in favour of the term 'jus inter gentes' ('law between nations') rather than 'jus gentium' ('law of nations') to describe the subject. 

'Cases and Questions Resolved According to the Civil Law' (1652) is a casebook of problems taken from the texts of Justinian's 'Digest', with full references, primarily for the use of students of the civil law. It was originally intended to be published in 'the proper language of the civil law', but, he explained cautiously, it appeared exceptionally in English, 'that others also might discerne that the study of that learning conduceth to the knowledge of some things worthy of consideration'. Although the Roman fact-situations might appear 'forraigne', the doubts expressed and their resolution could be applied to more familiar topics. 'Specimen quaestionum juris civilis' (1653) was published anonymously. It is a series of civil-law problems on which different views are found in the literature, arranged in ten classes and addressed to students. Each problem is accompanied merely by references to enable the student to find the different opinions in the texts. 'Quaestionum juris civilis centuria, in decem classes distributa', published at Oxford in 1660 and at London in 1682, follows the same scheme as the 'Specimen', although the problems treated in the ten classes are somewhat amplified and the arguments are set out extensively, instead of by reference only. In the preface, written from St Alban Hall in 1659, Zouche refers back to the 'Specimen' and says that these 'efforts of his old age' were intended specially for the alumni of Winchester and New College, in which he himself had learned classics and civil law. In the same mode a collection of logical, rhetorical, and moral maxims, 'Eruditionis ingenuae specimen, scilicet artium logicae, dialecticae et rhetoricae nec non moralis philosophiae' (1657), illustrated from definitions, maxims, and opinions taken from Cicero's writings, was published anonymously but introduced from the 'Wicchamical museum' of St Alban Hall in 1656. 
Zouche's last book was 'The jurisdiction of the admiralty of England asserted against Sir Edward Coke's 'Articuli admiralitatis' in chap. xxii of his 'Jurisdiction of courts'', a polemical work, published posthumously (1663, repr. in G. Malynes's 'Consuetudo, vel, Lex mercatoria', 1686). Dr T. Baldwyn of Doctors' Commons certified in a preface that he received the manuscript from Zouche himself to be printed. Coke's attack on the admiralty jurisdiction is systematically refuted. Zouche argues that the law merchant did not derogate from the common law; admiralty law and common law coexist and litigants may choose their court; the special admiralty procedure makes it more convenient to litigants. 
With the end of the Commonwealth, Zouche's fortunes improved. He was a member of the commission sent to Oxford to review the work of the parliamentary visitors and to restore those who had been deprived of their posts. In July 1660 he appears as president of Doctors' Commons. On 4 February 1661 he recovered his old position as judge of the court of Admiralty, but on 1 March 1661 he died in London at Doctors' Commons and was buried in Fulham parish church. In his will he divided his estate into three parts for his wife, Sarah, who lived on until 1683, being buried in St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, for his son Richard and for his daughter Anne, who had married Robert Say, provost of Oriel. (Another daughter, Sarah, married Dr Lydall, warden of Merton.) 
Zouche left a considerable body of published work. His earliest publication was a rather feeble poem in English called 'The Dove, or, Passages of Cosmography' (1613), which described the known world after the manner of the 'Periegesis' of Dionysius Periegetes. His only other literary work is possibly 'The Sophister, a Comedy' (1639), an anonymous work which is attributed to Zouche in an old note in the Bodleian Library copy. In his own field, however, he made a major contribution to the pedagogic literature of the civil law, usually writing in Latin. He was descriptive rather than original, inclined to synthesis rather than analysis. 
His contemporary Anthony Wood, describes Zouche as: 'an exact artist, a subtile logician, expert historian, and for the knowledge in, and practice of, the civil law, the chief person of his time; as his works, much esteemed beyond the seas (where several of them are reprinted), partly testify. He was so well vers'd also in the statutes of the university, and controversies between the members thereof and the city, that none after Twyne's death went beyond him. As his birth was noble, so was his behaviour and discourse, and as personable and handsome, so naturally sweet, pleasing and affable. The truth is that there was nothing wanting but a froward spirit for his advancement. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.511)' Levack in his chapter on law in the seventeenth-century volume of the 'History of the University of Oxford', describes him as 'clearly the most distinguished civilian [lawyer] that Oxford produced in the seventeenth century. He was also the last of his kind: an English civil lawyer whose writings acquired a durable European reputation' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 563). 


@@@@@


doc= 30303


Zouche, William (d. 1352), administrator and archbishop of York, was most likely a son of the Roger la Zouche who died in 1302 holding the manor of Lubbesthorpe in Leicestershire. If this identification is correct, William's birth would have taken place some time after 1292-3, the year in which Roger, the eldest son and heir to the Lubbesthorpe manor, was born. In 1337 the two brothers, William and Roger, founded chantries at Lubbesthorpe and at Clipsham, Rutland. The future archbishop was a kinsman (but not a younger son, as has sometimes been supposed) of William, first Lord Zouche (died 1352) of Harringworth. It was the baron's mother, Millicent de Monte Alto, who had granted Lubbesthorpe to Roger la Zouche the elder in 1267-8, and it was the baron himself who presented the young William to his first ecclesiastical benefice, the rectory of Clipsham, in 1315. 
By this date Zouche had been ordained acolyte. During the ensuing year he proceeded to the subdiaconate, but thereafter his progress through the orders was slow. He was still a subdeacon in 1324, and as late as 1330 he was granted letters dimissory by Bishop John Grandison of Exeter, enabling him to proceed to all orders. His long period as a subdeacon indicates that the benefice of Clipsham was intended to finance his studies at university. In accordance with the papal constitution 'Cum ex eo', he was granted four separate dispensations for study by successive bishops of Lincoln: two by John Dalderby in 1316 and 1318, and two by Henry Burghersh in 1320 and 1324. He had attained the degree of master of arts by 1320, and it seems likely that he remained at university for a total period of some twelve years, culminating in the award of the degree of bachelor of civil law, which he is known to have received before, and probably well before, 1335. The place of his studies is not known, but as the two earlier dispensations stipulated that he was to study within England it is quite possible that he attended the schools at Oxford. 
At the conclusion of his university career Zouche entered royal service. By April 1328 he was a king's clerk, employed within the wardrobe. His efficient work as clerk of the spicery brought him promotion in January 1329, when he was appointed keeper of the great wardrobe. The favour with which he was regarded by the administration governing England in the name of the young Edward III was underlined in July 1328 by the grant, nominally at the king's petition, of a papal provision to a canonry of Exeter with reservation of a prebend. The prebend soon followed, and to it was added in December 1329 the archdeaconry of Barnstaple. He vacated this six months later for the archdeaconry of Exeter which he exchanged in turn, in June 1331, for the valuable rectory of Yaxley, Huntingdonshire. It is unlikely that Zouche personally carried out the duties of any of these ecclesiastical offices, which are probably to be seen as the means of providing him with an income. As keeper of the great wardrobe, he was based initially at Westminster; in both 1332 and 1333 he spent some time in Flanders for the purpose of obtaining cloth. In 1333, however, the wardrobe, along with other government departments, moved to York, where it was involved in providing clothing, arms, and equipment for the Scottish campaigns of 1333-5. 
Zouche's work at the great wardrobe marked him out for further promotion. On 31 July 1334 he was appointed controller of the wardrobe, and eight months later, on 1 April 1335, he was made keeper of the privy seal. In this capacity Zouche was involved in the campaign against the Scots in the summer of 1335. His more eminent role in government was reflected in two further ecclesiastical benefices, both in York Minster where he was made a prebendary in November 1335, and, twelve months later, dean. The culmination of Zouche's career as a civil servant came in March 1337 with his appointment as treasurer of the exchequer. He took office at a time when preparations for war with France and negotiations with potential allies in the Low Countries were placing ever-increasing burdens on the nation's finances. One symptom of this strain can be seen in the frequency with which the office of treasurer changed hands. After a year in office Zouche was replaced by Robert Wodehouse (died 1346), only to be recalled to the post nine months later. He was unable, however, to satisfy the king who was becoming increasingly impatient at the delays in producing adequate money and supplies for the war. Zouche's standing began to deteriorate, particularly since he was now working with Archbishop John Stratford (died 1348), a man whom Edward regarded with growing disfavour. 
William Melton, archbishop of York, died on 4 April 1340. Three days later the king granted custody of the temporalities to Zouche. The 'conge d'elire' was issued on 13 April and Zouche, leaving the treasury in the hands of a deputy, set out for York to oversee the temporalities and, as dean, to preside at the election. On the following day the king suddenly ordered the transfer of the temporalities to the officials of the chamber. It is not clear what caused this reversal: perhaps the king had been told that Stratford favoured Zouche for the vacant archbishopric. It is certain that the king wanted the post for his closest adviser, William Kilsby (died 1346). Accordingly Kilsby was sent to York, and steps were taken to secure for him a seat in the chapter. The king issued letters praising Kilsby and denying 'slanderous reports' that he had been excommunicated. On 2 May, Zouche was relieved of his office as treasurer but on the same day he found himself elected, by twelve votes to five, archbishop of York. 
No doubt foreseeing a struggle, Zouche prudently had himself installed archbishop on the day of the election. Kilsby refused to abandon his claim, and both parties appealed to Avignon. The king wrote to Pope Benedict XII ('r'. 1334-42) in support of Kilsby, and attempts were made to prevent Zouche from leaving England. On 13 August the pope ordered the excommunication of all who sought to detain Zouche, who was now finally able to set out for the papal court. Travelling via the Low Countries and Germany, on account of the French war, he had just passed through Geneva when he was kidnapped by three knights and confined in a remote place on the north side of Lake Geneva. This was clearly another attempt to prevent him from reaching Avignon, and Kilsby's involvement was strongly suspected. At length Zouche was released on payment of a ransom and after swearing not to reveal the identity of his captors. On his arrival at Avignon, Zouche was released from his oath by the pope, who took vigorous measures to bring the culprits to justice. Nevertheless, the matter of the disputed election was left unresolved for more than two years until on 26 June 1342, Zouche was granted a papal provision to the see of York by Clement VI ('r'. 1342-52). He was consecrated at Avignon on 7 July, returned to England in September, and on 8 December his enthronement took place at York. Edward III must have come to accept Zouche's elevation, since the temporalities were restored on 19 September. The question of his successor as dean gave rise to another lengthy dispute, Zouche's involvement in which led ultimately to his excommunication by Pope Clement for opposing the papal nominee. This sentence was not lifted by Clement until July 1352, three months before Zouche's death. 
Although Zouche's relations with the king had cooled during the dispute over the archbishopric, Edward was not one to harbour grudges against anyone who was likely to prove useful to him. With English military resources overwhelmingly committed on the continent, the border with Scotland remained vulnerable. Zouche, who had himself been involved in the Scottish campaigns of the 1330s, was well placed as archbishop to help in consolidating the country's defence. In 1346 Edward III's victory at Crecy moved the Scots to attempt a diversionary action to relieve their French allies. In expectation of this Zouche had been appointed warden of the Scottish march and joint commissioner of array for the northern army When King David of Scotland invaded in October, Zouche, along with Henry Percy and Ralph Neville, mustered an army to oppose him. At the decisive action of Nevilles Cross on 17 October, Zouche commanded one of the three divisions. His part in the victory, erasing the unhappy memory of the defeat of his predecessor, Archbishop William Melton, at Myton in 1319, secured him considerable renown in the north of England. 
Apart from this excursion into military affairs Zouche spent most of his time as archbishop residing in his diocese, occupied in routine administration. The smooth running of the diocese was severely challenged during the plague epidemic of 1349. Zouche warned of the imminent arrival of the disease in a letter dated 28 July 1348, in which he ordered the litany to be sung in procession on Wednesdays and Fridays, and special collects to be said at mass, in every church in the diocese. The black death arrived in Yorkshire in May 1349; it has been estimated that mortality among the beneficed clergy was over 40 per cent during July and August. Zouche remained in his diocese, moving between his manors of Cawood, Ripon, and Bishop Burton, where large numbers of clergy came to him, seeking institution to the numerous benefices which had fallen vacant through death. On one day two successive candidates were admitted to the same benefice, the first having presumably succumbed to the disease within a few hours of his institution. Meanwhile Zouche's suffragan Hugh, archbishop of Damascus, was commissioned to hold additional ordinations and to consecrate new burial-grounds. 
During the course of the epidemic, on 28 June 1349, Zouche drew up his will. It was said that he had long been suffering with a serious illness. He made provision in his will for the foundation of a chantry chapel in York Minster, where he asked to be buried, and in April 1351 he received permission from the dean and chapter to proceed with this work; it was still in progress at the time of his death. Zouche died at his manor of Cawood on 19 July 1352, and was buried in York Minster before the altar of St Edward. His chapel was eventually completed, but his executors not only failed to found his chantry but also neglected to erect any monument to his memory, 'a proof' according to the chronicler Thomas Stubbs 'of the ingratitude of his kindred and those to whom he had been an exceptional benefactor' (Raine, 'Fasti', 2.419). 


@@@@@


doc= 30304


Zuccarelli, (Giacomo) Francesco (bap. 1702, d. 1788), landscape painter and draughtsman, was born at Pitigliano, Grosseto, Italy, and baptized there on 15 August 1702, the third son of Bartolomeo Zuccarelli (1641-1706), a tradesman, and his wife, Orazia Parrini ('b'. 1675), daughter of Domenico Parrini. He went when very young to Rome, studying there under several painters and practising as figure painter before specializing in landscape. By 1728 he was in Florence, where he etched some prints after earlier Florentine artists and exhibited two religious paintings in 1729. 
From approximately 1732 Zuccarelli was settled in Venice and soon became widely celebrated for his prolific output of pastoral scenes, frequently engraved. He was extensively patronized by Joseph Smith, the British consul, for whom he painted some of his more vigorous and varied compositions (Royal Collection), and for Smith he collaborated with the architect Antonio Visentini on a series of fanciful landscapes with English Palladian buildings (the majority are in the Royal Collection). He also painted small portraits for Italian patrons, notably his friend in Bergamo, Count Francesco Maria Tassi, who subsequently published useful information about him. A rare example of an altarpiece by Zuccarelli is that of St Jerome Emiliani (1748, Pinacoteca Repossi, Chiari, Brescia). 
In 1752 Zuccarelli left Venice for London. In the previous year he had met in Venice Richard Wilson and been painted by him (1751, Tate collection). Along with Smith, Wilson may have encouraged his travelling to a country where his landscapes were already popular. He remained in London until 1762, when a sale of his work was held on 10 February and announced in the catalogue as 'by reason of his returning to Italy'. In 1765 he was back in London, exhibiting in that and the following year at the Free Society. In 1767 the paintings he sent to the Society of Artists included 'Macbeth Encountering the Witches' (a version: Shakespeare Memorial Gallery, Stratford upon Avon). He was made a founder member of the Royal Academy in 1768 ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. George III commissioned some paintings from him, including probably the large 'Finding of Moses' (1768, Royal Collection), possibly the picture of the same subject exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1773 after Zuccarelli had returned finally to Italy. In 1774 he settled in Florence, where he died at his home in the via del Parione on 30 December 1788, being buried on the 31st in Santissima Trinita. His will refers to his wife, Giustina Agata Simonetti. 
Under numerous influences, Zuccarelli created a distinctive style of decorative pastoral landscape, evolving little in his long, productive career. Some monotony is inevitable but his work at its best is agreeable and highly accomplished. 


