@@@@@


doc= 30305


Zuccaro, Federico (1539/40-1609), painter, was born at Sant'Angelo in Vado in the Marche Italy, the son of the painter Ottaviano Zuccaro ('b'. 1505) and Antonia Nari. His birth date is calculated from an inscription on a festival design executed in 1565 that identifies the artist as twenty-five years old. Zuccaro has suffered historically from the comparison with his older and shorter-lived brother and frequent collaborator Taddeo Zuccaro (1529-1566), about whom far less is known although he possessed, by consensus, a far greater artistic talent. The more copious documentary evidence on Federico -- including his own published writings, correspondence, and often angry marginal annotations to his personal copy of Giorgio Vasari's biography of his brother -- forms the impression of a worldly and ambitious artist, sensitive to slights, who exploited the more conservative religious atmosphere following the Council of Trent to achieve success. 
Federico Zuccaro went to Rome in 1550 while still a youth to live and train with his brother whom he assisted on several frescoed facade commissions between 1555 and 1560. In 1559 he received his first independent facade commission, for the Roman house of Tizio Chermandio da Spoleto, the 'maestro di casa' of Cardinal Alessandro Farnese. Thereafter, in addition to continuing to work with his brother on the decorations of Farnese's country villa at Caprarola and Vatican projects for Pope Pius through the early 1560s, Federico also went to Venice in October 1563 until July 1565, where he received commissions from the Grimani family for both their palace and their family chapel in the church of San Francesco della Vigna. He also competed unsuccessfully to replace a large fourteenth-century painting in the sala del gran consiglio. His departure from Venice was prompted by the invitation to journey to Florence to contribute to the wedding decorations of Grand Duke Francesco de' Medici and Joanna of Austria, an event that took place on 26 December 1565. While in Florence he was elected to membership in the Accademia delle Arti del Disegno on 14 October 1565. Following Taddeo's death in 1566 Federico was asked to complete his brother's paintings in the Pucci chapel in the church of Trinita dei Monti and to oversee the continuing work at Caprarola, the latter involvement lasting until his resignation under duress in July 1569. Until June 1573 Federico was active on commissions in Rome and Orvieto, at which time he left Italy and arrived in Paris in September to enter the service of Cardinal Carlo di Guisa. 
After the cardinal's death in December 1574 Zuccaro moved on to Antwerp and then to London, where he was introduced into the circle of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester and, consequently, to the court of Elizabeth I, where he remained from March to August 1575. The assumed purpose of his visit was to paint the portraits of Leicester and the queen. While no such image of Elizabeth survives, it is thought that the portrait of Leicester was executed and that it was destroyed during the Second World War. Both sitters are rendered in autograph red and black chalk studies by Zuccaro in the collection of the British Museum. Owing to a misunderstanding of how long he was actually in residence Zuccaro has traditionally been credited with stimulating the revival in full-length portraits in England. Given his brief presence there, however, and a number of full-length English portraits that predate 1575, it is doubtful that this is the case. Apart from the surviving drawings of Dudley and Elizabeth, only two drawings unquestionably from his English sojourn survive. These are chalk copies in Berlin after Hans Holbein's lost paintings for the Steelyard Guild in London. Zuccaro, however, made many sketches after works of art during his travels and some additional works with English provenance might still be identified. 
From 1575 to 1579, with brief interruptions, Federico executed the remaining two-thirds of the frescoes of the last judgment in the cupola of the Florentine cathedral of Santa Maria dei Fiore left unfinished by Vasari at his death in the summer of 1574. In 1578 he married Francesca Genga. By the end of 1579 he returned to Rome and work on decorations for the Pauline chapel for Pope Gregory XIII Boncampagni of Bologna. A simultaneous commission for an altarpiece in Bologna, when rejected by its patron, provoked the sensitive artist to design a large allegorical satire against his detractors, the so-called Port Virtutis, that was set up in Rome against the facade of the church of San Luca a Monte Santa Maria Maggiore on 18 October 1581, the feast day of St Luke, patron saint of artists. This act resulted in the artist's immediate expulsion from the city by the pope. He was not pardoned until the end of 1583, by which time the ever-enterprising artist had achieved commissions in Venice and Urbino. A major commission from Philip II to participate in the painted decorations at El Escorial brought Federico to Spain in late 1585, where he remained until the end of 1588. His return to Rome was marked by an elevation of his status as artist and gentleman as he was made a citizen by senate decree in 1591, began work on an impressive palazzo on the Pincian Hill not far from Trinita dei Monti, and was named 'principe' of the Accademia di San Luca in 1593. His well-preserved painted decorations at the Palazzo Zuccaro (now the German art history institute in Rome) are an inventive combination of high-minded allegory and family history. Several important public Roman fresco and altarpiece commissions were executed during this late period; most noteworthy are those in the cappella degli Angeli in the church of the Gesu in 1592 and in the cappella Ascoli of Santa Sabina in 1600. 
The last decade of Federico Zuccaro's life was dedicated to some lesser paintings executed for patrons in Pavia, Turin, Bologna, and the Borromeo Islands in Lake Maggiore, but this was also the period of publication of his elaborate biographical and theoretical treatises 'Lettere e principi et signori amatori del disegno, pittura, scultura et architettura' published in Mantua in 1605 and 'Idea dei pittori, scultori et architetti' published in Turin in 1607. He died of a fever in Ancona while travelling from Loreto to Urbino on 20 July 1609. In August his remains were interred with those of his brother Taddeo in the Pantheon in Rome. In his memoir of Zuccaro in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' Lionel Cust drew attention to the 'reckless profusion' of British portraits that had been attributed to that artist, and stated that Zuccaro was in Britain for a much shorter period than was originally believed. Subsequent research has reduced further the period of his stay in Britain and the number of works he produced there. Zuccaro was a successful pan-continental artist employed by popes, cardinals, and kings in Italy, Spain, England, and France. 


@@@@@


doc= 30306


Zucchi, Antonio Pietro Francesco (1726-1795), painter, was born in Venice on 1 May 1726, the son of Francesco Zucchi (1692-1764), an engraver. He was a member of a large family of artists, and studied with his father, his uncle Carlo Zucchi, a master of perspective and teacher of Piranesi, Francesco Fontebasso, and Jacopo Amigoni. His extant works in Venice include the 'Via crucis' ('c'.1750; San Giobbe) and 'The Incredulity of St Thomas' ('c'.1766; San Toma). His style developed from Venetian rococo to neo-classical. He was elected a member of the Accademia di Pittore e Scultore, Venice (1759). Conceivably the architect Robert Adam engaged Zucchi to make drawings from the Spalatro sketches for plates in 'The Ruins of the Palace of Diocletian at Spalatro' (1764), to which Zucchi subscribed, but Zucchi did not accompany Adam and C.-L. Clerisseau to Dalmatia in 1757, as stated by Goethe and in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Zucchi visited Pola, Istria, with James Adam and Clerisseau in 1760 and in 1761 went to live with them in Rome. They sketched in the city and the surrounding countryside and visited Naples. Goethe stated that 'he [Zucchi] drew figures for buildings and ruins which Clerisseau later published' (Goethe, 169). In 1763 James Adam noted that 'Zucchi [was] a worthy honest lad, a most singular character' (Clerk MSS, GD 18/4955). 
In 1766 Zucchi and his brother Giuseppe ['see below'] arrived in London to work for Robert Adam. Zucchi became his chief decorative painter, especially known for his large capriccios (for example, those at Harewood House, Yorkshire), illustrations from Homer and Virgil (examples at Home House, London), and arabesque work (as in the Lansdowne House drawing-room, now in the Philadelphia Museum of Art); he also made a drawing for a carpet at 20 St James's Square, London. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1770. He designed the frontispiece for 'The Works in Architecture of Robert and James Adam' (1773). 
The diarist Joseph Farington noted that 'Zucchi... courted Angelica Kauffman, the Artist' (Farington, 'Diary', 1.74). Fifteen years her senior, he married her ['see 'Kauffman, (Anna Maria) Angelica Catharina (1741-1807)] on 14 July 1781 and shortly afterwards they returned to Italy. He took charge of their household in Rome and showed great concern for her welfare. He recorded her work in his 'Memorandum of paintings of Maria Angelica Kauffmann'. A stroke and ill health led to his death on 26 December 1795 at his home, via Sistina 72, Rome, and he was buried in S. Andrea delle Frate, Rome, where his wife was later to be interred beside him. A tablet bears witness to their mutual devotion. His will nominated the major part of his fortune to his own family. Alessandro Longhi drew and engraved Zucchi's portrait for his 'Compendio delle vite de' pittori Veneziani istorici' (1762). 
Antonio Zucchi's brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 30307


Giuseppe Carlo Zucchi (1721-1805), engraver, was born in Venice and studied there with Francesco Zugno. He assisted his father, but, according to G. A. Moschini, appears never to have signed works until his father died in 1764, hence the difficulty in identifying which Zucchi engraved plates in Robert Adam's 'Spalatro'. He went with his brother to London in 1766 and engraved four plates signed J. Zucchi for Robert and James Adam's 'Works in Architecture' volumes 2 and 3 (1774-5). He was included in the circle of friends of Angelica Kauffmann, many of whose etchings he strengthened with a burin. He returned to Italy (1779) and became a professor at the Accademia di Roma. In 1786 Giuseppe Carlo Zucchi wrote 'Memorie cronologiche della famiglia' (MS, untraced) and in 1788 'Memorie istoriche di Maria Angelica Kauffmann Zucchi' (Vorarlberger Landesmuseum, Bregenz). Both works were consulted by G. G. de Rossi for his 'Vita di Angelica Kauffmann, pittrice' (1810). Giuseppe Carlo Zucchi died in Venice in 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 30308


Zukertort, John Hermann (1842-1888), chess player, was born on 7 September 1842, probably at Lublin in Russian Poland, the son of a converted Jew, who had been a protestant pastor of very humble means. In 1855 he entered the 'Gymnasium' at Breslau in Silesia, and in 1861 he was transferred to the university, whence (he said later) he graduated after a full course in medicine in 1866, serving with the medical corps of the German army in the campaign of that year and in 1870-71. It seems generally agreed, however, that his account of this period was exaggerated and that his interest in chess prevented completion of his degree. He learned chess at Breslau in 1861, entering for a handicap tourney in that year, and losing every game that he played, although he received the odds of the queen. He now purchased Bilguer's 'Handbook' and studied the game. 
Before the close of 1862 Zukertort encountered Adolf Anderssen, receiving the odds of the knight, and won a number of games. Henceforth, as Anderssen's most talented pupil, he began to meet first-class players on equal terms. By 1867 he was known as one of the strongest players in north Germany, and assumed the editorship (at first in conjunction with Anderssen and afterwards alone) of the 'Neue Berliner Schachzeitung', which had been founded by Neumann and Suhle after the retirement of P. Hirschfeld from the editorship of the Leipzig 'Schachzeitung'. In this he published a number of brilliant games and new variations of the openings, representing the strategic school of that period. During the previous two years he had joined Jean Dufresne in editing the invaluable 'Grosses Schach-Handbuch' (see Van der Linde, 'Geschichte und Litteratur des Schachspiels', 1874, 2.23-4). In 1871 he defeated Anderssen in a set match, and at the close of the same year the 'Neue Berliner Schachzeitung' collapsed. 
Early in 1872 Zukertort arrived in Britain by invitation of the St George's chess club, and in the tourney of that year he won the third prize (Wilhelm Steinitz taking the first and J. H. Blackburne, the second). It has been disputed whether he was naturalized, but he was thereafter regarded as an English representative in all contests abroad. The rapid strides that he made as an exponent of the game between 1872 and 1878 were attributed by him to the advantage derived from his 'assimilation of English characteristics', steadying his natural nervousness somewhat. 
From 1873 to 1876 Zukertort contributed to the 'Westminster Papers' (the official organ of the St George's club). In 1878 he won the first prize at the Paris Exhibition tournament, after a tie-match with Winawer. In September 1879, in conjunction with Leopold Hoffer, he founded and co-edited 'Chess Monthly', which continued for seventeen years to be the leading chess magazine. In March 1881 he captained the City of London club in its match with the rival St George's club, and later in the year was second to Blackburne in the Berlin tournament. He defeated Blackburne (1881) and the brilliant Paris master Rosenthal (1880) in two matches, annotating the games with an elaboration hitherto unknown in chess periodicals. In 1882 he shared the third position in the Vienna tournament. 
In 1883 Zukertort achieved one of the great objects of his ambition by triumphing over Steinitz -- possibly precipitating the latter's piqued emigration to the USA -- and winning the first prize of $300 in the London international chess tournament, in which Steinitz came second and Blackburne third. This tournament, which was the first important gathering of the kind held in London since 1862, took place at the Victoria Hall in the Criterion between 26 April and 21 June 1883. During the first six weeks of the tournament Zukertort achieved a record in first-class chess by winning twenty-two games to one defeat, showing in the performance a combination of brilliance, energy, and accuracy unequalled by any great master hitherto. His games against Winawer (of Warsaw) and Rosenthal (of Paris) were of the very highest order, while that against Blackburne, played on 5 May, was, in Steinitz's opinion, 'one of the most brilliant games on record'. But the master's nervous energy had been maintained only by recourse to opiates, leading to a breakdown on 7 June. On that day he made an elementary blunder in his game with Mackenzie, and on the two following days he was successively defeated by the weakest players in the tournament, fortunately only after his position as winner of the first prize had been assured. He never fully recovered the extraordinary mental vigour that he had exhibited during the early part of the London tournament. 
Contrary to medical advice, Zukertort persisted in accepting the challenge of Steinitz to an 'international match' -- subsequently regarded as a world championship match to which Steinitz was provoked by his tournament defeat -- the conditions of which (including the innovative use of time limits) were highly unfavourable to a man of his nervous temperament. He could not afford to lose the $400 staked. Twenty games were to be played, at New York, St Louis, and New Orleans. The British chess club entertained him in London in November 1885, before his departure. He won four out of the first five games, but was crushed by ten games to five (with five draws) before the match ended at New Orleans on 29 March 1886. 'He returned from the States a broken-down man. His nerves seemed overstrained, an impediment in his speech was noticeable, and he had not the energy to rouse himself from a kind of mental torpor' ('The Field', 71 1888, 905). 
Zukertort lost a short match with Blackburne (1887); more hopefully, in the summer handicap of the British chess club (1888) he headed the list, but on 19 June, while playing at Simpson's chess divan, he had a stroke. He was moved to Charing Cross Hospital and died there on 20 June 1888. He left two young daughters, who later returned to Germany. He was buried at Brompton cemetery on 26 June, when most of the prominent British chess players were represented at his graveside. From 1878 to 1883, said 'The Times' justly, in an obituary notice, 'Dr. Zukertort was considered by many to have attained a degree of excellence in chess that has never been exceeded' (21 June 1888, 9). 
Zukertort was a clever conversationalist and linguist (speaking English like a native), with a marvellous memory and a large store of general information (not always strictly accurate). His memory, it was said, failed him only when he had to answer a letter or keep an appointment; consequently he was known as 'the late Dr Zukertort'. At the chess-board it was impossible to gather from his countenance whether he was winning or losing, for he presented in either case the picture of abject misery, clutching his head in his hands. His gaunt, haggard, and 'corrugated' appearance was well conveyed by a pen-and-ink caricature which appeared in the 'Westminster Papers' (1 June 1876). At New York in 1886 he was described as illustrating nerves, while Steinitz illustrated solidity. 
As a blindfold player Zukertort was not surpassed even by Blackburne, and as an analyst he probably had no equal. His annotations upon the Morphy-Anderssen match in the pages of the 'Chess Monthly' were a revelation, entirely superseding the previous analysis by Loewenthal. His knowledge of the openings was exhaustive, and his analyses of the Evans, Muzio, and Allgaier gambits completely altered long-established opinions as to their value. Very few British players equalled Zukertort in devotion and service to the game of which he was such a brilliant exponent. 


@@@@@


doc= 30309


Frederik van Nassau van Zuylestein (1624-1672), soldier and courtier, was the illegitimate son of Prince William III of Orange's grandfather, Frederik Hendrik van Nassau, prince of Orange, and (it is thought) Margareta Katharina Bruyns, daughter of a burgomaster of Emmerik. Frederik Hendrik had him educated at court, giving him the title jonker van Buren and in May 1640 presenting him with the lordship of Zuylestein and Leersum. Entering the army of the states general he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of an infantry regiment in 1645, colonel three years later, and took part in Prince William II's abortive siege of Amsterdam in 1650. His marriage to Mary Killigrew on 18 October 1648 had meanwhile brought him into the English entourage of Mary Stuart, princess of Orange, who in 1659 appointed him as a suitably Anglophile governor to her eight-year-old son, the future William III. For the next seven years, first at Leiden and then at The Hague, he supervised every aspect of the prince's upbringing, from religious observance and language tuition to diet and outdoor exercise. A close bond of affection developed between them, and William was devastated when in April 1666 Zuylestein was replaced in his post by a nominee of the grand pensionary John de Witt, following the decision of the states of Holland to adopt the prince as a ward of state. 


@@@@@


doc= 30310


Frederick van Nassau van Zuylestein, third earl of Rochford (1682/3-1738), landowner, was the second son of William Frederick van Nassau van Zuylestein and his wife, Jane Wroth. Like his brother he was naturalized by act of parliament in 1696. He succeeded his brother as third earl on 27 July 1710, and an early assessment by Robert Harley judged him as 'doubtful' in his attitude to the whig ministry in the House of Lords. He does not seem to have attended in the 1713 session of parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 30311


Nassau van Zuylestein, William Frederick van, first earl of Rochford (1649-1708), soldier and diplomat, was born at Zuylestein near Utrecht and baptized on 7 October 1649 at The Hague, the elder son of Frederik van Nassau van Zuylestein and his wife, Mary Killigrew ('b'. 1627), daughter of Sir William Killigrew (bap. 1606, d. 1695) and maid of honour to Mary Stuart, princess royal of England and princess of Orange. 
William Frederick's father, 
Zuylestein continued, however, to receive an official salary and he remained close to Orange. He accompanied him on his first visit to England in November 1670; and, according to Bishop Gilbert Burnet, he was the one person in whom the prince confided following a remarkable private conversation with his uncle Charles II, in which the king revealed his 'papist' beliefs ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.501-2). About this time Zuylestein also resumed his career in the army. Promoted lieutenant-general in January 1668 he was made military governor of Breda in April 1670 and general of foot in February 1672. From Breda in May the same year he reported the movements of invading French forces along the Maas, and during the period of panic and disorder that followed the invasion he returned to The Hague where he witnessed the murder of the de Witt brothers by the mob on 20 August. (Whether he was personally involved in planning the murder, or in encouraging those who committed it, cannot be established with certainty, though as a prominent Orangist he was inevitably suspected of complicity.) He fought two months later in Orange's attempt to recapture Woerden on the border between Holland and Utrecht and he was killed at Grevenbrugge on 12 October 1672 by French forces under the duc de Luxembourg coming to relieve the town. Buried in the Kloosterkerk at The Hague on 17 January 1673, his remains were subsequently removed to Leersum. 
With Zuylestein's death the lordship passed to his elder son, William Frederick, who was already serving in a cavalry regiment of the Dutch army. Good-looking and assured, he was close in age to the prince of Orange and had become one of his favourite companions, sharing his enthusiasm for hunting. The prince was less approving when Zuylestein seduced and was forced to marry Jane ('bap'. 1659, died 1703), daughter of Sir Henry Wroth (1604/5-1671) ['see under 'Wroth, Sir Robert] and Anne Maynard, a maid of honour to the princess of Orange. The marriage ceremony was performed secretly on 28 January 1681 in the princess's chapel at The Hague and shortly afterwards a son was born, the first of six children. But Zuylestein was quickly restored to favour and in August 1687 was sent as a special envoy to London, ostensibly to offer Orange's condolences on the death of Queen Mary of Modena's mother. The real purpose of the mission was to gauge James II's intentions towards parliament and to canvass opinion among his opponents; its result was the establishment of an extensive correspondence network providing William with intelligence of English affairs. By the following spring the prince had made his decision to mount an invasion of England, provided he could be sure of support there; and it was to obtain that assurance that Zuylestein was sent on a second English mission late in June 1688. The pretext now was to convey William's congratulations to the king and queen on the birth of their son -- a birth which Zuylestein found was widely considered a fraud. And he had further meetings with the king's leading opponents, approving the so-called 'invitation' in which they pledged their support for Orange and agreeing their responsibilities in the final preparations for the invasion. By early August he was back in The Hague, reporting to William on the Association of Protestant Officers in James's army. He appears to have made a brief final reconnaissance visit to England early in November. As William's armada set sail from the Maas estuary on 2/12 November he joined the prince on board the 'Brill', reporting on the strength and movements of James II's army and recommending that the fleet should land in Dorset or Devon. 
Zuylestein was now a major-general in the Dutch army and his cavalry regiment was one of the fifteen which disembarked with the rest of Orange's forces at Torbay on 5/15 November to begin their six weeks' advance on London. A month later he was with the prince at Windsor when a letter was received from James II (detained at Rochester after his first attempt to flee the country) proposing a meeting with Orange in London. Zuylestein was immediately dispatched with a reply whose effect was both to evade the meeting (as William intended) and to force James out of the capital for good. Delivering his message to the king at St James's Palace on 16 December he insisted that Orange would not enter London while it contained forces under James's command. The following day those forces were withdrawn as Dutch guards occupied Whitehall, and on 18 December James himself was escorted back to Rochester. From there, four days later, he left for France. 
Zuylestein was duly rewarded for his part in preparing and carrying through the revolution. He was naturalized on 11 May 1689 -- a month after William and Mary's coronation -- and on 23 May was appointed master of the robes. Yet for all the skill and shrewdness of judgement that he had displayed in his missions of 1687 and 1688 he was reluctant to involve himself further in English political life -- less perhaps out of laziness, as some alleged, than from fear of parliamentary attack. As he explained to William's private secretary, Constantijn Huygens, 'he had no pretensions to be part of the grand deliberations' since 'in England it was customary for favourites and counsellors to be accused and punished if the king had done wrong' (Huygens, 'Journaal', 1.70). Instead, his services to William III during the 1690s were principally military. He accompanied him to Ireland in June 1690, fighting at the Boyne on 1 July and returning to London in August to bring news of the campaign to the queen; and in September he was promoted lieutenant-general in the English army. Subsequent years took him to the war against France in the Low Countries, where he fought with distinction at the battle of Landen (29 July 1693), rescuing the king from danger; he was wounded and taken prisoner to Namur, though he was later exchanged. 
Further honours were given to Zuylestein. On 10 May 1695 he was created Baron Enfield, Viscount Tunbridge, and earl of Rochford, while his office as master of the robes passed to William's favourite, Arnold Joost van Keppel. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 29 February 1696. From 25 December 1695 he received an annual pension from the crown of $1000; and on 26 April 1696 William granted him the confiscated estates of the marquess of Powis in Montgomeryshire, followed in July 1698 by more than 30,000 acres of forfeited Irish lands. It is unlikely, however, that he ever lived at Powis Castle; and his Irish property had to be handed over to public trustees following an 'Act of Resumption' passed by parliament in April 1700. About this time he acquired an English country house at Easton, Suffolk, but he returned frequently to his family estates at Zuylestein, where he developed the gardens first laid out by Frederik Hendrik and experimented with afforestation. Following the death of William III in March 1702 he remained briefly in Suffolk before going back to the Netherlands, where his last years were spent. He died at Zuylestein on 12 July 1708, and was succeeded as second earl of Rochford by his eldest son William van Nassau van Zuylestein. 


@@@@@


doc= 30312


Nassau van Zuylestein, William Henry van, fourth earl of Rochford (1717-1781), diplomatist and politician, was born on 17 September 1717 at St Osyth Priory, Essex, the elder son of Frederick van Nassau van Zuylestein, third earl of Rochford (1682/3-1738) ['see under 'Nassau van Zuylestein, William van], courtier and landowner, and his wife, Elizabeth (Bessy) Savage (1698/9-1746), illegitimate daughter and heir of Richard Savage, fourth Earl Rivers. Rochford was the first English-born son of a Dutch court family ennobled by William III in 1695. His childhood was spent at St Osyth, with occasional visits to the family's estates in Holland. He was educated at Eton College (1725-32), then spent several years in Switzerland, from where he returned fluent in French. 
Rochford succeeded to the earldom in June 1738 and was appointed a gentleman of the bedchamber to George II on $1000 a year. In 1741 he inherited Easton in Suffolk from his uncle Henry Nassau, and in May 1742 he married Lucy ('c'.1723-1773), daughter of Edward Younge of Durnford, Wiltshire. They had no children. As a young courtier in London, Rochford lived at 48 Berkeley Square. He formed a lifelong friendship with the actor David Garrick, and their correspondence reveals Rochford as a cheerful optimist with a lively sense of humour and a passionate devotion to the theatre, music, and dancing. Rochford had no interest in political intrigue, and decided that he could best serve his king by becoming an ambassador. Thanks to the patronage of the duke of Cumberland, Rochford was duly appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the court of Turin, the highest rank in the service short of ambassador. He and Lucy arrived at Turin on 9 September 1749. 
Savoy-Sardinia was the most important of the Italian states for British foreign policy in the eighteenth century, yet Turin was not an easy post for a novice diplomat, as France and Austria did their utmost to counteract British influence over Charles-Emmanuel III. Rochford went to great lengths to gain the king's ear, often riding out to hunt with him before breakfast. He was popular at the court of Turin, where he fostered the fashion for English country dances. His early advocacy of English interests in Savoy was successful, and he maintained close links with British consuls in the region. He played a useful role in negotiations leading to the treaty of Aranjuez (1752), and the neutrality of Savoy-Sardinia during the Seven Years' War must be credited in part to his careful cultivation of friendship between Turin and London. 
Rochford went on a tour of Italy in 1753, and employed a secret agent in Rome to report on the movements of the Young Pretender. Confessing himself 'excessively curious' for plants and herbs, he made several expeditions into the Alps from Turin, sending seedlings back to St Osyth. On his return home on leave in 1754 he brought with him a Lombardy poplar sapling, tied to the centre-pole of his carriage. The poplars at St Osyth were long regarded as the earliest in England. 
Rochford was recalled from Turin to replace Albemarle as groom of the stole on 2 March 1755. A week later he was sworn of the privy council. In April 1756 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Essex, and in November 1759 colonel of the Essex militia. Much of his time during the Seven Years' War was spent on militia exercises and Essex elections. In London he renewed his friendship with Garrick and cultivated new ones with Richard Rigby, the earl of Sandwich, Viscount Barrington, and the earl of Holdernesse. In 1758 Rochford and Lucy nearly separated after quarrelling over his affair with an expensive Italian opera dancer and her affair with Lord Thanet. They were reconciled, and Rochford chose a less expensive mistress in Martha Harrison of the parish of St George's, Hanover Square, with whom he had a daughter, Maria Nassau, soon after. When George II died on 24 October 1760, Rochford as groom of the stole was entitled to the contents of the king's bedroom, but settled for $3000 in cash, a breeches 'Bible', and a bed quilt which long served as an altar cloth in the church at St Osyth. He yielded office with such good grace that he won George III's favour and an Irish pension of $2000 a year. Rochford fell seriously ill in April 1763 and was still convalescing when he was named ambassador to Spain on 18 June 1763. 
Rochford reached Madrid on 6 December 1763. As at Turin, he had to deal with a widower king, but Charles III was not friendly towards Britain, and most of his ministers were strongly Francophile. Madrid was a key post in 1763, as British ministers feared a war of retaliation by the powers of the Family Compact, to recover their losses in the Seven Years' War. A major task of Rochford's embassy was to obtain naval and military intelligence, which he addressed with his customary diligence. He wrote over 400 dispatches from Madrid, and his figures for Spanish naval expansion were more accurate than those sent to Choiseul by the French ambassador. Rochford worked closely with the British consul-general in Spain, Stanier Porten, uncle of the historian Edward Gibbon, and made 'Frequent applications... for His Majesty's trading Subjects' (Rice, 'Diplomatic career', 319). His success in an early dispute over British logwood cutters in Honduras gave him a reputation as a tough anti-Bourbon. This did not help his major negotiation over the Manila Ransom, which remained unresolved when he left Madrid. At Madrid Rochford befriended the playwright Beaumarchais, and recommended his plays to Garrick. After witnessing the Madrid riots of March 1766 which brought down Squilace, Rochford was named ambassador to Paris on 1 July 1766. It is said that he had to pawn his plate and jewels for $6000 to settle his debts before leaving Madrid on 15 May 1766. 
Rochford insisted on taking Porten with him to Paris as his secretary of embassy, the start of a close working relationship which lasted until Rochford's retirement. At Paris from 28 October 1766 to 1 September 1768, Rochford was dean of the British diplomatic service, and kept in regular touch with other senior diplomats across Europe as well as leading politicians at home. While he could claim success in several minor negotiations over Dunkirk, the Canada bills, and the English East India Company, the two major crises of his Paris embassy were humiliating failures. The French foreign minister, Choiseul, regarded Rochford as evasive and anti-French after a proposal to resolve the first Falkland Islands dispute of 1766 by linking it to the Manila Ransom was bungled by the British secretary of state, Lord Shelburne. Much more serious was France's secret annexation of Corsica in 1768, about which Rochford had given only general warnings. The British cabinet was too weak and divided to support his strong stand at Paris. He also had the bad luck to fall seriously ill for two weeks at the most critical phase of the crisis. Feeling angry and betrayed, he returned to England to demand a cabinet post. The duke of Newcastle described Rochford as 'the fittest for it of any man in England'. Rochford was finally named secretary of state for the northern department on 21 October 1768. 
This appointment puzzled contemporaries, for Rochford's diplomatic experience lay in the southern department's sphere: some saw it as deference to Choiseul, but in fact it was because Viscount Weymouth wanted the more important of the two secretaryships. Foreign diplomats in London found Rochford more accessible and better informed than his predecessors, while British diplomats abroad were relieved and delighted to be instructed by an experienced former ambassador. As northern secretary (1768-70) Rochford was particularly scrupulous in his conduct of the routine correspondence and gave more coherence to British foreign policy than had been evident during the Chatham administration. The top priority at this time was the pursuit of a Russian alliance. As Michael Roberts has shown ('British Diplomacy'), the key post for this campaign was Stockholm, where Rochford sent large sums of money to Sir John Goodricke to help Russian attempts to influence the Swedish diet. Britain could have had the Russian alliance for the price of a large subsidy, but Rochford finally decided it was not worth the money. This decision was a realistic one in 1770, but it left Britain without a continental ally on the eve of the American war. 
While Rochford was busy with northern Europe, Weymouth gave Choiseul the clear impression that Britain would do anything to avoid another war at sea, and France therefore supported Spain in a much more serious dispute with Britain in 1770, that over the Falkland Islands. Weymouth's stance suddenly changed to one of inflexible belligerence. As military preparations quickened and the diplomatic situation remained deadlocked, the risk of war between Britain and the Bourbon powers came closer to flashpoint than at any time since the Seven Years' War. Indeed, historians suspect that Weymouth and his ambitious under-secretary Wood wanted to provoke war in order to collapse North's ministry and reinstate Chatham. George III and North now took personal control of the crisis, assisted by Rochford. North proposed that, in return for Spain's apology and reinstatement of the British garrison on the Falklands, Britain would give a secret verbal promise to abandon the islands some time in the near future. While the rest of the cabinet endorsed this solution, Weymouth rejected it and resigned. Rochford replaced him as southern secretary (19 December 1770) and took charge of the diplomatic negotiations. The crisis was resolved when Louis XV dismissed Choiseul, and Charles III realized that Spain could not fight Britain alone. It was Rochford's idea that the three powers disarm simultaneously. The formal agreement ending the crisis was signed on 22 January 1771, just one hour before parliament reassembled, but rumours of the secret promise made North and Rochford extremely unpopular with a jingoistic opposition and their London supporters. 
As southern secretary (1770-75) Rochford's workload increased considerably. Besides maintaining an extensive correspondence with British diplomats in Portugal, Spain, France, Switzerland, the Italian states, and elsewhere, this department had many domestic responsibilities (before the 1782 rationalization into Home and Foreign offices) as well as oversight of Ireland and the East India Company. Rochford's name appears on nearly every page of volumes 3 and 4 of the massive 'Calendar of Home Office Papers of the Reign of George III'. He was now part of the inner core of North's cabinet, where he got on well with Gower and Sandwich, but disliked Suffolk and Dartmouth. Rochford was the foreign policy expert, but was too nervous a speaker to be an effective spokesman in the House of Lords. Sandwich once described one of his cabinet papers on the current situation in Europe as the best he had seen in all his years in office. 
George III was clearly fond of Rochford for his 'many amiable qualities', but he was also aware of his limitations, his extravagance, and occasional indiscretions. The king once remarked to North that Rochford's 'Zeal makes him rather in a hurry', and to Suffolk that Rochford was at times 'not very prudent' ('Correspondence of George III', 2.369-72). Yet in 1771 the king told Porten that Rochford, despite poor health, was 'more active and had more Spirit' than anyone else in the cabinet (Porten MSS, 'Notes of interview with the king', 23 June 1771) which is perhaps why he relied on Rochford as his go-between in the painful negotiations with his brother, the duke of Gloucester, after the 'Royal Marriages Act' of 1772. This episode gave Rochford a bitter and influential enemy in the diarist Horace Walpole, for the duke's wife was Walpole's niece. In his memoirs, Walpole deliberately belittled Rochford as 'a man of no abilities and of as little knowledge, except in the routine of office' (Walpole, 3.168), a spiteful remark which too many historians have accepted uncritically. 
Despite his anti-Bourbon reputation, Rochford saw that the balance of power in Europe had changed with the emergence of Russia as a major power, as shown by the 1772 partition of Poland, and warned that this 'changed absolutely the System of Europe'. He therefore initiated secret negotiations for friendlier relations with France, a bold, imaginative, but risky policy which stalled in the aftermath of the Swedish Revolution of 1772. In public, of course, he had to maintain a resolutely anti-Bourbon stance, to placate the parliamentary opposition. Rochford wrote to Gower in characteristic vein on 10 October 1772: 'We are determined to let France know that we will not be bambouzled; I hope we shall not shew our teeth without biting, though I believe it will not be necessary, for I am sure if we are 'firm and temperate' we may yet keep all quiet. (Rochford to Gower, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/29/1/14)' George III shared Rochford's broader view of British diplomacy, and respected his experience and judgement, but Rochford's volatile temperament and verbal vivacity often led him into indiscreet conversations with foreign diplomats. 
By the spring of 1775 it was clear that Britain faced a serious colonial rebellion in North America. News of the Bunker Hill engagement reached London in late July, and forced North's government to recognize that Britain would have to fight a costly war at a great distance to keep control of her colonies. Rochford's policy of friendlier relations with the Bourbon powers now paid dividends, at least for a short time, by helping to keep France and Spain out of the conflict. Peace in Europe was vital for British success in America. The eventual American victory was mainly because Britain's resources were diverted after 1778 to the larger conflict at sea with France and Spain. 
Rochford himself favoured a negotiated solution to Britain's problems in the American colonies, but this brought him into conflict with his brother-secretary Suffolk, who favoured a hardline military solution. They clashed over Suffolk's scheme to hire troops from Russia, and over a minor 'faux pas' by the British charge d'affaires in Paris; Rochford's claim that he knew more about diplomacy than Suffolk was confirmed by no less a person than the Spanish ambassador, Masserano. But Rochford's failing health and increasing isolation in cabinet led him to offer his resignation in October 1775. As he left office, Rochford urged a treaty of guarantee among the European powers, to deprive the colonists of foreign aid: such a guarantee 'would conquer America sooner than 20,000 soldiers'. Britain's foreign policy towards the Bourbons in the first years of the war followed the lines set by Rochford, and certainly helped delay the involvement of France and Spain in the American war. At his retirement Rochford was granted a pension of $2500 a year, later increased to $3320. His departure from office was clouded by a blunder in drawing up a warrant for the arrest of an opposition pamphleteer, Stephen Sayre, who brought a successful action against Rochford in June 1776. 
Lady Rochford died on 9 January 1773 and was buried at St Osyth. Rochford's daughter Maria Nassau had lived with them in Paris in 1767 and since at St Osyth. Rochford by then had two children with Anne Labbee Johnstone, who now came to live with him at St Osyth. In 1776 Rochford was made master of Trinity House, and visited his estates in Holland. He was elected a KG on 3 June 1778. George III twice visited St Osyth, and presented Rochford with portraits of himself and Queen Charlotte by Allan Ramsay. In his last years Rochford was involved as lord lieutenant in preparations to defend the coast against a threatened French invasion. Commanding a camp of militia at Fingringhoe in 1781 he caught a fever, and returned to St Osyth where he lay ill for three weeks until his death on 28 September aged sixty-four. His will disposed of landed property yielding an income of $2000 a year. The earldom passed to his bachelor nephew, at whose death in 1830 the title became extinct. 
Rochford was certainly no Walpole, much less a Chatham, but he has suffered undeserved neglect as a member of the most reviled British cabinet of the eighteenth century. Nicholas Tracy has described Rochford as 'one of the stronger men of the period, ranking with Sandwich in his professionalism within his department' (N. Tracy, 'Navies, Deterrence and American Independence', 1988, 43). In his chosen profession Rochford proved himself an exceptionally diligent and effective diplomat, outwitting his French counterpart at Madrid and earning the grudging respect of Choiseul for his spirited opposition to Bourbon rearmament. Of the nine secretaries of state who controlled British foreign policy between 1763 and 1775, Rochford was the only career diplomat and former ambassador. Recent research has shown that as secretary of state he achieved as much as anyone could reasonably expect in a period of unusually difficult circumstances for Britain in Europe. He restored unity and direction to a foreign policy which had virtually collapsed in 1768, and pursued the Russian alliance as far as it was realistic to do so. It may be argued that without Rochford's skill and experience British foreign policy might have suffered worse humiliations in the period 1763-75. His more conciliatory policy towards Spain after 1771 drove a wedge into the Family Compact which delayed Spanish involvement in the American war. Hamish Scott's judgement that Rochford was 'the ablest man to control foreign policy in the first decade of peace [after 1763], a statesman of intelligence, perception and considerable application, though perhaps lacking patience and tact' remains a fair and accurate assessment (Scott, 'Anglo-Austrian relations', 9). 


@@@@@


doc= 30313


Nassau van Zuylestein, William van, second earl of Rochford (1681?-1710), army officer, was born in Zuylestein, near Utrecht, probably in late 1681, the eldest son of William Frederick van Nassau van Zuylestein, first earl of Rochford (1649-1708), army officer, and his wife, Jane ('bap'. 1659), daughter of Sir Henry Wroth of Durrants, Enfield, Middlesex. Following his father's elevation to the peerage as earl of Rochford, he was styled Lord Tunbridge. In 1696, when still aged under sixteen, he was naturalized by act of parliament. He embarked on a military career, and served as a volunteer in the campaign in the duke of Ormond's expedition against Cadiz in 1702 and in Flanders in 1703; he was made a brevet colonel on the Irish establishment a year on. However, the campaign of 1704 saw him in Flanders as an aide-de-camp to the duke of Marlborough, his father having 'hurried me into this field' ('Ormonde MSS', 8.74). In August 1704 he carried the official report of the battle of Blenheim to Queen Anne, and rather than join Ormond in Ireland he seems to have tarried in London during the winter of 1704-5 and then travelled to Flanders in the following summer. 
In 1705 Tunbridge was elected a member of the Irish parliament for Kilkenny owing to Ormond's influence. Ormond also helped to procure him the lieutenant-colonelcy of a newly raised regiment of foot guards in December 1705. In April 1706 he obtained the colonelcy of a regiment of foot, and in 1707 a regiment of dragoons. At the general election of 1708 Tunbridge was returned for Steyning, but his tenure of the seat was cut short by the death of his father on 30 June, before the parliament met. On the day following his father's death, Rochford wrote from Zuylestein to Marlborough hoping for the duke's support in the continuation of his father's pension of $1000 out of the Post Office revenues. Rochford took his seat in the Lords on 16 November 1708, but did not get the pension he craved. On 1 January 1710 he was promoted brigadier-general, and went via Italy to Spain, where he was killed at the battle of Almenara on 27 July 1710. As he was unmarried, the earldom devolved upon his brother. 


Rochford married, on 3 August 1714, Elizabeth (Bessy) Savage (1698/9-1746), illegitimate daughter of Richard Savage, fourth Earl Rivers, and Elizabeth Colleton, who brought him a country residence at St Osyth Priory, Essex. They had two sons and three daughters. He seems to have been interested in politics only intermittently, as in May 1717 Harley (now earl of Oxford) was uncertain how he would stand on his impeachment 'if in England', but in the event Rochford supported Oxford's acquittal. Perhaps in order to retain his support the whig ministry then gave him a pension of $600 p.a. in July 1717. Rochford died on 14 June 1738 at his London house in Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was buried at Easton, Suffolk, the seat of his younger brother, Henry (died 1741). His wife married the Revd Philip Carter and died on 23 June 1746, by which a reputed $4000 p.a. devolved upon her eldest son, William Henry van Nassau van Zuylestein, fourth earl of Rochford. 


@@@@@


doc= 30314


Abbey, Edwin Austin (1852-1911), illustrator and painter, was born at 315 Race Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on 1 April 1852, the eldest of the three children of William Maxwell Abbey (1827-1897), a merchant of French and English descent, and Margery Ann Kiple (1825-1880), who was descended from German and Irish immigrants. He was educated in Philadelphia at Mrs Elizabeth Hall's school (1859-62), the Jefferson and Randolph schools (1862-4), and Henry Gregory's academy (1864-8). From the age of fourteen he took drawing lessons from the landscape painter Isaac L. Williams. A year later, under the pen-name Yorick, he began sending humorous letters, riddles, and rebuses to 'Oliver Optic's Magazine: Our Boys and Girls'. In 1868 he went to work for W. H. Van Ingen and H. M. Snyder, wood-engravers, and enrolled in evening classes at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, then in 1871 he took a job as staff illustrator for the publishers Harper & Brothers and moved to New York. There he made drawings for 'Harper's Weekly' and 'Harper's Monthly', as well as for books, including Charles Dickens's 'Christmas Stories' (1876). Among his colleagues at Harper's were Winslow Homer, Arthur B. Frost, and Howard Pyle. 
Inspired by the English illustrators of the 1860s as well as Adolf Menzel and Daniel Vierge, Abbey developed a lively pen-and-ink style characterized by architectonic compositions, dazzling light effects, close attention to detail, and keen insight into human emotions. Like his illustrations, Abbey's watercolours of the 1870s were modelled on British examples. One of them, 'Rustics Dancing in a Barn' (exh. American Water Color Society, 1876), was sold to a collector who reportedly mistook it for the work of an English artist. Another, 'A Rose in October' (exh. American Water Color Society, 1878), depicted the kind of subject then popular in England: a woman in 1820s costume standing by a gate and surrounded by autumn foliage. Unfortunately the present locations of these watercolours are unknown. Abbey first encountered a significant number of British oil paintings in 1876 at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia, where he preferred the English pictures to the French. Attracted to the work of the Pre-Raphaelites, he was especially devoted to the poetry and art of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. In 1877 he joined the Tile Club in New York. Inspired by the English arts and crafts movement, the club met weekly to socialize and paint decorative ceramic tiles; members included Winslow Homer and William Merritt Chase, the sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens, and the architect Stanford White. In 1878 'Harper's Monthly' began the serial publication of Abbey's illustrations to the poetry of Robert Herrick; these were issued in book form in 1882. Meanwhile, in December 1878, Harper's sent Abbey to England to absorb its ambience at first hand. He left behind his family and friends, planning to stay abroad for a year. Instead he remained in England for most of the rest of his life, except for occasional trips to New York, which included an extended stay in 1881-2. 
During his first decade in England, Abbey's life and work revolved around the nostalgic ideal of a quiet old-fashioned existence in the country. His independent watercolours of the 1880s -- representing genteel figures in period dress, set in simple but refined rural interiors -- were exhibited in London and New York. Prominent among these were 'The Sisters' (exh. American Water Color Society, 1882), which is set in The Swan inn in Lechlade; 'The Widower' (exh. Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, 1883), set in nearby Buscot rectory; and 'An Old Song' (exh. Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, 1885), all three of which are now in the Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut. Abbey's illustrations -- for travel features, contemporary fiction, and English literature -- were serialized in 'Harper's Monthly' and often published in book form: 'Sketching Rambles in Holland' (written and co-illustrated by George H. Boughton, 1885); Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1886); two collections of old English ballads and poems, 'Old Songs' (1889) and 'The Quiet Life' (1890); and Goldsmith's 'The Deserted Village' (1902). For research on these projects the artist spent time in various small towns in the midlands. In 1885 he joined the artists' colony in Broadway, Worcestershire, where his friends included the American painters Francis D. Millet and John Singer Sargent, the English illustrator Alfred Parsons, the writers Austin Dobson, Edmund Gosse, and Henry James, and the American actress Mary Anderson. 
In 1888 Abbey began the first of four major Shakespearian projects: illustrations for the comedies, which were serialized in 'Harper's Monthly', then published in book form in 1896. This was followed by seven large Shakespearian oil paintings, notably 'Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and the Lady Anne' (exh. RA, 1896), 'Hamlet' (exh. RA, 1897; both Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut), 'King Lear' (exh. RA, 1898; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), and 'The Penance of Eleanor, Duchess of Gloucester' (exh. RA, 1900; Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh). In 1898 Abbey designed Henry Irving's abortive production of 'Richard II'. His illustrations for Shakespeare's tragedies and histories were published in 'Harper's Monthly' between 1902 and 1909 but never appeared in book form. 
On 22 April 1890, in New York, Abbey married (Mary) Gertrude Mead (1851-1931), the daughter of a wealthy New York merchant, whom he had met in Broadway in spring 1888. Both were nearly forty years of age at the time of their marriage, and they remained childless. Ambitious and well educated, Gertrude Abbey encouraged her new husband to take on more challenging projects and secured for him a commission to paint murals on the theme 'The Quest and Achievement of the Holy Grail' for the Delivery Room of the new Boston Public Library, designed by the architects McKim, Mead, and White. Abbey leased Morgan Hall, near Fairford, Gloucestershire, to accommodate work on the fifteen monumental canvases, which he completed in 1901. In the murals, as in Abbey's contemporaneous Shakespearian paintings, space is flattened and decorative and moods are high-keyed. Teeming crowds heighten the works' theatricality and project them as spectacles or public events. During the 1890s Abbey travelled to Italy, France, and Germany for research on the murals and other projects. In that period he also executed dozens of pastels, mostly showing single figures in medieval or eighteenth-century costume; these were sold to help finance work on the murals. In 1902 he received a more lucrative commission, for a series of enormous murals to decorate the new state capitol in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, his native state. Its centrepiece is 'The Apotheosis of Pennsylvania', an omnium gatherum of figures drawn from the entire history of the state, which dominates the vast ornate chamber of the capitol's house of representatives. For Harrisburg, Abbey developed a more classicizing approach, one that not only embodied his own increasing academicism but also reflected a more general turn away from flat, decorative, two-dimensional art towards a more physically conceived, three-dimensional style. 
Recognized as one of the leading artists of his time, Abbey was showered with honours and awards. In the United States he belonged to the American Water Color Society in New York (member, 1876), the American Academy in Rome (member, 1895), the National Academy of Design (associate, 1901; member, 1902), and the American Academy of Arts and Letters (member, 1904); he also received honorary degrees from Yale University (MA, 1897), and the University of Pennsylvania (LLD, 1902). In England he was elected to the Royal Academy (associate, 1896; member, 1898), the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours (member, 1883; resigned 1893), and the Royal Watercolour Society (member, 1895). In addition he won gold medals in numerous international expositions in Europe and the United States and was an honorary member of artists' academies in Paris, Munich, and Madrid. In 1903-4 he executed the official painting of the coronation of Edward VII (Royal Collection), a huge canvas involving more than a hundred individual portraits. The king recommended Abbey for a knighthood in 1907, but he declined the honour in order to retain his American citizenship. 
Abbey died of cancer at his London residence, Chelsea Lodge, 42 Tite Street, Chelsea, on 1 August 1911; following cremation his ashes were buried on 3 August at Kingsbury Old Church, near Willesden. His widow oversaw his memorial exhibition at the Royal Academy early in 1912 and commissioned the two-volume biography by E. V. Lucas (1921) that remains the standard work on the artist. After her death in 1931, her executors donated the more than 4000 works of art in her estate to the Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven, which is now the foremost repository of Abbey's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 30315


Abbey, John Roland (1894-1969), book collector, was born in Brighton on 23 November 1894, the eldest of three sons of William Henry Abbey, brewer, of Sedgwick Park, Horsham, and his wife, Florence, daughter of Henry Belcher, of Hove, Sussex. He was named John Rowland, but later dropped the 'w'. 
In consequence of an accident which caused lasting damage to one elbow, Abbey was educated by a private tutor, Mr Moens, at Rottingdean, instead of at school. In November 1914 he was commissioned in the rifle brigade and served as a regimental officer on the western front for two years from September 1915. The 13th and 8th battalions, to which he was posted in succession, saw severe fighting and both suffered heavy casualties. During the capture of Flers on 15 September 1916, when he was temporarily in reserve, the 8th battalion lost all its officers except one. He spent five months in hospital and on sick leave after being gassed in November 1916, the only interval in this long term of active service. He was invalided home in October 1917 and demobilized in August 1919. His war experiences in France and Flanders, especially during the third battle of Ypres, remained a vivid memory even in old age. His younger brother Lieutenant Noel Roland Abbey was killed in action in France in 1918 while serving with the Grenadier Guards. 
Abbey became a director of the Kemp Town brewery, Brighton, after leaving the army, and succeeded his father as chairman after the latter's death in 1943. The brewery was sold to Charrington's in 1954. On 7 June 1921 he married Lady Ursula Helen Cairns ('b'. 1899), second daughter of the fourth Earl Cairns. There were two daughters of the marriage. Abbey rejoined the rifle brigade in November 1939 and served for two years from 1941 as staff officer to the admiral-superintendent, Great Yarmouth, until his release in October 1943. In 1946 he was granted the honorary rank of major. 
Abbey started to collect in 1929, buying initially the productions of the modern private presses, and eventually formed complete collections of books from the Kelmscott, Ashendene, and Gregynog presses. His Kelmscott books included the 'Bible' in pigskin blind-tooled by the Doves bindery after a design by William Morris; the Gregynog books were all bound by the press bindery. Meanwhile he had become interested in modern bindings and in 1931 commissioned examples from Sybil Pye and R. de Coverley & Sons. The latter, on a copy of 'Memoirs of an Infantry Officer', by Siegfried Sassoon, bore Abbey's arms and was decorated to his design. His first antiquarian bindings were some modestly priced armorial examples from the Rosebery sale of 1933 but this part of the collection was rapidly built up between 1936 and 1938 with purchases from the Mensing, Moss, Aldenham, Schiff, and Cortlandt F. Bishop sales and ultimately numbered over 1300 works, including seven Groliers. Contemporary French binding, with its faultless technique, its air of luxury, and its bold colouring, gave him particular pleasure. In 1937 he ordered his first specimen from Paul Bonet, whom he regarded as the greatest living master of the craft, and eventually he owned 100 modern illustrated books, mostly in polychrome bindings by Bonet, Creuzevault, Martin, and other members of the Societe de la Reliure Originale, acquired or commissioned on post-war visits to Paris. 
Bindings, however, did not monopolize his interest or resources. From 1935, with the help of two booksellers, George Stephenson of Messrs Rimell, and later George Bates, of Hove, he collected English colour-plate books of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Here he broke new ground by paying attention to many neglected minor works, to copies in the wrappered parts in which they were issued, and to original condition. The collection, eventually consisting of 1914 items, represented the most creative side of his connoisseurship. 
In 1946 Abbey entered a new field by buying for $40,000 the collection of illuminated manuscripts, mostly written in Gothic or humanistic scripts, formed by C. H. St John Hornby, the founder of the Ashendene Press. With the help of a small but distinguished group from Sir Sydney Cockerell, of the fourteenth-century 'Ruskin Hours' and the late and lavish 'Monypenny Breviary' bought from a Hove collector, D. M. Colman, and of single purchases from booksellers and at auction, Abbey finally acquired 143 medieval and Renaissance manuscripts. This collection, however, although including many outstanding volumes, remained a somewhat heterogeneous assemblage, owing its excellence more to the taste of Hornby and Cockerell than to its owner's discrimination. The library reached its maximum size at Greyfriars, Storrington, in the mid-1950s, with the addition of many bibliographical works and private library catalogues -- bought in part at the suggestion of A. N. L. Munby -- and an almost complete set of Roxburghe Club publications. 
Abbey made no pretensions to scholarship and knew no language except English. It was the appearance, not the contents, of books which appealed to him. He was, however, a keen reader and a tireless visitor to libraries and bookshops; he had an excellent visual memory and a flair for quality in bindings; and he was fortunate in being advised by distinguished scholars, notably G. D. Hobson and A. N. L. Munby. He admired bibliographical scholarship and wanted his collections to be of service to bibliographers. For this purpose he commissioned a series of handsomely produced catalogues; G. D. Hobson, 'English Bindings, 1490-1940, in the Library of J. R. Abbey' (1940); A. R. A. Hobson, 'French and Italian collectors and their bindings, illustrated from examples in the library of J. R. Abbey' (1953); J. J. G. Alexander and A. C. de la Mare, 'The Italian Manuscripts in the Library of Major J. R. Abbey' (1969). The bindings he had commissioned both in Britain and on the continent were exhibited at the Arts Council in 1949 and 1965, and described in the exhibition catalogues. In early days he bought many damaged or over-restored specimens. But a post-war visit to Sir Robert Abdy's eighteenth-century morocco library at Newton Ferrers, in a room permanently curtained to prevent sunlight fading the spines, converted him to the French attitude to book collecting, in which quality and fine condition are the predominant considerations. 
Having bought extensively in the buyer's market of the 1930s Abbey was not always able to resist the temptation of a profit when prices rose after the war. Through John Carter of Charles Scribner & Sons he sold the colour-plate collection to Paul Mellon before the last two volumes of the catalogue had appeared. It is now at Yale University. A small group of fine books went to H. P. Kraus, of New York, and his German bindings to the Wurttembergische Landesbibliothek, Stuttgart. The other bindings and the bibliography were auctioned in a series of four sales in 1965-7 for $378,313. In 1967 Abbey moved from Redlynch House, Salisbury (his residence since he left Storrington in Sussex in 1957), to a flat at 12 Hill Street, Mayfair. Here the medieval manuscripts, French illustrated books, and modern bindings were shelved. He died in London on 24 December 1969. With the exception of a select group of manuscripts retained by his family, the Kelmscott Press books, which he had given to Eton College Library, and a choice of six French bindings bequeathed to the British Museum, the remainder of the collection was dispersed in five further sales in 1970-75 for $993,509. 
If not the most learned, Abbey was certainly the largest English book collector of his time. His colour-plate collection showed genuine originality and his catalogues represented real advances of knowledge. Although sometimes too ready to take offence in matters affecting his collection, he was of a naturally amiable disposition and a generous and charming host, always glad to welcome scholars or fellow collectors. He was responsible for the publication of three books, compiled by E. Jutro and other collaborators: 'Scenery of Great Britain and Ireland in Aquatint and Lithography, 1770-1860' (1952); 'Life in England, in Aquatint and Lithography 1770-1860' (1953); and 'Travel in Aquatint and Lithography' (2 vols., 1956-7). His favourite pastime, next to book collecting, was croquet, a game he played with skill and enthusiasm. Abbey was appointed high sheriff of Sussex in 1945. 
Anthony Hobson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30316


Abbott, Edwin Abbott (1838-1926), headmaster and writer, was born at 38 Gloucester Place, Marylebone, Middlesex, on 20 December 1838, the eldest son of Edwin Abbott (1808-1882), headmaster of the Philological School, Marylebone, and his wife, Jane Abbott (1806-1882), a first cousin. Educated at the City of London School under Dr G. F. W. Mortimer, he entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1857, became senior classic and senior chancellor's medallist in 1861, and was elected to a fellowship at his college in 1862. He resigned this position in 1863 on account of his marriage with Mary Elizabeth (1843/4-1919), daughter of Henry Rangeley, landed proprietor and coal owner, of Unstone, Derbyshire. They had one son and one daughter. Abbott was ordained deacon in 1862 and priest in 1863. 
Having held teaching appointments at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and Clifton College, Abbott was elected in 1865, at the early age of twenty-six, to the headmastership of the City of London School, which he held until his retirement in 1889. The school had already risen greatly in reputation under Abbott's predecessor and teacher, Dr Mortimer; but it was owing to Abbott's inspiration that it won the distinction of providing the highest intellectual training. His greatness as an educator derived partly from his organization of new methods of instruction, partly from his initiation of many innovations in the school curriculum, and partly from what can only be called his genius for teaching. Having a reverence for physical science not often found among the classical scholars of his day, he made an elementary knowledge of chemistry compulsory throughout the upper school. As regards classical instruction, he instilled in his pupils the greatest respect for severe standards of formal scholarship; but he breathed new life into it, being among the first, for instance, to adopt the reformed pronunciation of Latin. Having caught the enthusiasm then prevalent at Cambridge for the study of comparative philology, Abbott provided advanced teaching in the subject for the members of his sixth form, where he introduced his keenest pupils to the study of Sanskrit. More than one of them -- notably Professor Cecil Bendall -- became eminent Sanskrit scholars. 
Abbott's most fruitful innovation in the traditional curriculum was the introduction of English literature as an integral part of form-teaching throughout the school. Every term his sixth form studied a play of Shakespeare as they studied a Greek play, in the hope that the language and soul of one great world would help to interpret the other. His own enthusiasm for great literature inspired the careers of such pupils as Arthur Henry Bullen, Sidney Lee, and others who won fame as English scholars and men of letters. Of all the capacities that he strove to evoke in his pupils, Abbott valued most highly that of the clear expression of serious thought, which he conceived to be the chief result of the Oxford Greats training; and of all his pupils he was perhaps proudest of H. H. Asquith, whom he regarded as its best representative. 
A great moral and religious teacher, Abbott had the mark of the spiritual leader in that he could impart to others something of his own inspiration. Without driving or overtaxing his pupils, he made intellectual effort a kind of religion for them; his deep reprobation of intellectual slackness and unveracity was such a spur to them that his sixth form became a most stimulating training ground for eager and receptive spirits. In spite of a frail and delicate physique, Abbott could keep discipline without effort. He was an impressive preacher: in the pulpit he was a bold and original exponent of advanced broad church doctrines. His own university elected him Hulsean lecturer in 1876, and Oxford invited him to be select preacher in 1877. But, next to teaching, Abbott's vocation lay in writing; and it was probably the attraction of complete leisure for literary work, as well as his weariness of administration, which prompted his retirement at the zenith of his reputation and at the comparatively early age of fifty in 1889. 
During the active period of his life Abbott produced much. He began to publish in 1870, and his important works include 'Shakespearean Grammar', in 1870; 'English Lessons, for English People', in 1871 (written with J. R. Seeley); and 'How to Write Clearly', in 1872. The English classical author on whom Abbott laboured most was Francis Bacon. In 1877 he published 'Bacon and Essex' to correct the partial judgement of James Spedding of Bacon's action on the occasion of the trial of the earl of Essex. The introduction which accompanied his seventh edition of Bacon's 'Essays' (1886) contains an original and masterly study of Bacon's varied activities and complex character. 
More numerous and perhaps more weighty than Abbott's works of secular scholarship are his theological writings. Their range is wide, for they include treatises of textual criticism, showing the most minute and laborious attention to statistical details and to linguistic interpretation ('Johannine Vocabulary', 1905; 'Johannine Grammar', 1906), as well as works of high religious imagination and bold constructive power, such as 'Philochristus' (1878), 'Onesimus: Memoirs of a Disciple of Paul' (1882), and 'Silanus the Christian' (1906). These are striking expositions of the broad church point of view; the first is dedicated to J. R. Seeley. His broad church sympathies also inspired 'Philomythus' (1891), a critique of J. H. Newman's 'Essay on miracles', and 'The Anglican Career of Cardinal Newman' (2 vols., 1892). However, he is most remembered as the author of 'Flatland: a Romance of Many Dimensions', published under the pseudonym of A Square in 1884. At once a lesson in higher dimensional geometry, a social satire, and an expression of religious principle, this work gives lasting testimony to Abbott's genius as a teacher and to his literary and moral imagination. 
Abbott died of influenza at his home, Wellside, Well Walk, Hampstead, London, on 12 October 1926, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30317


Abbott, Evelyn (1843-1901), classical scholar, was born at Epperstone, Nottinghamshire, on 10 March 1843, the third of the five sons of Evelyn Abbott, a farmer and landowner, and his wife, Mary Lambe. Educated first at Lincoln grammar school and afterwards at the Somersetshire College, Bath, Abbott was elected in 1862 to an open exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford. He gained a high academic reputation and was also a good athlete. In 1864 he won the Gaisford prize for Greek verse and a first class in classical moderations. In the Easter vacation of 1866, just before he entered for his final examination, he fell in a hurdle race and injured his spine. Unfortunately, unused to illness as he was, he did not recognize the serious nature of the accident, and continued his exertions, both at his books and at cricket, as if nothing had happened. In the summer he obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores'. In the following autumn, when the damage became obvious, it was too late for a cure; he became hopelessly paralysed in the legs, and never walked again. For thirty-five years, thanks to a very strong natural constitution and great courage and patience, he managed to overcome this handicap. He soon began to take private pupils, sometimes near his birthplace in Sherwood Forest, sometimes at Filey. In 1870 he was appointed sixth-form master at Clifton College by John Percival. In 1873 Benjamin Jowett, master of Balliol, invited him to return to Oxford, and until 1875 he took work at Corpus as well as at Balliol. In 1873 he graduated BA and MA. In 1874 he was elected a fellow and tutor of Balliol. From that time until his resignation, only a few days before his death, he was a mainstay of the administration and teaching of his college. At first he taught mainly Latin and Greek literature; in his later years Greek history was his principal subject. He became Jowett lecturer in Greek in 1895, was librarian of the college from 1881 to 1897, and in 1882 served as junior bursar. 
Throughout his life Abbott was constantly engaged in writing in addition to his college work. He was well versed in German, and besides Curtius's 'Elucidations of the Students' Greek Grammar' (1870) he published 'History of Antiquity' (6 vols., 1877-81), a translation of the work by Max Duncker. He also assisted Sarah Frances Alleyne (1836-1884) in English versions of Duncker's history of Greece (2 vols., 1883-6) and 'Outlines of Greek Philosophy' (1885), a translation of the work by Zeller. He was editor of 'Hellenica' (1880; 2nd edn, 1898), a collection of essays on Greek themes, and was general editor of the 'Heroes of the Nations' series, to which he contributed a life of Pericles (1891). Other works were 'Elements of Greek Accidence' (1874) and an index to Jowett's translation of Plato (1875). With Lewis Campbell he wrote a biography of Benjamin Jowett, master of Balliol and his lifelong friend (1897). His most important literary work was his 'History of Greece' in three volumes (1888-1900), admirable alike for its learning, sound judgement, and simple and lucid style. The sceptical view of the 'Iliad' and 'Odyssey', which regards them as purely works of poetical imagination, had not previously been so ably presented, and it demonstrated Abbott's independent method in treating historical problems. 
Abbott, who was made LLD of St Andrews in 1879, maintained his activities until a few weeks before his death at Knotsford Lodge, Great Malvern, on 3 September 1901. He was buried at Redlands cemetery, near Cardiff. 


@@@@@


doc= 30318


A Beckett, Arthur William (1844-1909), humorist and journalist, the third son of Gilbert Abbott A Beckett (1811-1856) and Mary Anne Glossop (1817-1863), was born at Portland House, North End, Fulham, on 25 October 1844. He was educated at Honiton, then at Felsted School (1858-9). His eldest brother was Gilbert Arthur A Beckett (1837-1891). Like so many contemporary journalists, including both his brothers, his first journalism was in part supported by a clerkship, in Arthur's case, at the War Office. From there he migrated to the Post Office, but left the civil service altogether after only three years in 1865. Journalism was always his first vocation, but at various times he took other employment. From 1871 to 1874 he was private secretary to the fifteenth duke of Norfolk. He resigned in the same year that he, like his close friend, Francis Cowley Burnand, converted to Roman Catholicism. In 1877 he joined Gray's Inn and was called to the bar in 1882, but never practised; in 1887, however, he served as Master of the Revels at his inn of court. 
From 1865 to 1868 A Beckett assisted Burnand with a penny evening humorous paper, the 'Glow-Worm'; and from 1868 to 1870 edited the magazine 'Britannia'. Although he did not consider it important at the time, his most significant editorship was of the short-lived weekly 'Tomahawk', which combined satire, informed rumour, and social intelligence. It owed something to contemporary Parisian models, but was designed for a very specific English readership. 'Tomahawk' was the inspiration for and progenitor of Gibson Bowles's later enormously successful 'Vanity Fair'. A prolific, facile writer, A Beckett engaged tirelessly, but with little distinction, in a multitude of literary tasks. He was by turn, and often simultaneously, novelist, dramatist, versifier, humorist, and editor. During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 he acted as special correspondent to the 'Globe' and the 'Standard'. This experience kindled an enthusiasm for 'amateur soldiering' which he indulged as a militia captain commanding a company of the 4th battalion of the Cheshire regiment. He also edited the 'Naval and Military Magazine', a short-lived journal published between 1897 and 1899. 
A Beckett's longest, most significant, literary connection was with 'Punch'. The title of one of his volumes of recollections, 'The A Becketts of Punch' (1903), reveals that he thought of the magazine almost as a family property. He claimed, incorrectly, that his father was one of its founders. To his chagrin his earliest contributions to 'Punch' were refused. But in May 1874 he was asked to contribute, and in August of the following year he was made a member of the staff. 'Punch' never had a more ardent devotee. In 1880 Burnand became editor and, after a short, initial period of reforming activity, he appointed A Beckett as his deputy. Known by everyone in the literary world, popular, cheerful, self-assured, and careless, A Beckett presided over 'Punch''s decline into decrepitude. He would have nothing changed; all new blood was excluded. What at first had been gay, spontaneous, novel, became by repetition dull, predictable, and mechanical. Eventually, in 1902, the long-suffering proprietors were obliged to act: A Beckett, confidently expecting to be made editor, was instead asked to resign. His amazement, outrage, wounded ambition, and injured pride at this unexpected outcome were thoroughly indulged in a rambling, autobiographical fragment, 'Recollections of a Humorist' (1907). 
From 1893 to 1895 A Beckett also served as working editor of the 'Sunday Times'. With such a double burden, even his irrepressible energy could guarantee neither accuracy nor originality. Yet egotism and naivety were so balanced in his character that he could as little appreciate his faulty work at the 'Sunday Times', or understand why Cardinal Manning was not anxious to purchase a loss-making sporting sheet on his recommendation, as comprehend why he had been dismissed from 'Punch'. He had little real talent as a journalist. His geniality, abundant charm, and kindliness best explain how he managed for so many years to keep a number of demanding and important jobs. He was a good committee man, serving the Society of Authors from 1891 until 1903, and was an office holder and president of the Newspaper Society (1893-4) and the Institute of Journalists (1900-01). 
On 17 February 1876, A Beckett married Susannah Frances, only daughter of Forbes Winslow MD; they had two sons. Susannah was an occasional contributor to various magazines, and a vice-president of the Society of Women Journalists. A Beckett died of post-operative shock on 14 January 1909, after the amputation of a leg; he was buried in Mortlake Catholic cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30319


Abel, Sir Frederick Augustus, first baronet (1827-1902), chemist and explosives expert, was born on 17 July 1827 at Woolwich, the eldest son of Johann Leopold Abel (1795-1871), a music master in Kennington, and his wife, Louisa (died 1864), daughter of Martin Hopkins of Walworth. His paternal grandfather, August Christian Andreas Abel ('b'. 1751), was court miniature painter to the grand duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. 
Abel was attracted to a scientific career by a visit at the age of fourteen to an uncle in Hamburg, A. J. Abel, a mineralogist and pupil of Berzelius. After a course of chemistry under Dr Ryan at the Royal Polytechnic Institution, he entered the Royal College of Chemistry, founded in October 1845 under A. W. Hofmann, as one of the twenty-six original students. Next year he became an assistant, holding the position for five years. In 1851 he was appointed demonstrator of chemistry at St Bartholomew's Hospital to Dr John Stenhouse, and in March 1852 lecturer on chemistry at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in succession to Faraday. With Charles Loudon Bloxam (died 1887), his assistant and successor there, he published a useful 'Handbook of Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and Technical' (1854; 2nd edn, 1858). 
Abel married Sarah Selina (1854-1888), daughter of James Blanch of Bristol. They had no children. He became ordnance chemist at Woolwich on 24 July 1854, and was made chemist to the war department there in January 1856. He retired from Woolwich in 1888. His first wife died in the same year, and on 31 December 1888 he married Guilietta La Feuillade (1853-1892). 
At Woolwich, Abel was the chief official authority on all matters connected with explosives. The transformation of arms and ammunition which took place during his tenure necessarily occupied the greater part of his scientific career, though almost every branch of technical science was enriched by his labours. The supersession of black by 'smokeless' powder was due to his researches on gun cotton, founded on the attempts of Baron von Lenk to utilize this explosive in 1862. He developed the process of reducing gun cotton to a fine pulp, which enabled it to be worked and stored without danger; the results were published as 'Gun Cotton, a Lecture' (1874) and 'The Modern History of Gunpowder' (1879). Another important research, undertaken jointly with Andrew Noble, determined the nature of the chemical changes produced on firing explosives. This work, carried out at great personal risk, threw new light on the theory of explosives. The conclusions were published in various papers and lectures from 1871 to 1880: 'On Explosive Agents' (1871), and 'Researches on Explosives with Capt. Noble' (1875, 1880). 
The explosion in Seaham colliery in 1881 led to the appointment of a royal commission on accidents in coal mines on which Abel served. This in turn prompted his researches on dangerous dusts (1882), in which he investigated the part played by dust in bringing about an explosion. In other directions he reached equally important results. As an expert in petroleum he devised the Abel open-test, with a flashpoint of 100 degree F, legalized in 1868, which was superseded in 1879 by the Abel close-test, with a flashpoint of 73 degree F. He also carried out many researches into the composition of alloyed metals with reference to their physical properties. 
Abel's last piece of work, carried out with James Dewar, was the invention of cordite in 1889. The use of high explosives abroad forced the British government to search for a better material than gun cotton, and a committee was appointed in 1888, under Abel's presidency, to examine all the modern high explosives. None of them was exactly suitable to service requirements, and their inventors would not make the necessary modifications. Abel and Dewar therefore devised and patented a compound of gun cotton and nitroglycerine and assigned it to the secretary of war in 1890. The wording of the patent application was crucial, for it allowed them to circumvent other patents held in the fields of nitroglycerine and nitrocotton explosives, principally those of Alfred Nobel and his company. The selection of gun cotton rather than soluble nitrocellulose seemed to many to have been made purposely to take advantage of a gap left in Nobel's earlier patent for ballistite. Nobel decided to sue when he learned that Abel and Dewar had, early in 1889, seen full specifications of his invention in their capacity as members of the government's explosives committee. The cordite case lasted three years (1892-5); Nobel lost, having no case in law, but many believed that he had been harshly treated. 
Abel contributed over sixty-five papers to scientific publications, and some important articles to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. His remarkable powers of organization and his official position as scientific adviser to the government gave him a prominent role in the scientific world. He was elected FRS in 1860, and received the royal medal in 1887. He was successively president of the Chemical Society (1875-7), the Institute of Chemistry (1881-2), the Society of Chemical Industry (1883), and the Institution of Electrical Engineers. He was president of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1891, and was awarded the Bessemer gold medal in 1897. He acted as chairman of the Society of Arts (1883-4) and received the Albert medal in 1891. The Telford medal was bestowed on him by the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1879. 
He presided over the chemistry section of the British Association in 1877, and as president of the association in 1890 he gave an address on recent practical applications of science. When the foundation of the Imperial Institute was decided on in 1887, Abel was appointed organizing secretary, remaining its honorary secretary and director from its opening in 1893 until it was transferred to the Board of Trade in 1901. He was made CB in 1877, was knighted in 1883, became KCB in 1891, a baronet in 1893, and GCVO in 1901; he received honorary degrees of DCL (Oxford, 1883) and DSc (Cambridge, 1888). He combined with his scientific capacity high accomplishments as a musician. Abel died of cardiac failure at his residence, 2 Whitehall Court, London, on 6 September 1902 and was buried at Nunhead cemetery on 11 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 30320


Abell, Sir Westcott Stile (1877-1961), naval architect and surveyor, was born on 16 January 1877 at Littleham in Devon, the first of the four sons of Thomas Abell, house painter and, later, builder and member of Exmouth council for over fifty years, and of his wife, Mary Ann Stile. He also had a half-sister. He was educated at West Buckland and Devon County schools and the Royal Naval Engineering College, Keyham (1892-7), before proceeding in 1897 to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. At the age of twenty he lost his right hand and suffered serious throat injuries while lighting fireworks to celebrate the diamond jubilee. Despite this handicap, he taught himself to write with his left hand and recovered to such good purpose that he passed out head of his year (1900) at Greenwich with a level of marks unsurpassed for many years. 
Abell entered the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors in 1900, was attached to the staff of the chief constructor at Devonport Dockyard, and was shortly afterwards transferred temporarily to the Admiralty to assist at the inquiry into the stability of the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert'. After a further short spell at Devonport, he was posted to the Admiralty, and from 1904 to 1907 he was professional private secretary to Sir Philip Watts, director of naval construction. During this period he was closely involved with the committee on designs which had been appointed by Sir John Fisher. In 1902 Abell married Beatrice Gertrude (died 1953), daughter of Joseph Wyld Davenport, dentist, of Devonport. They had one son, T. W. D. Abell, who adopted his father's profession, and three daughters, one of whom married the scientist D. W. W. Henderson. 
In 1907 Abell became junior lecturer on naval architecture at the Royal Naval College until his selection in December 1909 to be professor of naval architecture in the newly founded chair at Liverpool. In 1909 he also became a member of the Institution of Naval Architects. In 1913 he was appointed a member of the committee of the Board of Trade to examine the application of the 'Merchant Shipping Act' to the internationalization of load lines. It was for this work that he was awarded the James Watt gold medal in 1919. He was chairman of the technical subcommittee, and his lifelong interest and association with the solution of the problems of safety of life at sea probably dated from this period. His outstanding contributions to the Institution of Naval Architects on these subjects must certainly have earned him recognition by the committee of Lloyd's register of shipping, and in 1914 he was invited to fill the post of chief ship surveyor, a position which he occupied with distinction for the next fourteen years. On vacating the chair at Liverpool, he was succeeded by his brother Thomas Bertrand Abell. 
During the First World War, Abell made a significant contribution in the field of merchant shipbuilding and was also closely associated with the Admiralty in the construction of great numbers of naval auxiliary craft. He also served on a special Admiralty committee to determine the feasibility of submarine merchant vessels to thwart the growing U-boat menace, and in 1917 was also appointed technical adviser to the controller of shipping. Among his many other commitments he was a member of a war committee on the distribution of steel and of the advisory committee on the merchant shipbuilding programme. 
In recognition of his outstanding services Abell was created KBE in 1920, and now turned his attention to the peacetime problems of ship classification and safety. Fully aware that the war had stimulated technological advance, he directed a complete revision of the structural requirements of Lloyd's rules and effected major amendments to their philosophy, which resulted in an increase of structural efficiency and, as a corollary, the reduction of steel weights. For the first time longitudinal framing was recognized as a valid form of construction. He also recruited many young graduates of attainment who were later to rise to eminence in the service of Lloyd's. 
Abell served on the Board of Trade load-line committee in 1927, but in 1928 he resigned his appointment with Lloyd's register to take up the chair of naval architecture at the Armstrong College of Durham University at Newcastle upon Tyne; and, shortly after his return to academic affairs, he was a British delegate at the international Safety of Life at Sea Conference in 1929. It was he who designed the channel train ferry, for which special docks had to be built at Dover and Dunkirk. Three ships were built, one of which was launched by Abell's wife. They were used for mine-laying during the Second World War. 
Abell made many important contributions to technical institutions. His publications included 'The Ship and her Work' (1932), 'The Safe Sea' (1932), and 'The Shipwright's Trade' (1948), the last of which exhibited a profound understanding of ships and shipbuilding. It was he who was responsible for getting the 'Cutty Sark' dry-docked at Greenwich, and his worry about the condition of the 'Victory' at Portsmouth caused Lord Louis Mountbatten to get the woodwork restored. 
Abell was a member of the executive committee of the National Physical Laboratory and chairman of the Froude ship research subcommittee of the ship division of the laboratory. It was in large measure due to his resource and initiative that the new ship hydrodynamics laboratory at Feltham was completed in 1959. 
Abell was a source of help and encouragement to the younger men of his profession, particularly during his tenure of office in the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights. On public occasions his experience, shrewd understanding, and wit were inestimable assets. 
Abell was president of the Institute of Marine Engineers (1924-5), master of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights (1931-2), and president of the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers (1941). At the time of his death he was senior honorary vice-president of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects. Both he and his wife held the freedom of the City of London. He did much for the Institute of Marine Engineers and Shipbuilders in Newcastle, which awarded him a gold medal and placed a gilt plaque in his honour in Bolbec Hall, Newcastle. Abell died on 29 July 1961 at his home, 95 Kenton Road, Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne. 
J. McCallum', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30321


Abercrombie, Lascelles (1881-1938), poet and literary critic, was born at Manor House, Ashton upon Mersey, Cheshire, on 9 January 1881, the sixth son, and the tenth of eleven children (two of whom died in childhood), of William Abercrombie (1838-1908), stockbroker, of Ashton upon Mersey, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Heron (1842-1916). One of his brothers was (Leslie) Patrick Abercrombie, the town planner. From boyhood Abercrombie was devoted to music and literature; his taste was fostered at a preparatory school, and also at Malvern College, where he read Greek and Latin eagerly. From 1900 to 1902 he studied science at the Victoria University of Manchester, but then turned to quantity surveying for a living, and to poetry for his vocation. He became a journalist in 1907, writing much for the Manchester, Liverpool, and national papers. His first poem, 'Blind', appeared in 1907 and his first volume of verse, 'Interludes and Poems', in 1908. On 23 January 1909 he married Catherine (1881-1968), daughter of Owen Gwatkin, surgeon, of Grange-over-Sands; they had one daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom, David Abercrombie, became a phonetician, and the middle son, Michael Abercrombie (1912-1979), a biologist. After a stay of more than a year in Birkenhead he and his wife migrated first to Herefordshire and then in 1911 to a cottage, The Gallows, at Ryton, near Dymock, Gloucestershire, where, inspired by happiness and by the noble scenery, he published some of his best verse. It included 'Mary and the Bramble' (1910), 'The Sale of St. Thomas', act I (1911), and also some poetic plays in 'New Numbers', 1-4 (1914), a periodical privately issued in partnership with Rupert Brooke, John Drinkwater, and Wilfrid Gibson ['see 'Dymock poets]. 
Abercrombie now came to be recognized as a leading poet of the new generation, distinguished for his lyrical power and speculative daring. He was praised by Robert Bridges for his lucid exposition of difficult themes, and Yeats was to devote eight pages of the 'Oxford Book of Modern Verse' (1936) to Abercrombie's poetry. He responded profoundly to natural beauty; his love poetry was ardent and exalted; and the mystical and metaphysical strain was ever present. It is heard again in the prose of 'Speculative Dialogues' (1913), with its musings on life and love and on the last things; and also in several dramatic poems, such as 'Deborah' (1912), which were not designed for the stage. But several were acted; of these the most notable is 'The End of the World' (published in 'New Numbers'), in which some homely folk are terrified by a false alarm that doomsday has arrived. His appreciative study of Thomas Hardy, published in 1912, gives some insight into his own poetic development. 
Abercrombie was still to write his best verse, but his richest period of poetic production was over. The First World War came as a grievous interruption. Although a keen patriot, he was not strong enough for military service, and laboured in Liverpool as an examiner of munitions. After the war he took up a lecturership in poetry at Liverpool University; this appointment, which he held from 1919 to 1922, was an event that was to affect his whole career. He spoke upon his own craft; he held public audiences, not least by his rare gift for reading aloud; and he taught small classes the outlines of literary criticism and of its history. Abercrombie published many critical studies, often based on the public lectures which he gave at Cambridge, at Baltimore, to the British Academy, and elsewhere. They include 'An Essay towards a Theory of Art' (1922), 'Principles of English Prosody' (1923), and 'Romanticism' (1926). In 1930 Oxford University Press published (in the 'Oxford Poets') Abercrombie's collected 'Poems', all but one, the richest and maturest of all, the completed 'Sale of St. Thomas' (1930). Here, in a style which often rises to grandeur, he proclaims his faith in an omnipresent divine spirit embodying the law of ideal beauty. Abercrombie deepened and ennobled English metaphysical poetry. He charged it anew with his passionate feeling for the essential beauty of nature and of human nature. 'Poetry, its Music and Meaning' (1932) ably states the artistic and critical convictions upon which his work was based. 
A very active professor, Abercrombie rose quickly in the academic world. He occupied the chair of English language and literature at Leeds University from 1922 to 1929 and was Hildred Carlile professor of English literature in London University, at Bedford College for Women, from 1929 to 1935. In 1935 he became Goldsmiths' reader in English at Oxford and a fellow of Merton College. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Cambridge, Manchester, and Belfast, held several special lecturerships, including the Clark lecturership at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1923, and was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1937. 
Abercrombie was closely involved in the Association of University Teachers as well as Labour student organizations and the League of Nations Union. From 1925 to 1936 he was president of the Society for Cultural Relations between the Peoples of the British Commonwealth and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (known as the SCR). His anti-Nazi activities included being a founder member of the German Relief Fund, the Academic Assistance Council, and the British Committee for the Relief of German Teachers. He was also a founder member of the (National) Council for Civil Liberties, and the Academic Freedom Committee. 
Abercrombie's health declined, and he died of diabetes at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, St John's Wood, London, on 27 October 1938; he was survived by his wife. Two posthumous volumes of his work were published, 'Lyrics and Unfinished Poems' (1940) and 'The Art of Wordsworth' (1952). 
Oliver Elton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30322


Abercrombie, Sir (Leslie) Patrick (1879-1957), town planner, was born on 6 June 1879 at Green Bank, Sale, Altrincham, one of a family of nine. His father, William Abercrombie (1838-1908), born in Bradford, was a Manchester stockbroker and businessman, with literary and artistic interests; his mother, Sarah Ann Heron (1842-1916), was from Dewsbury. Among his siblings was Lascelles Abercrombie (1881-1938), the poet. In 1887 Lynngarth, a new family home, was built in Brooklands Road, Ashton. It was designed by a Leicester architect, Joseph Goddard, and decorated with the advice of J. Aldam Heaton, who frequently worked with Richard Norman Shaw. The arts and crafts interiors left a strong impression on the young Patrick Abercrombie, and inculcated a love of architecture. With his two younger brothers, he was educated at Locker's Park preparatory school, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire (1891-3), before attending Uppingham School, Leicestershire (1893-6), and the Realschule, Lucerne, Switzerland (1896-7). 
On 11 May 1897 Abercrombie was articled to a Manchester architect, Charles Henry Heathcote, for four years, at a premium of $300; at the same time he also attended evening classes at Manchester School of Art. On completion of his articles he worked for three years in the Liverpool office of Sir Arnold Thornely. His Liverpool post prompted his move to Birkenhead, on the Wirral, which he described as 'a complete break, possibly the most complete in my life' (Abercrombie, pt I, chap. 2, 1). The area remained his home until 1936. In 1906 he worked for the Chester architect Philip Lockwood for a year, but was disappointed in his hopes of a partnership. However, the historic walled town -- then under transformation by the Grosvenors, the major landholders -- left a lasting impression upon him. In 1907 C. H. Reilly, head of the Liverpool University school of architecture, offered him an appointment as junior lecturer and studio instructor. This was a defining moment in Abercrombie's career, and began his long involvement with civic design and town planning. 
When W. H. Lever (subsequently the first Lord Leverhulme) endowed the chair of civic design at Liverpool University in 1909, initially filled by Stanley Davenport Adshead, he also provided sufficient resources to fund a research fellowship and the publication of 'Town Planning Review', the first journal to be devoted to this subject in Great Britain. Abercrombie was appointed by Adshead to fill the fellowship and to edit the 'Review': his literary inclinations and growing knowledge of town planning, a subject which commanded increasing public attention, and which had become a local government function under the 'Housing and Town Planning Act' of 1909, made him the obvious choice as editor. With Adshead, he was the chief contributor to the early volumes, providing many suggestions for the development of Merseyside, chronicling the contemporary growth of the garden city movement, and publishing articles on planning and civic design in continental cities. Abercrombie's fellowship took him abroad every year, and he visited Rome, Florence, Paris, Vienna, Brussels, and Berlin. His breadth of vision was influenced by, and matched, that of Patrick Geddes, in emphasizing the symbiotic cultural and social interdependence of the city-region. This underlay his subsequent writing, teaching, and practice. Following Adshead's resignation in 1915, Abercrombie was appointed his successor as Lever professor of civic design, a post he held for twenty years. 
Initially, Abercrombie's practice involved modest projects including housing schemes at Chester and Mouldsworth, built before 1914. Although his early architectural education was influenced by the arts and crafts movement, he developed a simplified Georgian style, which was reflected in his subsequent planning work, particularly at Dormanstown. This rational style represented the English equivalent of emergent modernism in architecture, and became widely influential through its use by Louis de Soissons at Welwyn Garden City from the early 1920s. In 1914, in association with Sydney and Arthur Kelly, Abercrombie entered the Dublin town planning competition, at the prompting of Patrick Geddes. Owing to the outbreak of the First World War, the assessors (who included Geddes) were unable to confer. Announcement of the award of the first prize to Abercrombie and the Kellys was deferred until 1916, and the plan was not published in full until 1922. Nevertheless, it established Abercrombie's international reputation. In 1914 he collaborated with Sydney Kelly and Manning Robertson on a sketch development plan for Dublin county borough. In 1920, in conjunction with Adshead and Stanley Ramsey, Abercrombie designed Dormanstown, an industrial village to house the employees of Dorman Long, the Middlesbrough steel-founders. The same year he was appointed, with Henry Johnson, to prepare a regional planning scheme for 169 square miles around Doncaster, centre of the expanding south Yorkshire coalfield. Approved in 1922, this was the first plan of its type to be published in Britain, and included proposals for ten satellite communities, separated from each other and Doncaster by a green belt, with a 120 foot reservation for the improved A1 road, the major highway from London to the north. 
Abercrombie was a leading consultant throughout the inter-war period, and worked prolifically. In 1923 he and his brother Lascelles were asked to report on the preservation of Stratford upon Avon. He produced the Sheffield civic survey (1924), the east Kent regional planning scheme (1925, with John Archibald), the Bristol and Bath regional planning scheme (1930, with B. F. Brueton), the Cumbrian regional report (1932), the east Suffolk regional planning scheme (1935), and the Gloucestershire rural development scheme (all with Sydney Kelly). In many of his plans preservation of rural amenity and landscape was a common thread. In 1929, with the earl of Mayo and Adshead, he prepared a report on the Thames valley, from Cricklade to Staines, presenting a survey of the existing situation, and suggestions for preservation. Regrettably, the scope of many of his plans of the 1920s lay beyond the narrow confines of statutory town planning, which was largely concerned with the regulation of suburban development. Abercrombie was a leading advocate of the broader perspective, reflected to a degree in the 1932 'Town and Country Planning Act'. In 1933 his book 'Town and Country Planning', published in the 'Home University Library', brought the subject to a growing middle-class readership. 
Abercrombie's love of the traditional English landscapes and historic country towns found a broader expression in the 1920s. In May 1926 his article 'The preservation of rural England' in the 'Town Planning Review' acted as catalyst for the foundation of the Council for the Preservation of Rural England; Abercrombie was also co-founder with Clough Williams-Ellis of the council's Welsh equivalent. As chairman of the executive committee of the council, Abercrombie undertook much advisory work on their behalf. In 1935 he succeeded Adshead as professor of town planning at University College, London, which post he held until 1946. From 1936 he was also consultant architect to the Department of Health for Scotland. 
In 1937 Abercrombie was appointed a member of the royal commission on the distribution of the industrial population, chaired by Sir Montagu Barlow. This sought to analyse the causes of concentration of population in London and the industrial conurbations, and to recommend possible changes to redress regional imbalance. Abercrombie set out a critique of planning under the 1932 act in his 'Dissentient memorandum', which appeared in the 'Report', published in 1940, a few months after the outbreak of the Second World War. He called for national strategic policy guidance and the interlocking of plans at regional and local level. As a consultant, he had long been concerned by the lack of consistency between advisory regional plans and the statutory local authority plans, where individual councils were motivated by local self-interest, rather than a broader perspective. As Lord Holford wrote, 'if any one man had a truly synoptic view of the physical planning problems of the British Isles, that man was Abercrombie' ('DNB'). In May 1940 Abercrombie travelled to Ceylon, where, with A. Clifford Holliday, his former student, he planned a new site and buildings for the University of Ceylon at Peradinya. The blitz bombing of London and other cities in 1940 revealed the urgency of planning for reconstruction, promoted by Lord Reith, minister-designate of works. Upon his return to Britain, Abercrombie became involved with two major plans for London. 
The London plans were probably Abercrombie's greatest achievement. The 'County of London Plan', published in 1943, covered inner London -- the area administrated by the London county council with the exception of the City. It was prepared in collaboration with J. H. Forshaw, architect to the council. Wesley Dougill, who had been senior lecturer at Liverpool, made a significant contribution to the preparation of the plan, but died a few months before its publication. Abercrombie also brought in Arthur Ling, who prepared a functional analysis of land uses and open spaces. The key problems addressed were traffic congestion, poor housing, inadequate and haphazardly distributed open space, and conflicting land uses. Redevelopment of slum neighbourhoods would entail mixed development, which also included some high-rise housing, set in open space: an English reworking of Le Corbusier's 'radiant city' of the 1920s, which shaped the post-war housing response by the London county council and the London boroughs. Influenced by the contemporary 'precinct theory' of the traffic expert and theorist Alker Tripp, Abercrombie proposed traffic-free areas for the university area in Bloomsbury, around St Paul's, and the Temple. In addition to the technical innovation of the proposals, the plan also strongly emphasized the need to preserve and underpin the traditional character of each locality, based on the peripheral market towns and villages which had been absorbed into the metropolis. Abercrombie's recurrent preoccupation with the human side of his profession -- his concept of a town as primarily the setting for human life, rather than a mere pattern of roads and land uses -- was updated from Geddes; however, it tended to be overlooked by those responsible for implementation in the post-war political arena. In his 1933 book 'Town and Country Planning' Abercrombie commended the comprehensive analytical approach found in the privately funded 'Regional Plan for New York and its Environs' (1929), for which Thomas Adams had been consultant. American analytical methods and techniques such as height-zoning were advocated in the plan. 
The 'Greater London Plan, 1944', which covered the outer area of London and parts of the home counties, was commissioned by the standing conference on London regional planning, at the request of the minister for town and country planning. Its preparation overlapped with, and was complementary to, the county of London plan. With Abercrombie, Gordon Stephenson and Peter Shepheard also worked on the plan. Its context recognized the spreading influence of the capital city beyond its immediate local government unit. Abercrombie drew four rings, beginning with consolidation of the urban core of the county, through the suburban ring, the green belt, and an outer country ring. The green belt was intended to curb the further spread of suburbs; codified as the metropolitan green belt in 1955, it effectively halted London at its 1939 limits. Within the green belt, new development unrelated to agriculture was to be strictly controlled. The county of London plan had suggested the necessity for planned decentralization of more than a million people and associated industry, and this was to be accommodated in a ring of new towns beyond the green belt. The eight 'first generation' new towns were commenced, following legislation in 1946, by state-created development corporations: although only two were built on the sites proposed by Abercrombie, they have been recognized as a major planning achievement. The road plan, of major motorway radials and rings, was implemented only in modified form, and not completed until the mid-1980s, with the M25. Abercrombie saw London continuing as a world port and manufacturing centre, and failed to anticipate the startling expansion of the service sector and office employment. Nevertheless, his strategy guided the planning of London and the home counties for a half-century after its publication in 1945, despite the lack of a regional executive to co-ordinate the constituent local authorities. 
Another important plan by Abercrombie, for Plymouth, was commissioned in the autumn of 1941 by Viscount Astor, lord mayor of the city, which had been intensively bombed, virtually obliterating the city centre. In the plan for Plymouth (1943) comprehensive replanning created a traffic-free shopping centre, based on Tripp's precincts, with a grand central axis -- Armada Way -- sweeping from the railway station, across Royal Parade, where the guildhall and rebuilt civic centre were located, and onwards to the hoe. Unfortunately the architecture failed to match the boldness of the concept, with Abercrombie opting for the safety of the stripped Georgian style, which was carried through with little imagination or flair. In the broader context of the plan, as usual, Abercrombie declined to be constrained by administrative boundaries, but the adjoining authorities failed to participate actively in the plan, and the proposed regional dimension was lost. He subsequently collaborated with Edwin Lutyens on the plan for Kingston upon Hull, published in 1945, but little of it was implemented. 
Before the war's end Abercrombie began work on a major regional plan for the Clyde valley, with Robert Matthew. This was published in 1946, and was followed by a west midlands plan in 1948, and a plan for Edinburgh in 1949. The 1947 'Town and Country Planning Act' placed emphasis on statutory development planning by local authorities, but Abercrombie took no direct role in statutory planning (nor in the implementation of his Greater London proposals through the 1946 'New Towns Act'). The post-war period witnessed the expansion of his consultancy work, with no diminution of his energy or enthusiasm in his sixties and seventies. He travelled widely, to Addis Ababa, Hong Kong, and Cyprus. As late as 1956 he returned to Addis Ababa, to spend six weeks putting the finishing touches to his plan for that city. 
Abercrombie was knighted in 1945, and was also an officer of the order of the crown of Belgium, and of the Legion d'honneur of France. Among professional honours he received were the Ebenezer Howard memorial medal (1943), the royal gold medal for architecture (1946), the gold medal of the American Institute of Architects (1949), and the gold medal of the Town Planning Institute (1955). He had been president of the Town Planning Institute in 1925, and vice-president of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1937-9. He was a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission and of the royal commission on the location of industry. After retirement from London University in 1946, Abercrombie gave much time to the Union Internationale des Architectes, established following conferences in London and Brussels in 1947 and 1948. He served as the union's president from 1951 to 1956, and gained the support of the USSR, the United States, and South American republics, in addition to western European countries. He received honorary degrees from the universities of London, Liverpool, and Melbourne. 
Abercrombie's written style was elegant, and he was a meticulous draughtsman. His interests were wide-ranging, and he had a close-clipped manner of speech and a ready wit. Patrician in appearance, with sharp features, and wearing a monocle (having lost the sight of his left eye in his youth), he enjoyed the finer things of life. In 1944, after an air raid had seriously damaged the offices in which the Greater London plan was under preparation, Abercrombie braved the wrath of the wardens to retrieve a case of vintage claret from the cellar, which he opened there and then to boost the morale of his staff before getting down to the task of sorting through the debris. A great believer in co-operation, he invariably acknowledged the contribution of partners and collaborators. He was a sympathetic mentor to several generations of students, some of whom collaborated with him later in their careers. 
On 5 August 1908 Abercrombie married (Emily) Maud (1886-1942), daughter of Robert Gordon, a corn merchant; the couple had a son and a daughter. The death of his wife in 1942 was a grievous loss for Abercrombie. He himself died at his Berkshire home, the Red House at Aston, on 23 March 1957. He had retained a summer home, Penrhos Bach, Holy Island, Anglesey, and he was buried on 27 March at Rhoscolyn, Anglesey. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 24 April 1957, when the address was given by Clough Williams-Ellis. He stated, 'I feel that one of Patrick's great services was that he gave wings to planning, never letting its ultimate end -- more happiness for more people -- be obscured by its solemn technical processes' (C. Williams-Ellis, 'Address... at the memorial service for Sir Patrick Abercrombie', RIBA BAL, biography file, 1). Abercrombie's embracing vision was predicated upon acceptance of the planner as an expert, a characteristic rejected by the community participation movement of the 1960s, and scarcely possible under the statutory process of the late twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 30323


Aberhart, William (1878-1943), politician and evangelist in Canada, was born in Hibbert township, near Seaforth, Perth county, Ontario, on 30 December 1878, the son of William Aberhart (who as a child had been brought from Germany) and his wife, Louisa Pepper, the daughter of an Englishman. He was educated at schools in Ontario and at a business college at Chatham, Ontario, and he graduated from a correspondence programme of Queen's University, Kingston, as BA in 1906. He married in 1902 Jessie, daughter of George Flatt, of Galt, Ontario, with whom he had two daughters. 
Aberhart took up school teaching and became principal of a school at Brantford. In 1910 he moved to Alberta, then an agricultural region recently established as a province, and in 1915 became principal of Crescent Heights high school, Calgary, a post which he held until he entered the provincial government in 1935. As an active lay preacher he formed in 1918 an institute for the study of the 'Bible'. He began broadcasting in 1924 and funds from his audience quickly enabled the institute to build premises for its classes in 1927 and to extend its broadcasting. It was known as the Calgary Prophetic Bible Institute. 
The universal collapse of wheat prices after 1929 caused profound distress among the wheat farmers, and to them, as to the urban unemployed in the years of depression, Aberhart's vigorous broadcasts at once brought the comforts of evangelical preaching and the hope of economic relief through the issue of a free, popular currency known as social credit. His monetary theories, which he began to broadcast after 1932, were adopted from those of Major Clifford Hugh Douglas, of Fearnan, Perthshire, who visited Canada several times and whose views had already been made familiar by the United Farmers Party of Alberta, which had formed the Alberta government since 1921 and was also represented in the House of Commons at Ottawa. In 1933 Aberhart published a pamphlet, 'The Douglas System of Economics', which found a wide sale. 
Aberhart's advocacy of social credit drew increasing attention to his broadcasts and led to the formation of listening or study groups throughout Alberta, which were later organized as the Alberta Social Credit League. This league at first had no intention of challenging the provincial government, but it adopted political tactics in pressing its policies upon the government by petitions, delegations, and extensive activity by the local study groups, to which the government replied by appointing Douglas as one of its advisers. In the elections of August 1935 Social Credit candidates, approved by Aberhart and the party leaders, won fifty-six out of the sixty-three seats in the provincial legislature, and Aberhart, who later was returned for Okotoks-High River by acclamation, was called upon to form a government. He became premier and minister of education. 
Aberhart was a man of robust physique and mercurial temperament, who won respect for his energy and fervour. In office, as in education, he proved a sound administrator and organizer. His electoral success, in the critical economic situation of the time, flowed from his popular influence as a 'Bible' teacher and an advocate of social credit, one of the aspects of which was an election promise to distribute a 'social dividend' of $25 a month to every adult in the province. More significantly, his power with the public was due to his championship of the debtors against their creditors, whom he described as eastern Canadian and international bankers and financiers. In its early, more radical years, the Social Credit Party resembled earlier farm debtors' movements in western America, such as that for 'free silver'. But the movement's leadership was primarily urban-based and party support in the 1935 provincial election reflected a split between better-off Albertans and those struggling to make it through the depression, rather than an urban-rural split. Provincial legislation to control banks and cancel debts, public or private, was, however, found 'ultra vires' by the courts and disallowed. Attempts to control the press were also ineffective. The government had to be content with establishing a parallel provincial banking system of so-called treasury branches. 
Aberhart's outlook remained greatly influenced by the Douglas social crediter, L. D. Byrne, the technical adviser to the Alberta Social Credit Board. But, for the most part, after his re-election in 1940 Aberhart's policies reflected an acceptance of the limitations on a provincial government in the area of credit and banking. During its first term in office the Social Credit government passed legislation of benefit to farmers and workers, and alienated most of the business community. In its second term, although the government was active in social welfare, labour questions, and the field of education, it moved away from radical experimentation, turning towards both cautious administration and opposition to the state activity in business advocated by socialists. Aberhart died in Vancouver on 30 May 1943, while still in office. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30324


Abney, Sir William de Wiveleslie (1843-1920), civil servant and photographic scientist, was born at Derby on 24 July 1843, the eldest son of Edward Henry Abney ('bap'. 1811, died 1892), vicar of St Alkmund's, Derby, afterwards prebendary of Lichfield, and Catharina, daughter of Jedediah Strutt of Greenhall, Belper. Through his mother, he was the great-great-grandson of Jedediah Strutt (1726-1797), the inventor and partner of Richard Arkwright. He married Agnes Mathilda, daughter of Edward William Smith of Tickton Hall, near Beverley in the East Riding of Yorkshire, on 4 August 1864. They had one son and two daughters. After Agnes's death in 1888, he married Mary Louisa, daughter of the Revd Eward Nathaniel Mead, of East Barnet, Hertfordshire, on 3 December 1889. They had a daughter. 
Abney was educated at Rossall School in Lancashire and the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. In 1861 he was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Royal Engineers, and he served in the sappers and miners at Bombay before being transferred to the public works department in 1865. Two years later he returned to England and was stationed at Chatham, where he developed the Abney level, a surveying instrument for use during military reconnaissance, which was cheaper and more versatile than its predecessors. In 1871 Abney was appointed assistant to the instructor in telegraphy at the School of Military Engineering, and shortly afterwards he was given a small chemical laboratory and photographic darkroom in the electrical school. He published 'Instruction in Photography for Use at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham' in the same year and also became an active member of the Royal Photographic Society of London (later the Royal Photographic Society). 'Instruction in Photography' was very popular and the eleventh edition was published in 1905. He was promoted to captain in 1873, and was always called Captain Abney until 1900, when he was knighted. His work demonstrated the importance of photography to the armed forces for surveying and reconnaissance and it was removed from the supervision of the instructor in electricity to form part of a new school of chemistry and photography in 1874. Abney became an assistant instructor in this new department, and in the same year was also listed as an assistant instructor in surveying. He was chosen to organize the photographic observation in Egypt of the transit of Venus in 1874. Afterwards, as a result of his Egyptian trip, he wrote 'Thebes and its Five Great Temples' (1876). 
Although Abney did not formally retire from the army until 1881, he left Chatham in 1877 to become an inspector of science schools of the Department of Science and Art at South Kensington. He was highly regarded by his new employers and he was promoted assistant director for science in 1884 and director for science in 1893. When the Department of Science and Art was replaced by the Board of Education in 1899 he was made a principal assistant secretary. Abney retired in 1903, following the changes brought about by Balfour's 'Education Act'. He then became an adviser to the science department of the Board of Education and a member of the advisory council for education to the War Office. He was also appointed lecturer on colour vision at the Imperial College of Science and Technology in South Kensington in 1909. 
The middle of the nineteenth century saw several high-powered commissions set up to investigate the state of science education in England. The Taunton Commission of 1868 had allowed government to make grants for building school laboratories, and the Devonshire Commission of 1872 strongly supported secondary science education. Abney himself gave evidence to the Samuelson Commission of 1881-4. One of Abney's major tasks was to approve grants for setting up and fitting out school laboratories. At Chatham he had become convinced of the importance of practical work in scientific education and at the Department of Science and Art he considered the establishment of new school laboratories as his particular mission. At first he sought to lay down a standard plan for these laboratories, based on his experience at Chatham, but eventually practically any plan was accepted if it met the 'absolute necessities of instruction'. His approach was later criticized for creating an excessive uniformity, but the numbers speak for themselves. When Abney joined the department only a handful of school laboratories existed, but in 1903, when he retired, 1165 laboratories were recognized by the Board of Education. 
Abney also pursued photographic research in a darkroom, which was entered from the galleries of the South Kensington Museum (on the site of the Victoria and Albert Museum), but may have actually been in the neighbouring Royal College of Science (later Imperial College). It was described in 1883 as a cold and draughty backstairs lumber room. His studies were thorough and precise rather than inspired, and he must have found it difficult to balance his scientific work with his administrative duties. As early as 1873, at Chatham, he had developed the papyrotype photolithographic process which used paper coated with bichromated gelatin to create the initial image, and in his early years at South Kensington he concentrated on improving photographic emulsions, the development of prints, and photographic printing paper -- then in its infancy. He introduced hydroquinone as a developer in 1880 and the gelatino-citrochloride emulsion printing process in 1881, which became the basis of POP (Printing Out Paper), which was very popular with amateur photographers at the end of the nineteenth century. In this period Abney published 'Emulsion Processes in Photography' (1878), later retitled 'Photography with Emulsions', the third edition appearing in 1885, and the popular 'Treatise on Photography' (1878) which reached its tenth edition in 1905. 
As a result of this work Abney developed a photographic emulsion that was sensitive in the infra-red region of the electromagnetic spectrum. William Herschel had discovered that the sun radiated energy beyond the red end of the visible spectrum in 1800, but no permanent visible record of the infra-red spectrum of the sun was possible until Abney used his new emulsion for this purpose. More importantly, with his colleague Major-General Edward Robert Festing FRS he studied the infra-red absorption spectra of numerous organic and inorganic chemical compounds. They established in 1881 that the absorption bands were associated with groups of atoms in the molecules rather than the molecule as a whole, and tentatively correlated different bands to specific groupings, for instance the nitro group in nitrobenzene. In the hands of later physicists and chemists, infra-red spectroscopy became an important method of identifying such groups. 
Abney was also interested in the development of colour photography, and saw the need to clarify the whole field of colour analysis and colour vision beforehand. He developed a colour photometer in 1885, and carried out a wide range of colour measurements with Festing. He also investigated the sensitivity of the eye to light and colour. On the basis of his research he introduced his own system of colour photography in 1905. It employed three separate lenses and colour separation positives, but was not a commercial success. Abney published 'Trichromatic Theory of Colour' (1914) on the basis of his research, and he tested the colour vision of a merchant seaman as his last official act in the summer of 1920 in his colour vision laboratory at Imperial College. Appropriately for someone engaged in the administration of science education, Abney was an enthusiastic lecturer and gave several series of popular lectures on 'the chemical action of light' and on the subject of light and colour. 
Abney was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1876 at the relatively early age of thirty-three, and was awarded the society's Rumford medal for his work on spectrum analysis in 1882. For his work at the Department of Science and Art, he was made CB in 1888 and KCB in 1900. Abney was prominent in the London-based scientific societies -- serving as president of the Royal Photographic Society in 1892-4, 1896, 1903, and 1905; president of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1893-5; and president of the Physical Society in 1895-7. He was also chairman of the Royal Society of Arts in 1903-5, and was elected a vice-president of the Royal Institution in 1905 and a member of the council of the Chemical Society in 1882-4. A keen traveller, he often visited the Swiss and Italian Alps and published 'The Pioneers of the Alps' (1887) with Carus Dunlop Cunningham. He listed painting, golf, and shooting as his interests in 'Who's Who'. Abney also helped to establish a national collection of photographic history at the Science Museum in South Kensington, now transferred to the National Museum of Photography, Film, and Television at Bradford. 
Abney lived for many years at Rathbone Lodge, South Bolton Gardens, not far from his office in South Kensington, and at a country residence at Measham Hall in Leicestershire. He went to Folkestone in autumn 1920 because of his failing health, and died there, at 12 Grimstone Avenue, of kidney failure and bronchitis on 2 December 1920. 


@@@@@


doc= 30325


Abraham, Charles John (1814-1903), bishop of Wellington, New Zealand, born on 17 June 1814 at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, was the second son of Captain Thomas Abraham of the 16th regiment, who was on the staff there, and Louisa Susannah, daughter of Edward Carter of Portsmouth. After attending Dr Thomas Arnold's school at Laleham, he went in 1826 to Eton College as an oppidan, but to save expenses he soon went into college, then half empty. He reached the sixth form, and played in the school cricket eleven. In 1833 Abraham went as a scholar to King's College, Cambridge, which then gave its own degrees without university examination in a tripos. Abraham was a good and accurate scholar, with a special memory for Horace and Homer, which he retained through life. He graduated BA in 1837 and succeeded to a fellowship at King's, which he held until 1849. He proceeded MA in 1840 and DD in 1859, and took the 'ad eundem' degree of MA at Oxford on 14 June 1849. 
Abraham was ordained deacon in 1838 and priest in 1839, and after entering on parochial work as curate of Headley Down, Hampshire, he returned to Eton in 1840 as a master. For nine years he threw himself heart and soul into Eton life. There were few masters and the classes were large and unwieldy; Abraham had more than ninety boys in his division. With George Augustus Selwyn, who was private tutor to the earl of Powis's sons at Eton and curate of Windsor, Abraham now began the friendship which determined his career. When in 1841 Selwyn became bishop of New Zealand, Abraham was anxious to follow him, but for the present the calls of Eton kept him at home. In the interests of the reform of the school he resigned the lucrative post of housemaster to become assistant master in college, in 1846, and was largely responsible for the rapid improvement in the moral tone of the King's scholars. He helped to modify the system of fagging, and repressed the old college songs. He widened the range of the curriculum, combining the teaching of history and geography and stimulating the boys' interest in history and literature. During this time he published several works, including 'The Unity of History' (1845). The collegers regarded him as a kind adviser and friend, and in 1850 gave a font and cover to the college chapel as a tribute of their regard. His pupils included Edward Henry Stanley, fifteenth earl of Derby, to whom for a time he was private tutor at Knowsley, and Lord Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne Cecil, later third marquess of Salisbury and prime minister, who visited him in New Zealand in 1852. In 1848 Abraham was appointed divinity lecturer of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and the following year, when he became BD at Cambridge, he published his 'Festival and Lenten Lectures'. 
Abraham left Eton at Christmas 1849 to join Bishop Selwyn in New Zealand. On 17 January 1850 he married Caroline Harriet (died 1877), daughter of Sir Charles Thomas Palmer, bt, of Wanlip, Leicestershire. They arrived in Auckland harbour in July 1850. Selwyn at once put Abraham in charge, as chaplain and principal, of St John's College, Auckland, a small training college for Maori and English youths. In 1853 he was made archdeacon of Waitemata, with the oversight of a large district. He supported church and Maori rights against the settler interest. 
Abraham visited England in 1857 for surgical treatment of an arm broken in a fall from his horse. While he was in England the new dioceses of Wellington and Nelson were constituted: Abraham was consecrated bishop of Wellington at Lambeth Palace on 29 September 1858, and his friend Edmund Hobhouse became bishop of Nelson. After returning to New Zealand, for twelve years Abraham was fully occupied in creating the machinery of his new diocese, the chief town in which had just been made the seat of government. He continued to take the Maori side and was a member of the 'missionary party', opposing settler attitudes and lobbying for the replacement of the governor, Thomas Gore Browne. He promoted Maori education and attempted to encourage Maori participation in church government. 
In 1870 Abraham returned to England with Selwyn, who was appointed to the see of Lichfield, and owing to Selwyn's temporary failure of health became coadjutor-bishop. In 1872 he was collated to the prebendal stall of Bobenhall in Lichfield Cathedral, and in 1876 he was made a canon residentiary and precentor. He assisted in the revision of the medieval statutes of the cathedral, taught in the theological college, and was responsible for the fabric of the cathedral and improving the music. In 1875-6 Abraham was also non-resident rector of Tatenhill, in Needwood Forest. A total abstainer, he was long a frequent speaker at meetings of the United Kingdom Alliance. 
After Selwyn's death in April 1878, Abraham, with Bishop Edmund Hobhouse and Sir William Martin, organized, by way of memorial, Selwyn College, Cambridge, which was opened in October 1882 and of which he was a chief benefactor. Abraham worked with William Dalrymple Maclagan, Selwyn's successor at Lichfield, until 1890, when he resigned his canonry, thenceforth living with his only son, the Revd Charles Thomas Abraham (later bishop of Derby), first at Christ Church, Lichfield, until 1897, and afterwards at Bakewell, Derbyshire. He died on 4 February 1903 at Bakewell vicarage, and was buried at Over Haddon churchyard. A memorial was placed in Eton College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 30326


Abraham, William (1842-1922), trade unionist and politician, was born at Cwmafan, near Port Talbot, Glamorgan, on 14 June 1842, the fourth son of Thomas and Mary Abraham. His father, a coalminer and copper smelter, soon died, leaving his mother to raise a large family. Mabon, as he was generally known, ended his formal education at the national school, Cwmafan, at the age of ten, when he started work underground as a door boy. On 18 August 1860 he married Sarah Williams ('bap'. 1842, died 1900), daughter of David Williams, the local blacksmith. They had twelve children, of whom eight survived infancy. Sarah died suddenly on 13 July 1900. 
After an abortive trip to Chile in search of work in 1864-5, Mabon worked at Cwmafan spelter works and a tinplate works near Swansea, before returning to coalmining at Caercynydd pit, near Gowerton. The rest of his life was bound up with coal and coalminers. In 1871 he addressed his first union meeting, speaking for the Amalgamated Association of Miners (AAM), which was newly recruiting in south Wales, and set up an AAM lodge at Waunarlwydd. In 1872 he was elected treasurer of Loughor district and to the national executive. His attendance at the executive's Manchester meetings led to dismissal as a collier: in December 1872 he worked his last shift as a miner and became paid agent of the Loughor district of the AAM. 
In the underdeveloped state of trade unionism in south Wales, Mabon's meteoric rise was perhaps unexceptional: what was remarkable was the extent to which he then dominated mining unionism there for nearly forty years. After the AAM rapidly withered amid the depression and defeats of 1874-5, he became the main figure, charged with keeping the idea of trade unionism alive. As part of the settlement of the five-month lock-out of 1875 (the third major stoppage in five years), the coal owners had determined on a system whereby wage rates would be 'automatically' adjusted to the market price of coal. Part of the mechanism for this scheme was a joint sliding scale committee: in July Mabon became the first chairman of the workers' side, a position he held until the sliding scale was abandoned in 1902. He was president of the South Wales Miners' Federation (SWMF) from its inception in 1898 until he resigned in 1912, making way for more aggressive leaders. 
The eventual demand for a different leadership style largely explains why Mabon's reputation slumped for a long period after his death. He was charged with presiding over and preserving an innocuous form of trade unionism. Apart from supporting the sliding scale, there was the ambiguity of union finances, including the pay of agents such as Mabon, which was dependent on employers making deductions from pay. It was also felt that at his death Mabon left more money ($32,777 net) than was proper for a union leader. Against all this, Mabon's career must be seen in the context of the near total collapse of unionism by the mid-1870s. After his original base at Loughor disappeared, he moved to the Rhondda in 1877 to become the agent for the Cambrian Miners' Association, the largest of several district-based organizations which kept the notion of unionism alive. Mabon's role was indispensable: he was a compelling orator in both languages and won general acceptance as the legitimate, responsible voice of labour. His status as a major public figure was exemplified by the fact that manufacturers of tobacco and sauces sought his endorsement. Above all, the later recriminations in a different industrial climate ignored the robust claims he had advanced for the rights of labour. 
The first challenge to his dominance came with the formation in 1888 of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB), which totally opposed sliding scale systems. A small branch was set up in Monmouthshire under the able leadership of William Brace, but Mabon comfortably saw off this threat. But the harder line adopted by coal owners gradually undermined his advocacy of conciliation. In 1896 they disdainfully rejected his proposals for raising prices by restricting output. In 1898 they imposed a deliberately humiliating settlement after a bitter six-month stoppage. In response the miners immediately formed the SWMF, and installed Mabon as president. At the next MFGB conference, Mabon attended as one of 'three penitent Welshmen' who renounced sliding scales. 
The 1898 settlement had signalled the limits of conciliation: a decade later the 'Mines Eight Hour Act', which had its greatest effect in south Wales, effectively made the policy completely unworkable. It simultaneously reduced miners' piece-work earnings while raising owners' costs. The result was especially poignant since Mabon, the apostle of conciliation, had also championed the eight-hour day. Faced with lower living standards and worsened working conditions, miners looked to younger, more aggressive leaders. The turbulence of the coalfield in the year-long Cambrian combine strike of 1910-11 over abnormal places, and the national 1912 struggle for a minimum wage, was not the world which Mabon, now nearly seventy, had hoped to create. He stepped down as SWMF president, but still served the industry through the International Miners' Congress and as MFGB treasurer. 
Alongside his central concern with miners' unionism, William Abraham was elected to parliament for Rhondda in 1885. He thus became the first Welsh miners' MP, defeating the official Liberal candidate, a local coal owner, and held the seat (Rhondda up to 1918, then West Rhondda) until he retired in 1920. Essentially a Liberal, he reluctantly renounced the label when the MFGB joined the Labour Party in 1909. He made no great mark in the House of Commons as an orator, but served on three royal commissions (mining royalties, 1889; labour, 1891; and mines, 1906). He was appointed JP in 1887, was sworn of the privy council in 1916, and received an LLD from the University of Wales in 1918. Mabon was a lifelong Calvinistic Methodist, a lay preacher, Band of Hope activist, and a renowned choir conductor, with a rich tenor voice of his own. In person he was very striking and wore a substantial black beard. Keir Hardie described him in 1888 as being 'five feet by four feet, correct measurement, so that he is not as broad as he is long, though I should say he soon will be' (W. J. Stewart, 'Keir Hardie', 1921, 45). He died at his home, Brynybedw, in Pentre, Glamorgan, on 14 May 1922, and was buried on 18 May at Treorci cemetery. His funeral effectively closed the entire valley with its mixed throng of populace and personages. 


@@@@@


doc= 30327


Acland, Sir Arthur Herbert Dyke, thirteenth baronet (1847-1926), politician and educational reformer, was born at Holnicote, near Porlock, Somerset, on 13 October 1847, the third son of Sir Thomas Dyke Acland, eleventh baronet (1809-1898), and his first wife, Mary (died 1851), daughter of Sir Charles Mordaunt, eighth baronet, of Massingham, Norfolk. The Aclands, leading landowners in the west of England, were well established, both at the University of Oxford and in wider political circles. Sir Thomas Acland was an educational reformer and Arthur recalled growing up among his father's reports for the Taunton commission. He entered Rugby School in 1861 and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1866. He obtained a second class in classical moderations (1868) and also in the final school of law and modern history (1870), graduating BA in 1870 and MA in 1873. 
In 1871 Acland was appointed lecturer, and in 1872 tutor, at Keble College, then newly founded. As the third son, however, Acland was educated to enter the church, being known from birth in the family as 'the little clergyman'. In 1872 he was ordained deacon and after his marriage on 14 June 1873 to Alice Sophia (1849-1935), daughter of Francis Macaulay Cunningham, the vicar of Witney ['see 'Acland, Alice Sophia], the young couple were expected to take up the family living at Luccombe, Somerset. Beset by doubts as to the validity of Anglican dogma, Acland suffered a nervous collapse. He later told R. B. Haldane in a letter in 1898: 'I knocked up my brain early in life and have overstrained it ever since' (Matthew, 9). His curacy under Mandell Creighton in Embleton, Northumberland, did nothing to reassure him. A tour of the industrial north in 1875 and, in particular, to the working men's club in Rochdale, however, suddenly provided invigoration and a growing political awareness. It also confirmed his decision to resign holy orders, and he took advantage of the 'Clerical Disabilities Act' in 1879. 
Acland's time as principal of the new Oxford Military College from 1875 to 1877 proved unhappy. In 1879 he was appointed steward of Christ Church and was a senior student there in 1884-5. He was the first treasurer of Somerville College. In 1884 he was appointed senior bursar of Balliol College and was made an honorary fellow in 1888. While at Oxford he gathered around him a group of young fellows and undergraduates, including Hubert Llewellyn Smith, J. A. Spender, L. T. Hobhouse, and Michael Sadler, known as the Inner Ring, who met at his home to discuss political and social questions. Acland remained a mentor for many of them. He urged Spender to investigate old age pensions and sickness insurance and wrote the introduction to the findings in 'The State and Pensions in Old Age' (1892). 
In 1878 Acland was appointed secretary responsible for 'the provision of Lectures and Teaching in the large towns of England and Wales', a new initiative of the University of Oxford delegacy of local examinations (which had been founded by his father in 1857). The chairman was his close friend T. H. Green, the Balliol idealist philosopher, and it was his teaching which Acland now began to translate into a programme of 'education for citizenship'. Significantly, it was the industrial north of England, with its growing political strength, to which Acland directed his efforts. His great success as a lecturer, often to audiences of more than seven hundred, and the rapport he established with working men, and especially co-operators, laid the foundation for the unique contribution of Oxford University extension. In 1882 he brought the Co-operative Congress to Oxford and in meetings in the Sheldonian Theatre and Balliol College leading co-operators and sympathetic university dons forged relationships which were to result eventually in the creation of the Workers' Educational Association and the joint tutorial classes. Acland not only lectured but provided syllabuses and texts for classes. In 1882, with Professor Cyril Ransome, he produced 'A Handbook of the Political History of England', which had considerable popularity as a book of reference and reached a new edition in 1913. In 1883 he published 'The Education of Citizens' and in 1884, with Benjamin Jones, 'Working Men Co-Operators', an account of the artisans' co-operative movement in Great Britain. University extension did much to emphasize the gaps in educational provision, particularly between elementary and higher education, and it was to a campaign for the provision of greater educational opportunity, which he felt would underpin a democratic society, that Acland was to devote the rest of his life. 
In December 1885 Acland was elected as Liberal MP for the newly formed Rotherham division of the West Riding of Yorkshire with a majority which was one of the largest in the country. In a series of painstakingly researched speeches on education, land reform, and local government reform he established a reputation in parliament as a leading exponent of a new positioning of Liberalism, based on links with the working classes. His earnestly democratic stance and his zeal for social justice won him a following among a group of young Liberal MPs including Haldane, Grey (well known to Acland since Embleton days), Asquith, Atherley-Jones, and particularly Tom Ellis, the Welsh member for Merioneth. 
Since 1881 Acland had kept a home at Clynnog Fawr, Caernarvonshire. Buoyed by the deep friendship he had formed with Ellis, Acland began discreetly to orchestrate the campaign for Welsh education. He injected his advanced democratic ideals into the proposals for the reorganization of secondary schooling, ensuring better access for both girls and boys, as well as providing guidelines for an enhanced common curriculum. He pointed out what might be achieved through the use of county councils as educational authorities. He guided the passage of the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Bill'. He chaired a series of meetings of the joint committees of the Welsh counties at Shrewsbury in 1890, and, with great political skill, achieved unanimity of purpose throughout Wales. As alderman of Caernarfon, he submitted the first scheme for approval under the 'Welsh Intermediate Act' of 1889, providing a model for the other Welsh county councils and anticipating the reform of English secondary education. In government Acland helped to crown the new system by assisting with the creation of a linked University of Wales. 
In 1887, with Henry Roscoe, Acland founded the National Association for Technical Education to persuade the government to organize and supervise secondary and technical education. He furthered the passing of the 'Technical Instruction Acts' of 1889 and 1891 and, by diverting revenue from liquor duties ('whisky money') to county councils for the benefit of education, allowed what was virtually a secondary education system to grow up. With the assistance of H. Llewellyn Smith, he edited a comprehensive review, with guidelines for reconstruction, of secondary education, published as 'Studies in Secondary Education' (1892). 
In August 1892 Acland was appointed vice-president of the committee of council on education in Gladstone's fourth ministry, Gladstone overruling Harcourt's attempt to make him chief whip. Morley recalled that to admit 'the son of the oldest of all the surviving friends of his youth' (J. Morley, 'Life of Gladstone', 3.494-5) gave personal gratification to Gladstone. Morley dubbed Acland and his earnest friends, Asquith, Haldane, and Grey, the 'Brethren'. With his uncompromising and ardent nature, Acland could be a demanding colleague but Haldane wrote admiringly, 'I would rather be like Arthur Acland, with all his fanaticisms, than anyone I know just now' (D. Sommer, 'Haldane of Cloan: his Life and Times, 1856-1928', 1960, 90) and Morley recorded that he was one of the 'inner ring' in the cabinet. 
By taking advantage of his considerable administrative freedom Acland made substantial gains. He exploited the 1891 act rapidly to extend the number of children with free places and he publicized the right to free education by urging parents to make 'representations' about 'deficiencies'. In his codes of 1893 and 1895, he ended payment by results and liberalized the curriculum in elementary schools. In 1893 the age for compulsory attendance at school was raised from ten to eleven. Acland's syllabus for the evening school code, 'The life and duties of a citizen', reiterated his belief in the democratic power of adult education, and evening school education spread at an unprecedented rate once work of the highest possible level could be attempted and age restrictions were removed. Fresh appointments invigorated the inspectorate but when grants were refused to schools deemed inefficient, Acland was accused of being the enemy of voluntary schools. In particular his circular on the sanitary and hygienic requirements of the department, including the provision of playgrounds, was felt by hard-up church schools to impose onerous obligations on them. For some churchmen he was 'a bitter little Radical' and taunts of apostasy wounded him (Acland, journal, 3 Sept 1893). 
At Acland's prompting request, a national conference on secondary education held in Oxford in 1893 resulted in a memorial to the prime minister from the convocation of the university calling for a royal commission. The resulting commission of 1894, chaired by James Bryce, had among its members many close to Acland -- H. Llewellyn Smith, Harry Reichel, Roscoe, T. H. Warren, and Sadler -- and the recommendations laid the foundation of Balfour's 1902 'Education Act'. In 1895 Acland appointed Michael Sadler to be director of the newly created department of special inquiries with the hope that such information would help to maintain the momentum of reform when he left office. He instituted a new departmental committee with the Charity Commissioners and the Department of Science and Art, foreshadowing a single central authority for education. Asquith described him as 'the success of the Government' but by the time of the Liberals' fall from power in 1895 he was feeling 'squeezed out'. He was a formidable opponent of Conservative educational measures but in 1899 he resigned his seat, fearing a breakdown in health. His father's death in 1898 had resulted in a period of personal crisis. As the unrecognized heir to his childless elder brother, he sublimated his unhappiness by writing a loving memoir of his father, 'Sir Thomas Acland: Memoir and Letters' (1902). 
In 1900 Acland was called on to lead the Liberal attack on the proposed new 'Education Act'. Once passed, however, he decided to 'work it to the best of our ability' (Acland, journal, 4 Feb 1903). For seven years he guided his local West Riding of Yorkshire county council in implementing a system of secondary education, taking a particular interest in Pickering grammar school where he was chairman of governors. He also assisted the Yorkshire College at Leeds to receive its charter as a university in 1904. As chairman of Bedford College (1903-15) and Imperial College (1907-25) he ensured an important period of growth. 
Acland's influence remained strong at national level. From 1906 he chaired the consultative committee of the Board of Education and, with the help of members who had long been close to him, such as Reichel, T. H. Warren, Mansbridge, and Sadler, produced a series of wide-ranging and far-sighted reports which kept up the pressure for further reform. Successive education ministers, Birrell, Haldane, and Trevelyan, turned to him for coaching and direction. He continued to champion the case for greater democratic representation in the management of schools, the provision of better teacher training, pay, and pensions. In his lengthy evidence to the royal commission on the civil service in 1912 he took the opportunity to air his dissatisfaction. The changes he advocated anticipated those of many later educational reformers: a wider curriculum, a revised examination system, supplemented by both teacher assessment and school inspection. 
Acland continued to exert influence on the political fortunes of the Liberal Party, persuading Grey and Haldane to join the cabinet in December 1905. He became president of the National Liberal Federation in 1906 but he resigned in 1907, feeling out of sympathy with 'official Liberalism'. When Asquith offered him a peerage in 1908 he refused it as 'inconsistent with all we care most about in life on the democratic side' (Acland, journal, 9 Aug 1908). 
In 1912 Acland chaired an inquiry, linked to Lloyd George's campaign for land reform, into 'the facts of Land in town and country and Rural conditions generally'. The report, published in 1913, with an introduction by Acland, was very favourably received in progressive circles, despite recommendations for a ministry of land, a legal minimum wage for farm workers, and compulsory power to acquire land for allotments. Acland began to raise money and work on a number of the Webbs' research projects, such as mother and infant welfare, and conditions for women in industrial work, and he chaired a committee set up to investigate the feasibility of forming an institute in London to further such research. For Beatrice Webb, he was the most enlightened and far-seeing of all the liberal politicians of the last decade of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the twentieth (Webb, 77n). He maintained his friendship with Lloyd George but judged that his influence had been 'overall degrading to public life' (Acland, journal, 23 April 1920). In the 1922 general election he helped to finance young Labour candidates, among them Hugh Dalton, and rejoiced when Labour almost doubled its membership. He gave $600 a year for three years to the rental of the Parliamentary Labour Club, close to the House of Commons, for members and their wives. 
On 18 February 1919 Acland succeeded his brother Sir Charles Thomas Dyke Acland, as thirteenth baronet. 'We shrug our shoulders and make the best of the 'Sir Arthur' and 'Your ladyship'', he commented (Acland, journal, March 1919). He received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Leeds (1904) and Bristol (1912). He died at his London home, 85 Onslow Square, on 9 October 1926 and was cremated at Golders Green. His ashes were interred at Columb John Chapel in the Killerton estate, Devon. He was succeeded as fourteenth baronet by his elder son, Francis Dyke Acland (1874-1939), also a Liberal MP. He left $10,000 to found four scholarships, two for the Labour Party and two for the central co-operative board, to allow young men and women to travel abroad and do research of value to either organization. The trust, the Acland Memorial Fund, still continues. 


@@@@@


doc= 30328


Acton, Sir Edward (1865-1945), judge, was born at Stretford in Lancashire on 6 November 1865, the son of Henry Morell Acton (1828-1907) ['see under 'Acton, Henry], one of the editors of the 'Manchester Guardian', and his wife, Anne Shaw, daughter of Nathaniel Williamson, sharebroker, of Manchester. He was educated at Uppingham School, where he was an exhibitioner, and Wadham College, Oxford, where he held a classical scholarship and the Hody Greek exhibition. He was at Oxford from 1884 to 1888 and thus was a precursor rather than a member of that remarkable group of Wadham lawyers which included Frederick Edwin Smith (the future earl of Birkenhead), Alexander Adair Roche (later Lord Roche), and John Allsebrook Simon (later Viscount Simon). After gaining a first in classical moderations (1886) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1888), Acton joined the Inner Temple, where he was awarded a foundation scholarship in 1890; he was called to the bar in 1891 and later became a bencher of his inn. 
Acton joined the northern circuit and practised in Manchester and Liverpool, where he soon built up an extensive practice. On 12 August 1903 he married Edith Nina, daughter of Conrad William Alexander Tulloch, a chartered accountant, of London. Acton and his wife were devoted to each other; there were no children of the marriage. In 1913 Acton became a lecturer in the law of evidence and procedure at the University of Manchester. In 1918, when he might have been expected to be thinking of taking silk, he surprised those who knew him by accepting appointment as a county court judge. For the next two years he worked on circuit 18 at Nottingham. 
In 1920 arrears of work in the King's Bench Division made it necessary to appoint two additional judges and Acton was chosen to fill one of these posts by Birkenhead, the lord chancellor, himself an old member of the northern circuit. Such a promotion from the county court to the High Court had never been made before. The experiment was successful, however, and the precedent created in Acton's case has since been followed on a number of occasions. Acton received the customary knighthood on his appointment to the bench in 1920. In 1934 ill health compelled him to retire and he lived quietly, a semi-invalid, at his home, The Hatch, Churt, Surrey, where he died on 17 November 1945. He was survived by his wife. 
At the bar Acton had a large and solid practice; as an advocate he was sound and accurate but not spectacular. These qualities he displayed on the bench. In his judgments he was content to deal closely with the case in hand without feeling it necessary to elaborate on the surrounding legal field or to strive after the distinction of creating precedents for quotation in the books. Although he was so modest, his decisions satisfactorily stood the test of appeal. 
Acton was interested in the theatre and music, though as an auditor rather than a performer. A portrait by John St Helier Lander is in Wadham College, of which he was elected an honorary fellow in 1923. The artist's attempt to overcome the belittling effect on the face which the wearing of a full-bottomed wig can have has not been entirely successful, and the picture gives the impression that Acton was of larger proportions than was the fact. 


@@@@@


doc= 30329


Acton, John Emerich Edward Dalberg, first Baron Acton (1834-1902), historian and moralist, was born at Naples on 10 January 1834, the only child of Sir Ferdinand Richard Edward Acton, seventh baronet (1801-1837), and Marie Louise Pelline de Dalberg (1812-1860), the French-bred heir of Emeric Joseph, duc de Dalberg, the last survivor of an eminent German noble family with its seat at Herrnsheim. After his father's early death in Paris, his mother took him to England where she married (2 July 1840) Granville George Leveson-Gower, Lord Leveson, later second Earl Granville, the Liberal statesman. The Acton family had long been settled at Aldenham in Shropshire, receiving a baronetcy in 1643 for loyalty to Charles I. Acton was descended from a Roman Catholic cadet branch of the family which had settled in France. The baronetcy passed in 1791 to the eldest of that line, Sir John Francis Edward Acton (1736-1811), who had entered the Neapolitan naval service, reorganized it and the army, and eventually became prime minister of Naples. Because of his harsh repression of rebels, it is said, his grandson refused the income from his Italian estates. In 1799 General Acton married his brother's daughter by papal dispensation. Their younger son, Charles Januarius Edward Acton (1803-1847), became a cardinal. 
Cosmopolitan by birth and breeding, speaking several languages and related to the nobilities of south Germany, France, and Italy, Acton was only in part an Englishman. His education was similarly varied. In 1842 he was sent to a school in Paris under Felix Dupanloup, passing in 1843 to Oscott College, then under the future cardinal Nicholas Wiseman, who made Oscott a centre of the Roman Catholic revival in England. In 1848 he went to Edinburgh for two rather unsatisfactory years under the tutelage of Dr Henry Logan. Then, in 1850, he found the master who formed his mind: he went to Munich for six years of private study under Professor Ignaz von Dollinger, living in his house. Dollinger was the foremost Roman Catholic church historian in Germany, a major figure in the scientific school of historians of whom Ranke was the leader. Under Dollinger's training Acton became a scientific and critical historian, particularly critical in dealing with the history of his church. Dollinger also initiated him in Burkean liberalism, cultivating a hatred of all forms of absolutism whether in church or state. The ethical effect of Dollinger's teaching was a deep commitment to the value of truth, especially in historiography, and to the sovereignty and freedom of conscience. Finally, Dollinger introduced Acton to the liberal Catholic movement of the continent, particularly on his annual visits with him to France, where Acton met the leading figures such as Montalembert and Broglie. Introduced early to eminent men, Acton had little opportunity to interact with his contemporaries. 
In 1853 Acton accompanied Lord Ellesmere, commissioner to an industrial exhibition, to the United States, meeting many eminent figures. In 1856 he was attached to the mission of Lord Granville to the coronation of Tsar Alexander II of Russia. In 1857 he travelled with Dollinger to Italy, where he had connections, particularly Marco Minghetti, later premier, a relative and correspondent. Most important was his visit to Rome, where he was introduced to Pope Pius IX. From this Roman visit Dollinger dated his own disillusionment with the papacy. Acton was merely cool; personally devout, he was unimpressed by Roman institutions. 
Returning to England in 1857, Acton settled at Aldenham, where he built his great library; but he did not have the tastes of a country squire. He sought to enter politics, and a seat was found for him in the whig interest at Carlow, where he was elected without making a personal appearance in 1859. He was not a suitable representative for this unruly Irish constituency, and he turned to his neighbouring borough of Bridgnorth in the 1865 election. He was elected by a majority of one but unseated in 1866 on a scrutiny. A second candidacy at Bridgnorth in 1868 was a failure. Acton was unsuited for competitive political life. He spoke only three times in the House of Commons, and when made a peer he appeared infrequently in the House of Lords. A failure as a practical politician, he was to achieve success as the confidant and adviser of William Ewart Gladstone. 
On her deathbed in 1860, Acton's mother arranged a marriage between her son and his cousin, Countess Maria (Marie) Anna Ludomilla Euphrosina (1841-1923), second daughter of Count Johann Maximilian von Arco-Valley and his wife, Anna Margareta Maria Juliana Pelina, Countess Marescalchi; she viewed it as a dynastic alliance of two noble houses. Acton wooed his bride through her mother, of whom he was very fond. Considered too young to marry in 1860, she eventually became attached to another suitor, who was however disqualified by epilepsy. The engagement with Acton was once broken off, but later resumed after intervention by Dollinger. The couple were married on 1 August 1865 at St Martin in Austria, and despite the adverse circumstances of the union, it does not seem to have been initially unhappy. Acton's letters to his bride in 1865 and his pregnant wife in 1870 were full of tenderness. But the pair proved to be intellectually incompatible: Acton was unsuccessful in using his letters to Marie as a means of testing out his thoughts on serious questions, as he later did with Mary Gladstone. But it was in the intellectual sphere that Acton's true career lay. 
One of Acton's objectives on his return to England was to develop an active intellectual life among English Catholics, introducing them to the critical scholarship he had learned on the continent. For this purpose he needed a periodical organ, which he found in 1858 when he acquired a principal share in the proprietorship of 'The Rambler', a monthly founded in 1848 by an Oxford convert, John Moore Capes, which had originally served as an organ for the converts, better educated than their 'old Catholic' co-religionists. Already, especially under the editorship of Richard Simpson, 'The Rambler' had moved to a liberal Catholic position, supporting freedom of scholarship and philosophic speculation and coming into conflict with Cardinal Wiseman and his organ, the 'Dublin Review'. In 1859 the bishops forced Simpson's resignation as editor. He was succeeded by John Henry Newman, who himself was forced to resign after two numbers. Acton then took the editorship, consolidating 'The Rambler's' position as the organ of the liberal Catholic movement in England. He contributed several articles, some of which have been republished, and numerous reviews. The conflict with the ultramontanism of Wiseman, Henry Edward Manning, and William George Ward intensified. Partly to avert episcopal censure, the journal was transformed into the quarterly 'Home and Foreign Review' in 1862; but the review was itself censured by Wiseman and William Bernard Ullathorne, bishop of Birmingham. None the less, the 'Home and Foreign Review' established itself not only as the rival of Ward's 'Dublin Review' but as one of the great periodicals of the age, notable for its learning and its European rather than insular character, winning the praise of Matthew Arnold for its knowledge and play of mind. Its excellence was especially displayed in numerous short notices of books in many languages, many of them written by Acton, a voracious reader and knowledgeable critic. 
In late 1863 Acton attended a congress of Catholic scholars at Munich, where Dollinger gave an address urging a progressive historical rather than scholastic theology and demanding freedom of Catholic scholarship. Acton hailed this enthusiastically in the 'Home and Foreign Review' (Jan 1864). But it aroused the direct hostility of Roman authority, and a papal brief to the archbishop of Munich asserted that Roman Catholic thought was bound by the decisions of Roman congregations. This was an explicit rejection of the fundamental principles of the review, denying any distinction between fixed dogma and theological opinion. Acton, knowing that a direct confrontation with Rome could only lead to a condemnation by an authority higher than English bishops, chose to 'sacrifice the existence of the 'Review' to the defence of its principles, in order that I may combine the obedience which is due to legitimate ecclesiastical authority, with an equally conscientious maintenance of the rightful and necessary liberty of thought'. This statement, reasserting both his principle of freedom of thought and his loyalty to the authority of Rome, appeared in an article entitled 'Conflicts with Rome' in the final issue of the 'Home and Foreign Review' in April 1864. This was the end of the liberal Catholic movement in England. The movement was decisively condemned in December 1864 by the encyclical 'Quanta cura' and its appended 'Syllabus of Errors', the pope's refusal to 'come to terms with progress, liberalism, and modern civilization'. Acton could not endorse the 'Syllabus' and spoke in 1865 of belonging 'rather to the soul than the body of the Roman Catholic Church'. His sacramental piety was not impaired, but his hopes for explicitly Catholic intellectual activity were dashed. 
Acton turned to pure historical research, making several tours of archives throughout Europe between 1864 and 1868 for a variety of projects, none actually published. It was in the course of these archival tours that he became indignantly aware of the mendacity regularly practised by Roman Catholic historians to further the interests of their church. Also during this time he developed his hatred for religious persecution, which he regarded as nothing other than murder. These two concerns raised his opposition to Rome from the ecclesiastical to the ethical plane, leading to the rigorous moralism of his later years. 
The liberal Catholics were able to return to literary endeavours, though not as a religious movement, when they founded a weekly journal, 'The Chronicle', in 1867, underwritten by Sir Rowland Blennerhassett and edited by T. F. Wetherell, Acton's former sub-editor. Acton served as Roman correspondent for 'The Chronicle' and wrote several articles. The journal, too liberal for Catholics and too Catholic for liberals, lasted only a year. In 1869 the Acton circle, again with Wetherell as editor, took over the former organ of the Scottish Free Church, the 'North British Review', keeping it going until 1871. Acton contributed weighty articles, notably 'The massacre of St Bartholomew' (October 1869), where his scholarship was marred by his sharp anti-papal bias. Both these periodicals were secular rather than religious in character, devoted primarily to Gladstonian Liberalism. Acton was also able to express his thoughts on recent history with lectures delivered to the Bridgnorth Literary and Scientific Institution on the American Civil War in 1866 and on the Mexican empire in 1868. 
During these years Acton's friendship with Gladstone became one of intimacy and mutual admiration. Acton, much younger, treated Gladstone with the respect due his seniority, but the younger man had the greater influence upon the elder. Gladstone shared his moralism and respected his learning and wisdom. Acton influenced Gladstone more than any other man, on subjects ranging from his support of the South during the American Civil War to his eventual conversion to home rule. Their friendship grew steadily from 1866, when they were in Rome together. On 11 December 1869, Acton was created a peer, on Gladstone's recommendation, as Baron Acton of Aldenham, one of the first two Roman Catholic peers created since emancipation. There were political reasons: he and his fellow, Lord Howard of Glossop, had recently lost seats, and more Liberal peers were needed in the Lords. But Gladstone, aside from wishing to compliment his friend, had the additional motive of seeking to strengthen Acton's position at Rome, where he was already working to organize opposition to the impending definition of papal infallibility at the First Vatican Council. 
Acton played a remarkable role for a layman during the council. He was Gladstone's personal agent and observer, and he urged him to have Britain join other powers in diplomatic action to prevent the definition. This was foiled not, as has been alleged, because of Manning's influence on Odo Russell, the British diplomatic agent, but because Gladstone found resistance in the cabinet led by the foreign secretary, Lord Clarendon. Acton also sought to influence European public opinion by writing detailed accounts of the council to Dollinger at Munich, who combined them with others in a series published in the Augsburg 'Allgemeine Zeitung' under the name of Quirinus. They were published as a book at Munich and translated into English as 'Letters from Rome on the Council' (1870). Acton was responsible only for fifteen of the letters, and he differed from Dollinger on some of the others, Dollinger opposing infallibility as untrue and Acton because it was immoral, the symbol of papal absolutism and the ultramontane system of untruthfulness and justification of persecution. Acton's most important activity was within the council itself, where, although not a member, he organized the minority of opposition bishops, urging them to hold together in resistance, and in general functioning as a sort of minority whip. His ability was recognized by all, but most of the opposition bishops were unreliable for his purpose, opposing the definition only on the ground of its being inopportune. Expecting defeat, the minority withdrew from Rome, allowing the dogma to be adopted in July 1870. Acton had already left. 
From Tegernsee, his wife's family home, Acton issued his 'Sendschreiben an einen deutschen Bischof des vaticanischen Concils' (1870), quoting from anti-infallibilist statements and asking whether the bishops still maintained their resistance. They did not; within a year all the bishops had submitted. This was a grave moral crisis for Acton but in a way it eventually made it easier for him to live with the newly defined dogma. He could argue, as his correspondent Archbishop Kenrick of St Louis did, that the consent of the church at large remedied any defects in the council itself and that he need not give internal assent to the dogma; he could trust, as a believer in the development of doctrine, that in time infallibility could be acceptably incorporated into the body of Roman Catholic dogma. So he did not leave the church. Dollinger, whose quarrel was with the dogma itself rather than the existing system which it represented, could not submit and was excommunicated; and other opponents formed a small secessionist 'Old Catholic' communion. 
Acton's position was unchallenged until 1874, when Gladstone published his pamphlet on 'The Vatican Decrees in their Bearing on Civil Allegiance', inspired in part by Acton's letters to him during the council. Acton had advised against publication, and he responded to Gladstone in letters to 'The Times', vindicating the loyalty of British Catholics by showing that they had disregarded papal instructions in the past and that the practical power of the papacy was not increased by the decrees. He struck a final blow at ultramontanism, showing by historical examples that church authorities had for centuries committed political crimes without the aid of the dogma of infallibility. This was a defence of Catholics at the expense of the church as an institution, and when reproached for this Acton asserted the duty of uttering historical truth, which might disgrace churchmen but could never tarnish the holiness of the church. Archbishop Manning, by now an enemy, demanded an explanation (November 1874); Acton evaded an outright acceptance of infallibility, saying only that he submitted to the acts of the council, relying on God's providence in the government of the church. Manning was dissatisfied and referred the matter to Rome. But Acton had satisfied his diocesan bishop as to his orthodoxy; he was a layman and a peer; and Rome took no action. For months, however, Acton expected to be excommunicated, a fate especially dreadful to one whose simple devotion was centred on the sacraments. When he said that communion with Rome was dearer than life, the emphasis should be placed on 'communion'. Retaining that, he withdrew from religious controversy. 
Acton turned to the study of history, for which he had built a library of some 60,000 volumes. In 1863 he had published a tract, 'Human Sacrifice', and an edition of 'Les matinees royales', alleged memoirs of Frederick the Great which he later found to be spurious. He edited Nicholas Harpsfield's 'Narrative of the Divorce' and 'Letters of James II to the Abbot of La Trappe' for the Philobiblon Society (1872-6). But his original publications were few. He would not write until he had read all the sources, a rule which was fatal in the era of the opening of archives. The spur of journalism was no longer available to him. He published an article in the 'Quarterly Review', 'Wolsey and the divorce of Henry VIII' (January 1877), and a review of Sir Erskine May's 'Democracy in Europe' (January 1878) which displayed his learning, and a substantial article on George Eliot in the 'Nineteenth Century' (March 1885). In 1886 he was one of the founders of the 'English Historical Review', contributing to the first number a massively learned article, 'German schools of history' (German trans. 1887), part of his programme of introducing German scholarship to England, and later publishing some substantial reviews. He also served the cause of learning as a trustee of the British Museum and a member of the Historical Manuscripts Commission. But he published no book, though he formulated several book projects. The greatest of these was a 'History of liberty', which occupied him from 1877 to 1883. The only result, aside from a mass of notes, was a pair of lectures at Bridgnorth in 1877 on the 'History of freedom' in antiquity and in Christianity, published in French translation in Paris in 1878. Of his other projects, a biography of Dollinger yielded an article, 'Dollinger's historical works', in the 'English Historical Review' (1890). Acton was a natural essayist, of the monographic sort, with a somewhat difficult and allusive style and a flair for aphorisms. 
Another reason why Acton wrote no book was his sense of isolation. He was not isolated from intellectual society; he was a member of Grillion's, the Club, and the Athenaeum among other clubs, met the best intellectual society and corresponded copiously. But he was isolated in his intellectual position by his rigorous moralism. He insisted on an absolute moral standard in history, the basic test being murder, with the historian as judge condemning not only the murderer but even more those who encouraged or justified the murder; this required him to condemn the leaders of his own church most of all for their justification of persecution. In 1879 he discovered that Dollinger, for all his opposition to infallibility, did not share this fundamental criticism of the pre-1870 church, and a painful correspondence of several years ended in their intellectual separation. The shock left Acton's creative faculties almost paralysed for a time. He was indeed isolated, as he found later when he wrote a severe review of Mandell Creighton's 'History of the Popes' (1887), faulting him for being insufficiently condemnatory of medieval popes. In the ensuing correspondence, in which Creighton made the better case, Acton uttered his best-known aphorism, 'power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely' (Acton to Creighton, 3 April 1887, cited in L. Creighton, 'Life... of Mandell Creighton', 1904, 1, chap. 13). The standard of morality was not always compatible with his other standard of impartiality, and in practice Acton did not always adhere to either, having a whig bias toward seeing history as progress to liberty. 
Although publishing little and isolated in his fundamental principles, Acton was known and appreciated in the intellectual world for his erudition, which he freely shared. An American visitor called him the nearest approach to omniscience he had met. Honours came to him: in 1872 the University of Munich gave him an honorary doctorate of philosophy, and he became an FSA in 1876. In 1888 he was made an honorary LLD at Cambridge, in 1889 an honorary DCL at Oxford. In 1891, at Gladstone's suggestion, he received an honorary fellowship of All Souls. 
Acton suffered financial troubles during these years. Although the Aldenham estate of some 6000 acres had a nominal rental of about $7500, it was heavily encumbered; Acton paid little attention to management, and the 1870s were years of agricultural depression. In 1879 he had to sell his house at Herrnsheim and let that at Aldenham, taking out a large loan as well. Henceforth he lived mostly abroad, at Tegernsee and Cannes. In the late 1870s and 1880s, his marriage seems to have suffered too: there are definite signs of unhappiness, even estrangement. His financial situation was finally eased in 1890 when, at Gladstone's suggestion, Andrew Carnegie purchased his great library, allowing Acton to keep it for his lifetime. (After Acton's death, Carnegie gave the library to John Morley, who gave it to Cambridge University Library, where it is separately housed.) It is unclear, however, how long-lived Acton's marital difficulties were. 
When forming his fourth ministry in 1892, Gladstone wished to include Acton, who avidly sought a place; but no place could be found for him more consequential than lord-in-waiting. His political role was to speak for the government on Irish issues in the Lords. As a courtier, he won the favour of Queen Victoria, whose German interests he shared. She made him a KCVO in 1897. 
Acton was destined to achieve eminence neither as politician nor as courtier, but as a scholar. In 1895 Lord Rosebery, whom Acton had helped to bring into the 1892 cabinet, nominated him to become regius professor of modern history at Cambridge, where he took up residence at Trinity College. On 11 June 1895 he delivered an impressive inaugural lecture on the study of history, urging his favourite themes, the unity of modern history as the progress of liberty, the importance of the critical scientific method of research, and the duty of the historian to uphold the moral standard in history. The lecture was published with Germanic footnotes of extensive quotations; it was translated into German in 1897. 
Acton entered fully into Cambridge life and professorial work, and his Cambridge years were the happiest of his life. His pleasure in his college rooms, bachelor digs, may have been connected to his marital problems. He gave a course of lectures on the French Revolution, followed a few years later by a course on modern history, both published after his death. The lectures were well attended by dons, students, and the public. Their impressiveness was enhanced by Acton's striking dignity, his flowing beard, and the deep voice in which he read from his text. But his work at Cambridge was not limited to lecturing. He revitalized the history school, stagnant under his predecessors Charles Kingsley and Sir John Seeley. He entertained his colleagues and gave freely of his wisdom to don and undergraduate alike. 
In 1896 the syndics of the Cambridge University Press approached Acton with a proposal for a collaborative work which became the 'Cambridge Modern History'. He accepted the editorship, drew up the plan of chapters for the twelve volumes, and began to solicit contributors. That part of the work was the hardest, as he had to deal with collaborators none of whom shared his historical moralism and many of whom opposed each other on other issues; all he could do was exhort them to be impartial. The strain broke him down; characteristically, none of his own chapters was completed. Yet the first volume was in type before he died; and the plan of work is his monument. 
Acton suffered a paralytic stroke in 1901 and withdrew to Tegernsee, where he died, after receiving the sacraments of his church, on 19 June 1902, and where he was buried. He was survived by his widow, three daughters, and a son, Richard Maximilian (1870-1924), who succeeded him as the second Baron Acton. The cosmopolitan character of the Acton family is illustrated by the fact that the second lord, a British diplomat, found it advisable to obtain a private act of naturalization in 1911. 
Aside from periodical articles, Acton published in his lifetime only scattered lectures and edited works. After his death, the extent of his writings was revealed by the publication of his two courses of lectures (1906, 1910) and two volumes of collected essays (1907), all edited by J. N. Figgis and R. V. Laurence, who also edited his selected correspondence (1917). Two other volumes of letters appeared shortly after Acton's death, and several further volumes both of essays and letters have subsequently been published (the greatest compilation is the three-volume 'Selected Writings' edited by J. Rufus Fears, 1986-8). A bibliography of Acton's writings was edited by W. A. Shaw for the Royal Historical Society in 1903, but there is still no truly complete and accurate bibliography. Acton's notes, in Cambridge University Library, are a mine of aphorisms. 
Acton's reputation was revived after the Second World War, when his defence of liberty against absolutism was perceived as a prophetic warning against totalitarianism. This aspect of the Acton revival has been misappropriated by neo-conservative ideologues; but it produced Gertrude Himmelfarb's biography (1952). There was also a renewed interest in Acton as a historian, under the auspices of Herbert Butterfield. A third aspect of the Acton revival has come from interest in his liberal Catholicism. There has been some reaction against this revived study of one whose life was largely a failure. But others may feel that failure is especially worthy of study when it reveals the fierce integrity of Acton's devotion to conscience, to truth, and to liberty. 


@@@@@


doc= 30330


Acworth, Sir William Mitchell (1850-1925), railway economist, was born at Rothley, Leicestershire, on 22 November 1850, the third son of the Revd William Acworth, vicar of Rothley, and his wife, Margaret Dundas, daughter of Andrew Mitchell of Maulside, Beath, and Blythswood Place, Glasgow. He was educated at Uppingham and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 13 May 1871. After taking a degree in history in 1872, for eighteen months he tutored the two sons of Crown Prince Frederick of Germany, William (afterwards Kaiser Wilhelm II) and Henry. On returning to Britain he was appointed in 1875 an assistant master at Dulwich College, where he remained until 1885. In 1878 he married Elizabeth Louisa Oswald (died 1904), eldest daughter of James Brown, of Orangefield, Ayrshire. In 1886 he was elected a member, later chairman, of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. He served on the London county council from 1889 to 1892, and in 1890 was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. 
Having begun to specialize in railway affairs, in 1889 and 1890 Acworth published his first books, descriptive accounts of the railways in England and Scotland respectively. In 1891 he turned his attention to the economic and statistical aspects of his topic, and the principles that governed the fixing of railway rates. After visiting the United States to learn about statistical methods used in American railroads, he severely criticized British railway accounts in 'The Railways and the Traders', published that year. These criticisms led to accounting procedures being overhauled by the UK railways in 1911. 
Soon after its foundation in 1895, Acworth began lectures for railway students at the London School of Economics. In 1905 he published his best work, 'The Elements of Railway Economics', a pioneer textbook that was widely translated. A revised edition, co-authored by W. Tetley Stephenson, appeared in 1925. He wrote many articles on railway economics for technical and other periodicals in Britain, and also in the United States, where his work was highly esteemed. His knowledge of such matters earned him membership of the royal commission on railway accidents in 1899, on the viceregal commission on Irish railways in 1906, and on the Board of Trade committee on railway accounts and statistics the same year. He became a director of the Underground Electric Railways of London Ltd and of the Midland and South-Western Junction Railway. 
Acworth gained political experience as a Unionist candidate for the Yorkshire constituency of Keighley in the general elections of 1906, 1910, and 1911. In the First World War he served for a time in the Red Cross, until in 1916 he was made a member of the royal commission of inquiry into the Canadian railways. A year later he gave evidence in the US congress before the joint committee on inter-state and foreign commerce; his testimony was revised and published in 1920 as 'A Historical Sketch of State Railway Ownership', in which Acworth gave his reasons for preferring private enterprise. During that year the British authorities required railway accounts to be expressed in terms of ton-miles and passenger miles. 
In 1921 Acworth received a knighthood and was appointed chairman of the committee on Indian railway policy and administration. After the committee had concluded its work a year later, he was created KCSI. In 1923 he married Elizabeth Learmonth, younger daughter of Thomas Wotherspoon, of Hundleshope, Peeblesshire. There were no children of either marriage. That year the council of the League of Nations invited him to undertake an investigation of the Austrian railways. In 1924 the reparations commission, set up to implement the Dawes plan, asked him to draw up a scheme for reorganizing the German railways. Fluent in French and German, and with a barrister's training in addition to his unparalleled railway expertise, he dominated the inquiry, which recommended a public corporation to supersede the former government department. That task proved so exacting for a man in his seventies that Acworth suffered a breakdown and died at A8 the Albany, Piccadilly, London, on 2 April 1925, shortly before he was due to depart for a similar investigation in Romania. His unique collection of transport literature was bequeathed to the London School of Economics. 
A supporter of private enterprise, Acworth was, in some instances, led to recommend measures of state control owing to chaotic post-war conditions; but he always strongly emphasized the necessity of separate railway budgets and of adequate safeguards against political interference. A man of concentrated energy, he undertook much journalistic work for 'The Times'. He served on the councils of the Royal Economic Society and the Royal Statistical Society, having presided over the economics section of the British Association in 1908. Not surprisingly, his entry in 'Who's Who' listed no recreations. He was noted for his moral courage, fair-mindedness, hospitality, and sense of humour. Widely read, he often lamented (as did some economists) that he knew so little economic theory, although he had great skill in unravelling quantitative data. Although practical railway officers often charged him with being too theoretical, they turned up in droves to his lectures, and some helped to supervise the teaching curriculum. No recognition gave him so much satisfaction as this acceptance by his own country's railway industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 30331


Adam, James (1860-1907), classical scholar and philosopher, born on 7 April 1860 at Kinmuck in the parish of Keithhall near Inverurie in Aberdeenshire, was second child and only son of James Adam and his wife, Barbara Anderson. The father owned the general store and tailor's shop which served the neighbouring countryside; he died of typhoid fever when his son was only eight. His mother by her own energy carried on the business, and brought up her six children. He made rapid progress at the parish school of Keithhall under George Kemp MA, and having spent some months at the grammar school of Old Aberdeen won the third bursary at Aberdeen University in October 1876. Though chiefly interested in Greek, Adam took a good place in most of the classes of the arts course. His devotion to Greek was fostered by the professor, William Geddes. In 1880 he graduated with first-class honours in classics and carried off the chief classical prizes and the Ferguson scholarship. Meanwhile in spring 1880 he had been elected classical scholar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. In summer 1882 he was placed in division one of the first class in the classical tripos, part one. In 1883 he just missed the Craven scholarship, but in 1884 was awarded the first chancellor's medal and obtained a specially brilliant first class (only once equalled) in part two of the classical tripos with distinction in classics, ancient philosophy, and comparative philology. 
In December 1884 Adam was elected a junior fellow and was soon appointed classical lecturer of Emmanuel College, where he settled down at once to his life's work as a teacher. During his undergraduate career at Cambridge he had concentrated with increasing enthusiasm on the study of Plato, and for the rest of his life some work of Plato (most frequently the 'Phaedo' or some books of the 'Republic') was usually the subject for one of the two courses of intercollegiate lectures. Aristotle's 'Ethics', Lucretius, Cicero's 'De finibus', and above all the Greek lyric poets were also frequent subjects. His lectures were full of wit as well as learning, and however mystical some might consider his philosophical views, there was no lack of precision in his scholarship. 
Throughout his teaching career Adam took classes with rare intermissions at Girton College, and was a keen supporter of the claims of women to degrees, when the question came before the senate of the university in 1897. He married, on 22 July 1890, one of his Girton pupils, Adela Marion (1866-1944), youngest daughter of Arthur Kensington, formerly fellow and tutor of Trinity College, Oxford. They had two sons and a daughter. Adela Adam taught classics at Girton and Newnham colleges and became a research fellow of Girton (1920-23). 
Adam regarded a knowledge of Greek as an essential part of university education, and he resolutely opposed all attempts to make Greek an optional subject of study. At Easter 1890 he visited Greece. In the same year he was appointed joint tutor of his college with William Napier Shaw, and in 1900, the number of tutors having been mean time increased, he succeeded Shaw as senior tutor. His relations with pupils and colleagues were kindly and affectionate, while his efficiency as a lecturer proved of great benefit to the college. The changes in the classical tripos, which came into force in 1903, emphasized the importance of ancient philosophy, and the college hall was barely able to hold the numbers that flocked to Adam's lectures on Plato and Aristotle. 
In 1887, inspired probably by his closest friend, Robert Alexander Neil, Adam published his first edition of a Platonic dialogue, the 'Apology'. This was followed by the 'Crito' in 1888, the 'Euthyphro' in 1890, and (in conjunction with his wife) the 'Protagoras' in 1893. In 1890 he had announced an intention of preparing an edition of the 'Republic'. In 1897 he published a revised text. This, however, differed in many passages from the large edition in two volumes which appeared after many years of labour in 1902, and immediately took its place as the standard edition. Adam's notes and excursuses, which are very concise considering the difficulty of the subject, represent a judgement based upon a thorough knowledge of the vast work of his many predecessors. The outstanding quality of his translations and notes is reflected in the longevity of his scholarly work: a second edition of his 'Republic' was published in 1962 and of his 'Protagoras' in 1971. 
In textual matters Adam became steadily more conservative, believing that the tradition of the Platonic text was in the main quite sound. An investigation preliminary to his edition of the 'Republic' was a discussion in his 'Platonic Number' (1891). His interpretation was confirmed by Professor Hilprecht's discovery of the Babylonian perfect number. At Christmas 1902 he was nominated Gifford lecturer at Aberdeen, choosing for his subject 'The religious teachers of Greece', and delivering the lectures in 1904 and 1905. 
In spring 1907, Adam, who, amid his unceasing work, retained his youthful appearance in middle age, was attacked by illness. He died on 30 August 1907 at 5 Albyn Place, Aberdeen, after an operation, and was buried at Woking. 
The Gifford lectures, which were left complete but not finally revised for publication, were edited with a short memoir by Adam's widow and published in 1908 (2nd edn, 1909). A collection of his essays and lectures, 'The Vitality of Platonism, and other Essays', was edited by his widow in 1911. These collected papers best illustrate the bent of Adam's mind in later life. For many years he had been deeply interested in the relationship between Greek philosophy and the 'New Testament'. Though he would not have said with Westcott that 'the final cause of Greek was the 'New Testament'', he certainly tended to regard Greek philosophy pre-eminently as a 'Praeparatio evangelica', and his occasional lectures on such semi-religious topics at summer meetings in Cambridge found large and appreciative audiences. Witty and paradoxical in conversation, though with a vein of melancholy in his nature, Adam found fullest scope for his abilities as a teacher, and to education in the highest sense all his work as lecturer and writer was devoted. 


@@@@@


doc= 30332


Adami, John George (1862-1926), pathologist, was born on 12 January 1862 in the Albion Hotel, Piccadilly, Manchester. He was the second son of five sons and four daughters of John George Adami, hotel proprietor, and his wife, Sarah Ann Ellis, daughter of Thomas Leech of Urmston, Lancashire. His mother was the sister of Daniel John Leech (1840-1900), professor of materia medica and therapeutics in the Victoria University and physician to the Manchester Royal Infirmary. The Adami name came from an Italian ancestor who migrated to Bavaria and became protestant in the sixteenth century. Both Adami's parents had many doctors in their families. 
Adami was baptized in Manchester Cathedral, and at the age of ten he went to Old Trafford School. After matriculating, he moved to Owens College, Manchester, and passed the first part of the London BSc. In 1880 he entered Christ's College, Cambridge. At Cambridge he was greatly influenced by, and later became a friend of, Sir Michael Foster. Even as a student Adami showed a broad interest in the place of science in the community, and delivered a paper to the exclusive Natural Science Club: 'The medical degree with special reference to the new Medical Act'. He gained a first class in both parts of the natural science tripos (1882, 1884), and then worked for eight months at Breslau under Rudolf Heidenhain. From 1885 to 1887 he was house physician at the Royal Infirmary, Manchester. In 1888 he returned to Cambridge as university demonstrator in pathology. In 1889 Adami was exposed to rabies, and received anti-rabies immunization from the Pasteur Institute in Paris. He returned to the Pasteur Institute the following year and worked under the key French immunologists and bacteriologists Pierre Roux, Ilya Mechnikov, and Louis Pasteur. In March 1891 Adami was elected to a fellowship at Jesus College, Cambridge. 
An old friend from Owens College drew Adami's attention to the new chair in pathology and bacteriology at McGill University, Montreal, and Adami was appointed in 1892. He found a young university and a department badly hampered by lack of funds, buildings, and equipment. These material needs were met by the generosity of J. H. R. Molson and Lord Strathcona, who endowed the chair of pathology and financed the pathology wing in the university and the Royal Victoria Hospital. Under Adami the hospital had an autopsy rate of 80 per cent. Adami was a good teacher with an original mind in research. He considered that the department of pathology should be of value to the community at large, and in 1894 he became bacteriologist to the department of agriculture. Montreal had great poverty, and was divided into French and British parts. Adami became involved in the campaign against pulmonary tuberculosis, and was the English president of the City Improvement League, which was concerned with city planning, water supplies, clean streets and rented accommodation. He was also the English president of the Child Welfare Exhibition of 1912, which made the public aware of increasing infant mortality, and chairman of a representative committee on venereal disease. Adami married Mary Stuart, daughter of James Alexander Cantlie, of Montreal, in 1894; they had a son and a daughter. His wife was intimately connected through her mother with Lord Strathcona and Lord Mountstephen, two great benefactors of McGill University. She died in 1916. 
Adami contributed an important chapter on inflammation to Sir Clifford Allbutt's 'System of Medicine' (1896), which attracted particular attention. In 1899 he was invited to apply for the chair of pathology at Cambridge; although tempted, he eventually declined the offer. He was elected FRS in 1905. Adami finished 'The Principles of Pathology' during a sabbatical in 1906, while collaborating with Ludwig Aschoff in Marburg. It was an important teaching text, but somewhat too long for students. The book emphasized the role of functional as well as structural changes in disease. In 1911 Adami was elected president of the Canadian Association for the Prevention of Tuberculosis, and in 1912 he became president of the Association of American Physicians and the Royal Society of Canada. However, he realized that the idea that intestinal derangements (stasis and absorption of toxins) caused many diseases made its adherents appear obsessed, and in 1914 he wrote that '[for the last fourteen years] I have largely permitted this particular field to lie fallow' (Adami, 'BMJ', 24 Jan 1914). In the same year Adami wrote to Sir William Osler, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, and formerly of McGill, indicating the desire of doctors for a medical history of the war. In due course Adami became assistant director of medical services (in charge of records) to the Canadian expeditionary force, and wrote 'The War Story of the Canadian Army Medical Corps' (1918). 
In 1919, with the support of William Osler and Sir Clifford Allbutt, Adami was appointed vice-chancellor of the University of Liverpool. He was made CBE in the same year. The university was then in the throes of post-war expansion, its numbers having grown from under 900 in August 1914 to 2600 by 1919. Adami's chief service was to raise by appeal the large sum of $360,000 for new buildings and equipment, and the endowment of new chairs and additional lectureships. Adami placed a high value on the contribution that the university could make to the then great commercial city of Liverpool. He strengthened the links between business and academic life and maintained the interest of the districts around the city. This made fund-raising easier. In particular, he raised money for a multidisciplinary approach to cancer research. He was an untiring and witty public speaker, accessible, genial, and energetic; he had a lively and well-stocked mind and a broad range of interests. His scientific judgement was good and his reputation in the university and city was high. 
Adami developed a lymphoma about 1918 and suffered from great tiredness for two years. However, he remained active. He married, on 4 April 1922, Marie, elder daughter of the Revd Thomas Wilkinson, of Litherland, near Liverpool. They had no children. Adami received treatment for his lymphoma from Dr W. B. Coley in America, who was treating tumours with bacterial toxins. He died in Ruthin Castle, a private hospital in Ruthin, Denbighshire, on 29 August 1926. His funeral was four days later at Liverpool Cathedral and he was buried at Allerton cemetery. A memorial service for the University of Liverpool was held in the cathedral in October. He was survived by his wife. 
Adami's chief service to pathology was to link it more closely with clinical medicine, stressing always the importance of preventive medicine. Before the First World War he fought a campaign in Canada for public health and in particular child welfare and measures against tuberculosis. As chairman of the Medical Research Committee in 1917 on standardization of routine pathological methods, he was influential in the standardization of the Wassermann test for syphilis in British laboratories, and spoke out fearlessly on venereal disease in an address to the Royal Institute of Public Health, under the title 'The policy of the ostrich' which was published in the 'Canadian Medical Association Journal' in 1919. Adami also championed the use of immunization with BCG (attenuated bovine tubercle bacillus) for the prophylaxis of tuberculosis at a time when this approach was neglected in Great Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 30333


Adams, James Williams (1839-1903), army chaplain, born on 24 November 1839 in Cork, was the only son of James O'Brien Adams, magistrate of Cork (died 1854), and his wife, Elizabeth Williams. Educated at Hamlin and Porter's School, on the South Mall, Cork, he went to Trinity College, Dublin (BA 1861). He excelled in athletics, and was regarded as the strongest man in Ireland, vying with his friend Frederick Burnaby in gymnastic feats. He was ordained deacon 1863 and priest 1864 and served curacies at Hyde, Hampshire (1863-5), and at Shottesbrooke, Berkshire (1865-6). 
In October 1866 Adams became a chaplain on the Bengal establishment under Bishop Robert Milman at Calcutta. There he had a severe attack of fever, and after sick leave in Ceylon was appointed to Peshawar. He was tireless in visiting the outstations Nowshera and Kohat; he restored and beautified the church and cemetery at Peshawar, and received the thanks of government for his exertions in the cholera camps during two outbreaks. Except for some months at Allahabad (March to December 1870) he remained at Peshawar until December 1872. He was then stationed at the camp of exercise at Hassan-Abdal army headquarters until March 1873, and in 1874 he was sent to Kashmir on special duty. There he built, largely with his own hands, a church of pine logs, where services were frequently held for the numerous visitors to Gulmarg and Sonamarg; it was later accidentally burnt down. In January 1876 he was appointed to Meerut, and in December took charge of the cavalry and artillery camp for the Delhi durbar on the visit of the prince of Wales. 
Subsequently Adams experienced much active service. In November 1878 he joined the Kurram field force under Sir Frederick (afterwards Earl) Roberts, and was at all the operations in the advance on Kabul. At Killa Kazi on 11 December 1879 he risked his life in rescuing several injured men of the 9th lancers, who were in danger of drowning in a watercourse while under Afghan fire. Lord Roberts witnessed Adams's exploit and recommended him for the Victoria Cross, which he received from the queen on 4 August 1881. He also took part in Roberts's march from Kabul to Kandahar in August 1880, and was at the battle of Kandahar on 1 September 1880. While in England on furlough he married on 16 August 1881 Alice Mary, daughter of General Sir Thomas Willshire. She survived him with their only daughter, Edith Juliet Mary. 
On returning to India later in 1881 Adams spent a year at Lucknow, then three years (1883-5) at Naini Tal. In 1885 he accompanied the field force under Roberts to Burma, and took part in the operations there. 
Through twenty years' service in India 'Padre Adams' was highly regarded by the soldiers. In 1886 he settled in England, and from 1887 to 1894 he held the rectory of Postwick near Norwich. After two years' rest in Jersey he became in 1896 vicar of Stow Bardolph with Wimbotsham near Downham Market. He was appointed in 1900 honorary chaplain to Queen Victoria, and King Edward made him chaplain-in-ordinary in 1901. In 1902 he left Stow for the small living of Ashwell, near Oakham, Rutland. There, at the rectory, he died on 20 October 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 30334


Adams, Sir John (1857-1934), educationist, was born at Glasgow on 2 July 1857, the third son of Charles Adams, a master blacksmith in the Trongate, Glasgow, and his wife, Barbara McCallum. After attending St David's School he became a pupil teacher at Old Wynd School (later Oatlands School). There he received encouragement from the headmaster, Mr Liddell, and won a queen's scholarship, entering the Glasgow Free Church Training College and the University of Glasgow (1875), where he graduated with a first class in mental and moral science. He taught in the Aberdeen Free Church Training College Demonstration School, 1879-81, returning as a lecturer in 1883. He then became headmaster of the Jean Street School, Port Glasgow, and afterwards rector of Campbeltown grammar school. This experience of school practice formed a sound basis for his subsequent work as a trainer of teachers and a university lecturer in education. In 1890 he was appointed principal of the Free Church Training College, Aberdeen. He married in 1893 Agnes Anne, youngest daughter of John Cook, a shipowner, of Ashley, Aberdeen. 
In 1898 Adams became rector of the Free Church Training College, Glasgow. Here his connection with university teaching began, for he then held the lecturership in education in the University of Glasgow. He had already achieved the local distinction of being president (from 1896) of the Educational Institute of Scotland, and had gained wider fame by the publication of a provocative little book, the forbidding title of which, 'Herbartian Psychology Applied to Education', belied the sprightliness of its contents. 
In 1902 Adams visited Canada and published an account of the protestant schools of the province of Quebec. He was appointed principal of the London Day Training College, and became the first professor of education in the University of London, also in 1902. He was pre-eminently the teacher of London teachers -- not only teachers in training, but also teachers at work -- for he lectured abundantly in the evenings as well as in the daytime. After he had, in 1922, retired from training-college work and become emeritus professor, he travelled overseas, and by the delivery of series of lectures in the USA, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand he became an international figure in the world of education. He settled in Los Angeles, and lectured at the University of California between 1923 and 1934. 
Adams published more than 160 books and articles, the most important of which, in addition to 'Herbartian Psychology', are 'Exposition and Illustration in Teaching' (1909), 'The Evolution of Educational Theory' (1912), 'The Student's Guide' (1917), and 'Everyman's Psychology' (1929). All these works, like his lectures, are characterized by an easy style, a shrewd wisdom, and a 'pawky' humour. In addition he wrote books for boys under the pseudonym Skelton Kuppord. In 1925 he was knighted for his services to education, and the honorary degree of LLD was conferred upon him by St Andrews University. 
As a lecturer Adams was a memorable figure. His impressive bald head, his Scottish accent, his clear, incisive style, and particularly his sly humour, rendered him attractive to audiences all over the English-speaking world. He died suddenly, as the result of a stroke, at Los Angeles on 30 September 1934. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 30335


Adams, William Davenport (1851-1904), journalist and compiler of reference works, was born at Park Terrace, New Park Road, Brixton, on 28 December 1851, the elder surviving son of William Henry Davenport Adams (1828-1891), then a private tutor, and his wife, Sarah Esther, 'nee' Morgan. He entered Merchant Taylors' School in January 1863, and proceeded to Glasgow Academy and Edinburgh University, where poor health prevented him from getting a good degree. Becoming a journalist, he was appointed in 1875 as leader writer and literary and drama critic for the 'Glasgow Daily News'; later he edited the evening and weekly editions. On 19 October 1875 he married Caroline Estelle, the daughter of John Korner, a Polish exile of a noble family. From 1878 to 1880 he was the editor of the 'Greenock Advertiser', from 1880 to 1882 the acting editor of the 'Nottingham Guardian', from 1882 to 1885 the editor of the 'Derby Mercury', and from 1885 until his death the literary editor and drama critic of the London 'Globe'. In addition to his many newspaper and journal articles, Adams published: 'A Dictionary of English Literature, being a Comprehensive Guide to English Authors and their Works' (1878), 'By-Ways in Book-Land' (1888), 'A Book of Burlesque' (1891), and 'With Poet and Player' (1891). 
Adams's main interest was drama, and he spent twenty years compiling his 'A Dictionary of the Drama', which was to be 'a guide to the plays, playwrights, players, and playhouses of the United Kingdom and America, from the earliest times to the present day'. Only the first of the two projected volumes (A-G) was completed when he died, on 26 July 1904 at 17 Burstock Road, Putney. He was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30336


Adams, William George Stewart (1874-1966), political scientist and college head, was born on 8 November 1874 at Hamilton, Lanarkshire, the second son and youngest of the four children of John Adams, headmaster of St John's Grammar School, Hamilton, with Aberdonian farming ancestors, and his wife, Margaret, of Appin, daughter of John Stewart of Glasgow, cotton manufacturer. Often recalling his happy childhood in later years, Adams went to his father's school and to Glasgow University. There he won a first class in classics in 1897 and was awarded a Snell exhibition to Balliol College, Oxford, where he gained a second class in classical moderations (1898) and firsts in Greats (1900) and modern history (1901). 
Adams became a tutor at Borough Road Training College, Isleworth, Middlesex (1901-2), and in 1902 went as lecturer in economics to the University of Chicago, the start of his lifelong interest in America, which he often revisited. In 1903 he became lecturer in economics and secretary of university extension at Manchester University. In his early career the two major influences upon him were Samuel Augustus Barnett and Arthur Lionel Smith, but in 1905 he became superintendent of statistics and intelligence at the Irish department of agriculture and technical instruction in Dublin under Sir Horace Plunkett, who then became the dominant influence upon him, especially with his belief in rural smallholdings; in later years Plunkett's name often featured in Adams's speeches and casual remarks. In 1908 Adams married Muriel, daughter of William Lane, a Treasury solicitor, of Stonehurst, Killiney, co. Dublin; they had one son. In 1910 Adams was appointed lecturer in political science at Oxford, and his career prospered with the rapid growth in Oxford's politics teaching under the twin influences of the Rhodes scholars and the students of Ruskin College. His post became a readership later in the year, and in 1912 he became Gladstone professor. His chair was held at All Souls, and he continued in the post until elected the college's warden in 1933. 
In 1911 Adams's Irish expertise led to his joining the committee advising the cabinet on Irish finance, and both then and later he promoted a federalism that still seemed the feasible and peaceful route towards an Irish settlement. 1914 must have been a busy year for him because in that year he launched three large projects. First, he published two businesslike and severely empirical chapters -- on trade and public administration -- in the British volume of the six-volume 'Oxford Survey of the British Empire', edited by A. J. Herbertson and O. J. R. Howarth. Second, he comprehensively surveyed United Kingdom library services for the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, whose publishable parts, again factual in approach and without comment, appeared in 1915 with a wealth of statistics largely designed to expose patchy regional library provision. Third, he founded and edited the 'Political Quarterly', whose eight issues before its demise in 1916 drew together practical and academic concerns in politics. It included articles by distinguished authors (Lindsay, Lewis Namier, and Arnold Toynbee), updates on current developments in government and international relations, and reviews of relevant books. Harold Laski in his inaugural lecture of 1926 still felt the need for such a journal, a need acknowledged when the new 'Political Quarterly' was launched in 1931. 
Adams's first two editorials sympathetically discussed Irish home rule, but his third (later published as a pamphlet) portrayed the war as 'first and foremost a struggle of freedom against militarism', with liberty as the source of peace and the unifying principle of the British empire. The war also prompted Adams's public commitment as editor to the advance of internationalism, and his editorial in May 1915 argued strongly for an all-party coalition, claiming that 'the danger of our type of constitution is the excess of party government'. In the same year Adams joined the Ministry of Munitions, and through the influence of Thomas Jones was invited in December 1916 to join Lloyd George's personal secretariat, editing the reports of the war cabinet and serving until 1918 as one of the private secretaries to Lloyd George, whose courage and decisiveness he admired. At the general election of 1918 Adams turned down the chance of a couponed seat in the House of Commons, and in 1919 he returned to Oxford. 
There, with his carefully prepared and lucid lectures, he did much to establish Oxford's new degree in politics, philosophy, and economics. He joined the royal commission on the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and played a full part in the university's life as a member of its hebdomadal council from 1912 to 1924 and as pro-vice-chancellor in 1939-45. In 1919 he was prominent among the founders of the National Council of Social Service (now the National Council for Voluntary Organizations), and chaired it from 1920 to 1949. He was very active in the Oxford Preservation Trust, and for some years owned and ran a farm on Boars Hill which was progressive in its methods. He tried to keep alive Plunkett's spirit of co-operation, and was prominent among the founders of the National Federation of Young Farmers' Clubs, chairing it from 1928 to 1946. He was keen to encourage village halls, women's institutes, and rural crafts and industries. George Haynes, a close colleague in the National Council, recalled 'the noble head on robust shoulders, the deep melodious voice ringing across the conference hall, the firm friendly handshake for friends and strangers alike, the strong, kindly gaze both compelling and reassuring' ('Social Service Quarterly', 136), and spoke of Adams's lifelong enthusiasm and taste for human idiosyncrasy which led him to 'discover' people wherever he went. 
In 1933 Adams was elected warden of All Souls. In that role he was personally modest but showed a firm grasp of practical issues requiring decision, and encouraged groups to meet in the college to discuss public issues. Among the most important of these was the 'All Souls group', which from June 1941 brought together experts on educational matters. Adams was appointed Companion of Honour in 1936. On retiring from All Souls in 1945 Adams and his wife went to live in Donegal, where he took an active interest in Magee University College, Londonderry. His wife died in 1956 and Adams died at Fahan House, co. Donegal, on 30 January 1966. 
Contemporaries often remarked upon Adams's impartiality, public spirit, optimism, and friendliness -- qualities which equipped him to draw people together for shared purposes but which left posterity with a somewhat colourless image, especially as his few publications are not self-revealing. Yet Adams was widely trusted in high circles, and there is a fourfold context in which it is possible to comprehend a career now no longer feasible: the unashamed dominance of liberal-minded and rational debate within an intellectual elite with close links to Whitehall and Westminster; the vitality of a Liberal Party whose yoking of intellectuals, subordinate nationalities, and organized labour created a powerful progressive machine; the widespread belief in 'citizenship' as a set of voluntarist and rationalistic attitudes transitional between an individualist religious idealism and a secular and collectivist professionalism; and an academic world where respect was won from colleagues less through prolific publication than through displaying wisdom in informal debate. As George Haynes (who had reason to know) pointed out, Adams's 'most natural medium of communication was through the spoken word, and that is perhaps why so many persons, eminent or unknown, came to him for help and advice' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 30337


Acton, John Adams- (1830-1910), sculptor, was born on 11 December 1830 at Acton Hill, Middlesex, one of the two surviving sons and three daughters of William Adams, an artist, and his wife, Helen Elizabeth Humphreys. His sister Clarissa was also an artist, and exhibited at the Royal Academy. He added Acton to his surname in 1869 to avoid confusion with other artists called John Adams. 
Adams was educated at Ealing Grove School (founded by Lady Byron, wife of the poet Lord Byron), and then trained with the sculptors Timothy Butler and Matthew Noble before attending the Royal Academy Schools from 1853 to 1858. After winning early medals in the antique and life classes, he went on to win a gold medal for an allegorical sculpture group, 'Eve Supplicating Forgiveness at the Feet of Adam' (1855). In 1858 he won the Royal Academy's travelling studentship and went to Rome, where he stayed until 1865. While there he became known to John Gibson, the most significant British sculptor in Rome. Gibson acknowledged Adams's talent for portraiture, and subsequently sent many distinguished visitors to his studio, including Gladstone, who became his patron and close friend. Throughout his stay in Rome, Adams executed numerous significant portrait commissions as a result of Gibson's recommendations. Many of these patrons affirmed his talent as a portrait sculptor when they returned to London, thereby ensuring his reputation and future commissions. Adams-Acton married on 15 April 1875, at St Mark's Church, Hamilton Terrace, London, Marion (1846-1928) ['see 'Acton, Marion Jean Catherine Adams-], adopted daughter of George Edwards Hering, artist, born Marion Hamilton of the Isle of Arran, a novelist writing under the name of Jeanie Hering. They had three daughters and four sons, two of whom later became sculptors. 
After an eight-month sojourn in India, where Adams-Acton endeavoured to secure further important contacts and commissions, they returned to settle in London. From 1880 they lived at 103 Marylebone Road, his studio being located in Salisbury Mews, until he could find a freehold with sufficient land to build a large studio adjacent to his house. This he found at 8 Langford Place where he lived and worked from 1882 to 1906; he then moved to 17 Abbey Road for the last years of his working life. These residences were all in St John's Wood, a district favoured by many artists in the nineteenth century. Each summer the Adams-Acton family stayed in Mrs Adams-Acton's house at Brodick on the Isle of Arran. 
Adams-Acton was popular as a portrait sculptor mainly working in marble. His ability to produce a natural likeness was in great demand. He was also sought after to undertake allegorical, classical, and heroic work. Important commissions included the monument to Bishop Waldegrave (1869; Carlisle Cathedral), the Cruikshank memorial ('c'.1871; St Paul's Cathedral, London), the Wesley memorial ('c'.1875; Westminster Abbey), and the memorial to Cardinal Manning (1908; Westminster Cathedral). He also executed a colossal statue of Titus Salt for Bradford (1874); statues of Queen Victoria for Kingston, Jamaica, and the Bahamas; and 'W. E. Gladstone' for Liverpool and Blackburn. Edward VII, as prince of Wales, sat to him on many occasions. 
A number of Adams-Acton's portrait busts are in the National Portrait Gallery, London. He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy until 1892, sending statues or busts of Gladstone, Lord Brougham, John Bright, Charles Dickens, Charles Spurgeon, Earl Russell, Archbishop Manning, Disraeli, and Pope Leo XIII. Notable sitters included Lord Shaftesbury, Lord Roberts, and Sir Edwin Landseer. Considered the best of his ideal works were 'The First Sacrifice', 'The Lady of the Lake', 'Pharaoh's Daughter', 'Zenobia', and 'The Millennium'. Adams-Acton's last, unfinished work was a small figure of 'The Angel of Peace'. He died at his wife's home on the Isle of Arran on 28 October 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 30338


Adamson, Sir John Ernest (1867-1950), educationist, was born at Westgate Common, Wakefield, Yorkshire, on 11 January 1867, the son of Tom Adamson, engine fitter, and his wife, Eliza Stokoe. He attended St Michael's elementary school, Wakefield, and went on to St Mark's College, Chelsea (1889-91), where he trained as a teacher. He was subsequently appointed to the staff of the St Mark's College Training School. In 1891 he became a tutor and lecturer in the theory and method of teaching at South Wales Training College, Carmarthen, while studying for a BA at London University, which he obtained in 1894. He subsequently gained an MA in philosophy (1901). On 23 April 1897 he married Gwendolyn Mary ('b'. 1872/3), daughter of John Howell Thomas, of Starling Park, Carmarthen. 
In 1902 Adamson moved to South Africa where he was to play a major role in the shaping of educational policy in the reconstruction era. On the recommendation of Sir Michael Sadler he was appointed principal of the new Normal College in Pretoria which was to provide teachers for the new Transvaal Colony, and in 1905 he became director of education for Transvaal, a post which he occupied with distinction until 1924. He first worked under Viscount Milner's military regime with Patrick Duncan as minister of education. He very effectively brokered an agreement which brought the Christian national schools of the post-war era into the ambit of state education. 
When the Transvaal achieved responsible government in 1907, Adamson worked closely with the new minister of education, J. C. Smuts, to lay the foundations of a new education system which found expression in the 'Transvaal Education Act' of 1907. The new system was designed to promote reconciliation and to balance the rights and demands of the Dutch and English sections of the population in the highly volatile political context of the time. The fact that he learned Dutch and Afrikaans and showed great sympathy with the cause of his former enemies was of great assistance in these delicate negotiations. 
Adamson's role in the development of educational policy in Transvaal can be seen in the context of the growth of a new form of educational administration that sought to link schooling with a systematic approach to social reconstruction. His outstanding achievements were the introduction in 1916 of compulsory schooling for all white children between the ages of seven and fifteen and the successful accommodation of both sections of the white population to the new state educational system with his sympathetic treatment of language and religious issues. His annual reports as director of education from 1906, and the reports of the council of education (an advisory body on educational policy chaired by Adamson from 1913) provide invaluable sources for the study of education in Transvaal from the end of the South African War to the early years of union. After 1910 he served under three successive administrators of Transvaal: Johan Rissik (1910-15), A. G. Robertson (1915-24), and J. H. Hofmeyr (1924-9), retiring from his post after the defeat of the South African Party in 1924. 
As director for nineteen years Adamson was active in all fields of educational policy development -- provision, governance, legislation, finances, curriculum development (especially post-1916), medium of instruction and language issues, inspection and supervision, teacher training, teaching methods, teachers' conditions of service, non-sectarian religious teaching, and high-school selection. He paid a great deal of attention to the issue of equal educational provision for all white inhabitants of the province, with special attention to the demand for adequate schooling in the countryside and the provision of appropriate vocational education. With hindsight he can perhaps be criticized for showing too little concern for the education of the indigenous people where he advocated a policy of 'proceeding cautiously', despite the lively debate that surrounded this issue at the time. Yet he was to note in 1920 that 'neither from the missionary side nor from the side of the Government is responsibility towards native education recognised and accepted as it should be'. 
Adamson's major academic work was 'The Individual and the Environment: some Aspects of the Theory of Education as Adjustment' (1921) for which he received a DLitt from London University in 1920. It represents a rather dense summary of contemporary British educational philosophy focused around the notion of education as an 'adjustment' to 'the world of nature', 'the world of civilization', and 'the world of morality'. Perhaps the most striking aspect of the work to the modern reader is its extremely abstract and general nature and the absence of any significant reference to his South African experience in nearly 400 pages of text, perhaps reflecting the gulf between the formal study of philosophy of education at that time and the everyday world of policy development and educational practice in colonial South Africa. Other writings include 'The Theory of Education in Plato's 'Republic'' (1903), 'The Teacher's Logic' (1904), 'Externals and Essentials' (a collection of essays, 1933), 'Education for a brave new world' (1941 unpublished), a book of poetry, 'Songs of the South' (1915), and numerous articles and presentations on educational topics. 
Adamson was appointed CMG in 1923 for his exceptional service, and was knighted in 1924. He was a member of the councils of the University of the Cape of Good Hope (1906-17) and the University of South Africa (1918-24), and was vice-chancellor of the latter from 1922 to 1926. Following his retirement as director of education for Transvaal, he was principal and professor of education at Rhodes University College (1924-30). 
In 1935, while Sir Percy Nunn was on leave of absence, Adamson undertook most of his teaching duties at the London Institute of Education for six months. During the latter part of his career he also chaired a South African union government committee of inquiry into subsidies to universities, university colleges, and technical colleges (its report was published in 1933) and another into the position of languages in the South African education system (it reported in 1941). Much of our knowledge of his life comes from the biography by G. P. van Rooyen in the form of a PhD dissertation (University of Potchefstroom, 1951) which emphasizes his role as a pioneer educational planner and a friend of the Afrikaner. Adamson, who was a talented musician and an ardent golfer until his eightieth year, died on 25 April 1950 at Muizenberg, near Cape Town, South Africa. His wife predeceased him; they had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 30339


Adamson, Robert (1852-1902), philosopher, was born at Edinburgh on 19 January 1852, fifth of the six children of Robert Adamson (died 1855), solicitor, and Mary Agnes Buist, daughter of Matthew Buist, factor to the earl of Haddington. His father died when Adamson was three years old, and his mother -- whose own father had been ejected for heresy from the Society of Friends -- was at pains to ensure her children's education and to share their studies. The boy passed from Daniel Stewart's Hospital, Edinburgh, to Edinburgh University in November 1866, and, after obtaining first prizes in metaphysics and in English literature, graduated in 1871 with first-class honours in philosophy and with a scholarship awarded to the best graduate in that subject. He spent the summer of 1871 at Heidelberg, and acted as assistant the following winter to Henry Calderwood, professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh, and in 1872-4 to A. Campbell Fraser, professor of logic and metaphysics. During these years he read omnivorously in the Signet Library and elsewhere, and gained other postgraduate scholarships or fellowships, including the Ferguson scholarship and the Shaw fellowship, both open to graduates of any Scottish university. In 1874 he was appointed additional examiner in philosophy in the university, and joined the editorial staff of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn). He contributed a large number of articles on subjects of general literature, and in the third volume began a series of important philosophical articles, including those on Francis Bacon, Hume, Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, and an article on 'Logic', which, along with a book on Kant (1879) and one on Fichte (1881), expressed the idealism of his earlier thought. 
In the summer of 1876 Adamson was appointed professor of philosophy and political economy at Owens College, Manchester, in succession to W. Stanley Jevons. After six years economics was established as a separate chair, but he greatly extended the philosophical teaching, especially after 1880, when the creation of the Victoria University gave him freedom to plan the work in accordance with his own views. He also gave popular lectures in Manchester, for example on 'The restoration of Germany'. On 6 September 1881 he married Margaret ('b'. 1858/9), daughter of David Duncan, a Manchester linen merchant, who survived him with two sons and four daughters, the eldest of whom, Mary (1882-1966), became labour MP for Blackburn ['see 'Hamilton, Mary Agnes]. He was made an honorary LLD of Glasgow in 1883. 
In 1893 Adamson was appointed professor of logic at the University of Aberdeen. He moved to Glasgow in 1895 on his election to the professorship of logic and rhetoric there. Between 1885 and 1901 he acted on six occasions as examiner for the moral science tripos at Cambridge. For five years (1887-91) he was one of the examiners in mental and moral science in the University of London. He was also the first external examiner in philosophy (1896-9) to the newly founded University of Wales. 
Adamson took an active part in academic business. At Manchester he warmly supported the admission of women students to college and university on equal terms with men; he also supported the enfranchisement of women. He threw himself zealously into the movement for an independent university, and when the Victoria University was created in 1880 he took a prominent part in its organization. He acted as temporary registrar, was first secretary and afterwards chairman of the new board of studies, and gave important assistance to the institution of the university department for training elementary teachers. At Glasgow he served on the court as well as on the senatus, and took a leading part in the early stages of the movement which afterwards resulted in substituting a three-term system for the unbroken session of the Scottish universities. He was also a keen politician, and gave active support to the advanced liberal party. 
After the early 1880s Adamson's publications became fewer, partly because of the pressures of teaching and university business, partly because of his active, practical nature. He was a friendly man who radiated happiness. He took up climbing and tennis and found 'time for everything -- except to write' (Sorley, xliii). The gradual change in his philosophical views also made it hard for him to commit them to print. Aside from a period as a student when the works of John Stuart Mill appealed to him, he was strongly influenced throughout his career by Kant. But his project of bringing Kant's critical method into constant discourse with new knowledge supplied by science generated a continual evolution of his thought away from idealism and towards a version of realism. During his period at Owens College his approach to Kant was broadly Hegelian, but by the mid-1890s he was arguing that the antitheses and abstractions of Kant's thought were to be resolved in a unity supplied not by speculative philosophy or metaphysics but by a return to concrete experience. He held that, contrary to the subjectivist character of Kant's theory of knowledge, the reality that precedes mind's activity is not a turmoil of unconnected sensations. It has an integrity which can be rediscovered by the systematic exclusion of the divisions imposed by the mind. Mind is not, however, less essential than, or inferior to, nature; each is a partial manifestation of reality. An outline of a theory of knowledge on these lines is given in the concluding part of Adamson's posthumously published 'Development of Modern Philosophy' (1903), a work which was derived by its editor, W. R. Sorley, from notes on Adamson's lectures. Two other works were also published posthumously, 'The Development of Greek Philosophy' (1908) and 'A Short History of Logic' (1911). But Adamson's mature thought was never worked out by him in detail, nor subjected to the same thorough criticism as idealistic philosophies received at his hands. 
Both in his earlier and in his later period Adamson's own views are developed by means of a critical study of the history of thought. Following the biological analogy of 'recapitulation' he found in the history of philosophy a treatment, only more elaborate and leisurely, of the same questions as those which face the individual enquirer. In general his work is distinguished by extensive and exact learning, by keen perception of the essential points in a problem, by great power of clear and sustained reasoning, by complete impartiality, and by rigid exclusion of metaphor and the imaginative factor. More than thirty years after his death he was described as 'since Sir William Hamilton... undoubtedly the greatest philosophical scholar whom the British nation has produced' (Metz, 495). On 5 February 1902 he died of enteric fever at Glasgow; his body was cremated at the Western Necropolis. In 1904 the Adamson lecture was founded in his memory at the University of Manchester. His philosophical books, numbering about 4387 volumes, were presented to Manchester University by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30340


Adcock, Sir Frank Ezra (1886-1968), historian of Greece and Rome, was born on 15 April 1886 at Desford, Leicestershire, the fourth of the five children of Thomas Draper Adcock, schoolmaster, head of the Desford Industrial School, and his wife, Mary Esther Coltman. He was educated at the Wyggeston grammar school, Leicester, and as a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he obtained first-class honours in both parts of the classical tripos (1908-9) and won the Craven scholarship (1908), a chancellor's medal (1909), and the Craven studentship (1910). As was then the custom at the beginning of a professional career in classical studies, he attended the seminars of Wilamowitz in Berlin and Eduard Meyer in Munich from 1910 to 1911. He was elected a fellow of his college and appointed to a university lectureship in classics in 1911; his early research and first publications concerned the problems of source-criticism relating to the statesman Solon. From 1913 to 1919 he was lay dean of King's. 
Adcock's service in the First World War was armchair but distinguished: he went into the intelligence division of the Admiralty as an interpreter of codes and ciphers, and in 1917 was appointed OBE. The crucial determinant of his academic career was that as soon as the war was over J. B. Bury decided to launch the previously projected 'Cambridge Ancient History', and chose Adcock to join himself and S. A. Cook in the editorship. Volume 1 was published in 1923; from the death of Bury in 1927 Adcock was in effect chief editor of the great undertaking, of which the last volume, thanks to his energy and constancy, came out in the nick of time in 1939. In 1925 he was promoted to the chair of ancient history at Cambridge. From 1929 to 1931 he was president of the Roman Society; and already in 1929 academic honours began to accrue to him, with an honorary degree of DLitt of Durham University, followed in 1936 by fellowship of the British Academy. 
In 1939 Adcock reverted to wartime duties in a branch of the Foreign Office, and stayed until 1943, when he was released to his college and his chair. From 1947 to 1948 he was president of the Classical Association. He retired from his chair in 1951, and served as vice-provost of King's from 1951 to 1955. In 1954 he was knighted, and further academic distinctions followed: the honorary degrees of LittD of Dublin and of Manchester (both in 1955) and of DLitt of Leicester (1961). 
Adcock was a small round man, who lost his hair early; he had a rosy colour, twinkling, intent eyes that peered from behind strong spectacles, a Leicestershire accent, and an 'r'-lisp. Having been brought up a Methodist, he remained sympathetic and helpful to Methodism all his life. He was a very competitive golfer and a cricket enthusiast, but he had no gift for the arts, and indeed, although very clever and learned, was not an intellectual. Nevertheless, Cambridge accepted him as one of the notable personalities of his age, celebrated for his wit in conversation and in lectures. He was perhaps the last of the studied wits: his sallies were strategically prepared, and part of the fun of his famous lectures in the flat-accented, high-pitched, maiden-auntish voice was to detect the build-up of forces, feel the imminence of the punch-line, observe the dawning of the tiny smirk on the bland face, and savour the release of tension when the 'bon mot' came. 
The writings of Adcock apart from his contributions to the 'Cambridge Ancient History' are not extensive: eight or nine good papers mostly related to the 'Cambridge Ancient History' chapters, and the short books and brochures which arose from his visiting lectures -- 'The Roman Art of War under the Republic' (1940, the Martin classical lectures, Oberlin); 'The Greek and Macedonian Art of War' (1957, the Sather classical lectures, California); and 'Roman Political Ideas and Practice' (1959, the Jerome lectures, Michigan). The Raleigh lecture to the British Academy (1953) was entitled 'Greek and Macedonian kingship', the Todd memorial lecture (Sydney, 1961), 'The character of the Romans'. In addition, three independent short books were published at Cambridge: 'Caesar as Man of Letters' (1956), 'Thucydides and his History' (1963), and 'Marcus Crassus, Millionaire' (1966). But essentially Adcock's monument is the 'Cambridge Ancient History', and in two ways -- in his vigorous and determined editorship that brought it to fruition (and as part of a scholar's monument that achievement must not be underestimated), and in his own chapters. There are ten in all, and in them he made the central periods of both Greek and Roman political history his own: the archaic age and the Thucydidean age of Athens, and the late Roman republic, with Julius Caesar and, as a summing up, the achievement of Augustus. What they contain is political history entirely (with war as an extension of policy) -- a conception against which the fashion of Adcock's age was turning, but which faithfully reflected his own ideal of history. It was a Thucydidean ideal, both in being political and in being magisterial: the historian tells the reader what he thinks is fit for the reader to know. It was also a tribute to Clio as a muse, for Adcock wrote with a poise and style which never lapsed into idiosyncrasy, and had the rare gift of being able to transfer the twinkle in the eye to the printed page. 
Adcock was still musing and writing about the Greek and Roman political past to the end of his life. To King's, as undergraduate and bachelor don, he had been devoted (not short of partisanship) for sixty years; and he gave a paper to the King's College Classical Society only three days before his death, which came peacefully, at King's College, on 22 February 1968. 
J. A. Crook', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30341


Adderley, Charles Bowyer, first Baron Norton (1814-1905), politician, born at Knighton House, Leicestershire, on 2 August 1814, was the eldest son of Charles Clement Adderley (1780-1818) and his wife, Anna Maria (died 1827), daughter of Sir Edmund Burney Cradock-Hartopp, first baronet, a descendant of Oliver Cromwell. On the death without issue of his great-uncle, Charles Bowyer Adderley of Hams Hall, Warwickshire, on 12 April 1826, Charles succeeded to the great family estates round Birmingham, elsewhere in Warwickshire, and in Staffordshire. He was subsequently taken from school at Redland near Bristol, and placed under a clerical tutor of low-church views, who deepened the evangelical convictions with which his parents had imbued him. In 1832 he became a gentleman commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, where he maintained his piety and acquired a knowledge of music and art, and a love of tobacco and horse-back riding -- he rode daily until he was eighty-eight, and hunted for many years. At Christ Church he began, too, a lifelong friendship with John Robert Godley, who greatly influenced him. He took a pass degree in 1835. 
From 1836 to 1841 Adderley mainly spent his time in travel, study, and the management of his estates. He sought to develop his property on enlightened principles. When he came of age in 1835 the estate at Saltley near Birmingham supported a population of 400, which grew to 27,000 in his lifetime. He planned the streets of the town in 1837 so as to avoid the possibility of slums, and hence may be called the father of town planning. In providing, endowing, and supporting places of worship in Saltley he spent $70,000. He gave Adderley Park to Birmingham; in 1847 he promoted the foundation of the Saltley Church Training College (in which he maintained a lifelong interest) and in 1852 he founded the Saltley Reformatory on the model of that at Mettray, near Tours, in France. 
The family residence at Hams Hall was not far from the home of Sir Robert Peel at Drayton Manor, Tamworth. Peel urged Adderley to enter parliament and in June 1841 he was elected as a tory for Staffordshire North. He held the seat through eight elections, retiring in 1878. Adderley opposed Peel's free trade policy of 1846, although he formally abandoned protection at the general election of 1852. At first he took little part in debate, but wrote occasionally -- on general topics in the 'Morning Chronicle' in 1848 and on colonial subjects in 'The Spectator' in 1854. 
Gradually colonial questions roused Adderley's enthusiasm, and he soon gave important services to the cause of colonial development. In 1849 he was involved with his friends Godley, Edward Gibbon Wakefield, Gladstone, and George William, fourth Baron Lyttelton, in the Church of England colony of Canterbury in New Zealand. In the same year he strenuously resisted Lord Grey's proposal to transport convicts to the Cape, and elaborated his argument in a pamphlet, 'Transportation not Necessary' (1851). To Adderley's advocacy the Cape colonists assigned the government's abandonment of its threat to send Irish political convicts among them, and by way of gratitude they named Adderley Street after him. Penal colonial settlements were abrogated in 1852, partly owing to Adderley's activity. 
Meanwhile in 1849 Adderley helped Wakefield to found the Colonial Reform Society for promoting colonial self-government, and he became its secretary. In 'The Australian Colonies Bill Discussed' (1849) he urged complete delegation of powers to the colony while throwing on it the cost of any imperial assistance. The independent constitution of New Zealand was drafted at Hams Hall in 1850 and the constitution of the other colonies followed this precedent. In 'Some Reflections on the Speech of Lord John Russell on Colonial Policy' (1850) Adderley declared that principles of self-government could alone yield 'thriving colonies, heartily and inseparably and usefully attached to England'. He powerfully developed his views in 'The Statement of the Present Cape Case' (1851); in his 'Remarks on Mr. Godley's Speech on Self-Government for New Zealand' (1857); in his letter to Disraeli on 'The Present Relation of England with her Colonies' (1861; 2nd edn 1862); and finally in his 'Review of 'The colonial policy of Lord John Russell's administration,' by Earl Grey [1853], and of subsequent colonial history' (3 pts, 1869), a comprehensive survey of the progress of colonial freedom. At the age of ninety, in his 'Imperial Fellowship of Self-Governed British Colonies' (1903), he enunciated anew his lifelong conviction that 'colonial self-administration and imperial fellowship' are 'co-ordinate elements' in 'true colonial relationship'. 
In Lord Derby's first administration of 1852 Adderley, having moved the motion on the Cape which led to the fall of Russell's government, refused the secretaryship of the Board of Control, and continued to advocate as a private member of the House of Commons social and educational as well as colonial reforms with a political independence which earned him the epithet of liberal conservative. In 1852 he introduced a reformatory schools bill, for bringing refractory children or young criminals under educational control. In 1853 he opposed with great foresight the abandonment of the Orange River Sovereignty. In 1854 he was responsible for the 'Young Offenders Act' (a part of his 'reformatory' policy), and he introduced the 'Manchester and Salford Education Bill', in which a local education rate was first proposed. In 'Punishment is not Education' (1856) and in his 'Tract on Tickets of Leave' (1857) he pushed further his plea that education might cure crime more effectively than punishment. 
On the formation of Lord Derby's second ministry in February 1858 Adderley was appointed vice-president of the education committee of the privy council. His office also constituted him president of the Board of Health, and a charity commissioner. The educational situation was peculiarly interesting. On 21 June 1858 Adderley, in moving the education vote, gave the first official estimate of the cost of a national system of elementary education: he put the amount at a million pounds per annum. At the same time he pointed out that that was the first day on which the University of Oxford was conducting its middle-class examinations throughout the country, and was thereby inaugurating a new correlation of the universities to national life. Next day the first royal commission on elementary education was announced. 
During his brief term of office Adderley consolidated the accumulated minutes of the council on education, prepared the way for the revised code, passed a 'Reformatory Act' amending that of 1854, and (faithful to the principle of devolution) passed a first 'Local Government Act', the term 'local government' being his own invention. 
In March 1859 Derby's ministry was defeated on a second reading of its 'Reform Bill'. A dissolution followed, leaving the Conservatives in a minority. In the event Lord Palmerston became prime minister. The outbreak of war in New Zealand in 1860 moved Adderley deeply, but he advised the colonists to provide an army of their own, while urging that all parts of the empire should give mutual help in case of need. In the same year he introduced without success an education bill which aimed at making education compulsory. In Derby's third administration of 1866 Adderley became under-secretary for the colonies, and was immediately confronted by the difficult case of Governor Edward John Eyre whom he controversially defended from the attacks of John Stuart Mill and others. In the same session he carried through the House of Commons the 'British North America Act' (1867), which created the dominion of Canada. Amid his parliamentary occupations, Adderley published 'Europe Incapable of American Democracy' (1867), in which he sought to reconcile his Conservative faith with advanced ideas of social freedom and progress. 
Adderley continued in office when Disraeli succeeded Derby as prime minister. He resigned with his colleagues in December 1868, and was made KCMG the next year by Gladstone, the new prime minister, who was a personal friend. 'I am glad our opponents decorate our bench,' remarked Disraeli. Adderley was made chairman of the sanitary commission which reported in 1871 and led to the passing of the 'Public Health Acts' of 1872 and 1875. He took a prominent part in opposing Irish disestablishment. 
When Disraeli returned to office in February 1874, Adderley became president of the Board of Trade, but owing to his frank independence, which the prime minister feared, he was not admitted to the cabinet. 'Single-heartedness, unfailing temper, and unwearied zeal' characterized his departmental work. The amendment of the merchant shipping law was his first official concern in the House of Commons, and he was brought into painful conflict with Samuel Plimsoll. Adderley's bill of 1875 was assailed by Plimsoll and withdrawn. In 1876 another bill which legalized a 'loadline' usually named after Plimsoll, although Adderley claimed it as his own, was introduced and passed. On 8 March 1878 Adderley retired from office with a peerage, taking the title of Baron Norton. In the same year he presided at the Cheltenham meeting of the Social Science Congress, and he was a frequent speaker in the House of Lords on education and colonial and social questions. In 1880 he refused an offer of the governorship of Bombay. In his speech in the upper house on the education code of May 1882 (reprinted as a pamphlet) he practically advocated free education and protested against the complexity of the code with its detailed system of payment by results. He sat on the reformatory and industrial schools commission (1883) and on the education commissions of 1883-4 and 1887. In 1884 he played some part in effecting a compromise between the two houses on the Liberal government's 'Reform Bill'. 
Norton had long played an active part in religious affairs. As early as 1849 he had published a devotional 'Essay on Human Happiness' (rev. edn 1854). In his 'Reflections on the Rev. Dr. Hook's Sermon on 'the Lord's Day'' (1856) he dwelt on the need for popular parks, gardens, and reading-rooms for Sunday recreation and religious contemplation. A strong churchman, he nevertheless advocated in 1889 a union between the Church of England and the Wesleyans, and he developed an aspiration to heal protestant schism and stay controversy in 'High and Low Church' (1892, 2nd edn 1893). His hope of reconciling apparently opposing social as well as religious forces found expression in his 'Socialism' (1895), in which respect for manual labour and zeal in social service and social reform were shown to harmonize with Conservative and Christian feeling. In his 'Reflections on the Course from the Goal' (1898, 2nd edn 1899) he discussed the formation of character. His religious views kept him in touch with all classes of thinkers, and neither doctrinal nor political differences affected his private friendship. With Gladstone especially he was long on cordial terms. Cobden and Bright were among his political friends, and he reckoned Archbishop Benson, Cardinal Manning, Dr Dale, and Edward King, bishop of Lincoln, among his intimate acquaintances. To the end of his life Norton wrote long letters to 'The Times' on his favourite themes of social reform, education, and colonial affairs. He was not a brilliant writer or speaker, and was reckoned by political colleagues to be tenacious and outspoken to the verge of obstinacy and bluntness, but his views were enlightened, generous, and far-seeing, and they influenced the progress of public opinion. He was in addition a skilled musician and a competent art critic. 
Adderley married on 28 July 1842 Julia Anne Eliza (died 1887), daughter of Chandos Leigh, first Baron Leigh of Stoneleigh. There were ten children -- five sons and five daughters. He was succeeded, as second Baron Norton, by his eldest son, Charles Leigh Adderley. His youngest son, James Granville Adderley (1861-1942), became vicar of Saltley in 1904. Lady Norton died on 8 May 1887. Norton died at his home, Hams Hall, on 28 March 1905, and was buried in the family vault in Lea Marston church, Warwickshire. The Norton Memorial Hall at Saltley was erected in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 30342


Addison, Christopher, first Viscount Addison (1869-1951), politician, was born at the Willows Farm, Hogsthorpe, Lincolnshire, on 19 June 1869. His father, Robert Addison (1838-1899), who came from a long line of yeoman farmers, grazed cattle in Lindsey, east Lincolnshire. Later he moved to a much larger farm of 200 acres at Stallingborough, near Grimsby. In 1861 Robert Addison married Susan (died 1913), daughter of Charles Fanthorpe, a customs official in Lincolnshire. Seven of their twelve children survived. Christopher was the youngest of three boys. He retained the outlook and style of a countryman all his life; he was instinctively an agrarian radical, rooted in the peasantry of the Danelaw. 
Addison was sent off to Trinity College, Harrogate, at the age of thirteen. Thereafter he went to Sheffield medical school and, despite much financial stringency, on to St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he graduated with honours. He proved to be an exceptionally able medical student, especially in the field of human anatomy. In 1893 he was appointed demonstrator, later lecturer, in the Sheffield medical school, and in 1897, at the age of twenty-eight, became the first holder of the Arthur Jackson chair of anatomy. In 1893 he had gained his doctorate from the University of London. In 1901 he delivered the prestigious Hunterian lectures at the Royal College of Surgeons and then moved to Charing Cross Hospital, where he later became dean. His research as a physiologist and anatomist, especially in relation to the abdominal organs, was most distinguished. His name was given to Addison's plane, a method of identifying the shape and position of the pancreas. In 1904-6 he served as secretary of the Anatomical Society of Great Britain. 
From his childhood, however, Addison had a compelling interest in politics. His early radicalism startled his Conservative father. While at Charing Cross, he developed a lifelong concern with health and social deprivation in London's East End. He also backed land nationalization. He thus campaigned actively for the Liberals in the 1906 general election. Another radical impulse came from his marriage, on 25 March 1902, to Isobel Mackinnon Gray (1875/6-1934), the daughter of Archibald Gray, a wealthy shipping man active in Indian trade. She was a passionate Christian socialist. In an exceptionally happy marriage, they were to have three sons (one of whom died in early childhood) and two daughters. In addition, his wife's wealth enabled him to think of a political career, and in 1907 he was adopted as Liberal candidate for the Hoxton division of Shoreditch, an East End constituency that had somewhat surprisingly remained Unionist in 1906. 
In the general election of January 1910, Addison captured Hoxton with a 338 majority; at the age of forty, therefore, he left medicine for the uncertain fortunes of politics. In the following general election that December he increased his majority to 694. In both contests he campaigned strongly as a vehement supporter of Lloyd George's People's Budget and social reform programme, and of the government's 'Parliament Bill' to curb the power of the Lords. It proved to be Lloyd George who was largely responsible for his political breakthrough. The chancellor's massive 'National Insurance Bill' of 1911 ran into opposition both from the industrial assurance companies and from the doctors. Addison emerged as a member of the British Medical Association advisory committee on the bill, but one who strongly backed Lloyd George's measure. He persuaded Lloyd George to frame concessions to the medical profession on the make-up of the new health committees, the terms of service under the new act, and the levels of remuneration. His campaigning did much to persuade the doctors to come to terms with Lloyd George's measure. From that time onwards, Lloyd George regarded the unassuming Dr Addison with high respect for his administrative skills and also his moral courage. They worked closely together in 1912-14 on behalf of a range of radical causes, health and housing, a new Medical Research Council, women's suffrage, Ireland, and the land taxes included in Lloyd George's budget of April 1914. Together, Addison recorded, they 'dreamed dreams but based them on existing realities'. On 8 August 1914 Asquith made him parliamentary secretary to the Board of Education. 
But by now Addison, like all other politicians, saw his world engulfed by world war. He had been a member of the radical foreign affairs group, critics of Grey's foreign policy. But he was no Little Englander and no pacifist. Like Lloyd George, he accepted the necessity to declare war on Germany after the invasion of Belgium. His fortunes became ever more closely entwined with those of Lloyd George now. When the political crisis of May 1915 saw Asquith's Liberal government transformed into a coalition including the Unionists and Labour, Addison found himself moved as under-secretary to Lloyd George's new office as minister of munitions. His political role now moved on to a higher plane. He was an essential lieutenant as Lloyd George used munitions' production to transform the war economy. He was most active in costing contracts and in negotiations with arms manufacturers and the unions. Here he had to handle delicate issues over dilution of skilled labour and the use of women workers. There was a prolonged crisis on the Clyde where the Clyde Workers' Committee called for strikes; Addison was centrally involved in trying to provide a solution through the use of trade cards and 'de-badging' procedures, and with some success. He became, therefore, a major practitioner of 'war socialism'. Also he became much involved in the political manoeuvres that led to the triumph of Lloyd George. He was among those Liberals who strongly backed Lloyd George in the cabinet wrangles on military conscription. The latter's success in April 1916 severely damaged the authority of Asquith and encouraged many Liberals to think of him as a replacement at 10 Downing Street. To this end, Addison showed Lloyd George a list he had drawn up with David Davies and F. G. Kellaway of Liberals who would back Lloyd George as premier. It retained its relevance that summer and autumn as the war went increasingly badly with heavy defeat on the Somme, failure in Gallipoli, the Grand Fleet mauled at Jutland, the surrender of Romania, and Asquith's ineffective handling of Ireland after the Easter rising. 
In the crucial events of 1-9 December 1916, days central to the collapse of British Liberalism, it was the relatively little-known Dr Addison who was among the kingmakers. When Asquith rejected the idea of a war committee that Lloyd George, Bonar Law, and Carson had put to him, Addison and Kellaway 'on our own account' drew up a list of Liberal MPs prepared to support a Lloyd George government. It emerged that forty-nine would do so without equivocation and that another 126 -- making well over half the Liberals in the house -- would do so if one were formed. Lloyd George's position as the possible head of an all-party coalition was much strengthened. Addison also made contact with key Labour leaders. Lloyd George duly became prime minister on 7 December. Two days later, Addison (who had turned down the position of chief whip) became minister of munitions. He had been central to a palace revolution that transformed both his own career and the long-term future of British party politics. 
Addison remained at munitions until July 1917. He developed the established strategies for enhanced arms production, including the shipping and tank-building programmes, and the new aeroplanes. He was also again embroiled in difficulties with labour. The continuing problems with dilution led to a three-week strike of over 200,000 engineering workers in May 1917 and meant a temporary falling out with Lloyd George over the press coverage that resulted. However, Addison's reputation for executive competence survived, while he also remained a crucial Liberal ally for the beleaguered prime minister. When in July 1917 Lloyd George sought to remodel his government, notably by bringing in Churchill to munitions, Addison moved to the new Ministry of Reconstruction, concerned with post-war social and economic planning. Here he took on a wide remit including health, housing, the poor law, agriculture, and resettlement. His role here led to some criticism that the reconstruction programme was confused and ill-focused. Addison, however, had at least one considerable achievement to his credit, victory over the Local Government Board in proposing a new Ministry of Health. His work gave the coalition much of its domestic manifesto henceforth. He was also pivotal to Lloyd George's dominance within the coalition. Addison's was a crucial voice in creating the Coalition Liberals, to give Lloyd George a power base in negotiating a post-war alliance with the Unionists. In the 'coupon' general election in December 1918, Addison was a key Liberal figure in the coalition. Its massive election victory, with 526 government supporters returned, as against 57 Labour and about 24 Asquithians, appeared to be a triumph for the British right. Addison, however, saw the coalition as radical, designed to promote social reform and a land fit for heroes. Post-war tensions resulted from this conflict. 
In January 1919 Addison became president of the Local Government Board, charged with giving substance to the government's pledges of post-war reform. His immediate task was setting up a new Ministry of Health, and indeed he took over this new office that June. Even more momentous a reform was his 'Housing and Town Planning Act' (the 'Addison Act') which launched a massive new programme of house building by the local authorities, with the quite new principle of a Treasury subsidy to cover the difference between the capital costs and the income earned through rents from working-class tenants, over and above a penny rate levied by the local authorities. This was amended at the end of 1919 to include a $150 subsidy to private builders. Controversy dogged the housing programme from the start. Progress in house building was slow, the private enterprise building industry was fragmented, the building unions were reluctant to admit unskilled workers, the local authorities could hardly cope with their massive new responsibilities, and Treasury policy overall was unhelpful. In addition, the costs of the Treasury subsidy began to soar, with uncontrolled prices of raw materials leading to apparently open-ended subventions from the state. Addison thus became a prime target for the right-wing 'anti-waste' campaign. For the left, the 'homes for heroes' were simply not being built. However, Addison could ultimately claim that, in spite of all difficulties, 210,000 high-quality houses were built for working people, and that an important new social principle of housing as a social service had been enacted. 
The real problem with Addison, though, was that in a coalition government lurching to the right he was a constant radical gadfly, on foreign affairs, India, and Ireland as well as domestic reform, in meeting the challenge from Labour. Lloyd George, long impatient with the soaring costs of state housing, thus transferred Addison from health in March 1921 to the anomalous post of minister without portfolio. His standing in the government rapidly collapsed. There was public humiliation in the enforced cutting of his ministerial salary. As the economy deteriorated and 'anti-waste' pressure mounted, Addison was a target for all those who felt the government was being both incompetent and socialistic. The reversal of coalition social reform policies led to the halting of the housing programme, the effective end of the Treasury subsidy, and the phasing down of slum clearance. The Geddes 'axe' soon followed, and on 14 July Addison resigned. In an angry, incoherent speech in the Commons, he denounced the government for its broken promises on social reform. Later, he wrote a fierce pamphlet, 'The Betrayal of the Slums' (1922). There was a violent and highly public falling out with his old ally Lloyd George. Addison now seemed a marginalized figure in the wilderness, destroyed by the all-powerful prime minister. In reality, it was Lloyd George who was now almost finished, Addison whose career had thirty years still to run. 
When the Lloyd George coalition unexpectedly fell in October 1922, Addison ran at the subsequent general election a month later as an independent Liberal at Shoreditch. In fact, he enjoyed the support of neither Asquithian nor Lloyd Georgian Liberals in the constituency, and found himself having to finance both rival Liberal associations there simultaneously. His agent mismanaged his funds, and the debts he faced left him close to bankruptcy. Almost inevitably, he was defeated at Shoreditch in 1922, finishing a poor third in the poll to Labour. However his determination to remain in politics on the left remained intense. He now spoke for Labour candidates and became close to Ramsay MacDonald and other Labour leaders. At the end of 1923 he joined the Labour Party. Where Churchill, Mond, Guest, Greenwood, and Grigg among the Coalition Liberals were to move to the right, Addison was unique in joining Labour. In the 1924 general election, called after the resignation of the first Labour government, he stood as a Labour candidate at Hammersmith South, but was unsuccessful. He now spent much time in writing, notably in producing two-volume reminiscences, 'Politics from Within' (1924), and 'Practical Socialism' (1926). But his main priority lay in working on agriculture, a quite new priority for Labour with its traditional roots in urban, industrial areas. He emphasized the need for guaranteed prices for wheat farmers and minimum wages for farm labourers. His chosen mechanism was that of marketing boards for key foodstuffs, an idea which was very much his own and which proved prophetic. He was particularly anxious to improve Labour prospects in rural areas in view of Lloyd George's new campaigns through the 'green book'. Addison also advocated the nationalization of land. In the 1929 general election he returned to the house as Labour MP for Swindon, and became parliamentary secretary for agriculture under MacDonald. 
As a senior politician, Addison was from the first a major figure in the second Labour administration, even in a minor post. He rapidly began to dominate Noel Buxton, his minister, and to take the initiative in putting forward proposals for the marketing of home food produce and advocating the idea of an empire marketing board. He also showed a zeal to support home agriculture, including through quotas for production, that led some ministers to fear protectionist tendencies. In June 1930 he succeeded Noel Buxton as minister for agriculture within the cabinet, and was able to press his various policies with the more force. He was also an important figure politically since he formed a link of a kind between the minority MacDonald government and his old leader, Lloyd George, with whom relations had been somewhat repaired. Ideas on agriculture became the basis for suggestions of a wider Lib-Lab collaboration, including on policies to combat unemployment. There seemed a prospect of the pre-war progressive alliance being re-established, this time with Labour as the dominant partner. 
Addison launched in cabinet a series of plans to remedy the long depression in agriculture and food production generally. He pressed for import boards for cereal growers, quotas for production, and new powers for local authorities to take over land for cultivation. The most important of his proposals, however, was his 'Agricultural Marketing Bill' of 1931. This measure, by raising the price for the producer, lowering it for the consumer, and fostering an overall expansion of agriculture through guaranteed prices and regular price reviews, was to inaugurate a long-term revolution in policy. It was to be extended under the National Government and the wartime coalition into the marketing of milk, potatoes, cheese, cereals, livestock, and fruit, and to form much of the basis of the post-war Labour government's programme. It was a remarkable instance of Addison's executive skill and flair in obtaining all-party co-operation. However, everything changed in the financial crisis of August 1931. When, following the May report, MacDonald called for massive cuts in public spending including in unemployment benefit, Addison led the opposition. He denounced a policy introduced to placate foreign bankers that would seriously erode standards of public health and education, and was the first to urge that Britain leave the gold standard. He was the one middle-class member of the nine members of MacDonald's government who opposed cuts in social spending. The government fell and a new National Government under MacDonald now emerged. Addison was bitterly opposed to it. He was among the plethora of former Labour ministers who lost their seats in the October 1931 general election, being defeated at Swindon by a Conservative. 
Although now in his early sixties, Addison retained all his zest for politics. He was an active figure in Labour policy making in the thirties, especially in the New Fabian Research Bureau (of which he was chairman 1933-7) and the 'XYZ group' to discuss economic policy. He remained active in crusading on Labour's behalf in rural areas and wrote an influential work, 'A Policy for British Agriculture', in 1939. He also continued to collaborate with politicians in other parties, retaining his links with Lloyd George (and even, surprisingly, being invited to become a trustee of the 'Lloyd George Fund' -- which he declined after some thought). He also maintained close relations with the agriculture minister, the Conservative Walter Elliot, who pressed on with the policy of marketing boards. In 1934 he got back into the house in a by-election in his old seat at Swindon, but in the 1935 election he was unexpectedly defeated again, by the Conservative candidate, the rugby player Wavell Wakefield. Addison's career took a new turn, however, on 22 May 1937 when he went to the Lords as Baron Addison -- as it happened, the only Labour peer to be created by Neville Chamberlain, an old adversary. Addison also took a major part in the discussion of foreign affairs, especially in attacking the appeasement policies towards the European dictators. He was a fierce critic during the Italo-Abyssinian War and condemned the policy of non-intervention during the Spanish Civil War. As a distinguished medical man, he was chairman of the Spanish Medical Aid Committee: he was also prominent in the Socialist Medical Association. He also kept in touch with his old ministerial colleague Winston Churchill in providing information on the failures of defence policy, especially in the air. 
During the Second World War Addison took no significant role, other than serving as chairman of the Buckinghamshire War Agricultural Executive Committee. His personal life had now changed considerably. His first wife, Isobel, had died in 1934, and on 4 November 1937 Addison had married a second time. His new wife was (Beatrice) Dorothy Low (1895/6-1982), the daughter of a solicitor, (Frederick) Percy Low, who was also a Conservative agent. The new Lady Addison manifestly did not share Addison's radicalism. However, as a poised and supportive wife she sustained his morale and enduring ambition. They lived in the village of Radnage, in Buckinghamshire, quite near Chequers. Addison remained prominent in public debate during the war, speaking out on land issues and on post-war reconstruction. Of particular importance was the close relationship he struck up with his Buckinghamshire neighbour, the Labour leader, Clement Attlee. The latter enormously valued Addison's judgement and long experience in a variety of public offices, and their relationship became particularly close. When Labour won a landslide election victory in 1945, Attlee became prime minister. One of his first decisions was to make Addison (from 2 July 1945 Viscount Addison of Stallingborough) secretary to the dominions and leader of the House of Lords. 
Addison began his important role at the age of seventy-six. He remained, however, an active and highly influential politician and was in the cabinet right down to the fall of the government in October 1951, by which time he was eighty-two. He was an important figure in cabinet, where members deferred to his experience (Harold Wilson called Addison 'a wise old man') and Attlee gave him particular latitude in debate. He took a particular interest, as befitted his record, in social welfare, and gave Aneurin Bevan crucial backing in the debate on the nationalization of hospitals. Housing and agriculture were other pet subjects that claimed his attention. As dominions secretary he was a leading figure in meetings of Commonwealth heads of government, and struck up an unexpectedly close friendship with the Canadian prime minister, Mackenzie King. He and his wife went on a cross-continental tour of Canada in the autumn of 1946. He was also closely involved with Field Marshal Smuts, who had served with him in government under Lloyd George in 1917. In October 1947, in a cabinet reshuffle, he left Commonwealth relations to become lord privy seal, while continuing to lead the Lords. One ominous concern of his proved to be British policy towards nuclear weapons. He was a member of the six-man top secret committee known as GEN 163, which took in January 1947 the momentous decision that Britain should continue secretly to develop the atomic bomb. He had few doubts that Britain should retain her own nuclear deterrent. 
Addison played a major unseen role as chairman of key cabinet committees and member of the future legislation committee. But his most important role in the Attlee years was leading the House of Lords. That body had a huge majority of hereditary tory peers at a time of a massive Labour majority in the Commons, and it required all Addison's statesmanship and emollient qualities to ensure that a constitutional crisis was averted. He made the small band of (mainly elderly) Labour peers a surprisingly effective fighting force. But in addition, through his personal ascendancy over the Lords and his good relationship with Lord Cranborne (later Lord Salisbury), the tory leader, he managed to get a vast body of legislation through a hostile chamber largely unscathed. Measures of nationalization, planning, and state intervention on an unprecedented scale were put on the statute book with little difficulty. When a real crisis emerged in the summer of 1947 over iron and steel nationalization (a measure over which he himself was not enthusiastic), Addison had to call on all his powers of diplomacy. In the end, steel nationalization passed through the Lords at the end of 1949, but there was also the passage of a parliamentary act to reduce the delaying powers of the upper house to one year only. All in all, his leadership of the Lords was one of the most distinguished phases of his long career. 
Even after the general election of February 1950, when Attlee clung onto office by only six votes, Addison remained a member of his cabinet. He remained active in Commonwealth affairs, including the crisis surrounding Seretse Khama in Bechuanaland. He was among those who tried to persuade Bevan not to resign from the government over health service charges in the spring of 1951. He was one of eight cabinet ministers present on 19 September 1951 when Attlee unexpectedly told them that he was going to call another general election. Labour now lost office, and the Conservatives returned under Winston Churchill, another important figure in Addison's long career. By now, however, he was a dying man, stricken by cancer. He died at his home, Neighbours, at Radnage, on 11 December 1951, and is buried in the churchyard of St Mary's Church there. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 30 January 1952, attended by Attlee and many others. He left two sons and two daughters. 
Christopher Addison, a quiet, uncharismatic man and a dull speaker, had an astonishing career. A distinguished professor of medicine, he turned politician in middle age and remained a major figure in public life for a further forty years. He illustrates the continuities of the progressive tradition in British politics. He was a leading 'new Liberal' before 1914 and a natural convert to Labour after 1918. However, whereas many Liberals who joined Labour did so in reaction against the war, Addison embraced the wartime experience and saw it as a major argument for constructive democratic socialism. He was the one significant Coalition Liberal who moved left after the fall of Lloyd George. He was also a generally effective minister, the only one to serve in both post-war governments. His record at munitions was rather mixed, and his achievement at reconstruction hard to assess. However, he was a pioneer minister of health whose controversial housing policy was a major new departure. At agriculture under Labour in 1930-31 he was remarkably innovative in promoting marketing boards. As leader of the Lords under Attlee he was a major success, showing himself again an idealistic radical who could use power. Finally, he was a crucial figure at pivotal moments in party politics, helping to build up Lloyd George prior to 1916, breaking with him in 1921, leading the revolt against MacDonald in 1931, and emerging as remarkably influential under Attlee in his final years. The most notable doctor ever to be involved in British politics, he played a much underestimated part, in two periods of war and reconstruction, in making Britain a welfare democracy and a more humane society. 


@@@@@


doc= 30343


Adler, Hermann (1839-1911), chief rabbi, was born in Hanover on 30 May 1839, the second son of two sons and three daughters of Nathan Marcus Adler (1803-1890), then chief rabbi of Hanover, and his first wife, Henrietta Worms (died 1854). In June 1845 the family moved to London, where Nathan Adler was installed as chief rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations. Hermann attended University College School and University College, London, graduating BA in 1854. He determined to follow his father into the rabbinate, and carried out a range of ecclesiastical duties while pursuing private study. In 1860 his father sent him to Prague, where two years later he received rabbinical ordination from S. J. Rapoport, chief rabbi there. In December 1862 he obtained from the University of Leipzig the degree of PhD for a thesis on druidism. 
In practice Adler acted henceforth as secretary and assistant to his father, who was clearly grooming him to succeed to his office. In 1863 Adler was appointed temporary principal of Jews' College, London, where he taught until 1879 and to the chairmanship of which he ultimately succeeded in 1887. In February 1864 he became first minister at the fashionable Bayswater synagogue. On 3 September 1867 he married Rachel (died 1912), elder daughter of Solomon Joseph, a well-to-do businessman. They had two daughters and a son. Adler took a particular interest in Jewish education, establishing schools in Bayswater and making arrangements for Jewish religious instruction at schools of the London school board in the East End. It was during these two decades -- the 1860s and 1870s -- that Adler perfected his skills as a preacher; it is doubtful whether the Anglo-Jewish sermon has ever reached greater heights as an art form. 
It was also in this period that Adler met and made friends with a wide range of non-Jews occupying positions of authority and influence in government and society. In time he came to move in the very highest social circles. Well spoken, dignified, and cultured, Adler came to be regarded by them as the respectable face of Jewish Orthodoxy, conforming to Orthodox norms but eschewing extremes. When his father practically retired from office in 1879, it was a foregone conclusion that he would become 'delegate' chief rabbi. And it was regarded as inevitable that he should succeed to the office following his father's death, as he did in 1891. 
Adler moved easily and with grace in the world of high society, and he deliberately used this status to bolster and reinforce his authority within the Jewish world. He saw himself as, and wished others to think of himself as, the Jewish equivalent of the archbishop of Canterbury. He wore gaiters and 'canonicals'. He styled himself 'the very reverend', a term unknown in the Jewish canon. His name was a byword for patriotism. He was also an avowed tory, preaching in favour of the South African War even though he must have known how controversial that conflict was within British politics. He became a good friend of the future Edward VII, who enjoyed his company (the king is said to have referred to him as 'my Chief Rabbi') and appointed him a commander in the Royal Victorian Order, an honour conferred for personal services rendered to the monarch or to members of the royal family. 
Yet as Adler's stature increased within the non-Jewish world, it fell within the Jewish. Adler, unlike his father, was no Talmudic scholar. Unlike his father, he was latitudinarian in his religious outlook. Although, in a famous incident in 1892, he vetoed the appointment of Morris Joseph as minister of the newly constructed Hampstead synagogue on account of Joseph's Reformist leanings, Adler was himself prepared to sanction practices which were at variance with the strictest interpretations of Jewish Orthodoxy -- for instance, the introduction of verbal consents by the bride and bridegroom in the marriage service. In mid-Victorian Britain, where the moneyed and interrelated 'cousinhood' ruled Anglo-Jewry, Adler's interpretation of Orthodoxy fitted perfectly. But as the pace of immigration to Britain of Jews from Russia and Poland increased during the 1880s and 1890s, his position became increasingly fraught. 
Between 1880 and 1906 a 'native' Anglo-Jewry of some 60,000 souls was swamped by at least twice as many Jewish immigrants. Adler's chief rabbinate was deeply scarred by a series of conflicts with this immigrant body. His right-wing, anti-socialist, and anti-trade-unionist views were not welcomed in the slums of Whitechapel, Leeds, or Manchester into which the immigrant Jewish poor settled in large numbers. It is true that he identified himself with a number of public protests against the persecution of Jews in tsarist Russia. It is equally true that he used his influence to try to stem the refugee tide, and that he refused to condemn the passage of the 'Aliens Act' of 1905, passed in response to a wave of 'anti-alien' sentiment. Among the immigrants Zionism was a popular creed. Adler (along with almost all the Anglo-Jewish establishment) viewed the idea of a separate Jewish nationality as anathema and likely to jeopardize emancipation. Addressing the Anglo-Jewish Association in July 1897, he condemned the forthcoming First Zionist Congress (summoned in Basel by Theodor Herzl) as 'an egregious blunder', and for good measure he denounced the very idea of a Jewish state as 'contrary to Jewish principles' ('Jewish Chronicle', 16 July 1897, 13). Adler distinguished himself as the only western European rabbi to contribute to a collection of anti-Zionist essays published in Warsaw in 1900. 
Of all the disputes Adler entered into with the immigrants, none was more bitter, or more bitterly fought, than those which stemmed from his interpretation of Jewish religious law. He permitted mixed-sex choirs in synagogues under his control. He turned a blind eye to palpable infringements of Orthodox practice regarding the preparation and sale of kosher meat and poultry, with the result that in London's East End, and in Liverpool and Manchester, his religious authority in these matters was openly defied. In eastern Europe every Jewish community had its own rabbi. Adler's insistence on being recognized as a unique rabbinical authority, not even subject to the rulings of his own 'beth din' (ecclesiastical court), brought him into ridicule. Worse still, it threatened to bring schism into Anglo-Jewry. Adler's authority was only restored, in 1905, through the efforts of Samuel Montagu, first Baron Swaythling, the staunchly Orthodox Liberal politician and founder (1887) of the Federation of Synagogues. 
Adler continued for the remainder of his life to be dogged by conflict and confrontation with immigrant rabbis, whose refusal to acknowledge his suzerainty he regarded with the deepest anger. Though clever, up to a point, he was not a wise man. He understood the limitations neither of his own intellect nor, in changing circumstances, those of his own office. In seeking to reinforce the legitimacy of that office through the support of the non-Jewish world Adler scored a dazzling but short-term victory. His death was mourned, but he himself was unloved by the Yiddish-speaking poor who now formed the majority of Anglo-Jewry. 
Adler died of heart failure on 18 July 1911 at his residence, 6 Craven Hill, London, and was buried in the Willesden cemetery of the United Synagogue. His elder daughter, Henrietta (Nettie) Adler (1868-1950), became one of the first women to sit on the London county council. A son, Alfred, entered the Jewish ministry but predeceased his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 30344


Adshead, Stanley Davenport (1868-1946), architect and town planner, was born at Bowden Vale, Bowden, Cheshire, on 8 March 1868. He was the second of eight children and eldest son of Joseph Adshead, an artist, and his wife, Eliza Davies. He was educated at Buxton, and on leaving school at sixteen was articled to the architect J. Medland Taylor in Manchester. Adshead described him as 'a relic of the Dickens era' (Powers, 106). He moved on to the office of Salomon and Eli in Manchester and later described the revelatory effect of his first visit to London during these years, when Bloomsbury appeared as 'something strange, fresh and pacifying' in contrast to Manchester (ibid., 109). He was determined to move, and in 1890 got a job with George Sherrin, where he learned from other assistants, notably H. V. Lanchester and E. A. Rickards. He followed Rickards into the office of Dunn and Watson and thence to Howard Ince, who was building a studio house in Maida Vale for the sculptor Alfred Gilbert. Several more moves ensued, with Adshead rising up an artistic scale to finish in the office of William Flockhart, which involved him in a four-year spell as clerk of works at Rosehaugh, Argyll, a vast eclectic mansion on the Black Isle. There he met his future wife, Mary Annie (1874-1960), daughter of Andrew Blackie of Strathpeffer. They were married on 24 October 1900. 
On his return to London in 1898 Adshead found a new occupation as a freelance perspective artist, drawing the schemes of other architects for competition and exhibition. His style for this work was atmospheric in a limpid way, avoiding the tricks then common in this important art of architectural persuasion. In 1900 he made the perspectives for five out of six of the entries in the competition for the new central criminal courts. In 1904 he finally won a competition in his own name for a library and technical school at Ramsgate, from which followed a pavilion in the same town, in which Adshead began to explore the late eighteenth-century revival style with which his architecture is largely associated. His practice failed to thrive, however, and he was happy to be offered the newly created chair of civic design at the University of Liverpool in 1909. This proposal came from the professor of architecture, C. H. Reilly, one of Adshead's associates in London at the turn of the century, who wanted to add town planning in a grand artistic style to the existing architectural curriculum. Adshead thus acquired a new career as a result of Reilly's insight and the sponsorship of William Hesketh Lever (later the first Lord Leverhulme), although there was a secondary motive in the hope that he would teach Liverpool students to make fine presentation drawings. Adshead and Reilly shared a mission to purify Edwardian classicism, which implied a greater sympathy with neo-classicism, including its grand urban schemes and attacks on late projects by Norman Shaw, who described them as 'tin-pot professors'. Adshead was secretary of an evanescent 'Classical Society' around 1907. 
Adshead's subject became newly fashionable in the wake of the first 'Town Planning Act' in 1909, and he was the first editor of the 'Town Planning Review', which promoted formal design in place of garden city vernacular. He broadened Reilly's propagandist thrust with sensitivity to places and their evolution, awakened in him by one of his colleagues, Ramsay Muir. Reilly's student and successor (in both his university chairs), Sir Patrick Abercrombie, believed that Adshead's synthesized and balanced approach, which combined the monumental, statistical, and legalistic aspects of the years before 1914, was the foundation on which the planning profession in Britain was based: 'He might appear contradictory or confusing in his verbal approach, but the final verdict showed an unerring logical and artistic sense' (quoted in Powers, 122). In 1914 Adshead left his half-time position in Liverpool for a new chair in civic design at University College, London, where he remained until retirement in 1935, becoming a colleague of Professor A. E. Richardson, whose architectural office was for a time housed below Adshead's London office and residence at 46 Great Russell Street. 
Adshead's practice, in partnership with Stanley Ramsey (the author of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry on Adshead), was commissioned in 1911 to design extensive new buildings to replace existing slums on the duchy of Cornwall estate, Kennington, London, in an initiative by Sir Walter Peacock, secretary to the prince's council. As Ramsey characterized their work: 'From the outset, Adshead insisted that it was to be a Royal Estate and he it was who laid down the broad principles of development. There remained, and do remain to this day, many fine examples of late eighteenth century and Regency buildings in the neighbourhood, and we decided that the architectural expression for the new buildings should be a modern transcript of these styles. (S. Ramsey, 'Our work together', MS, family papers)' The main development consisted of terraces of two-storey houses in yellow London stock brick, some of which formed Courtenay Square, and a quadrangle of old people's dwellings. Additional sections, increasingly in flats, were inserted in the existing streetscapes until the end of the 1920s, and a new church of St Anselm was planned in 1914 and completed in modified form in 1933. It cannot be claimed that the Kennington work was influential as an alternative to the tenement type dwellings which constituted the majority model for slum clearance projects between the wars, but it was widely admired. 
In 1917 Adshead was commissioned to build a workers' settlement for Dorman Long steel works at Redcar, called Dormanstown. Conventional in external appearance, the paired Georgian houses were in fact based on a steel frame, and a formal layout was proposed. Adshead and Ramsey also designed a number of smaller housing projects under the 'Housing Act' of 1919, in Totnes, Brighton, and elsewhere. In the 1920s he continued to produce a small number of buildings similar in approach to the Kennington estate; the only exception, at the end of his career, was Scurr House, Stepney, in 1932, a tenement block with emphatic horizontal balconies which are modernist in style. 
During the 1920s Adshead produced a number of published planning surveys of different parts of England, including south Tees-side, the Thames valley, west Essex, Scarborough, Teignmouth, and York, which were distinguished by his line drawings of landscape and towns. In 1930 he visited Northern Rhodesia to select and plan a site for the capital, Lusaka. Adshead's book 'Town Planning and Town Development' (1923) was his major statement of the subject, and covered issues of regional planning, street layout, and the impact of the motor car and mobile leisure, illustrated with photographs of good and bad practice. In 1941 his book 'A New England: Planning for the Future' proposed a nationwide rationalization of land use and transport; it was followed by 'New Towns for Old' (1943). 
Adshead and his wife had one child, (Sylvia) Mary Adshead (1904-1995). She studied painting at the Slade School of Art and became well known as a mural painter with a strong, slightly naive style who executed a number of commissions for her father's buildings, and those of his contemporaries and pupils. Adshead, who was very tall, was described as 'rather of the dreamy and slow-moving type' (W. A. Downe, 'Some memories', 'Sir Albert Richardson, 1880-1964', ed. A. Powers, S. Houfe, and J. Wilton-Ely, 1999). C. H. Reilly recognized Adshead's qualities when he wrote, 'The classical backbone of his thought has never prevented his appreciating the romantic interest of accidental things' (Reilly, 26). Adshead died at Chapel Cottage, Lower Ashley, New Milton, Hampshire, on 11 April 1946 of stomach cancer. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30345


Aga Khan III (1877-1957), leader of the Ismailis, was born in Karachi on 2 November 1877, a member of the ruling Qajar dynasty in Persia, the son of Aga Ali Shah, Aga Khan II (died 1885), and Shams al-Muluk, known as Lady Ali Shah ('c'.1850-1938), a former Persian princess, and a woman of character and vision, who was alive to the importance of the role, political and religious, which her son, named Mohammed Shah, would have to fill, and brought him up with a care, skill, and judgement for which he always remained grateful. He succeeded his father as the third Aga Khan (a title bestowed on his grandfather by the British government) and as forty-eighth head of the Ismaili sect of the Shi'i Muslim community. 
The Aga Khan assumed the active administration of the imamate in 1893, in his sixteenth year. His 11-12 million followers, scattered over India, Burma, the Middle East, and Africa, looked to him not only as their spiritual leader but for the resolution of their temporal problems. On taking over the imamate he instructed his followers in Bombay to keep out of communal rioting, and in 1901 he applied spiritual sanctions to Ismailis who had made murderous attacks on Sunnis. He consistently urged his followers to identify themselves, in manners, language, and customs, with the countries in which they lived. There were occasions when his liberal and moderate attitude failed to carry his community with him, as in 1901, when the Ithna Ashari sect broke away, and again during the Balkan wars (1912-13) and the 'khilafat' agitation (1919-24). But his was a restraining influence, and broadly speaking the community responded to his lead over political issues. His spiritual influence remained unshaken, even after old age and ill health had reduced his political importance. 
The Aga Khan was chosen in 1897 by the Muslims of western India to convey to the viceroy their greetings to the queen empress on her diamond jubilee. In 1898 he began a lifelong series of visits to Europe, Africa, Asia, and America, and was received at Windsor by Queen Victoria. In 1902 Lord Curzon nominated him to the viceroy's legislative council, on which he served for two years, declining a second term. He used the opportunity to urge the claims of a Muslim university at Aligarh, to which he had lent substantial financial support. 
The Aga Khan was married in 1896 to a cousin in her teens, Shahzadi Begum. There was no issue, and the marriage was dissolved in 1907. In 1908 he married, in Cairo, by Muslim rites, an Italian lady, the artist and dancer Theresa Magliano (1889-1926), with whom he had a son who died in infancy, and Aly Khan. 
The Aga Khan had maintained the friendliest of relations with the Indian Congress leaders, and particularly with G. K. Gokhale. He had spared no pains to maintain communal unity, to integrate Muslim political feeling with the Congress Party, and so to present a united front, with constitutional advance as its objective, to the British government. He had, too, done his best to reduce the communal antagonisms which derived from the partition of Bengal of 1905. But by 1906, now established as a political force, and as the recognized leader and spokesman of the Indian Muslims as a whole, he began to conclude that Congress would prove incapable of representing Indian Muslim feeling: 'already that artificial unity which the British Raj had imposed from without was cracking'; 'our only hope lay along the lines of independent organization and action'. 
In that year the Aga Khan led a delegation to Lord Minto which urged the case for the increased participation of Muslims in the political life of the country and pressed that they should be regarded as a nation within a nation, with rights and obligations safeguarded by statute, with adequate and separate representations both in local bodies and on legislative councils, and with a separate communal franchise and electoral roll. Lord Minto's reply was reassuring. 
Later in 1906 the All-India Muslim League was founded, and the Aga Khan was elected its first president, an office which he held until 1912. He lent his active support to the Morley-Minto Council reforms of 1909, but intercommunal feeling continued to grow, despite the cancellation of the partition of Bengal. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 the Aga Khan, who had exercised a restraining influence on Indian Muslim opinion during the Balkan wars of 1912-13, was in Zanzibar. He at once volunteered his services and instructed his followers to render all possible support. He was advised that he could help best in the diplomatic field. His endeavours to promote Turkish neutrality failed, but when Turkey joined the central powers and, by declaring a 'jihad' or holy war, created a difficult situation for Indian and other Muslims, he unhesitatingly and successfully urged on them full co-operation with the allies. In 1915 he was entrusted with a mission of major importance to Egypt, the effect of which was to reassure Egyptian opinion and to secure the internal stability of the country, with the invaluable consequent assistance to the allies of a strategically placed and dependable base. 
On his return to England in September 1914 the Aga Khan had again met Gokhale, and with him strove to compose a memorandum on Indian constitutional progress representing their joint views on the establishment of federation in India as a step towards self-government. Early in 1915 Gokhale died, addressing his political testament to the Aga Khan, and not to M. K. Gandhi or any Hindu leader, for publication two years later, by when he hoped the war would be over and India capable of working out her own destiny. The testament was duly published, with a further plea by the Aga Khan that after the war east Africa might be reserved for Indian colonization in recognition of India's services. But it was overtaken by events which led to the Montagu-Chelmsford Council reforms of 1919. 
Ill health prevented the Aga Khan from taking the part he would have wished in these developments. But his enforced leisure resulted in 1918 in his 'India in Transition', dedicated to his mother, a thoughtful and closely argued study which attracted much attention. He reminded the British of their grant of full self-government to South Africa, and urged the case for the sharing of power in India and for a widely based South Asian Federation, of which an India ultimately self-governing must be the centre and pivot. 
After the war the Aga Khan was active in pressing on the allies the long-term importance of the question of the caliphate, and of a policy towards Turkey which should be practical as well as temperate, just, and equitable. Strongly as his own sympathies lay with Turkey, he was a realist and a restraining influence on Muslims in India, and as such sharply criticized by many members of his community during the 'khilafat' agitation, the leaders of which, Muhammad and Shaukat Ali, had the active support of Gandhi and the Congress. 
By 1924 difficulties in Kenya between the British settlers on the one hand, and the British government and the local Indian interests on the other, resulted in a committee of inquiry under John Hope Simpson. The Aga Khan, who had declined the chairmanship, was a member, and the committee's report proposed compromises, more particularly over Indian immigration into east Africa, and the reservation of certain districts in the coastal lowlands which were of much importance to India. 
From 1924 to 1928 the Aga Khan spent 'a period devoted almost exclusively to my own personal and private life' (Aga Khan, 168). At the end of 1928 an All-Indian Muslim Conference met at Delhi under his chairmanship to formulate Muslim opinion in view of the commission under Sir John Simon on India's constitutional future. Its unanimous conclusions, the more significant in that they had the support of M. A. Jinnah, remained the guiding light for the Muslim community in all subsequent discussions. They contemplated a federal system with complete autonomy and residuary powers vested in the constituent states; took note that the right of Muslims to elect their representatives in the various Indian legislatures was now the law of the land, of which they could not be deprived without their consent; and stipulated that in the provinces in which Muslims constituted a minority they should have a representation in no case less than that already enjoyed, and that they must have their due share in the central and provincial cabinets. 
The Simon report of 1930 was followed by the three round-table conferences of 1930-32. The Aga Khan was elected chairman of the British-India delegation and throughout played a material part in the discussions. At all times alive to the importance of compromise, and of adapting communal claims to the interests of India as a whole, he made an important contribution to securing a unanimous report from the joint select committee (1933-4) presided over by Lord Linlithgow which resulted in the 'Government of India Act' of 1935. But he failed to secure Congress acceptance of a joint memorandum, with the drafting of which he was closely concerned, embodying a united demand on behalf of all communities covering almost every important political point at issue, which sought to ensure continuity in the process of the further transfer of responsibility, and which, in his judgement, would have immensely simplified all future constitutional progress. 
With the passing of the 'Government of India Act' the Aga Khan ceased for the time actively to concern himself with Indian constitutional advance. But his high standing, religious and political, his extensive travels and wide contacts, his fluency in the principal European languages, and his independence of outlook had made him increasingly a figure not merely of Indian and Commonwealth but of international importance, and from 1932 he was for some years prominent in the League of Nations. He was a representative of India at the world disarmament conference at Geneva in 1932, was leader of the Indian delegation to the League of Nations assembly in 1932 and 1934-7, and in 1937 president of the assembly. It was while president that he visited Hitler. He subsequently lent his fullest support to the Munich settlement, suggesting in a much criticized article in 'The Times' that Hitler should be taken at his word, and questioning whether he had really meant what he had said in 'Mein Kampf'. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 the Aga Khan was in Europe. He at once issued a manifesto urging his followers to give the fullest support to Britain. In the winter of 1939-40 he visited India, when he persistently restated British war aims, and endeavoured to act as an intermediary with Reza Shah of Persia. He led a deputation to the viceroy on behalf of Indians in South Africa, and endeavoured, unsuccessfully, by discussion with the nawab of Bhopal and Gandhi, to bring about mutual understanding between the Indian parties for the prosecution of the war. He returned to Europe in April 1940, and on the fall of France withdrew to Switzerland, where he remained under medical treatment, barred from political activity, until the end of the war. The criticism which his inactivity provoked took perhaps insufficient account of his serious and continued ill health. In 1929 he had married Andree Carron ('b'. 'c'.1898), with whom he had one son, Sadruddin. This union having been dissolved by divorce in the Geneva civil courts in 1943 (the Aga Khan being awarded custody of the son), he married in 1944 the former Miss France, Yvette Larbousse (1906-2000), who survived him, and to whose devoted care in old age and illness he owed much. 
The Aga Khan returned to India in 1946 to find that, while his influence remained unshaken with his own community, which celebrated his diamond jubilee in India and east Africa in 1946, the Muslim political leadership had passed decisively to Jinnah, to whom he was to pay a generous tribute in his 'Memoirs'. After partition in 1947 the Aga Khan ceased to be an active participant in Indian politics. 
Ill health in his later years greatly reduced the Aga Khan's activity, but he maintained the closest touch with the Ismaili community, and continued to travel extensively. In 1949 he took up Persian citizenship, while remaining a British subject. His platinum jubilee was celebrated in Karachi in February 1954. In that year he published his 'Memoirs'. 
Throughout his life the Aga Khan was keenly interested in horse-racing, and his scientific concern with bloodstock and breeding methods had a material effect on English horse-breeding. On coming to the English turf after 1918, he won the Queen Mary Stakes at Ascot in 1922 (Cos) and had thereafter a record of outstanding distinction, winning, in addition to many minor successes, the Derby in 1930 (Blenheim); the Two Thousand Guineas, Derby, and St Leger (the triple crown) with Bahram in 1935; and the Derby again in 1936 (Mahmoud), 1948 (My Love), and 1952 (Tulyar). In 1954 he finally disposed of his studs. 
Shrewd, active, a connoisseur of the arts, a good scholar, a citizen of the world, an experienced and courageous politician, a hardworking religious leader alive to the importance of the education and physical fitness of his community, with great material resources, the Aga Khan was for long a major figure in Indian politics, and in his time, helped by his broad-minded and constructive approach and his instinct for compromise, he gave service of great value to his community and to the Commonwealth. 
In 1898 Queen Victoria had personally invested the Aga Khan with the KCIE. He was appointed GCIE (1902), GCSI (1911), GCVO (1923), and GCMG (1955), thus receiving his last decoration from Elizabeth II. He held also the Brilliant Star of Zanzibar (first class, 1900), and (1901) the royal Prussian order of the Crown (first class, which he returned on the outbreak of war in 1914). In 1934 he was sworn of the privy council, the first Indian, other than members of the judicial committee, to receive this honour. He was an honorary LLD of Cambridge (1911). In 1916 George V gave him an honour which he particularly valued, a salute of eleven guns, and the rank and precedence for life of a first-class ruling chief of the Bombay presidency. 
The Aga Khan died at Versoix, near Geneva, on 11 July 1957, and was buried at Aswan. He nominated as his successor as Aga Khan IV his grandson Karim ('b'. 1936), elder son of Aly Khan. 


@@@@@


doc= 30346


Agate, James Evershed (1877-1947), drama critic, was born at Pendleton, Lancashire, on 9 September 1877, the eldest of the five sons and one daughter of Charles James Agate (1832-1909), cotton manufacturer's agent, and his wife, Eulalie Julia Young, daughter of a widowed piano teacher. Although generally regarded during his lifetime as the writer from Manchester who had conquered London in the 'man from the provinces' manner of Arnold Bennett and J. B. Priestley, Agate was not of Lancashire ancestry. His father came originally from Horsham, Sussex, and his mother was a Yorkshirewoman who had been educated in Paris and Heidelberg and studied the piano under a pupil of Chopin. The young Agates were taught to speak French fluently and to appreciate the fine points of music and the arts. Their father was chairman of the committee of the Unitarian chapel which the family attended; James in his teens was its secretary. Charles Agate was also a keen theatregoer who had once run away from home to see Macready. He encouraged his children to visit good plays and took James to see Sarah Bernhardt perform; she became for the child the model of theatrical performance ever after; 'Her acting on that evening' he said later, 'unveiled for me the ecstasy of the body and the torture of the mind' (Harding, 19). His only sister, May, later studied under her in Paris. 
Agate was educated at Giggleswick, where he topped his class in English, Latin, history, and French, and at Manchester grammar school. Oxford or Cambridge would have suited him perfectly but he left school in 1896 to enter into his father's business, learned to weave, and sold grey cloth for seventeen years. Although his mind was more concerned with the arts than with the cotton trade, he was described as 'a fascinating mixture of the intellectual and the philistine' (Hobson, Knightley, and Russell, 88). From boyhood Agate had been a 'cricket fanatic' (Harding, 7); he later liked to live in Derbyshire, to dress like a sporting farmer, and to own and to exhibit show hackneys, a pastime which he continued for much of his life. 
A passionate theatregoer, Agate in January 1906 wrote a letter on the subject to the 'Daily Dispatch' in Manchester. The editor printed it and asked for more, resulting in a weekly drama criticism column. After a year he joined the 'Manchester Guardian' team of critics which included C. E. Montague and Allan Monkhouse, and under their guidance he 'quickly mastered the tricks of the trade' of journalism (Harding, 37). 
During the First World War, with his experience of horses, Agate was sent as a captain in the Army Service Corps to buy hay in the south of France. This duty gave some leisure for writing. His first book, in the form of letters, 'L. of C. (Lines of Communication)', came out in 1917 and was followed by a book of essays on the theatre, 'Buzz, Buzz!' (1918). In his early twenties he had written a play called 'The After Years' which was less than successfully realized, as was his later fictional output of another play and three novels, which have been described as 'of small import' (Harding, 25). 
Agate married in France in 1918 Sidonie Josephine Edmee Mourret-Castillon, daughter of a rich landowner from Salon. The marriage lasted only a short time. From then Agate was openly homosexual in his relationships. 
After his return to London, Agate bought, with characteristic caprice, a general store in South Lambeth Road, a business venture which rapidly failed. But he was finding success as a critic. In 1921 Filson Young appointed him to the chair of dramatic criticism on the 'Saturday Review', a covetable post once held by G. B. Shaw, whose contributions had first fired in Agate the ambition to become a drama critic. The talent that he displayed won him, in 1923, the theatre critic's post on the 'Sunday Times', which he held until his death. He was also drama critic for the British Broadcasting Corporation from 1925 to 1932. 
Although his fiction was unsuccessful, Agate set his hand to writing about himself, and aspired to be the diarist of his epoch. In twelve years from 1935 he wrote nine volumes under the title 'Ego', the last appearing posthumously. They record chiefly the books, plays, personalities, club talk, and bohemian life of the time. But Agate had no interest in politics or social problems and this limited what might have been a wonderful landscape of London life. 
Agate never lost his sense of himself as a character bestriding his own stage. Unashamedly the egoist, he played the part with a nice mixture of humour and panache. He had a 'feverish love of a daily crisis' (Hobson, Knightley, and Russell, 143). Editors generally were tolerant of his extravagance and exhibitionist nature, although doubts crept in as his reputation as 'another Oscar Wilde' spread (ibid., 150). In 1945 Lord Kemsley, proprietor of the 'Sunday Times', threatened to replace him with a 'married man' when he learned, belatedly, of his homosexuality (ibid., 276). 
Agate was an 'immensely prolific' ('The Times', 7 June 1947, 6) and at times inspired critic, writing with passion and scholarship. His 'Sunday Times' articles were described as being in themselves 'wonderful performances' (Hobson, Knightley, and Russell, 146). He was a hedonist in the best sense, seeking pleasure of the senses to the end; but his hedonism was mitigated by discernment. He died at his home at Queen Alexandra Mansions, Grape Street, Holborn, London, on 6 June 1947 and was buried at Hendon Park cemetery, Mill Hill, on 11 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 30347


Agnew, Sir James Willson (1815-1901), medical practitioner and politician in Tasmania, born at Ballyclare, co. Antrim, Ireland, on 2 October 1815, was the son of James William Agnew, a physician, and Ellen Stewart, of Larne, co. Antrim. Educated for the medical profession at University College, London, at Paris, and at Glasgow, he qualified as MRCS in 1838 and graduated MD from Glasgow in 1839. That September he sailed for Sydney, Australia, on the 'Wilmot', arriving on 26 January 1840. He spent a few months practising in Sydney, and planned to take up land at Port Phillip, but accepted an invitation to become private secretary to Sir John Franklin, then governor of Van Diemen's Land. When he reached Hobart Town the post had been filled, but on 24 December 1841 he was appointed assistant surgeon on the agricultural establishment; in July 1842 he moved to Saltwater Creek on the Tasman peninsula as assistant surgeon. On 28 February 1845 he was transferred to be assistant surgeon (and later colonial surgeon) at Hobart Town, with charge of the general hospital. Concurrently he established a wide private practice, which laid the foundation of his influence among the people of Hobart Town. On 27 April 1846 he married Louisa Mary (died 1868), the daughter of Major J. Fraser of the 78th highlanders. Of their six children, two sons and a daughter survived. 
Agnew was one of the founders of the Tasmanian (Royal) Society, was elected to its council in 1851, and was honorary secretary from 1861 to 1881 and again from 1884 to 1894. He also served on the boards of the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery and the Hobart Public Library, as president of the racing club, and as chairman of the botanical garden. 
In 1877 Agnew gave up his practice, and at the general election of July that year entered the legislative council as member for Hobart. He served in three short ministries led by P. O. Fysh, W. R. Giblin, and W. L. Crowther between August 1877 and February 1880, when he resigned in order to visit Melbourne and then England. His first wife had died on 10 March 1868, and on 19 November 1878 he married Blanche, the daughter of William Legge, of Tipperary, the widow of Revd Dr Parsons of Hobart Town; they had no children, and she died on 16 December 1891. 
After returning from England in 1881, Agnew re-entered the legislative council in 1884. From 8 March 1886 to 29 March 1887 he was premier; he was also chief secretary until 1 March. His tenure of office was marked by educational reform, in which, as a member of the council of education and of the university, he was particularly interested. In 1891 he left the colony for a long visit to England; on his return to Tasmania in 1894 he was made KCMG. In 1899 he was disabled by illness, and he died at his home in Hobart Town on 8 November 1901. He was accorded a public funeral and buried at the Cornelian Bay cemetery, Hobart Town. Known as Good Doctor Agnew, he made material contributions to the cultural and social as well as the political life of Tasmania. 


@@@@@


doc= 30348


Sir William Agnew, first baronet (1825-1910), born on 20 October 1825 in Salford, established Agnews as a leading international firm. A second son, Thomas [ii], born in 1827, was followed by two more sons and four daughters. The elder Thomas, an ardent Swedenborgian, sent his sons William and Thomas to the Revd J. H. Smithson's Swedenborgian school in Salford; adhering to their father's faith, with its emphasis on good works, they absorbed its mixture of scientific, pantheistic, and theosophic doctrines. 
After an apprenticeship to his father in 1840, William and his brother Thomas became his partners in 1850; the firm traded as Thos. Agnew & Sons from Exchange Street from 1826 until the Manchester branch closed in 1932, when it became a limited company. Surviving records show that stock was valued at $27,000 in 1851, of which $5700 was in pictures, $700 in watercolours, with $16,000 owed the firm; this compares with $7000 of stock held in 1824. The firm traded chiefly in British contemporary artists such as Daniel Maclise, J. R. Herbert, and Clarkson Stanfield; J. M. W. Turner's 'View from Barnes Terrace' (National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC) was listed at $252, and was the first of many Turners to pass through Agnews; works by William Etty, T. S. Cooper, Sir Edwin Landseer, J. B. Pyne, and William Westall also feature. Agnews catered primarily for the newly wealthy self-made northern and midland industrialists such as Joseph Gillott, T. Horrocks Miller, Sir William Armstrong, George Holt, and John Graham of Glasgow. 
A London branch was opened at 5 Waterloo Place in 1860. Stock held in June 1861 totalled $61,000, comprising $14,000 in pictures, $6300 in watercolours, with engravings and money owed making up the balance. Agnews began bidding at Christies on a considerable scale; in one month (May 1861), for example, they spent $2400 at the auction room. Thomas [ii] may have initiated the London move, but he lacked his elder brother's wider interests, preferring to concentrate on money-making, and left over $500,000 on his death in 1883, much of it made outside picture dealing. In 1875 the firm moved to 39 (now 43) Old Bond Street, formerly an old coaching yard, where it built its present spacious galleries. 
After the elder Thomas's retirement in 1861 (he died on 24 March 1871 at his home, Fairhope, Eccles Old Road, Pendleton, Salford), William Agnew became the guiding force of the firm. Sir Geoffrey Agnew described his great-grandfather's exuberant vitality, immense ambition, strong will, occasional ruthlessness, and highest probity. An imposing man, William Agnew was a born actor (he always bid at auction in a top hat) and a most persuasive salesman; he was decisive and often bought ahead of the taste of his day. His business acumen was tempered by a personal charm and simplicity that endeared him to many, including the artists, musicians, politicians, and clients whom he frequently entertained either at Summer Hill, Salford, or at Great Stanhope Street, London. 
Among William Agnew's coups was the purchase in 1884 from the Leigh Court sale of Hogarth's 'Shrimp Girl' and 'Miss Fenton' for the National Gallery. Earlier, on 6 May 1876, he had bought from the Wynn Ellis sale Gainsborough's 'Duchess of Devonshire' (1783) for $10,505. Stolen later that month, it was not recovered until March 1901, when it was purchased by J. Pierpont Morgan. Holman Hunt benefited from William's purchase in 1873 of 'The Shadow of Death' for $10,500, including the engraving rights (which recouped much of the initial outlay from sales of the engraving); in 1883 Agnew presented it to Manchester City Art Gallery. He discovered the young Fred Walker in 1864, and presented 'The Harbour of Refuge' (1872) to the Tate Gallery in 1893, in memory of his wife, Mary Kenworthy, whom he had married on 25 March 1851; she died on 2 September 1892. John Millais, Frederic Leighton, and Edward Burne-Jones he treated in an avuncular style, and he encouraged his client Henry Tate to found the Tate Gallery. 
William and Mary Agnew had four sons and two daughters. Their eldest son, George William (1852-1941), and their second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 30349


Agnew, Sir William Gladstone (1898-1960), naval officer, was born in London on 2 December 1898, the fifth son of the six children of (Charles) Morland Agnew (1855-1931) ['see under 'Agnew family], art dealer, and his wife, Evelyn Mary (died 1932), daughter of William Naylor, of Paddington Green, London. He was the grandson of Sir William Agnew, first baronet. He joined the Royal Navy in September 1911 and was at Dartmouth when war broke out in 1914. He was sent to sea as a midshipman, serving in the battleships 'Glory' and 'Royal Oak' and in the destroyer 'Skilful'. After the war his appointments included the royal yacht and in 1924 he went to the 'Excellent', the gunnery school at Portsmouth, to qualify as a specialist in gunnery. During these years he played rugby football regularly for the navy as well as cricket, hockey, and tennis. On 24 April 1930 he married Patricia Caroline (died 1977), younger daughter of Colonel Alfred William Bewley CMG of Campanella, Alverstoke, Hampshire. They had no children. 
Agnew's first ship as a specialist officer was the cruiser 'Durban' and in 1931 he was appointed gunnery officer of the battleship 'Queen Elizabeth', flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet. He was promoted commander in 1932 and captain in 1937. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Agnew was given command of the armed merchant cruiser 'Corfu' and in October 1940 was transferred to the cruiser 'Aurora'. Over the next year and a half Agnew's name and that of his ship were to become famous as part of the 'short but brilliant career' of force K (Roskill, 173). After the 'Aurora' had a share in the sinking of a German cruiser, a destroyer, and two supply ships, in the summer of 1941, Agnew was sent to the Mediterranean as the senior officer of a group consisting of the 'Aurora', her sister ship the 'Penelope', and the destroyers 'Lance' and 'Lively' -- force K. This move was quickly justified. On the night of 8 November force K intercepted a strongly escorted enemy supply convoy of seven ships bound for north Africa. Agnew had made carefully thought-out plans for just such an encounter and had discussed his tactics in detail with the other commanding officers. As a result he was able to stalk the convoy undetected and took the enemy completely by surprise. All the supply ships and one of their escorting destroyers were sunk without damage to force K. As he left his ship on return to harbour Agnew was spontaneously cheered by the officers and men of the 'Penelope' -- a rare tribute. A great leader, he was also remembered by colleagues for his friendly and modest manner. For his services in this action he was appointed CB in 1941. 
Further sorties by force K led to the sinking of three fuel tankers. All these successes created a critical fuel situation for the German air force in north Africa and had an important effect on axis plans. In December the 'Aurora' struck a mine but Agnew got her safely back to England after temporary repairs in Malta. Although force K was not reformed, at the end of 1942 the 'Aurora' formed part of the naval force in operation Torch, the allied invasion of north Africa, and from then on was constantly in action. It was a tribute to Agnew and the 'Aurora' that the ship was chosen to carry George VI from Tripoli to Malta for the royal visit to the island in June 1943. For this service the king appointed Agnew CVO. 
The 'Aurora' played a full part in the allied invasions of Italy and Sicily, carrying out a great many bombardments in support of the landings. In October, however, she was severely damaged in an air attack in the eastern Mediterranean. Agnew took his damaged ship into Alexandria and was ordered home to take command of the 'Excellent'. He had been appointed DSO in April 1943 and subsequently received a bar (1944). 
After the war, in March 1946, Agnew was appointed to command the battleship 'Vanguard'. He was promoted rear-admiral in January 1947 and remained in command for the royal visit to South Africa. On conclusion of the tour he was promoted KCVO. In August 1947 Agnew was appointed director of personal services at the Admiralty, where he remained until October 1949. He notably complained while in this position that the developing welfare state in Britain made life in the services less attractive. Civilian life had become 'a free and easy Tom Tiddler's ground on which he (i.e. the sailor) would be advised to stake a claim at the earliest possible moment' (Grove, 45). In January 1950 he retired from the navy at his own request, and later in the year was promoted to vice-admiral on the retired list. 
For the next three years Agnew was the general secretary of the National Playing Fields Association and re-established this organization after its hiatus during the war. He became involved in local government and the Christian stewardship campaign in his local parish. He died at his home, Glentinion, Palmerston Way, Alverstoke, Gosport, Hampshire, on 12 July 1960. His funeral was held at Alverstoke on 16 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 30350


Aide, (Charles) Hamilton (1826-1906), novelist and poet, born in the rue St Honore, Paris, on 4 November 1826, was the younger son of George Aida (died 1830), a diplomatist and the son of an Armenian merchant settled in Constantinople, and his wife, Georgina Collier (died 1875), second daughter of Admiral Sir George Collier. Aide's youth was marked by the deaths of his cosmopolitan father in a duel in Paris, when Aide was only four years old, and of his brother Frederick (1823-31), killed in an accident in Boulogne the following year. 
Taken by his mother to England, Aide was educated privately at East Sheen and Greenwich until the age of sixteen, when he was sent to the University of Bonn. In 1846 he obtained a commission in the British army, serving with the 85th light infantry until 1853, when he retired with the rank of captain. After a period of foreign travel he settled in England, living chiefly at Lyndhurst in the New Forest with his mother until her death at Southsea, Hampshire, on 12 October 1875. He then took rooms in Queen Anne's Gate, London, where he entertained prominent figures in the British and French social and artistic worlds. 
Aide, who spoke and wrote French as easily as English, devoted himself to society, music, art, and literature. In 1856 he published his first volume of poems, 'Eleanore, and other Poems'. His first novel, 'Rita', also appeared in 1856 and enjoyed greater popularity than his poetry, running to four editions within nine years and being translated into French in 1862. Aide capitalized on his success, producing 'Confidences: by the Author of 'Rita'' in 1859, which also sold well. His novels were light romances set in fashionable society and were simply written, under an obvious French influence. His frequent use of first-person female narrators led some early reviewers to believe that he was a woman. In 1868 he serialized a novel, 'The Marstons', in 'Fraser's Magazine', and he was to write a further fifteen novels over the next forty years, including 'Penruddock' (1873), an autobiographical novel containing revealing sections on the protagonist's 'vexed relation with his mother' (Sutherland, 13) and his experiences in the army. Also of interest is 'A Voyage of Discovery' (1892), which contains a depiction of American society that angered many transatlantic readers. 
The 'Biograph and Review' observed that 'Certainly the combination of poet, novelist, dramatist and musical composer is an unusual one, and exhibits Mr Aide as a man of exceptional powers and accomplishments'. In the 1870s Aide had turned his attention to the stage, and 'Philip', a romantic drama in four acts, was produced by Henry Irving at the Lyceum in London in February 1874, Irving taking the title role. A year later, 'A Nine Days' Wonder', adapted from Aide's simultaneously published novel for copyright reasons, was staged at the Court Theatre by John Hare. It was compared to French drama and praised for its 'neatness of construction rare in English art' (Knight, 46). 
Meanwhile, Aide continued to write novels and poetry. 'Poet and Peer' (1880) and 'Introduced to Society' (1884) confirmed his reputation as a writer of light popular fiction. In 1882 he produced a collection of poetry, 'Songs without Music: Rhymes and Recitations', which was enlarged in 1889. Many poems appeared in popular Victorian anthologies, and he set many to music. 'The Danube River', 'The Spanish Boat Song', and 'Brown Eyes and Blue Eyes' were among his best-known songs. A collection of seven one-act plays entitled 'We are Seven: Half Hours on the Stage, Grave and Gay' appeared in 1902, and his final collection of poems, 'Past and Present', in 1903. 
Aide died, unmarried, at 28 Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, London, on 13 December 1906 and was buried in the churchyard of All Souls, South Ascot, Berkshire. A novel, 'The Chivalry of Harold', was published posthumously in 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 30351


Aikman, George (1830-1905), painter and engraver, was born in Warriston Close, off the High Street, Edinburgh, on 20 May 1830, the ninth child of George Aikman, engraver, and Alison Mackay (died in or before 1859), his wife. His father had been an engraver for William Home Lizars but established his own business in 1825 where he continued the Lizars tradition by producing all the plates and illustrations for the seventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. Many of these were drawn and engraved by his son George, who was educated privately and then sent to the Royal High School, Edinburgh. Thereafter he was apprenticed to his father and, after a journeyman period during which he worked in London and Manchester, he joined his father's firm as a partner. During his apprenticeship, Aikman attended classes at the Trustees' Academy, then under the directorship of Robert Scott Lauder. Much later, between 1868 and 1871, he attended the life school of the Royal Scottish Academy. He first exhibited there in 1850 and thereafter became a regular exhibitor, his subjects ranging between landscapes, architectural studies, figure studies, and portraits. On 2 December 1859 Aikman married Elizabeth Barnett ('c'.1833-1912) of Greenock and they had two sons and three daughters. 
In 1872 Aikman abandoned his business as an engraver and turned his full attention to landscape painting in oils and watercolours. He worked mostly in Scotland, the north of England, and Warwickshire. Concentrating on moorland and woodland scenes, these oil paintings tend to be sombre in colour, for example 'Scotch Firs' (exh. RA, 1878). He also painted harbour and coastal subjects in both oils and watercolours. These, with their use of silvery grey tones, show the influence of the Dutch painters of The Hague school. Aikman was a founder member of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour in 1878 and three years later he was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy. In addition to his landscapes, Aikman was also deeply interested in the architecture of Edinburgh and he produced a series of finely worked drawings of the threatened buildings of the old town, for example 'Bakehouse Close, Canongate' (Edinburgh City Art Collections). 
Although Aikman first received recognition as a painter he also worked extensively as a printmaker. For most of his life he etched, and in this medium produced fine portraits, for example 'Portrait of Thomas Carlyle' (1889; Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh). He also experimented with mezzotints, for example, 'Portrait of Lord Blackburn after Daniel Macnee' (1888; Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh). In addition, Aikman produced 'A Round of the Links: the Golf Greens of Scotland' (1893) with twenty etchings after John Smart, and he illustrated Thomas Chapman and John Southesk's book 'The Midlothian Esks and their Associations from the Source to the Sea' (1895) with a series of full-plate etchings and smaller text illustrations. Through his father and from his own study, Aikman acquired a wide-ranging knowledge of engravers and engraving and he contributed to various publications on the subject as well as to the 'Art Journal'. 
Aikman died at home, 22 Scotland Street, Edinburgh, on 8 January 1905 and was buried in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, on 11 January. He was survived by his wife and family. 


@@@@@


doc= 30352


Ainger, Alfred (1837-1904), writer and Church of England clergyman, born at 10 Doughty Street, London, on 9 February 1837, was the youngest of the four children of Alfred Ainger (1797-1859) and his first wife, Marianne Jagger (died 1839) of Liverpool. His father, an architect of scientific tastes, who designed the first University College Hospital in London (demolished and rebuilt 1900-06), was a Unitarian of Huguenot descent. His mother, who was musically gifted, died two years after her son Alfred's birth; his father married again and had a second family. After attending University College School the younger Alfred went in 1849 to Joseph King's boarding-school at Carlton Hill, London, where he fell under the two potent influences of Charles Dickens and Frederick Denison Maurice. His schoolmaster took him to hear Maurice preach, and he turned from his father's Unitarianism to the Church of England. Dickens's sons were Ainger's schoolfellows at King's school, and with them he visited their father. Dickens early discovered the boy's dramatic gift, and for several years Ainger was his favourite dramatic pupil, acting with him and Mark Lemon in the amateur performances which Dickens organized at his home, Tavistock House. At sixteen Ainger went to King's College, London, where Maurice was professor both of divinity and of English literature. Literature now absorbed him, particularly the writings of Charles Lamb and George Crabbe. Devotion to Shakespeare manifested itself early and in 1855 he became the first president of the college's Shakespeare Society. In October 1856 he matriculated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, with a view to a legal career. Henry Latham and Leslie Stephen were tutors of his college, and Henry Fawcett -- soon to be Ainger's close friend -- was elected a fellow in the year of Ainger's entrance. At Cambridge, Ainger became the leading spirit of a literary circle which included Hugh Reginald Haweis, Horace Smith, and A. W. Ward. He was a foremost contributor to 'The Lion', a short-lived undergraduate magazine (3 nos., 1857-8) which Haweis edited. His Shakespearian criticism and his skit there on Thomas Babington Macaulay attested to his literary gifts and brilliant humour. Also at Cambridge he came to know Alexander Macmillan, at that time a bookseller in Trinity Street and afterwards the famous London publisher. 
Ainger's health allowed him to do no more than take the ordinary law examination (in June 1859). He graduated BA in 1860 and MA in 1865. After his father's death in November 1859, and partly on the advice of his friends, Leslie Stephen among them, he took holy orders. In 1860 he was ordained deacon and soon after became curate to Richard Haslehurst, vicar of Alrewas, in Staffordshire. In 1863 he was ordained priest, and from 1864 to 1866 was assistant master in the Collegiate School at Sheffield. In the autumn of 1865 he competed successfully for the readership at the Temple, London, and held the post for twenty-seven years. 
Both Ainger's sisters married early, the younger, Marianne, to a German named Wiss, and the elder, Adeline, to Dr Roscow of Sandgate, who died in 1865. Shortly after Ainger's resettlement in London (1867) he experienced the greatest sorrow of his life at the sudden death of Adeline, his widowed sister. The shock aged him prematurely and turned his hair white. He became the guardian of his sister's four children -- two girls and two boys -- and devoted himself to their care. In 1876 he moved to Hampstead, where he lived with his two nieces, Ada and Margaret Roscow, and where he became friends with the artist of 'Punch', George Du Maurier. That companionship provided him with a definite field for his wit, and he constantly suggested the jests which Du Maurier illustrated. The poet Tennyson, and Charles John Vaughan, the master of the Temple from 1869, also formed part of his circle, and he was elected a member of the Literary Club, which had been founded by Samuel Johnson. 
Ainger's own position in literature became established by his publications. At twenty-two he contributed his first successful article, 'Books and their uses', to an early number of 'Macmillan's Magazine' (1, 1859-60, 110). He took the whimsical pseudonym Doubleday (doubled A). Eleven other articles appeared under the same friendly auspices between 1871 and 1896. From 1900 to 1904 -- the last years of his life -- he was a regular contributor to 'The Pilot', a weekly journal edited by D. C. Lathbury. 
Ainger's chief writings dealt with the life and work of Charles Lamb. His monograph on Lamb was published in 1882, in the 'English Men of Letters' series (rev. and enlarged, 1888). There followed editions of 'Lamb's Essays' (1883), 'Lamb's Poems, Plays, and Miscellaneous Essays' (1884), and 'Lamb's Letters' (1888; new edn, 1904), the last the only collection which at the time of publication could lay claim to completeness. His life of Lamb and his edition of Lamb's writings were carefully researched, but he omitted passages from the collection of writings which jarred with his view of Lamb's character. He contributed the articles on Charles and Mary Lamb, Tennyson, and George Du Maurier to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. In a remark which became famous he summed up, in a speech at a dinner of the contributors (8 July 1897), the dictionary's character in the motto, 'No flowers, by request'. Three years later Ainger was one of forty writers present at a dinner hosted by the prince of Wales to celebrate completion of the dictionary. The prince, who was not a great reader and had little in common with his guests, took to scanning the table for more interesting company. According to Max Beerbohm the prince is said to have spotted Ainger and asked Sidney Lee, the dictionary's editor, 'Who's the little parson? Vy is 'he' here?', to which Lee replied that Ainger was a very great authority on Lamb. 'This was too much for the prince. He put down his knife and fork in stupefaction; a pained outcry of protest heaved from him: 'On 'lamb'!'' (S. N. Behrman, 'Conversations with Max', 1960, quoted in J. Gross, ed., 'The New Oxford Book of Literary Anecdotes', 2006, 208). 
As a lecturer on literary subjects Ainger was popular with cultivated audiences throughout the country, and from 1889 he frequently lectured at the Royal Institution; his titles included 'True and false humour in literature', 'Euphuism, past and present', and 'The three stages of Shakespeare's art'. In 1885 the University of Glasgow conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD, and he was made an honorary fellow of his college, Trinity Hall. 
During his last twenty years Ainger's influence as a preacher grew steadily. In 1887 he became a canon of Bristol. He was appointed select preacher of Oxford in 1893, and in the same year bad health compelled him to resign his readership at the Temple. He consequently accepted the living of St Edward's at Cambridge. Again illness speedily forced him to retire, and he spent two months travelling in Egypt and Greece. In June 1894, on Lord Rosebery's recommendation, he was appointed master of the Temple in succession to Charles Vaughan. Subsequently his duties of preacher became the main concern of his life. In 1895 he was made honorary chaplain, in 1896 chaplain-in-ordinary, to Queen Victoria, and in 1901 chaplain-in-ordinary to Edward VII. His sermons in the Temple were marked by beauty of language and by a quiet, practical piety, impatient of excess. Neither high-church nor low-church, he professed an unaggressive, moderate evangelicalism. 
In 1903 Ainger's health deteriorated after an attack of influenza, and at the end of the year he resigned his canonry at Bristol. He died of pneumonia on 8 February 1904 at Darley Abbey, near Derby, the home of his younger niece, Ada Roscow, who in 1896 had married an old friend, Walter Evans. He was buried in the churchyard of Darley Abbey. 
Apart from the works already mentioned and articles in periodicals, Ainger was the author of a volume of sermons (1870), a selection of Tennyson's works for the young (1891), a biographical preface to an edition of Thomas Hood's poems (1893, 1897), an introduction to an edition of John Galt's 'Annals of the Parish' (1895), and a monograph on Crabbe (1903) in the 'English Men of Letters' series. After his death a volume of sermons, 'The Gospel of Human Life' (1904), and 'Lectures and Essays' (2 vols., 1905) were edited by H. C. Beeching, dean of Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 30353


Ainley, Henry Hinchliffe (1879-1945), actor, was born at Morley, near Leeds, on 21 August 1879, the only son and eldest child of Richard Ainley, cloth finisher, and his wife, Ada Hinchliffe. After education at the church school of St Peter's, Morley, he became clerk in a bank at Sheffield, where he took part in amateur dramatics. When George Alexander and his company were on tour in 1899 young Ainley was permitted to 'walk on'. He then joined Frank Benson's company, making his first London appearance at the Lyceum Theatre in 1900 when he played Gloucester in 'Henry V'. He was still a Bensonian when Alexander saw him as Lorenzo in 'The Merchant of Venice' and chose him for Paolo in 'Paolo and Francesca' by Stephen Phillips. So perfectly fitted was Ainley, both in looks and voice -- from which the north country accent had gone during his training under Benson -- that he became famous on the first night, 6 March 1902. His manner at that time was gently, though eagerly, romantic -- in complete contrast to the masterfulness that he afterwards acquired. 
In 1903 Ainley went to the United States and made his first appearance in New York as leading man to Maude Adams, playing, among other parts, the Revd Gavin Dishart in 'The Little Minister'. That year he married Suzanne (1875-1924), actress, daughter of Richard Sheldon of New York. The marriage ended in divorce. In 1904 he returned to London to appear as Lancelot in Israel Zangwill's 'Merely Mary Ann' and in 1905 he paid a short visit to Paris, where he was seen as Romeo in the balcony scene at the Opera Comique. In 1906 he returned to the St James's Theatre to play Orlando in 'As You Like It' to the Rosalind of Lilian Braithwaite, and he later joined the Vedrenne-Barker Company at the Royal Court Theatre, appearing as Orestes in Euripides' 'Electra' and as Hippolytus. He gave a fine performance as Cassio in the production of 'Othello' by Lewis Waller in May 1906. He was for several periods in the company of Sir Herbert Tree at His Majesty's Theatre, where in 1910 he took part in six plays during the Shakespeare festival. 
It was in a production by Harley Granville Barker at the Savoy Theatre in 1912 that Ainley made one of his biggest and most original Shakespearian successes as Malvolio in 'Twelfth Night', giving the character an altogether new power and appeal. He also appeared memorably as Leontes in 'The Winter's Tale'. Another remarkable development in the direction of strong character was his creation (1913) of Ilam Carve in Arnold Bennett's 'The Great Adventure', which ran for nearly two years at the Kingsway Theatre. Another notable character part which he made his own was Joseph Quinney in H. A. Vachell's 'Quinneys'' at the Haymarket Theatre in 1915. In 1916 he joined the army with a commission in the Royal Garrison Artillery and served in England, France, and Italy. In 1917 he married Elaine Fearon, daughter of J. Willis Titus; this marriage was also dissolved. He was demobilized in 1919 and went into management at the St James's Theatre, opening as Fedya in 'Reparation', an adaptation of Tolstoy's 'The Living Corpse', and playing Mark Antony in a revival of 'Julius Caesar' (1920). At His Majesty's Theatre in 1923 he gave a superb performance in the title part of J. E. Flecker's 'Hassan'. At the Prince's Theatre in 1926 he played Macbeth to Sybil Thorndike's Lady Macbeth. After two years' illness he returned in July 1929 to play one of the most successful of all of his characters, as James Fraser in St John Ervine's 'The First Mrs Fraser' at the Haymarket Theatre. In 1930 he appeared as Hamlet in a revival that was chosen for a royal command performance in the same year. At the Westminster Theatre in 1931 he did excellent work as Dr Knox in James Bridie's 'The Anatomist' and in 1932 as the archangel in Bridie's 'Tobias and the Angel'. 
After an absence from the stage of six years, caused by illness, Ainley gave a single performance in 1938 at the Vaudeville Theatre of a scene from 'Hassan'. After 1915 he appeared in a number of films, mostly theatrically conceived adaptations of Victorian novels and plays, but he made no deep impression in that medium. His broadcasts, on the other hand, were specially preserved by the British Broadcasting Corporation as examples of fine diction. No other actor of his time was better equipped for greatness than Ainley. In the romantic charm of his early performances and in the forceful but appealing character-creations of his later years he remained unexcelled. His Hamlet and Macbeth were not wholly satisfactory in construction and relation to the other characters, but they had magnificent moments. Whatever the type of play, Ainley's personality gave distinction to every part he took. 
Henry Ainley had four children, two daughters and two sons, the elder of whom, Richard (1910-1956), also proved himself an actor of high ability. Henry Ainley died in London on 31 October 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 30354


Aird, Sir John, first baronet (1833-1911), civil engineering contractor, was born on 3 December 1833 in Greenwich, the second son of eight children of John Aird (1800-1876), contractor, and Agnes (died 1869), daughter of Charles Bennett of Lambeth. His grandfather Robert Aird went south from Fortrose, Ross-shire, early in the nineteenth century, and worked for Hugh McIntosh, the civil engineering contractor. After Robert's death in an earth fall on the Regent's Canal works, John Aird senior continued to work for McIntosh until 1827. McIntosh had a large number of pipe-laying contracts for the metropolitan gas companies, and this probably helped Aird obtain a position with the Phoenix Gas Company, initially as an inspector and subsequently as manager of their works in Greenwich. During the 1840s he took an increasing number of private contracts, and in 1848 left the Phoenix Gas Company which, however, continued to provide him with pipe-laying work. John Aird junior, who was privately educated in Greenwich and Southgate, joined his father when he was eighteen; his elder brother, Charles, was also part of the firm, which became known as John Aird & Sons. Aird senior had obtained contracts for pipe-laying and building work for the Great Exhibition of 1851, and one of Aird junior's first tasks was to assist in its demolition and the re-erection of the Crystal Palace at Sydenham. 
On 6 September 1855 Aird married Sarah (1835-1909), daughter of Benjamin Smith, a Deptford wharfinger. They had two sons and seven daughters. Three of the daughters were to marry into families with civil engineering links. The eldest, Sarah, married Basil Pym Ellis who eventually became a partner in the firms of Aird & Sons and Lucas Brothers. Jessie, the second, married George Neill Abernethy, and Kate, the third, Alfred William Thomas Bean. In the 1850s the activities of John Aird & Sons expanded rapidly. Building on mains laying experience for the east London waterworks in the previous decade the Airds obtained contracts for the new waterworks of the Southwark and Vauxhall, Grand Junction, and west Middlesex water companies near Hampton in the 1850s. On the continent, where British-owned utility companies were often involved, the Airds began mains laying in the Netherlands, before building waterworks in Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Hamburg, Altona, Schiedam, Brunswick, Riga, Archangel, and Moscow. In Copenhagen, in addition to the waterworks, John Aird senior built the first major outfall sewer, which nearly bankrupted the firm. The Airds formed a partnership with Charles Fox and Thomas Crompton to establish the Berlin Water Company. Aird's brother-in-law Henry Gill was the engineer. Alexander, John Aird's younger brother, was the contractor's agent on many of these schemes, and remained in Germany for forty years. 
The firm continued to work on gasworks contracts throughout the 1850s. John Aird senior took shares in the Crystal Palace Gas Company, whose works were built in 1854; Charles increasingly took responsibility for this side of the family's business. John Aird junior worked on a variety of schemes at this time, including South Staffordshire waterworks, Berlin waterworks, Palermo gasworks, and contracts in Ottawa, Brazil, and Singapore. 
In the 1860s the Airds began railway contracting. In the Thames Valley Railway they took an entrepreneurial role with nearly 90 per cent of the share capital. They also became increasingly involved with other contractors. In addition to waterworks schemes at Calcutta, with Brassey and Wythes, and works with Peto and Betts in Cagliari, they partnered Sir John Kelk in the construction of Millwall docks (1863-8), which they helped finance. Their most lasting connection was with Charles Thomas and Thomas Lucas, who shared their premises in Belvedere Road, Lambeth, in the 1860s. 
The Lucas brothers had begun their careers with Sir Samuel Morton Peto before branching off on their own, particularly as building contractors. In the wake of the Overend Gurney banking failure in 1866 both Airds and Lucas Brothers were ideally placed to fill the vacuum left by the bankruptcy of many of the leading contracting firms. Between them they completed many of Peto's contracts. From 1870 the two families operated as three firms: Lucas Brothers, who carried out building works, Lucas and Aird, who carried out railway and civil engineering contracts, and John Aird & Sons, who continued to specialize in water and gas contracts. Aird took increasing responsibility within the family firm at this time, having supervised the massive Beckton gasworks contract, completed in 1870. Following his father's death the firm was reorganized. In early 1877 it was in serious financial trouble with the Nottingham and Melton contract for the Midland Railway, and Lucas Brothers had to rescue it. Charles Aird retired, leaving Aird to continue with the Lucas brothers. Although their junior in years, his strength of personality made him a dominant force within the firms. 
Over twenty years the various firms undertook more than seventy contracts, many on a grand scale, such as the Royal Albert and Tilbury docks schemes in the Port of London, Hodbarrow sea wall, works on the Midland, Metropolitan, and Great Eastern railways, including Liverpool Street Station, and an extensive railway system around Hull docks. Docks were also built at Portsmouth, Southampton, Newport, and Newhaven. They continued to build gasworks, with further extensions at Beckton, and their waterworks involvement included Thirlmere aqueduct for Manchester, part of the Elan valley aqueduct for Birmingham, and several reservoirs for the East London Waterworks Company. 
As Aird's sons became old enough they were brought into the business. The elder, John (1861-1934), joined in 1879, and became a partner in 1886. One early scheme he worked on was the 1885 Suakim-Berber military railway. The younger, Malcolm (1872-1934), followed in 1892. Members of the Lucas family had been similarly brought in. After the death of Sir Charles Thomas Lucas in 1895 the firms of Lucas Brothers and Lucas and Aird were dissolved, almost all the Lucas family having retired, and a new firm of John Aird & Co. was set up to carry on the railway and civil engineering work; Aird & Sons continued the water and gas contracts. John Aird remained very active. Nearly fifty more contracts were taken by the two Aird firms before his death. 
Aird's greatest works, for which he became a grand lord of the order of the Mejidiye in 1902, were in Egypt. In the 1890s plans for improving irrigation and control on the Nile had been frustrated by the cost. Aird offered to accept a deferred payment for the Aswan Dam and Asyut barrage, and was awarded the contract in 1898. Further contracts for raising the Aswan Dam and building the Esna barrage followed. Other large contracts were obtained at the Royal Edward Dock, Avonmouth, and finally at Tanjong Pagar docks in Singapore. This was the last major contract undertaken by the Airds. Aird suffered a stroke in 1908, and this prompted his retirement. The Singapore contract proved a financial disaster, in part due to misleading site investigations, and the firm lost around $1 million by the time the affair had been settled after Aird's death. It was left to Malcom Aird to wind the business up. 
Sir John's baronetcy, awarded on 5 March 1901, was a public recognition of his considerable achievements. His organization was, after the death of Thomas Brassey, the largest contracting firm in the country, employing 30,000 men in December 1874, and as many as 20,000 men on the Aswan Dam alone twenty years later. It had its headquarters at 37 Great George Street, London, with depots in Lambeth and Fulham, and made great use of mechanical plant with a fleet of over a hundred locomotives. Aird himself helped develop the steam navvy. 
Like many engineers of the Victorian period Aird entered politics and was MP for North Paddington in 1887-1902. He took his responsibilities seriously. Although his speeches were unremarkable he attended public functions as a matter of course and played a leading role in the public library movement in Paddington. He was the first mayor of Paddington in 1900-01. His portrait by Sidney Paget decorated the council chamber and shows him in mayoral robes with characteristic flowing beard. 
Aird's other chief interest was in the arts. He had a theatre installed at his home at 14 Hyde Park Terrace, London, which also housed his important art collection. The works included early English and Dutch painters and a large number of works by late Victorian artists, including the Pre-Raphaelites. Aird's varied interests were reflected in his membership of a large number of professional and voluntary organizations. He was elected associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1859, and member of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1887. He was a liveryman of the Needlemakers' Company, and its master 1890-92 and 1897-8. He was one of the first contractors to be appointed to the engineer and railway volunteer staff corps, being a major and subsequently honorary lieutenant-colonel. A leading freemason, he was master of the Prince of Wales Lodge, and a grand deacon. He was a member of the Junior Carlton Club. He was churchwarden at St John's, Southwick Gardens, where the Revd E. P. Anderson, who married his daughter Vida, was vicar. He was appointed to the royal commission on the depression in trade (1886), and his other chief public appointment was as commissioner of lieutenancy of the City of London. Aird retired to Wilton Park, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, where he died on 6 January 1911. He was buried in a vault alongside his wife in St Anne's Church, at Littleworth, near Dropmore, Beaconsfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 30355


Aitchison, Craigie Mason, Lord Aitchison (1882-1941), judge, was born at the manse, Erskine, Falkirk, on 26 January 1882, the second son of the Revd James Aitchison, minister of the United Presbyterian church, and his wife, Elizabeth Mason Craigie. He was educated at Falkirk high school and went with a scholarship to the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MA in 1903. He was a Vans Dunlop scholar in logic and metaphysics, and Muirhead prizeman in civil law. In 1906 he graduated as LLB with distinction. He was called to the Scottish bar in 1907 and took silk in 1923. In 1919 he married Charlotte Mary Forbes Jones (died 1970), daughter of James Jones JP, of Torwood Hall, Larbert, Stirlingshire; they had two sons, one of whom, (John Ronald) Craigie Aitchison (1926-2009), became a painter and Royal Academician. 
In 1929 Aitchison was appointed lord advocate -- the first socialist to hold that great office -- and sworn of the privy council. In 1929 he entered parliament as Labour member for the Kilmarnock division of Ayrshire; he subsequently sat from 1931 as a National Labour member, and had a distinguished career in the House of Commons. In 1933 the degree of LLD was conferred upon him by the University of Edinburgh, and in the same year he became lord justice-clerk of Scotland, with the judicial title of Lord Aitchison. The bare recital of these facts fails, however, to present a true picture of Aitchison's personality and achievements. At the bar he specialized in criminal work. It is not too much to say that he was the greatest criminal advocate in Scotland of his time. He appeared for the defence in many murder trials, and in none of them did the crown secure a verdict. His forensic eloquence, coupled with a pleasing voice and a gracious personality, was unmatched by any of his contemporaries. The cases of John Donald Merrett (1927), of the Oscar Slater appeal (1928), and of Scottish Amalgamated Silks Ltd (1932) -- all well known to Scottish lawyers -- were the highlights of his career at the bar. The Merrett case was one of alleged matricide, in which, on that charge, he secured a verdict of not proven. In the Slater appeal he succeeded in quashing a twenty-year-old conviction recorded against the accused man. The Silks case, an alleged long term fraud, lasted for thirty-three days. 
In the office of lord justice-clerk Aitchison amply justified the expectations entertained regarding him by his colleagues and friends. He was a just and merciful judge. His opinions were luminous and convincing, and they stood well with the House of Lords. Their literary form was unimpeachable. In his later years Aitchison seemed to become in appearance, manner, and personality the embodiment of the old Scottish judges whom Sir Henry Raeburn loved to paint, with their characteristic combination of massive dignity, kindly good humour, and broad humanity. With a love of art and good literature, he was liberally endowed with the gift of friendship, and his friendship was loyal and abiding. A contemporary commentator and friend wrote of him after his death, quoting what Sir Walter Scott said to Lockhart at John Ballantyne's funeral: 'I feel as if there would be less sunshine for me from this day forth' (private information, 1959). Aitchison died in Edinburgh on 2 May 1941. His wife survived him. 
Alness', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30356


Aitchison, George (1825-1910), architect, was born in London on 7 November 1825, the son of George Aitchison (1792-1861) and his wife, Maria Freeman. After education at Merchant Taylors' School, London (1835-41), he was articled in 1841 to his father, then architect to the St Katherine Dock Company. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1847, graduated BA at University College, London, in 1851, and began in 1853 an architectural tour which led to his acquaintance in Rome with George Heming Mason. Mason introduced him to Frederick Leighton. After concluding the tour with William Burges, Aitchison returned to London in 1855 and four years later he was taken into partnership by his father, to whose practice and appointment he succeeded in 1861; he subsequently became joint architect to the London and St Katherine Dock Company. Aitchison's father was reputed to have designed 'the first incombustible building of iron and brick' ('RIBA Transactions', 14, 1863-4, 107), Irongate wharf on the Thames ('c'.1845). 
As a young man, Aitchison himself was also much involved with wharves, warehouses, and offices along the Thames, notably the depository for Messrs Hubbock and the tobacco warehouse for Victoria Dock. But it was Leighton, his lifelong friend, who gave him the opportunity to design one of the most innovative houses of the Victorian period, Leighton's own house and studio in Holland Road, South Kensington (1864-6; now Leighton House), to which the Arab Hall (1877-89) was later added. Aitchison's other principal works were: the hall of the Founders' Company (1877); offices for the Royal Exchange Company, Pall Mall (1886); decorations for the apartments of the Princess Louise at Kensington Palace; the board-room of the Thames conservancy (1868), with a frieze by Leighton; and a warehouse in Mark Lane, City of London (1864), the construction of which made ingenious use of cast iron. He was examiner in architecture and the principles of ornament in the Department of Science and Art, South Kensington, and for many years district surveyor for East Wandsworth and Tooting. Aitchison was elected ARA in 1881 and RA in 1898. He acted from 1881 as lecturer, then from 1887 as professor of architecture, at the Royal Academy, a post which he resigned in 1905. From 1896 to 1899 he was president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), and during his presidency (1898) was awarded the royal gold medal. For many years he was very much part of the inner circle of the RIBA. 
As a lecturer and public speaker Aitchison was prolific, in particular at the RIBA and RA. His style was literary, discursive, and genial. And yet, over a period of half a century, there is in his lectures a manifest sense of doubt, even of despair. For decades he wrestled in public with the Victorian dilemma of style. Looking backwards and forwards at the same time, how could architects square art and science, utility and beauty? How could they serve two masters, history and progress? The fact that he could never quite admit that eclecticism -- modern materials and historic forms -- was indeed the Victorian style, makes him an appealing, and representative, figure. 
Aitchison resided and worked at 150 Harley Street, London, where he died, unmarried, on 16 May 1910. He left a little over $13,000. His RIBA portrait by Alma-Tadema (1900) catches the style of the man: scholarly, gregarious, and perhaps a little garrulous. 


@@@@@


doc= 30357


Aitken, Alexander Craig (1895-1967), mathematician, was born at Dunedin, New Zealand, on 1 April 1895, the eldest of the seven children of William Aitken and his wife, Elizabeth Towers. His grandfather Alexander Aitken had emigrated from Lanarkshire to Otago in 1868 and farmed in the neighbourhood of Dunedin. Aitken's father, one of fourteen children, left the farm to work as a grocer in Dunedin, and subsequently acquired the business. Aitken's mother was born in Wolverhampton and went to New Zealand at the age of eight. 
Aitken became head boy of Otago Boys' High School in 1912 and won first place in the entrance scholarship examination to Otago University. His most striking characteristic at this stage was a phenomenal memory, and he had not shown any special bent for mathematics. He decided on a course combining languages with mathematics, but this was soon interrupted by the outbreak of war in 1914. He enlisted as a private soldier in the New Zealand expeditionary force and reached Gallipoli in November 1915 with the 6th infantry reinforcements, five weeks before the evacuation. Subsequently he served in France and was commissioned on the field of battle. He was badly wounded in a raid during the battle of the Somme and in March 1917 was invalided home to New Zealand. Before resuming his interrupted university career he wrote an account of his wartime experiences. His continuing anguish about those experiences caused him, forty-five years later with but little revision, to publish the work as 'Gallipoli to the Somme: Recollections of a New Zealand Infantryman' (1963), which won the Hawthornden prize. In 1920 Aitken married Mary Winifred, daughter of Alfred Betts, of Nelson, New Zealand. She was a lecturer in botany at Otago University from 1916 to 1923. They had two children, a boy and a girl. 
Mathematics was at a low ebb in Otago because there was no professor until R. J. T. Bell arrived from Glasgow in 1920. This may explain why in 1920 Aitken gained only a second-class degree in mathematics, although he achieved a first class in languages and literature (Latin and French). Nevertheless he decided to pursue mathematics: after three years as a master at his old school, in 1923 he was awarded a postgraduate scholarship and went to Edinburgh University to work under E. T. Whittaker, who was greatly interested in numerical mathematics and in 1913 had founded the only mathematical laboratory in the country. Since one of Whittaker's closest friends was G. J. Lidstone, the leading actuary of his time, Aitken was given a problem of actuarial interest as his doctoral subject: the graduation or the fitting of a smooth curve to a set of points subject to statistical error. Whittaker had taken the first step towards providing the subject with a rational basis but his formula was unsuited to numerical calculation. Aitken overcame the difficulty, an achievement for which he was awarded a DSc in 1926. The rest of his life, all of which was spent in Edinburgh (except for a brief period during the Second World War, when he worked as a cryptanalyst in Hut 6 at Bletchley Park), was devoted to the closely linked disciplines of numerical mathematics, statistics, and the algebra of matrices. 
Numerical mathematics is a difficult subject to appraise since it is dependent on the characteristics of the machines or tables in use at the time. Mechanical calculating machines were in common use in industry and commerce but their cost, and not less their noise, precluded their use in a class of fifty students. Whittaker considered that a properly trained student could do nearly as well with tables. It was on this basis that Aitken took over the conduct of the laboratory. He discovered two new devices which have passed into general use: 'Aitken's greekLetterdelta-process', by which a sequence may be transformed into one more rapidly convergent; and the Neville-Aitken method in finite difference theory, by which the values of the interpolating polynomial at a series of equidistant points can be discovered without having to find the polynomial explicitly. 
In 1925 Aitken was appointed as lecturer in actuarial mathematics at Edinburgh and in 1936 he became a reader in statistics. Much of his later work belongs to statistics, and the mathematics to which it gives rise. Aitken was also interested in decimal coinage, and broadcast on the subject. He succeeded Whittaker in the Edinburgh chair of mathematics when the latter retired in 1946. He himself retired in 1965. 
Aitken was renowned for his powers of mental calculation. They were the subject of a paper by the psychologist I. M. L. Hunter, who concluded that his skill possibly exceeded that of any other person for whom precise authenticated records existed. Aitken, a violinist and close friend of the musician Sir D. F. Tovey, said that he gave roughly four times as much thought to music as to mathematics. Physically he was short and slight; he was a leading high-jumper in his youth and a keen hill walker in his Edinburgh days. 
Aitken was elected FRS in 1936 and for several terms was a vice-president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, to which he had been elected in 1925. The universities of Glasgow and New Zealand awarded him honorary degrees. He was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, and an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand and of the Faculty of Actuaries. Aitken died at 153 Morningside Drive, Edinburgh, on 3 November 1967. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30358


Aitken, William Maxwell, first Baron Beaverbrook (1879-1964), newspaper proprietor and politician, was born on 25 May 1879 at the manse, Vaughan, Maple, Ontario, Canada. He was the third son and fifth member of a family of ten children, whose father, William Cuthbert Aitken (1834-1913), was a Presbyterian minister who had emigrated from Torphichen, Linlithgowshire, to Canada in 1864. His mother was Jane (1849-1927), daughter of Joseph Noble, a prosperous storekeeper and farmer in Vaughan. In 1880 William Cuthbert Aitken received the 'call' to St James's Church, Newcastle, New Brunswick, where Max Aitken spent his boyhood. Until he was sixteen he attended the local school, where he was described as a bright but idle boy and (an epithet which he was to relish later in life) mischievous. He was also sensitive and nervous and harboured a fear of death that remained with him. If it is true that the child is the father of the man, then Aitken's later character was discernible early on: his school principal noted his ability to size him up 'so accurately that he knew exactly every weak point in my character' (Chisholm and Davie, 24). At sixteen he took the examination for Dalhousie University, but declined to sit the Latin and Greek papers and was refused entrance, which was why he later helped build up the University of New Brunswick as a rival. 
While at school Aitken did various jobs to make money: he acquired a newspaper round and then became the St John 'Daily Sun''s Newcastle correspondent, being paid a dollar a column. He sold subscriptions for the 'Sun' and founded a school newspaper, 'The Leader'. After his failure to get into university he worked in a local drugstore, but escaped from drudgery by borrowing money from a local lumberjack and moved to Chatham with the intention of qualifying as a lawyer. He was restless and energetic, and showed initiative: he became local correspondent of the 'Montreal Star' and an agent for the Great West Life insurance company; he also collected debts for a Newcastle doctor. While in Chatham he gained his first experience in politics, persuading a friend to stand for election as an alderman, but when his colleague Richard Bedford Bennett (later prime minister of Canada) left the law firm for which they both worked, Aitken was passed over for promotion. He moved to St John, still intending to become a lawyer, and sold insurance to pay his board. He then followed Bennett to Calgary, where he helped run Bennett's campaign for election to the legislative assembly of the Northwest Territories. Aitken again showed a talent for many things, but to no successful end; in Edmonton he sold meat at a loss, and returned to St John to set up as a full-time insurance agent. 
Aitken was now twenty-one and still his restless energy had found no profitable outlet. In 1900 he decided to go to Halifax, where he resolved to do no more 'loafing' (Chisholm and Davie, 33). He was fortunate in his resolve, for at that time Halifax was entering a boom phase, as a growing town that was developing an infrastructure of gas, telephones, and tramways. Aitken sold bonds and became friendly with the family of John F. Stairs, a financial expert and local Conservative who supported the protectionist views then being expounded in England by Joseph Chamberlain. Aitken was an apt pupil, showing powers of flattery and persuasion, and also a certain lack of scruple. Stairs was impressed by Aitken's ability to drive staff and spot talent. Aitken learned the value of using the press to promote his business dealings, and he was good at acquiring inside information and assessing his fellow businessmen. As he became richer he showed his later habit of distributing largess to his family, but he counted every penny when he paid hotel or shop bills; he seemed to resent it when he was not making money, but he was no miser. On 29 January 1906 he married Gladys Henderson Drury (1887/8-1927), who was then eighteen years old. She was the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Drury, the first Canadian to command the Halifax garrison. Aitken wrote, rather ambiguously, in his diary of his hopes that the 'experiment' would succeed (ibid., 56). It did, on Aitken's own terms, but he was to be an unfaithful husband and inveterate pursuer of women, famous or otherwise. It was typical of him to set off, the day after his wedding, to the Royal Security Bank in St John to check up on office management. Aitken and his wife left Halifax for good and moved to Montreal, where he worked as vice-president of Royal Securities. His business dealing reached new levels of intensity: he put money to work, buying and selling companies, starting a weekly magazine, nearly buying the 'Montreal Gazette', dealing in stock markets, and becoming involved in Cuba and Puerto Rico. 
Aitken's ventures were not always successful, but he won more often than he lost, though he suffered from bouts of depression and illness. Their first child, Janet, was born on 9 July 1908, an event which Aitken reckoned increased the intimacy of his relationship with his wife; but he continued to please himself about when and where he went. In September 1908 he made his first visit to England. Soon after he was embroiled in controversy over his creation of a merger of Canada's cement industry; this was widely criticized in the press, and Aitken showed his anxiety over this when he wrote his little book 'Success' in 1922. In it he discussed the Canada Cement Company affair, pleading that if he had shown 'pliability' then it might have turned into a habit (Beaverbrook, 74-6). In spring 1910 he paid a second visit to England to raise money to finance the acquisition of a steel company, and his decision to make his life there was probably influenced by the bad odour surrounding the cement merger. 
Aitken's interest in politics was quickened by what he called the 'exciting political situation over Chamberlain's plea for a united Empire' (Chisholm and Davie, 69). This involved the United Kingdom setting a tariff on foreign goods, but giving empire countries a special preferential rate. This policy deeply split the Conservative and Unionist Party when Chamberlain launched his tariff reform crusade in 1903, and the divisions threatened to keep the party in the political wilderness; but the Liberals were certainly going to remain the party of free trade, and Aitken's political ambitions could lie nowhere else than with the Unionists, at least if they could be persuaded to adopt tariff reform. Aitken met the future Unionist leader Andrew Bonar Law, and on his third visit to England in autumn 1910 he met Law again. The two men got on well, despite their very different individual temperaments: both had Scots-Canadian connections, both were sons of the manse, both were businessmen. 
In the world of Edwardian politics Aitken's chief talents -- his ability to cultivate friendships, influence people, and make money -- were at a premium. In November 1910 Law recommended him as a possible parliamentary candidate for Ashton under Lyne. Aitken hesitated, thinking he was being offered a seat really intended for a working-class Conservative candidate, but he finally agreed to stand if he were given sufficient political support from leading Unionists such as F. E. Smith. Aitken was an efficient campaign organizer and he had money to spend on publicity. His wife was an able helper and Aitken, though not a natural public speaker -- he acknowledged that his wife was better at this -- won the seat by 196 votes. His victory was given added value by the fact that it was one of the few Unionist successes in the general election of December 1910. 
Aitken was neither an effective nor a comfortable member of parliament. He rarely spoke in the House of Commons, and made little mark. He was knighted in 1911, not because of his political achievements, but in expectation of future contributions to Unionist Party funds. Aitken bought Cherkley Court, a large house near Leatherhead, Surrey, which became a centre of political gatherings. When Law replaced A. J. Balfour as leader of the Unionists in 1911, Aitken's stock rose accordingly. His delight in acting as a political go-between found outlet in 1913 when he offered his house for negotiations on the Ulster question and Irish home rule then being conducted between Law and H. H. Asquith, the Liberal prime minister. 
Meanwhile Aitken made his first serious move into what was to be the real love of his life: journalism. He had already dabbled in the trade in Canada, founding the weekly 'Canadian Century' in 1910 and saving the 'Montreal Herald' from collapse by giving it $150,000 (and decisively influencing its change from a Liberal to a Conservative newspaper). In the same year he met R. D. Blumenfeld, editor of the 'Daily Express', whose newspaper also needed an injection of funds. Aitken wrote a cheque for $25,000 without collateral, thus beginning his long connection with the 'Express' on terms highly favourable to himself. He tried to buy 'The Standard', but failed, but he got effective control of 'The Globe', which, though it proved an unsuccessful newspaper, gave him experience in journalism and its practitioners. The 'Express' was still failing to pay its way, and Aitken was involved in yet another salvage operation on behalf of the Unionist Party; more importantly, he realized that the impact of the 'new journalism' launched by Lord Northcliffe had come to stay, and that this popular paper was the kind he wanted to own. He had to wait until November 1916 before finally getting his desire, paying $17,500 for shares which enabled him to take control of the 'Express', retaining Blumenfeld as editor. He kept the deal secret because he had learned by now that politicians, though they cultivated the press and even subsidized it, also resented its claim to speak to the people over their heads. 
The outbreak of war in August 1914 gave Aitken his chance to demonstrate that he was (to his own satisfaction at any rate) a significant political player. But at first it was his publicity skills that were most useful. In January 1915 he became honorary lieutenant-colonel and was appointed to 'take charge of the work connected with records generally appertaining to the Canadian Overseas Expeditionary Force' (Chisholm and Davie, 125-6). He was made Canadian record officer, and in January 1916 published his first book, 'Canada in Flanders', vol. 1. His utter commitment to the war effort aroused his hostility to Asquith, who by 1915 was under attack for his mismanaging of the war. When Asquith reconstructed his cabinet in May 1915, Aitken did not get a post, and his antipathy to Asquith increased when Law tried to get Aitken appointed KCMG on the colonial list, but was prevented by Asquith. In the political intrigue that ended in Asquith's being replaced as prime minister by David Lloyd George in December 1916, Aitken was credited then and later (not least by himself) as a key figure in the business, but his account of the affair is at certain points debatable or wrong, and his use of the 'Daily Express' to undermine Asquith may have been counter-productive. However, there is no doubt about his enjoyment of the crisis, and his role as go-between. Aitken later claimed that he expected to be included in Lloyd George's administration as president of the Board of Trade, but it seems unlikely that such an offer would have been made; in any event, no job emerged, but Aitken acquired a peerage, despite the king's objections, and Lord Beaverbrook, as he became, had collected material for his first major excursion into writing history, his 'Politicians and the War' (1928). He was clearly a man to be reckoned with, and he would not be kept out of places of power for long. But he had to be careful: when in 1917 his control of the 'Daily Express' became known, he was criticized by Conservative central office because, instead of doing the respectable thing and subsidizing loyal party newspapers, he was putting his money into an independent and, in central office's view, irresponsible non-party publication. 
Beaverbrook's understanding of the key role of publicity in wartime secured him the position as head of the propaganda committee under the control of the department of information, and in February 1918 he became the first ever minister of information. He was also made chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, with a seat in the cabinet. The appointment of a press lord, whose ranks Beaverbrook now openly joined, provoked political criticism, with Austen Chamberlain leading the attack. Beaverbrook decided to concentrate his propaganda efforts on using the press as the best means of promoting the British and allied cause. He made contact with people who had knowledge of foreign countries, but he met opposition from ministers, including Balfour, who resented his attempts to use their departments and networks for his own purposes. Beaverbrook was not a man to live long under frustrating circumstances, and he offered to resign in June 1918. His ministerial demise came, not over this, but from a leader in the 'Daily Express' on 29 August 1918 declaring that, unless Lloyd George gave pledges on tariff reform and imperial preference, the 'Express' would no longer support him. Lloyd George was furious, and the episode seemed to demonstrate the arrogance of the press barons. Beaverbrook stayed on until October 1918, and even after he went, pleading ill health, he threw the 'Express' behind Lloyd George in the general election that Lloyd George and Law planned for December 1918. 
Beaverbrook now threw his energies into making his newspaper business as successful as he had his other concerns. In 1919 the 'Daily Express' circulation was under 400,000; but by 1930 it was 1,693,000 and in 1937 it stood at 2,329,000, the largest circulation of any newspaper in the British Isles. This was because of its popular, aggressive tone, but also its optimism, enthusiasm, and claim to speak for those who were, like Beaverbrook himself, determined to stand up for themselves and take control of their own lives. There were also lively features, and all this in the style of the new journalism. Beaverbrook, like his great predecessor Northcliffe, was careful to keep up with the new technology and to experiment with layout. Unlike Northcliffe he did not use stunts to promote sales: his success was based on his belief in the importance of the words on the page, and to this end he hired first-rate staff -- financial writers like Francis Williams and the great cartoonist David Low (whom Beaverbrook brought to the 'Evening Standard' in 1927). He kept tight control of his editors. One of the 'Express''s long-serving editors, Arthur Christiansen, recollected 'feeling sick when Neville Chamberlain described Czechoslovakia as 'a far away country'' but when he expressed his opinion Beaverbrook said 'Well, isn't Czechoslovakia a far away country?' and 'I agreed that it was and got on with my job of producing an exciting newspaper' (Chester and Fenby, 23). Yet Beaverbrook allowed Low, in the words of the Political and Economic Planning 'Report on the British Press' published in 1938, to 'hold up the whole of capitalist society to ridicule' (p. 178). 
The paper stressed optimism. Francis Williams reminded Arthur Christiansen of his desire to 'make everyone feel it was a sunny day' (Christiansen, 151). The 'Express' was ever-vigilant on behalf of the British people; in its coverage of the food shortage of 1946, and bread rationing, it complained that 'ex-enemies get more' and printed pictures of a beauty treatment in Paris which required using eight eggs and two double cognacs ('Report of the royal commission on the press', 331). A. J. P. Taylor put the 'Express''s success down to the fact that its owner was indifferent to the British class system, holding that 'there was no difference between rich and poor except that the rich had more money' (Taylor, 'English History', 310). But the 'Express' did have its roots in what at the end of the twentieth century has been called 'middle England'. The Political and Economic Planning 'Report on the British Press' carried out a survey of British newspaper readership, revealing that the bulk of the 'Daily Express' readers were from social groups whose chief earner in the family brought in between $125 and $500 a year, concluding that 'in the middle grade of the population, the 'Daily Mail' and the 'Daily Express' held sway' (pp. 231, 235). 
Beaverbrook made mistakes: the 'Sunday Express', which he launched in December 1918, failed to attract good circulation and soon used up the $500,000 that he put into it; but when he made John Junor editor in 1928 it began to make money. Beaverbrook enjoyed the newspaper world. He liked attacking his enemies and supporting his friends. He loved picking up gossip to use in his newspapers, but he would also suppress a story if he were asked to by his wide circle of friends. Equally, he enjoyed playing fast and loose with the Conservative Party, broadly supporting it while finding fault with its policies and leaders when he saw fit. However, he did not seek to expand his empire indefinitely. In 1923 he bought the 'Evening Standard' for himself and Lord Rothermere, and got a controlling influence in the Glasgow 'Evening Citizen'. He installed machinery so that he could print the 'Daily Express' in Manchester, and in 1928 he started the 'Scottish Daily Express'; but that was as far as he went. 
Beaverbrook was less successful in his direct political campaigns. Between 1919 and 1922 he followed Northcliffe's example in claiming to speak for the people, and he attacked Lloyd George's coalition government on a whole range of issues, from British intervention in Russia to the question of London slums. His interest in politics quickened after the death of Bonar Law in October 1923. Beaverbrook claimed that he had been the key figure in persuading Law to attend the Carlton Club meeting in 1922 which brought down the Lloyd George administration, but his relations with Law were troubled by the latter's refusal fully to endorse tariff reform. Beaverbrook funded and supported independent Conservative candidates, and once Law had gone he was able to take the gloves off. For the next fifteen years he devoted his political will to endeavouring to remove Stanley Baldwin from the Conservative leadership. Partly this was because Beaverbrook soon realized that he had no hold over Baldwin when Baldwin called a general election in the autumn of 1923 against Beaverbrook's advice. His anger grew when Baldwin fought the election on the issue of protection, but without special terms for the empire. Nevertheless, he supported the Conservatives' election campaign, but, the election lost, he wrote disparagingly of Baldwin in the 'Sunday Express': Baldwin, the paper wrote, was now stripped of his power and patronage and must rely on his own capabilities which had so far 'proved of second rank' (Koss, 2.434). Beaverbrook and Rothermere persuaded Winston Churchill to stand as an independent constitutionalist in a by-election in the Abbey division of Westminster on a platform of imperial preference. In May 1925 the 'Daily Express' warned that independent Conservatives would again 'arise' and that it was quite likely that the 'Express' would support them (Boyce, 'Crusaders without chains', 106). By 1929 he was ready to launch his bid for power, a bid he felt sure must succeed for, as he wrote in 1926, 'when skilfully employed at the psychological moment no politician of any party can resist (the press)' (Chisholm and Davie, 276). 
Clearly Beaverbrook saw himself as the reincarnation of the great Northcliffe. There was another passing resemblance, and that was Beaverbrook's inability to remain faithful to his wife. It is hard to see how his marriage would have avoided strain, given Beaverbrook's lifestyle, but matters became more fraught in 1925 when he began to see Jean Norton (died 1945), a society lady of considerable beauty, whom Lady Beaverbrook saw as at any rate an improvement on the 'actresses' who had attracted her husband hitherto. Old friends began to invite Beaverbrook and Jean Norton together, and some noticed an increasing coarseness in his treatment of his wife. Lady Beaverbrook and her daughter Janet spent some time in Canada in the winter of 1926 and summer 1927, when Lady Beaverbrook began to show signs of illness. In April 1927 she returned to England, still unwell; doctors could find nothing wrong with her, but she died from a brain tumour on 1 December. Beaverbrook retained enough of his Presbyterian upbringing to feel guilty, and he destroyed all his wife's papers, including her letters to him. Some said he ensured that her nurse would remain silent, lest his wife had let slip some damaging revelation. Beaverbrook told a friend that he wished he could turn the clock back twenty years, but he was soon to find consolation in the world that he now lived in, one dominated for the next decade by economic turmoil and political danger. 
Characteristically, Beaverbrook rode out the great financial crash of 1929, selling shares before it struck. But he saw the opportunity for mobilizing opinion behind an empire crusade -- a crusade for protection and imperial preference -- in the crisis that overtook the world's markets. His brief, and not particularly happy, experience of cabinet government in 1917-18 had not dulled his appetite for political power, and while he would not have looked as far as Lord Rothermere, who hoped to see Beaverbrook in 10 Downing Street, he certainly believed that press lords had the power to 'coerce politicians' (Chisholm and Davie, 275). 
Beaverbrook now set his sights firmly on the moving target of Stanley Baldwin, whom he believed to be a stubborn man and therefore weak and vacillating. Beaverbrook launched his crusade on 8 July 1929; it would not only be a newspaper campaign, but would involve creating a new political party. The new party started well: it enrolled 173,000 members in a fortnight and one Conservative noted that his party's rank and file were 'seething with uncertainty and unrest' (Boyce, 'Crusaders without chains', 107). In July 1929 Conservative central office repudiated Sir John Ferguson as candidate for the Twickenham by-election because of his open support for empire free trade; Ferguson won the seat anyway. Thus encouraged, Beaverbrook put his own party's candidate forward in the West Fulham by-election of May 1930 and won, and in October an Empire Free Trade candidate won in South Paddington. But Beaverbrook's ambitions were damaged as much as enhanced by these successes. To unseat Baldwin he must, in the end, pressurize the Conservative Party into accepting his doctrine; but setting his candidates against official Conservatives angered the party, and when one success, in East Islington in January-February 1931, let in the Labour candidate through a Conservative split vote, then it was clear to most Conservatives that Beaverbrook posed a threat to that most essential political need: party unity. The downfall followed remarkably quickly. In the St George's Westminster by-election in March 1931 Baldwin counter-attacked, accusing the press lords of seeking 'power without responsibility' (Boyce, 'The fourth estate', 35). The words were Kipling's and they hit home. Baldwin's candidate, Duff Cooper, won; and in September 1931 Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart wrote in his diary that Brendan Bracken 'thinks that Max will be the last of his trade and that the reign of the great press lords is coming to an end' (Boyce, 'Crusaders without chains', 108). 
The empire crusade was effectively over. Now Beaverbrook seemed to be an inveterate picker of lost causes. He backed Edward VIII in his attempt to retain the throne, hardly realizing that the king did not want to be saved at the expense of losing Mrs Simpson (whom Beaverbrook did not find attractive). Beaverbrook, who was no monarchist and confessed that he 'scarcely knew the King', was motivated by his desire, as he put it, to 'bugger Baldwin' (Birkenhead, 138). His strong support of appeasement in the late 1930s was more in line with political as well as public opinion; few people in Britain wanted to admit that war on the continent of Europe was inevitable. Beaverbrook no doubt spoke for many when he supported the Munich agreement, with the 'Daily Express' claiming on 22 September 1938 that Britain had made no pledge to protect the frontiers of Czechoslovakia, but he pushed the point too far. In March 1939 he denied that Neville Chamberlain had made any absolute guarantee to Poland, and when war broke out in September Beaverbrook's confident assurances over the past few years that there would be no war this year or the next looked, to say the least, hollow. Beaverbrook's hostility to the war was compounded by his notion that the renamed duke of Windsor might be persuaded to stump the country calling for a compromise peace. However, the British failure in an expedition to Norway in April 1940 changed his mind. On 10 May he lunched with Churchill and thereafter threw his energy behind the war effort. Churchill asked the king to appoint Beaverbrook minister of aircraft production, knowing how good Beaverbrook was at inspiring and driving staff. On 14 May, aged sixty, Beaverbrook took over responsibility for repairs to damaged aircraft, as well as production of new planes. On 2 August he became a member of the war cabinet. 
There can be no doubt about Beaverbrook's commitment to the task, which he approached in his usual energetic and domineering style. Characteristically, he exaggerated his contribution to the increase in aircraft production, the numbers of which had been rising before he took up his position. He made some mistakes, for example in reducing the production of aircraft suitable for the vital role of photo-reconnaissance. His abrasive methods annoyed other departments and especially the Air Ministry, and he soon found his job irksome. He intimated to Churchill that he wished to go, and on 30 April 1941 his resignation was accepted. However, he now became minister of state because Churchill wanted to retain him in the cabinet; in addition he was made deputy chairman of the defence committee (supply), but with no executive function. He found this frustrating and in June 1941 got the Ministry of Supply for himself. But now a new crusade was on the horizon. 
In September 1941 Beaverbrook went to Moscow to persuade the USSR to stay in the war. He met Stalin and believed that the two of them had established a rapport. He was certain that Stalin could be trusted, and urged Britain to help the USSR in every way it could. To this end he approved of the USSR's retaining much of eastern Poland, the Baltic states, part of Romania, and some of Finland after the war. His political position in Britain was strengthened when Churchill made him minister of production in February 1942. Beaverbrook's temperament was not suitable for the task, however, and he quarrelled with Ernest Bevin over control of shipbuilding and labour. His resignation came after only twelve days in office, on 20 February; but at least he was now free to devote himself to the cause of supporting the USSR in the war. In June 1942 he addressed a large crowd in Birmingham, calling for the allies to open a second front in Europe, and he pushed this cause with his usual energy and single-mindedness. Nevertheless, the suspicion that dogged Beaverbrook's motives persisted, for some thought that he was really scheming to supplant Churchill as prime minister. In September 1943 he returned to the cabinet as lord privy seal, where he used his business acumen to better effect in planning post-war air routes across the Atlantic; but he became bored with the detail of negotiations and decided that he would devote himself to assisting Churchill to win the general election that would follow the end of the war. Any notion that press lords could swing the electorate was damaged by the large Labour Party victory in 1945; and the 'Daily Express''s claim that there would be 'Gestapo in Britain' if Labour won was a misjudgement of the public mood (Chisholm and Davie, 453-4). 
Beaverbrook's loss of touch was revealed also by his advice to Churchill in 1945 not to publish the Conservative Party's proposals for the health service, on the grounds that it was 'inexpedient' (Thomas, 38). He argued that free enterprise was the way forward, but he was not a consistently right-wing thinker: the cold war was, he thought, unnecessary. He still clung to the ideas of imperial unity, freedom from foreign entanglements, and a distant relationship with the United States of America, all of which -- though not necessarily mistaken -- were out of touch with the times. He remained the empire crusader, opposing British acceptance of an American loan in 1947, and, above all, against the British application to join the European Common Market (EEC) in 1961. His bitter attack on Europe derived its venom from his hatred of Germany. He complained that the EEC was 'an American device to put us alongside Germany. As our power was broken and lost by two German wars, it is very hard on us now to be asked to align ourselves with those villains' (Horne, 2.262). 
Beaverbrook's press power continued to be the object of criticism, not least from the 1947 royal commission on the press. He maintained that this was intent on persecuting him, provoked by what was regarded -- justifiably -- as his policy of using his papers to blacklist people he did not like, and of retaining too tight a control over his editors. As usual, Beaverbrook adopted attack as the best means of defence, telling an astonished commission that he ran his papers for propaganda purposes, and that if an editor opposed a policy that was dear to his heart, such as empire free trade, then he 'talked' him out of it ('Report of the royal commission on the press', 43). Beaverbrook went on to say: 'No paper is any good at all for propaganda unless it has a thoroughly good financial position. So we worked very hard to build up a commercial position on that account' (ibid., 26). He admitted that the 'Daily Express''s commercial position was built on its ability to give its readers what they liked; and the Political and Economic Planning 'Report on the British Press' had noted in 1938 that the chief subjects covered in the 'Express' in a chosen period (28 February-6 March 1938) were indeed law (including crime, police, divorce, and suicide), accidents, film stars and films, and sport. Such topics as industry, science, medicine, education, and labour relations came well down the list, and unemployment was completely absent. More evasively, Beaverbrook told the royal commission that editors must have a degree of latitude, but must also be carried along with the proprietor's views. The commission noted that Beaverbrook picked staff who shared his views and policies, and controlled the newspapers even when his presence was removed. 
In 1951 Beaverbrook ceased to renew his membership of the Conservative Party and it was from that year that the empire crusader on the 'Daily Express' masthead was draped in chains. This was significant. Beaverbrook's Presbyterian upbringing, though it seems to have exercised no influence on his private life, was perhaps manifested in his restless quest for a crusade -- for a great cause that could be given a moral as well as political dimension. But from now on there were no great causes, or at least none that held any possibility of success: opposition to Europe was an example. Yet Beaverbrook was excited by the recognition of his role as a historian of his own times. When A. J. P. Taylor reviewed Beaverbrook's 'Men and Power' in 1956, describing it as 'one of the most exciting works of history' he had ever read and its author as a great historian, comparable to Tacitus, Beaverbrook was delighted (Chisholm and Davie, 502). This was the start of a close friendship between the two, with Taylor witnessing to Beaverbrook's charm, and his ability to 'steal the hearts of men' (ibid., 503). Taylor remarked on Beaverbrook's restlessness in old age, with journeys to Jamaica, the Bahamas, France, New York, and Canada. He still ran the 'Daily Express' as a very successful newspaper, with talented staff. A collector of political papers, his purchases included those of Lloyd George and Bonar Law, which were later opened to historians in the Beaverbrook Library in the 'Daily Express' building, under the benign gaze of A. J. P. Taylor, its director. The University of New Brunswick, of which he became chancellor in 1953, received an endowment from him, as well as funding for founding scholarships and a new library and art gallery. He still aroused controversy, even in old age, with accusations of vendettas and sexual misbehaviour. Still accused of being unable to treat women with dignity, Beaverbrook nevertheless found a regular companion in Marcia Anastasia Dunn ['see below'], widow of Sir James Dunn, whom he married on 7 June 1963. Just over a year later, on 9 June 1964, he died of cancer at Cherkley. Beaverbrook's elder son, (John William) Max Aitken (1910-1985), succeeded to the baronetcy but disclaimed the barony, maintaining that 'there will be only one Lord Beaverbrook'. 
Beaverbrook's reputation was controversial in his day, and has remained so, as new information has emerged. He made gifts to many people, some famous, some obscure; but this was seen by many as his way of controlling and corrupting. Cecil King, who like Clement Attlee described Beaverbrook as 'evil', wrote that 'he seemed to take pleasure in humiliating and corrupting his young men, preventing them from breaking loose by absurdly over-paying them' (Gourley, 40). Yet this might also be regarded as sound business sense: keeping talented staff by paying them well was hardly unusual. The question was whether this went further, and was a means of buying, not simply employing, people; but Beaverbrook employed David Low, whose cartoons were entirely of Low's own creation. He also gave money to those whose political ideas he did not agree with, and whom he did not control. Notably, Michael Foot was given $3000 to help save the left-wing journal 'Tribune' from extinction. Yet even this could be construed as having a personal, or at least political, motive, that of promoting discord within the Labour Party. 
Many bore witness to his charm, especially A. J. P. Taylor. Among his unlikely conquests was Aneurin Bevan, who enjoyed both Beaverbrook's hospitality and his conversation, and -- to the disgust of Tom Clarke of the 'News Chronicle' -- 'addressed Beaverbrook familiarly as Max' (Campbell, 64). Yet Bevan carefully avoided Beaverbrook's efforts to place him directly in his debt, by way of offers of money to pay for medical treatment, and of a cottage on the Cherkley estate. Beaverbrook's appearance was most unprepossessing. One journalist described him as looking 'like some genial spider' ('Fleet Street', 93), while others were less complimentary. 
Beaverbrook seems to have possessed the gift of making those to whom he spoke feel that he was solely interested in them. But he was sensitive and nervous about his own image, and his self-absorption was seen in his efforts to exercise control over one of his biographers, Tom Driberg. Beaverbrook influenced the text, yet managed to keep this secret, so that what was in reality a vetted work was regarded by many at the time as a highly critical biography, though the perceptive Evelyn Waugh dismissed it as a 'honeyed eulogy', and complained that 'you give little impression of the deep malevolence of the man' ('Letters', 467). Beaverbrook disliked yielding centre stage, even to his first wife and his eldest son. His political adventures ended largely in failure. He made his career in England, but he remained devoted to the Canada he left for good in 1910, and he estimated that he had given $16 million to various causes and institutions in New Brunswick. He formally renounced his United Kingdom citizenship on 17 December 1951, and his ashes were laid to rest at Newcastle, New Brunswick, Canada, on 25 September 1964. 
Some even regarded Beaverbrook as essentially an outsider: the Canadian who, whatever his wealth and ambitions, remained outside the establishment. But his significance does not lie in his political ambitions and causes, which largely failed, nor in his financial acumen, but in his talent for producing a brilliant newspaper. The 'Daily Express' may not have exercised the political influence that Beaverbrook aspired to, but it represented a certain kind of Britain, or more properly England, at a particular era in its history. Beaverbrook was a shrewd picker of staff who recognized a first-rate journalist when he saw one. But he owed his success mainly to what he himself described as 'prejudice and breadth of vision. It's a rare combination' (Chisholm and Davie, 7-8). And one that Beaverbrook possessed, though in what proportions will always be a matter of controversy. 


Through her friendship with Lord Rosebery -- and although both her husbands had deplored the racing world -- Lady Beaverbrook became a leading racehorse owner and supporter of British racing. She was known in racing circles as Lady B, and her colours were beaver brown with maple-leaf green cross-belts. Devoted to her horses, she habitually gave them seven-letter names. Her pride and joy was Boldboy, who won more prize money than any other gelding trained in Britain: she made provision for him in her will. At the zenith of her career she employed Sir Gordon Richards as her racing manager. In total she owned more than 250 winners, and she was twice second in the owners' table. Following Beaverbrook's death she also renewed her interest in Dalhousie, which awarded her an honorary LLD degree in 1967 and of which she became chancellor in 1968. The university welcomed her money but resented her interference. Despite her wealth, some aspects of her life were austere. She died, childless, of liver failure and cancer at her Surrey home, Cherkley Court, Leatherhead, on 28 October 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 30359


Akers, Sir Wallace Alan (1888-1954), chemist and industrialist, was born on 9 September 1888 at Walthamstow, the second child of Charles Akers, a chartered accountant, and his wife, Mary Ethelreda Brown. He was educated at Lake House School in Bexhill, and at Aldenham School. From there he went to Christ Church, Oxford, where he studied chemistry and obtained first-class honours in 1909. 
In 1911 Akers joined Brunner Mond & Co. in Cheshire, the leading British firm of alkali manufacturers. Apart from a brief spell in the research laboratory, he was occupied with work in process technology. He was by training a physical chemist -- one of the first Oxford produced -- and the type of work he had in Cheshire suited him very well. 
In 1924 Akers went for some three years to the Far East in the employment of the Borneo Company Ltd. Meanwhile, Imperial Chemical Industries had been formed in 1926, absorbing, among others, Brunner Mond, and in 1928 he returned to London to work in close conjunction with Colonel George Paton Pollitt who was then ICI's technical director. This work gave Akers wide experience in many branches of chemical technology, and in 1931 he was made chairman of ICI's Billingham division. Work there was essentially concerned with high pressure techniques using hydrogen. Ammonia synthesis was a major interest at this time. 
From 1933 to 1936 Akers was responsible for an interesting project at Billingham which aimed to produce 100,000 tons of petrol a year by the hydrogenation of coal. At their most ambitious the executives at ICI saw this project as the beginning of a new industry which would compete with the oil companies in the production of petrol. The expense of the process and the commercial power of the oil companies made this a very risky undertaking, and Akers had been closely involved in negotiations intended to procure financial support from the government to set up this experimental industry. In the spring of 1931 he met a strong rebuff from the civil servant responsible, Sir John Anderson, whose skilful investigation had brought out the fact that ICI had already made a substantial investment in the project, which it was seeking to rescue. Akers and his colleagues resumed their negotiations with the government after the election of October 1931, obtaining some measure of success by 1933. 
After a reorganization of the company in 1937, Akers's chairmanship of the Billingham division came to an end and he returned to ICI headquarters. There he worked with Holbrook Gaskell, especially in connection with the enormous wartime factory expansion programme. In 1939 he was appointed an executive manager. In this capacity he was involved early on in secret informal co-operation between the company and the government on the project to prepare an atomic bomb. In 1941 he took part in a bid by the company to take over the entire nuclear project and run it on behalf of the Ministry of Aircraft Production; indeed according to one civil servant he was the plan's 'chief protagonist' (Gowing, 109). Though this takeover attempt was firmly rejected, he was nevertheless selected to become the director of the atomic project, working as a temporary civil servant responsible to Anderson, who was now a senior minister in the war cabinet. 
Akers's appointment in 1941 as director of Tube Alloys (the codename for atomic research) in the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research caused some resentment among civil servants and scientists who were suspicious of his connections with ICI, but this soon dissipated once they got to know him. Things were, however, more difficult in the United States, where his involvement created the suspicion that Britain might be using the research with an eye to post-war economic gain. General Leslie Groves, who was placed in charge of the Manhattan project, was unwilling to deal with him, and this was a significant factor in the temporary breakdown of co-operation over nuclear matters. After the re-establishment of the partnership in August 1943, the United States government made it clear that it considered him unsuitable to be in charge of liaison between the British and American ends of the project, and Sir James Chadwick was given this responsibility in his stead (as technical adviser to the Combined Policy Committee). Contemporaries noted that Akers responded to this difficult situation with characteristic good grace. He remained head of Tube Alloys in Britain, retaining an important role in co-ordinating the activities of scientists engaged in nuclear research in Britain, but as he no longer had access to all the information on joint research being conducted in the United States, his input to decision making was much reduced. 
Akers returned to full-time employment in ICI in 1946. In 1944 he had been appointed the company's first director to be specifically responsible for research, a post which he held until he retired in 1953. His juniors found him 'warm and friendly, with something of a donnish touch' (Reader, 447-8). He was strongly associated with ICI's post-war efforts to support fundamental research, 'freed from the urgencies and distractions of [the] applied research' already being carried out by the divisions (ibid., 447), and the laboratory complex set up for this purpose was renamed the Akers Research Laboratories in 1955. As part of the same policy he introduced ICI research fellowships, by which the company became involved in research carried out in university laboratories. 
Akers was made CBE for his war services in 1944, and knighted in 1946. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1952. He was a most clubbable man. For many years he resided in the Royal Thames Yacht Club where he delighted in having friends and acquaintances to dine. A hard worker, he readily occupied himself reading and writing to the small hours. In April 1953 he served as one of the three members of the committee that devised the Atomic Energy Authority. He was interested in music and art, and a good pianist until he suffered a hand injury. He was a member of the scientific advisory committee, and subsequently a trustee, of the National Gallery. 
Akers received the honorary degrees of DSc from Durham (1949) and DCL from Oxford (1952), and was elected FRS in 1952. He was treasurer of the Chemical Society from 1948 until 1954. He has been described as a 'tall, lean figure', with a 'blind eye' ('Chemistry and Industry', 1449). On his retirement in 1953 he married Mademoiselle Bernadette Marie La Marre. This surprised all who knew him, for he had been considered a confirmed bachelor. The couple made their home at Yledyn, King's Road, Alton, Hampshire, where he died, on 1 November 1954. His widow returned to France where she survived him by nearly six years. 


@@@@@


doc= 30360


Douglas, Aretas Akers-, first Viscount Chilston (1851-1926), politician, was born on 21 October 1851 at St Leonards. He was born Aretas Akers, son of the Revd Aretas Akers (1824-1856), of Malling Abbey, Kent, and Frances Maria (died 1900), daughter of Francis Holles Brandram of Underriver, Kent. He had two younger sisters. His father was a 'squarson', but the Akers family had only recently settled in Kent; on his father's side, he was descended from six generations of West Indies sugar planters and slave owners. He was educated at Eton College and at University College, Oxford, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1875. 
In the same year Akers inherited the estates of his kinsman James Douglas of Baads, Midlothian, consisting of 6629 acres in Dumfries, 3106 in Midlothian, and 2190 in Lanark, as well as Chilston Park and 3753 acres in Kent. He assumed the additional surname of Douglas, and soon afterwards (10 June 1875) married Adeline Mary (died 1929), daughter of Horatio Austen-Smith of Hayes, Kent. They settled at Chilston Park (Malling Abbey, the family home, belonged to his grandmother for life), and had seven children -- two boys and five girls -- but the marriage was not a happy one. Adeline was gifted but deeply eccentric, making impossible the social life normal for that time and class. 
As a young Kentish landowner and an excellent shot, Akers-Douglas came under the eye of Lord Abergavenny of Eridge Castle, Disraeli's unofficial adviser and chief of the 'Kentish gang' of Conservative Party managers. Encouraged by Abergavenny, he stood and was elected as a Conservative for East Kent in 1880. The constituency was reshaped as the St Augustine's division in 1885, and Akers-Douglas represented it until his retirement in 1911. In parliament he spoke rarely, but his sympathies were with the tory democratic wing of the party: he may have met Disraeli at Eridge, and he was friendly with Lord Randolph Churchill and the Fourth Party. Any signs of independence were checked, however, by his appointment as an opposition whip in 1883. In 1884 he was promoted second whip, and in June 1885, at the age of thirty-three, he became chief whip and patronage secretary to the Treasury in Salisbury's minority government (June 1885 - January 1886). He returned to the Treasury in July 1886, continuing as government chief whip in Salisbury's second ministry until 1892. 
Effective whipping was at a premium in the parliament of 1886-92. Not only was the government paralysed by obstruction from the Irish party in the house, making necessary the use of the closure and guillotine to force through government business, but the government's seventy-five Liberal Unionist allies, led by Hartington and Chamberlain, required diplomatic handling in the house and brought friction with Conservatives in the constituencies. As chief whip Akers-Douglas was responsible for a dramatic tightening in party discipline. Voting against party lines virtually disappeared after 1886, and conformity became in practice total. He managed the parliamentary party in tandem with central office and the constituencies, working through Richard Middleton (the 'Skipper'), whom he had recommended as chief party agent in 1885, and who remained at central office until 1903. In the house, Akers-Douglas formed a close partnership with W. H. Smith, leader of the house in 1887-91, with whom he dined nightly; the intelligence he collected from the party he regularly transmitted to Salisbury. He was sworn of the privy council in 1891. 
Smith was succeeded as leader of the house by A. J. Balfour in 1891, and in opposition to the Liberal government of 1892-5 Akers-Douglas continued as Conservative chief whip. He was the perfect foil to Balfour, playing tortoise to Balfour's hare; where Balfour was dexterous, agile in debate but languid and aloof, Akers-Douglas was assiduous, a natural conciliator and manager of men. 'No one knew better the changing mood of the lobby, the exact value of the 'frondeur', or the extent of an intrigue', wrote J. S. Sandars ('DNB'). For Akers-Douglas the whips' room provided the utterly absorbing escape from an unhappy marriage. 'The Room', with its clubbishness, its talk of 'old boy' and 'pal', played a crucial part in cementing party loyalty -- a function of key importance after 1886 as the Conservative Party lost its socially homogeneous character and the ranks of country gentlemen were swollen by recruits from newly won seats in the big towns. 
In July 1895, when Salisbury formed his third government, Akers-Douglas was appointed first commissioner of works with a seat in the cabinet. Adjusting from the whip's role, at the centre of the party's nervous system, to a junior department was not easy. He had no direct experience of government administration, but his running of his own estates helped him at the office of works, where his responsibilities included building new government offices, as well as acting as a kind of estates' bursar to the royal family. Ably assisted by his permanent secretary, Lord Esher, he presided over the preparations for the coronation of King Edward VII. But he owed his influence in cabinet not to his departmental work but to the sagacity of his advice, to his knowledge of men, and to his intuitive understanding of the party and the country. At Salisbury's request, he acted as adviser to Sir William Walrond, his successor as chief whip, and he continued to control party funds. He predicted the result of the 1900 election with remarkable accuracy. In 1900 he was used by Balfour to persuade the ageing Salisbury to give up the Foreign Office when he resumed office as prime minister; it was, wrote Akers-Douglas, 'a difficult and unpleasant mission'. In 1901-2 he chaired the committee on military education and officers' training, which published a report condemning officers' education at Woolwich and Sandhurst. When Balfour succeeded as prime minister in 1902, he rewarded the faithful Akers-Douglas by promoting him to home secretary (1902-5). 
As home secretary Akers-Douglas was responsible for the 'Aliens Bill', tightening the restrictions on immigration. The bill as originally introduced in 1904 was dropped, and a milder bill passed in 1905. After 1902 Akers-Douglas remained close to Balfour and his party managers; he was deeply involved with the government reshuffle of 1903 which followed the resignations of Joseph Chamberlain and the Unionist free-traders. In the house, he acted as deputy to Balfour, who combined the office of leader of the house with the premiership. To Akers-Douglas fell the duty of writing the nightly parliamentary letter to the king, and when Balfour was away Akers-Douglas took his place. In February 1904, he wound up a crucial debate on the fiscal question with an inept appeal for party unity -- an episode which appeared to epitomize his shortcomings as a politician. 'He is a most skilful wirepuller, and his methods of organization are wonderful', wrote Balcarres, then a junior whip: 'but as a speaker and debater his abilities are nil.' However, as the seasoned parliamentary journalist Henry Lucy perceived, Akers-Douglas's low-calibre performance was in fact a deliberate ploy: 'With fine art, the greater because it is concealed, the Home Secretary, questioned by unreasonable members opposite, absolutely looks as if he knew nothing on the particular subject submitted, or indeed on any other... Mr Akers-Douglas, surveying the inquisitive members opposite as if they were a field of buttercups and daisies, with childlike blandness says he doesn't know. And there the matter ends.' Akers-Douglas was returned for St Augustine's with an increased majority in the 1906 election, but he let it be known that he was no longer a contender for cabinet. Nevertheless, he continued to sit on the Unionist front bench, and behind the scenes he acted as adviser to the party leadership. In 1911 Balfour appointed him chairman of the Unionist Organization Committee, which was appointed to inquire into the party machine in the light of the double election defeat of 1910. When the committee called for the heads of both the chief whip, Acland-Hood, and the principal agent, Percival Hughes, Akers-Douglas refused to sign the report. None the less, he agreed to convey the committee's criticisms privately to Balfour; and Acland-Hood resigned shortly afterwards. It was an exercise in damage limitation characteristic of Akers-Douglas, for whom loyalty to the party came before all else. In the coronation honours of 1911 he received a peerage, becoming Baron Douglas, of Baads, and Viscount Chilston, of Boughton Malherbe, Kent. 
After 1911 Akers-Douglas retired completely from public life. His last years were spent at Chilston Park, surrounded by his collections of butterflies and birds' eggs. He wrote no memoirs, and he destroyed many of his papers, including fifty-three letters from Queen Victoria and over sixty from Lord Salisbury. The wealth of papers remaining provided the material for the illuminating biography, 'Chief Whip', published by his grandson in 1961. 
Akers-Douglas was a tall man, who developed an abundant Edwardian figure in middle age. Though a poor speaker, his smiling manner masked a quick mind; the soul of discretion, he could be secretive but was never duplicitous. He disliked women, especially fashionable women who meddled in politics. His world was the man's world of the lobby and the house: his loyalty to the party was absolute. He died at 34 Lower Belgrave Street, London, on 15 January 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 30361


Douglas, Aretas Akers-, second Viscount Chilston (1876-1947), diplomatist, was born in London on 17 February 1876, the elder son in the family of two sons and five daughters of Aretas Akers-Douglas, first Viscount Chilston (1851-1926), politician, and his wife, Adeline Mary (died 1929), daughter of Horatio Austen-Smith, of Hayes, Kent. His father was Conservative MP for East Kent (1880-85) and St Augustine's, Kent (1885-1911), and was home secretary from 1902 to 1905; he assumed the surname Akers-Douglas by royal licence in 1875, under the terms of the will of his cousin, Alexander Douglas of Baads, and was created first Viscount Chilston and Baron Douglas of Baads in 1911. 
Akers-Douglas was educated at Eton College from 1889 to 1895, and served briefly in the Royal Scots before entering the diplomatic service in October 1898. (From 1899 to 1907 he served as a captain in the 3rd battalion of the Royal Scots militia.) He was fortunate to be posted to Cairo in October 1899, where he served under Lord Cromer, whom he impressed, and where he showed evidence of a flair for languages which later assisted his diplomatic career. He was promoted third secretary in December 1900, and was employed at Madrid from September to December 1901. In January 1903 he was transferred to Constantinople, returning to London in June 1903. On 6 August that year he married Amy Constance (died 1962), daughter of John Robert Jennings-Bramly, officer in the Royal Horse Artillery. They had two sons, Aretas (1905-1940) and Eric Alexander (1910-1982). 
In September 1904 Akers-Douglas was appointed to Athens, where he was promoted second secretary in April 1905. He was acting agent and consul-general at Sofia from February to April 1907. Already identified as a high-flyer, he then served as head of Chancery in Rome and then in Vienna from May 1909. He was promoted first secretary in April 1912. On three occasions between 1911 and 1914 he was posted to rugged Montenegro, and from March to July 1912 he served as charge d'affaires at Bucharest; all this at the time of the Balkan wars when the area was highly unstable and communication with London was difficult. He was transferred to Bucharest in April 1914, returning in February 1915 to the Foreign Office, where he remained for the rest of the First World War. He was appointed CMG in 1918. 
After the First World War, Akers-Douglas was sent to Paris as a member of the British delegation to the Versailles peace conference. When he returned to London in August 1919 he was appointed diplomatic secretary to the secretary of state, Lord Curzon. He was promoted counsellor the following month. Robert Vansittart, then Curzon's private secretary, wrote later that Curzon 'underrated my assistants Allen Leeper and Akers-Douglas, later our Ambassador to Moscow and one of those mute Britons whose immobile faces effortlessly belie their shrewdness' (Vansittart, 274). But Akers-Douglas's merit was recognized by the diplomatic service when he was sent as minister to Vienna in November 1921, thus renewing his pre-war acquaintance with that city. 
Akers-Douglas remained in Vienna for almost seven years at a time when the rump Austrian state, all that was left of the old Habsburg empire, was surviving a difficult birth under its clerical chancellor Seipel. While in Vienna, Akers-Douglas became the second Viscount Chilston following his father's death on 15 January 1926. He was promoted KCMG in 1927. From Vienna he was transferred in June 1928 to Budapest, the other half of the old imperial tandem, where he dealt skilfully with Hungarian revisionist claims to Transylvania, and other territories lost under the treaty of Trianon. 
In October 1933 Chilston was appointed ambassador to Moscow, capital of what was then a pariah state in Europe. He took the trouble to learn Russian but found the post exacting. 'It is not what an ambassador can do', he later remarked, 'but what he can stand' (Craig and Gilbert, 657). It was very difficult to get access to the Kremlin, and Neville Chamberlain wrote of him in 1937: 'He gets no information and the condition of the country is a mystery to him' (Andrew, 407). His term as ambassador coincided with the infamous Stalinist purges, a process which puzzled many foreign diplomats and journalists. On first meeting Stalin, Chilston remarked to his staff: 'I think the chap's a gentleman' (de Jonge, 243), but he soon had cause to revise his opinion. He reported to the Foreign Office in 1937 that the indictment of Old Bolsheviks such as Radek and Piatokov was 'utterly unworthy of belief', and he was convinced (rightly) that their false confessions had been extracted by means of 'unavowable methods'. Nevertheless he was pleased that the trials helped to discredit Stalin's tyranny abroad ('Documents on British Foreign Policy', ser. 2A, documents 14, 23, and 31). 
It was perhaps surprising, given the dearth of accurate intelligence available to the embassy, that Chilston opposed the appointment of a passport control officer in Moscow, the normal role of such officers being to gather intelligence. However, he did campaign for a new cohort of consular officials who would get an intensive training in Russian before being posted to the Soviet Union. This would have followed the US practice of appointing 'experts' to Moscow, but the diplomatic service rejected the proposal and continued to employ 'generalists', partly because the Treasury flatly refused to provide the necessary funds. Chilston, whose character has been described as 'shrewd and sardonic' (Cameron Watt, 118), left Moscow in December 1938, before the abortive talks with Britain and France for a security pact. He then retired from the service. He was sworn of the privy council on retirement, having been promoted GCMG in 1935. 
Chilston lived out his remaining years at the family estate of Chilston Park, Maidstone, Kent. During the war he served as a Home Guard officer. He died at his home on 25 July 1947. He was survived by his wife and his younger son, who succeeded him as third viscount, his elder son having died in a motor accident in 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 30362


Albani, Dame Emma (1847-1930), singer, was born on 1 November 1847 at Chambly, Quebec, Canada, one of three surviving children of Joseph Lajeunesse, organist, and his wife, Melina Mignault (died 1856), from a better-off, half-Scottish family. (Albani later gave her date of birth as 1852.) Her father, whose own career was modest, had high ambitions for Emma. He trained her in singing, piano, and harp from the age of five, made her practise five hours a day, and showed her off in music shops; this led to her giving a public concert in Montreal at the age of eight, the first of several. According to H. Charbonneau, a biographer with local sources, Lajeunesse overworked Emma and beat her if she fell asleep or played badly, and she feared him; she herself recorded that she 'never had a doll'. 
After working in upper New York state, her father returned to the Montreal area and entered Emma in 1858 as a pupil in the Sacre-Coeur Convent, where she played the organ, composed, sang solos, and was encouraged by the Italian mother superior to think of a singing career. Following successful Montreal concerts in 1862, she was taken by her father to perform at Saratoga Springs and then Albany, New York; this led to her appointment at the age of sixteen as soloist, organist, and choirmaster of St Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, Albany. Four successful years there in turn resulted in her departure -- subsidized by well-wishers -- for Paris and then Milan. Here she studied (1868-70) first with Gilbert-Louis Duprez, later with Francesco Lamperti, both leading teachers of would-be opera singers. On Lamperti's advice she made her opera debut in 1870 at Messina as Amina in Bellini's 'La sonnambula'; this and later engagements at Acireale, Cento, Malta, and Florence were highly successful. 
Aspiring young singers, especially British and American women, at that time might win prestige by appearing in Italy -- the homeland of opera -- without a fee; some took a stage name Italianized from their home town. Emma, however, promised so well that she was paid something from the start, and she maintained that the name she adopted, Albani, had nothing to do with Albany but was taken from the noble papal family, then nearly extinct. She always thought her early Italian experience had been well worth while, in part because 'the British do not understand Italian music' (letter to Eva Gauthier, 30 Oct 1905). It led to her engagement by Frederick Gye to sing for five seasons, starting in 1872, at Covent Garden. She was to appear there nearly every spring until her retirement from opera in 1896, taking, for the rest of the year, engagements in Paris, Brussels, Berlin, St Petersburg, and North America. On 6 August 1878 she married Gye's son Ernest (1839-1926), who then took over Covent Garden from his father and ran it in adverse economic circumstances until 1884. The couple had one son. 
At first Albani sang mainly the coloratura soprano repertory (Amina, Lucia di Lammermoor, Linda di Chamounix, Gilda in 'Rigoletto'), but also the dramatic part of Mignon in its soprano version. She was so successful as to alternate with the reigning 'queen' Adelina Patti. The Italian works, however, were losing esteem; from 1875 (1874 in New York) Albani started to sing Wagner's lighter parts, in 'Lohengrin', 'Tannhauser', 'The Flying Dutchman', and ultimately (1889) 'Die Meistersinger'. By London custom, she sang them in Italian -- just as she did her roles in French works, even in Brussels, and notwithstanding the fact that she was a native French speaker; all she sang in German were a 'Lohengrin' in Berlin, and 'Tristan und Isolde' in her last Covent Garden season. According to Bernard Shaw, in Wagner she was 'always at her sincerest -- that is, her best'. The shining high notes her Italian technique secured were what the composer had wanted; Shaw, however, scoffed at her lingering on these notes ('like a woman who will not come downstairs sensibly because she wants to show off her diamonds') and at her phlegmatic acting in Italian works. 
In Britain Albani appeared regularly in oratorio at the Norwich, Crystal Palace, Birmingham, Leeds, and Three Choirs festivals, singing the staple Handel and Mendelssohn works, Gounod's 'Redemption' and 'Mors et vita' (on which she worked with the composer), Liszt's 'St Elisabeth', and other new works. Until her retirement in 1911 she went on lengthy concert tours to empire countries. Though highly paid in her best years, she was in financial trouble in 1908 and again in 1925, the year in which she was made DBE, and was helped in London and Canada with a benefit matinee, a subscription, and a civil-list pension of $100. She died at 61 Tregunter Road, Kensington, London, on 3 April 1930 and was buried in Brompton cemetery. As a leading singer with an irreproachable private life she had been a favourite of royalty, much decorated; in her last years she received visitors in 1890s dress and wearing her medals. 


@@@@@


doc= 30363


Alcock, Sir John William (1892-1919), aviator, was born at Basford House Cottage, Seymour Grove, Old Trafford, Manchester, on 6 November 1892, the eldest son of John Alcock, a domestic coachman and later a horsedealer, and his wife, Mary Whitelegg. He had a boyhood fascination with machines, and after attending the parish school at St Anne's on the Sea, Lancashire, he gained an apprenticeship at the Empress motor works in 1909. For a period in 1911 he worked for Norman Crossland, one of the founders of the Manchester Aero Club. When an aero engine was sent to Manchester for repair, Alcock had the opportunity to return with it to Brooklands in Surrey, where he became mechanic to the French pilot Maurice Ducrocq. Taught to fly by Ducrocq, Alcock took his Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate (no. 368) at Brooklands in a Farman biplane on 26 November 1912. He was then employed by the Sunbeam motor-car company as a racing pilot, and regularly took part in races at Hendon. In July 1914 he competed against Harry Hawker and Frederick Raynham in a race from London to Manchester and back sponsored by the 'Daily Mail'. 
In November 1914 Alcock joined the Royal Naval Air Service as a warrant officer instructor, serving mostly at the Royal Naval Flying School at Eastchurch, Kent. Although he received his commission as a flight sub-lieutenant in December 1915, and was anxious to see active service, his flying experience was so valuable that he was retained at Eastchurch for another year. Among the pilots whom he trained during his two years as an instructor was Reginald Alexander John Warneford, the first naval pilot to be awarded the Victoria Cross. 
In December 1916 Alcock was posted to 2 wing, royal naval air station, in the eastern Mediterranean. From the allied base at Mudros on the island of Lemnos he took part in long-distance bombing raids on targets in Turkish territory and on German targets in Macedonia. On 30 September 1917, flying a single-seater Sopwith F1 Camel, he earned the Distinguished Service Cross for a brave and skilful attack on three German seaplanes, two of which crashed into the sea. At 8.15 p.m. on the same day he set out in a Handley Page 0/100 bomber to attack Constantinople. One of his two engines failed over the Gallipoli peninsula, forcing him to turn back. After covering 60 miles with only one engine, he ditched in the sea, near Suvla Bay, where he and his two crew members remained afloat in the craft for two hours. Their Very lights failed to attract the attention of British destroyers, and as the plane began to sink they swam ashore. After hiding overnight, they were captured by the Turks the following noon, and held prisoner at Seraskerat prison in Constantinople. Alcock was later moved to the prisoner-of-war camp for officers at Kedos in Anatolia. 
At the time of his capture Jack Alcock had devised the single-seat Alcock Scout biplane, which consisted of components from the Sopwith Triplane, Pup, and, according to some accounts, the Sopwith Camel. Armed with a single Lewis gun, it was intended to be powered by either a 100 hp Monosoupape or 100 hp Clerget rotary motor. Its first flight was made in the hands of another pilot, since Alcock was held captive, although news of its success was smuggled to him in prison. It was afterwards operated by 2 wing at Mudros during 1917-18. 
Alcock was released by the Turks in September 1918 and reached London in December. He was passionate about flying and always hoped to do something outstanding. While imprisoned, he resolved to make an attempt to fly the Atlantic. In 1913 the 'Daily Mail', whose proprietor, Lord Northcliffe, was keen to promote aviation, had offered a prize of $10,000 to the first person to cross the Atlantic within seventy-two continuous hours. Competition was suspended during the war, but Northcliffe renewed the offer in July 1918; once hostilities ended in November, several manufacturers made plans to enter their aircraft. On demobilization in March 1919 Alcock approached the Vickers firm at Weybridge, who had considered entering their Vimy bomber (a twin-engined biplane powered by two Rolls-Royce 350 hp Eagle engines) but had not yet found a pilot. His enthusiasm quickly persuaded them to take up his proposition and work began on converting the Vimy for the long flight, replacing the bomb carriers with extra petrol tanks. Shortly afterwards a former Royal Flying Corps observer, Arthur Whitten Brown, was taken on as navigator, his first meeting with Alcock taking place in a hangar at Weybridge. Both were Mancunians by upbringing. Their shared determination to make the flight overcame marked differences in their personalities: Alcock, who was unmarried, was extrovert and sociable, with a boisterous sense of humour, while Brown, who was engaged, was quiet, nervous, and more intense. Together they tested the Vimy at Weybridge before leaving Southampton by sea on 4 May 1919 to join the other competitors assembled in Newfoundland to make the attempt from west to east (taking advantage of the prevailing winds). They arrived on 13 May, followed a fortnight later by the Vimy, which was transported in crates to be assembled and tested on site. 'Machine absolutely tophole', Alcock cabled to Vickers on 9 June after successfully completing the tests (Wallace, 71). 
By the end of May 1919 the Atlantic air crossing had become a matter of national prestige. A United States navy flying-boat, commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Albert Cushing Read, left Newfoundland on 16 May and, after stopping off in the Azores for several days, reached Lisbon on 27 May, completing the stage-by-stage crossing in eleven days. Meanwhile an attempt at the non-stop crossing by Harry Hawker and Kenneth Mackenzie-Grieve ended when their Sopwith Atlantic ditched into the sea 500 miles off the Irish coast after the plane's engine overheated. Alcock and Brown continued their preparations, levelling an airfield, known as Lester's Field, near St John's, Newfoundland, in readiness for their attempt on the record. 
Having eaten a final meal under the wings of the Vimy, loaded with 865 gallons of fuel, Alcock and Brown climbed into the cockpit at 16.00 Greenwich mean time (GMT) on Saturday 14 June 1919. Beneath his electrically heated flying suit Alcock wore a blue serge suit, Brown his Royal Flying Corps uniform. Two toy black cats, Twinkletoes and Lucky Jim, accompanied them as mascots. Seated side by side, Brown to port and Alcock, at the controls, to starboard, they took off at 16.13 and crossed the Newfoundland coast at 16.28. Their flight was beset by problems. The rupture of an inner exhaust pipe exposed them to the roar of the engines for most of the way, radio contact was lost, heavy cloud cover hindered navigation, and there was a continual danger of ice blocking the engines' air intakes and freezing the instrument gauges. Flying overnight, at one stage through a snowstorm, they crossed the coast of Ireland at 08.25 GMT the following morning and landed at 08.40 on what they took to be a field, but was in fact a marshy bog, at Clifden, Galway, where they were greeted by F. H. Teague, from the nearby Marconi wireless station. Coast to coast they flew 1890 miles in 15 hours 57 minutes at an average (wind-assisted) speed of 118.5 m.p.h., the actual journey from take-off to landing taking 16 hours 27 minutes. 
At the Savoy hotel, on 20 June, Winston Churchill presented Alcock and Brown with the 'Daily Mail''s prize of $10,000 for the first non-stop flight across the Atlantic. Northcliffe, who was unable through illness to attend the presentation, sent a message to Alcock: 'Your journey with your companion Whitten Brown is a typical example of British courage and organizing efficiency', and went on to hope that following the flight, 'The American and British people will understand each other better as they are brought into closer daily contact' (Wallace, 278-9). On 21 June Alcock and Brown were received by George V at Windsor Castle and created KBE. Their Vimy aeroplane was brought back from Galway and presented to the nation by the manufacturers, Vickers and Rolls-Royce, to be exhibited in the Science Museum, South Kensington, London. 
Alcock returned to Vickers at Weybridge as a staff pilot, testing and delivering new aircraft. On 18 December 1919 he set out to fly to Paris to deliver a Vickers Viking amphibian aeroplane which was to be shown off at the Aeronautical Exhibition. Flying solo (and therefore without a navigator) in fog, he came down at Cote d'Evrard, about 25 miles from Rouen. The plane tipped onto its nose and Alcock was thrown forward, sustaining a fracture of the skull. He was taken to no. 6 general hospital, Rouen, where he died on the same day without regaining consciousness. His body was brought back to England and after a service at Manchester Cathedral was buried in the southern cemetery, Manchester, on 27 December. 
Despite the publicity which their Atlantic crossing attracted, and the honours bestowed in its aftermath, Alcock and Brown's flight did not herald an immediate development of aerial traffic between Europe and North America. The significance of their feat began to be discounted. Writing in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' in 1927, Henry Albert Jones, the official air historian, suggested that 'the least eventful part' of Alcock's flying career, his period as an instructor during the early years of the First World War, was 'the most fruitful' ('DNB'). The Air Ministry, which was unenthusiastic about the newspaper-sponsored record-breaking attempts by commercial constructors, and gave no support to Alcock and Brown other than the loan of wireless and navigation equipment, preferred to develop airships as a safe and reliable means of long-distance air travel. In July 1919, less than a month after their flight, the Air Ministry's R34 airship, commanded by George Herbert Scott, accomplished the Atlantic crossing in both directions, though inevitably in a much slower time than Alcock and Brown had managed. No further successful Atlantic air crossing was achieved until the American Charles Lindbergh single-handedly flew a single-engine monoplane non-stop from New York to Paris in May 1927, and further losses of life on transatlantic crossings continued to cast doubt on the viability of heavier-than-air machines. Commercial flights across the Atlantic did not begin until twenty years after Alcock and Brown's record-breaking flight, and it was not until after the Second World War that their achievement was commemorated by a plaque near Lester's Field, Newfoundland, and by a statue at the foot of the control tower at London's Heathrow airport, erected at the suggestion of the aviator James Mollison, and unveiled in June 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 30364


Alderson, Sir Edwin Alfred Hervey (1859-1927), army officer, was born at Capel St Mary, Suffolk, on 8 April 1859, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Mott Alderson, of Poyle House, Ipswich, and his wife, Catherine Harriett Swainson. In 1876 he joined the Prince of Wales's Own Norfolk artillery militia, and in 1878 was gazetted to the 97th foot, later the Queen's Own Royal West Kent regiment, joining his unit in Halifax, Nova Scotia. After a short term there he went with the regiment to Gibraltar, then in 1881 to Natal. There he was detached for service with the mounted infantry at Laing's Nek, and it was with the mounted infantry that he was identified for much of his career. In 1882 he served with them in the Egyptian campaign, including at Qassasin (26 August and 9 September) and Tell al-Kebir (13 September). He took part in the Gordon relief expedition (1884-5) with the mounted (camel) regiment. For saving a private from drowning in the Nile in 1885 he was awarded the bronze medal of the Royal Humane Society. Alderson married in 1886 Alice Mary, second daughter of the Revd Oswald P. Sergeant, vicar of Chesterton, Oxfordshire. They had one son, and Alice survived her husband. 
In 1887 Alderson was appointed adjutant to the mounted infantry at Aldershot, having been promoted to captain in the previous year; he was given the same appointment in the Royal West Kent regiment in 1890, and retained it for four years. He passed out of the Staff College, Camberley, in 1895, and in 1896, with the substantive rank of major, went in command of the mounted infantry to Rhodesia, where he was prominent in defeating the Matabele (Ndebele) revolt (1896). He was then given command of all troops in Mashonaland, and received the brevet of lieutenant-colonel. He then served at Aldershot as deputy assistant adjutant-general and in command of the mounted infantry. In 1900 he was made brevet colonel and inspector-general of mounted infantry with the rank of brigadier-general. During the South African War he commanded the mounted infantry in 1901-2, his force including Canadian, Australian, New Zealand, and other colonial troops. He was mentioned in dispatches, subsequently receiving the CB (1900); he was also appointed successively aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria and to Edward VII. In 1903 he was promoted to the substantive rank of colonel, and for four years commanded the 2nd infantry brigade at Aldershot with the rank of brigadier-general. He was promoted major-general in 1907. From 1908 to 1912 in India he commanded the 6th (Poona) division. 
On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Alderson was appointed (4 August) to command the 1st mounted division, all troops in the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk. In October, with the rank of lieutenant-general, he was given the command of the 1st Canadian division, which embarked for France in February 1915. The division fought at Neuve Chapelle (10-13 March), second Ypres (22 April-25 May), Festubert (15-25 May), and second Givenchy (15-16 June). In August the 2nd Canadian division arrived in France, and the two divisions became the Canadian army corps, with Alderson in command. A third division was added in January 1916, and in the following May, when Sir Julian Byng took over the command, Alderson became inspector-general, Canadian forces, and held that appointment until the end of hostilities. He was promoted KCB in 1916. In 1921 he was made colonel of the Royal West Kent regiment. 
Alderson retired in 1920, and devoted himself to his two main recreations, hunting and yachting. A noted horseman, and a great believer in hunting as training for officers, he wrote 'Pink and Scarlet, or, Hunting as a School for Soldiering' (1900); wherever he was stationed he hunted. He owned several racing and other craft, and was commodore of the Broads Cruising Association. He published several other books, among them 'With the Mounted Infantry and Mashonaland Field Force, 1896' (1898). Alderson died at the Royal Hotel, Lowestoft, on 14 December 1927, and was buried three days later in Chesterton. 


@@@@@


doc= 30365


Alderson, Sir Henry James (1834-1909), army officer, was born at Quebec on 22 May 1834, the son of Lieutenant-Colonel Ralph Carr Alderson (1793-1849), Royal Engineers, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Henry Thorold of Cuxwold, Lincolnshire. John Alderson (bap. 1757, d. 1829), physician, was his grandfather. Educated at Stoton and Mayer's school at Wimbledon (1844-8), he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in May 1848. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery on 23 June 1852, and served in Canada until 1854, when, on promotion to lieutenant, he returned to England. Serving through the Crimean War, he was at the Alma, Inkerman, and the siege and fall of Sevastopol. He was mentioned in dispatches, and received the Legion d'honneur (third class). He was promoted second captain on 1 April 1859 and from February to June 1864 was attached on special mission to the headquarters of the Federal army under General O. A. Gillmor during the American Civil War, being present at the bombardment of Charleston. 
On his return to England, Alderson joined the experimental department of the School of Gunnery, Shoeburyness, and became successively captain on 6 July 1867, major on 3 July 1872, lieutenant-colonel on 1 October 1877, brevet colonel on 1 October 1881, and major-general on 9 July 1892. He married in 1877 his second cousin, Florence ('b'. 1844/5), youngest daughter of Sir Edward Hall Alderson (bap. 1787, d. 1857), baron of the exchequer. They had one son, and Florence survived her husband. 
From 1871 Alderson held various appointments in the department of the director of artillery at the War Office. From 1891 to 1896 he was president of the ordnance committee. He retired on 22 May 1896, and from 1897 until his death was a director of Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Co., an armaments manufacturer. He was made CB on 21 June 1887, KCB on 30 May 1891, and was appointed colonel-commandant in the Royal Artillery on 4 November 1905. He died at Durham on 10 September 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 30366


Aldington, Edward Godfree (1892-1962), writer, was born on 8 July 1892 at 50 High Street, Portsmouth, the eldest among the two sons and two daughters of Albert Edward Aldington (1864-1921), bookseller and stationer, and later solicitor's clerk and amateur author, and Jessie May Godfree (1872-1954), novelist and keeper of the Mermaid inn at Rye. After preparatory schools at Walmer and St Margaret's Bay, Aldington, known from a young age as Richard, attended Dover College from 1904 to 1906. He started to write poetry in the following year, aged fifteen, after reading Wilde and Keats. In 1910 he enrolled at University College, London, where he encountered W. P. Ker and A. E. Housman, but he had to leave before taking his degree after his father's speculations failed. 
Aldington worked briefly as assistant to a newspaper sports editor, but was soon making a living from his literary journalism and poetry. In 1912 he was introduced by Ethel Elizabeth (Brigit) Patmore (1882-1965) to avant-garde writers, including Yeats; Ford Madox Hueffer (later Ford); Ezra Pound, who became his close friend and literary ally; and the American poet Hilda Doolittle, known as H. D. (1886-1961). Pound, H. D., and Aldington founded the influential imagist movement in 1912, rejecting regular stanzaic forms in favour of 'vers libre', and nineteenth-century poetical language in favour of sparse, concrete, highly visual presentation. Aldington's work appeared in 'Des imagistes' (1914, edited by Pound), and he helped Amy Lowell edit the three volumes called 'Some Imagist Poets' (1915, 1916, 1917). His first book of poems, 'Images, 1910-1915', was published by Harold Monro's Poetry Bookshop in 1915. He became literary editor of Dora Marsden's feminist magazine 'New Freewoman' (later 'The Egoist'), to which Pound also contributed. Aldington and H. D. became lovers in 1912, while in Paris with Pound. In the following year they spent eight months in Italy and France, and were married on 18 October 1913 in Kensington register office. 
On the outbreak of the First World War, Aldington tried to join up in the Honourable Artillery Company, but was told he would be refused because of a childhood hernia operation. He worked instead as secretary to Ford, assisting with his propaganda writing and Ford's novel 'The Good Soldier'. H. D. had discovered she was pregnant on the day war was declared. A daughter was stillborn on 21 May 1915. On 24 June 1916 Aldington joined the 11th battalion of the Devonshire regiment at Wareham, Dorset. He embarked on 21 December 1916, and saw active service in France and Flanders, first attached to the 6th battalion of the Leicestershire regiment as a private, and transferred to the 11th battalion in January 1917. He stayed in France until the end of May, and was back in England for officer training from June to the end of November, when he got his commission in the Royal Sussex regiment. In London he met T. S. Eliot, who took over his editorial duties for 'The Egoist', and also the American art student Dorothy (Arabella) Yorke (1891-1971), who lived above the Aldingtons at 44 Mecklenburgh Square, and with whom Richard began an affair. He and H. D. had separated by autumn 1919 although they continued to write to each other until H. D.'s death. 
Aldington was back in the trenches from April 1918; by November he was signals officer to battalion headquarters, with the rank of acting captain. After the armistice he was in Belgium teaching arithmetic and English grammar to the troops, before being gazetted out in February 1919. Besides traumatic stress, he suffered from chronic bronchitis due to exposure to gas. 
In 1919 Aldington's poems 'War and Love' were published. He began to work for the 'Times Literary Supplement' as a regular reviewer of French books. From autumn 1919 to 1927 he and Arabella were based in Berkshire, though they travelled frequently, especially in France. He was assistant editor for Eliot's 'Criterion' from 1921, specializing in reviews of French poetry. He produced over twenty books of criticism and thirty books of translation, especially from the French, such as 'Les liaisons dangereuses' (1924) and 'Candide' (1927). His biographical study 'Voltaire' (1925) was praised for objectivity and masterly concision. 
During the general strike of 1926 Aldington was asked to help deliver 'The Times' and obliged. However, though his friendships were predominantly with right-inclined writers such as Eliot, Pound, Wyndham Lewis, and later Roy Campbell, Aldington was equally scathing about all political or religious systems. He was an epicurean individualist, who resented any threat to individual fulfilment, whether from communism, capitalism, bureaucracy, or Christianity. 
Aldington was expected to become editor of the 'Times Literary Supplement' but after a visit from D. H. Lawrence -- whom he had known since 1914, and who was the modern novelist he most admired -- he decided he needed to write more personally, and to make a decisive break with England, and with Eliot's influence. Aldington spent most of the next decade in France. He became friendly with Nancy Cunard, with whom he discovered a new young writer called Samuel Beckett. 
In autumn 1928 Aldington stayed at Port-Cros (an island near Hyeres) with the Lawrences, and with Brigit Patmore, his new love. They visited the Pounds at Rapallo, where the Yeatses were also staying. Aldington wrote little poetry after his late thirties but entered a new phase as a novelist, writing seven novels from 1929 to 1939. His first, the anti-war book 'Death of a Hero' (1929), made him famous: George Orwell thought it 'much the best of the English war books' (Doyle, 128) while Aldington thought of it as a 'jazz novel' (ibid., 129). It was a watershed in Aldington's career, and also the first real intimation of his satirical power: an angry denunciation of Victorian hypocrisy and social stupidity crushing individual happiness. These were his main fictional targets. 'Death of a Hero' is also a rawly autobiographical work, expressing his anger towards his parents (especially his mother), the war, and the literary establishment, with recognizable satiric portraits of Eliot, Ford, Lawrence, and Pound. 
Aldington's satire of modernist friends intensified in 'Soft Answers' (1932), with biting caricatures of Pound and Eliot. Aldington objected to what he saw as Eliot's death wish; 'the War despair which involved so many of us and from which the healthy-minded have been struggling to escape' (Doyle, 148-9). In 'Artifex' (1935) he elaborated his attack on the modernist movement as 'the art of exasperated neurasthenics' (pp. 33-4), on the grounds that art should intensify and enrich life. The satire of his second novel, 'The Colonel's Daughter' (1931), is aimed at a similar target: the life-denying stupidity of English village society. 
Aldington spent the early 1930s in Mediterranean Europe: he was with Patmore at the Villa Koeclin, Le Canadel (Var); then at Anacapri, where he worked on his third novel, 'All Men are Enemies' (1933). His habit of overwork undermined his health, yet he was continually on the move: in Portugal; in France for most of 1933, mainly at Villa Devos, near Le Lavandou; motoring around Spain. He broke his knee in a car accident in Austria. One of his best novels dates from this period: 'Women must Work' (1934). But during the depression he found it hard to repeat the success of 'Death of a Hero'; though he became one of Russia's favourite contemporary English writers, thanks partly to Gorky's interest. 
By 1935 Aldington felt finished even with Europe, and after a brief stay on a derelict plantation on Tobago he sailed for America in June, where he was based for the next decade, though his semi-nomadic existence regularly returned him to Europe before the Second World War. In winter 1935-6 he was back in London, then touring in Portugal, Spain, and Austria. He became involved with Patmore's daughter-in-law, Netta (1911-1977), daughter of James McCulloch, a lawyer, of Pinner, Middlesex. Early in 1937 Netta went with him to visit Italy and Nice, and to settle at the Villa Koeclin. His divorce from H. D. was finalized on 22 June 1938, and three days later Aldington and Netta married in London. Their daughter, Catherine (Catha), was born on 6 July 1938. In January 1939 they took an apartment on West 115th Street, New York. Aldington gave some lectures at Columbia and other east-coast universities. Late in 1940 they moved to Washington, DC. After the reception of his poem-sequence 'The Crystal World' (1937) Aldington said: 'I promised myself I would never write another line of poetry' (Doyle, 240). Instead he obtained access to the Library of Congress to edit the substantial 'Viking Book of Poetry of the English-Speaking World' (1941), which he intended to rival 'The Oxford Book of English Verse', and to offer alternative poetic traditions from those defined by Pound and Eliot. Aldington was happy and productive in America, saying 'our best time began' there (ibid., 204). He turned to life-writing for a last creative phase: eight biographical books, starting with his autobiography 'Life for Life's Sake' (1941). The travelling continued: Jamay Beach, Nokomis, in Florida; Taos, New Mexico, to stay with Frieda Lawrence. 
During much of the Second World War, Aldington, who had the appearance of a matinee idol, worked as a freelance screenwriter in Hollywood, where he befriended William Faulkner. His biography of the duke of Wellington (1943) won the James Tait Black memorial prize when it was published in the United Kingdom (1946). His last novel, 'The Romance of Casanova' (1946) was a half-hearted potboiler (written for the movies), but Aldington still needed to pay damages to the Patmores. (The courts awarded damages as part of Netta's divorce from her husband, Michael Patmore.) After the war he left America, saying 'the place has nothing to offer but money' (Doyle, 226-7), and returned to his beloved France: first Paris, where he met the young Australian poet Alister Kershaw, who admired his work and offered loyal friendship, assistance, and financial support for the rest of his life, then from August 1947 the Villa Aucassin, Le Lavandou. 
Aldington had edited Lawrence's 'Selected Poems' (1932), and was now influential in getting Lawrence's prose republished, writing fourteen introductions for Heinemann and Penguin. He also produced the important first biography of Lawrence, 'D. H. Lawrence: Portrait of a Genius, but...' (1950). His anthology of the aesthetes, 'The Religion of Beauty', appeared in the same year. That autumn Netta left him, and Aldington had what he called 'a sort of crack-up' (Doyle, 252). Unusually for him he did not produce a full-length book for the next four years. 'Pinorman', a biography of Norman Douglas and his friends Pino Orioli and Charles Prentice, appeared in 1954, as did the French edition of the book that was to have devastating personal consequences: 'Lawrence of Arabia: a Biographical Enquiry' (1955). He had intended to produce a study of war-heroism to follow 'Wellington', but his careful research produced instead another death of a hero: the first systematic debunking of the legend of T. E. Lawrence, whom Aldington found a liar and fraud. It was, he said, 'more than a mere biography -- it is the showing up and repudiation of a whole phase of our national life' (ibid., 274). The British establishment was scandalized. Attempts were made to prevent publication, then to ensure hostile reviews. Aldington's reputation and sales never recovered in the English-speaking world, and he lived in poverty, mainly on translation rights to his own books and his translations of others. In April 1951 Aldington and his daughter Catha left the Villa Aucassin, moving to a 'pension', Les Rosiers, Montpellier. Lawrence Durrell visited him here, and became another close friend. In 1957 Aldington was able to move to a cottage bought by Alister Kershaw, in the hamlet of Maison Salle, Sury-en-Vaux, Cher, which provided his home for the rest of his life -- though he continued to travel. His last trip was in summer 1962 to attend celebrations in the USSR for his seventieth birthday, where he was overwhelmed by admiration. He died on 27 July 1962 back at Maison Salle, and was buried at Sury-en-Vaux. 
The 'Times' obituary showed how Aldington's scathing criticisms of England remained unforgiven: 'He was an angry young man of the generation before they became fashionable'; 'There were times when his anger betrayed him' (30 July 1962). The 'Daily Telegraph' was more magnanimous: 'Aldington's brilliance in so many fields of literature has been rivalled by few of his generation and is indeed rare at any time' (30 July 1962). 
Richard Aldington was extraordinarily prolific and versatile: a poet, novelist, translator, critic, biographer, editor, and anthologist. C. P. Snow called him 'a writer of great gifts', giving his readers 'a glow of power and vitality' (Doyle, xiii). He was an important contributor to modernist poetics, and a significant post-war novelist, though his subsequent repudiation of modernism and reputation for 'ad hominem' denunciations have rather obscured his merits. In many ways a divided figure, he was characterized by acute sensitivity to beauty, passion for truth, and anger at hypocrisy. 


@@@@@


doc= 30367


Blake, Dame Louisa Brandreth Aldrich- (1865-1925), surgeon, was born on 15 August 1865, at the rectory, Chingford, Essex, eldest daughter and second of six children of the Revd Frederick James Aldrich-Blake 
(formerly Aldrich; 1824-1904)
, rector of Chingford, and his wife, Louisa Blake Morrison (died 1918). The surname of Blake was assumed by her father on his marriage. Soon after Louisa's birth her father was appointed rector of Welsh Bicknor in Herefordshire. Here she spent her childhood and retained a home throughout her life. She went to school in Great Malvern and Neuchatel, and then attended Cheltenham Ladies' College. In 1887 she entered the London School of Medicine for Women, graduating MB from London University in 1892 with first-class honours in medicine and obstetrics and BS with first-class honours in 1893. She obtained her MD (London) in 1894 and in 1895 became the first woman to obtain the master of surgery (MS). 
Determined on a career in general surgery Miss Aldrich-Blake was appointed, in 1895, as assistant surgeon to the New Hospital for Women (a hospital staffed only by medical women, later renamed the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital). She subsequently became senior and then consulting surgeon there. Also in 1895 she was the first woman appointed as anaesthetist to the Royal Free Hospital, the teaching hospital for the London School of Medicine for Women. In 1896 she was appointed surgical registrar at the Royal Free, again the first woman to hold the post. In 1919 she was appointed consulting surgeon there, a position she held until her death. She was also consultant to the Canning Town Women's Settlement Hospital in east London from 1897 to 1920. A landowner with private means she never made a large income from her professional practice. Miss Aldrich-Blake published little but was widely respected for her excellent judgement in surgery. She was one of the first surgeons in Britain to undertake Wertheim's operation for carcinoma of the cervix. In 1910 she was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine. 
For most of her professional life Miss Aldrich-Blake was closely associated with the London School of Medicine for Women, being appointed vice-dean in 1906 and dean in 1914. Under her leadership the school almost doubled in size during the First World War, as many young women sought a medical training to make their contribution to the war effort. Miss Aldrich-Blake was herself heavily involved in medical women's war efforts, over and above her roles as medical school dean and consultant surgeon. She helped organize a woman-staffed hospital in Cherbourg in 1914 and worked there in her vacation. In 1915 and 1916 she spent her vacations working at the Anglo-French Red Cross Hospital run by Dr Frances Ivens in Royaumont where she was dubbed 'Madame la Generale' by the patients (Crofton, 58). In 1916 she organized two major initiatives to recruit medical women for war service overseas. She was also visiting surgeon at the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps Hospital in Isleworth during the war years. 
Miss Aldrich-Blake was not a campaigning feminist but aimed to establish women's equality with men through professional example, a message she stressed to her students. Miss Aldrich-Blake was noted for her quietness, her readiness to help young women surgeons in their work and as an outstanding administrator and financial planner. She was founding treasurer of the Medical Women's Federation from 1917. After the war ended she was a prime mover in the substantial enlargement of both the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and the Royal Free hospitals. In 1925, the year of the London School of Medicine's golden jubilee, she was made DBE. Louisa Aldrich-Blake died of cancer on 28 December 1925 at her London home, 17 Nottingham Place, Marylebone, having been engaged in surgery up to the last six weeks of her life. Her funeral was held on 1 January 1926 in St Pancras Church, London, close to the women's medical school and the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Royal Free hospitals. Her ashes were taken to her country home in Welsh Bicknor. 


@@@@@


doc= 30368


Alexander, Albert Victor, Earl Alexander of Hillsborough (1885-1965), politician and co-operator, was born at 59 George Street, Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, on 1 May 1885, the son of Albert Alexander (died 1886), a blacksmith, and his wife, Eliza Jane, 'nee' Thatcher. On his father's death his mother moved back to her parents' house in Bristol, and provided for her four children by returning to her trade as a maker of surgical belts and corsets. For several years times were difficult, but eventually this determined and energetic woman owned a successful business. 
Alexander was educated at Barton Hill elementary school in Bristol, but ended his formal education at the age of thirteen to supplement the family income. His first job was in the office of a leather merchant, but he soon became employed as a boy clerk in the office of the Bristol school board. In 1903 he shifted to the school management department of the Somerset county council and returned to live at Weston-super-Mare. Apart from war service he remained in educational administration until 1920. 
Alexander's marriage on 6 June 1908 to Esther Ellen (1877/8-1969), a schoolteacher, daughter of George Chapple of Tiverton, Devon, was the prelude to some significant shifts in his activities. His first religious affiliation had been to the Church of England; under his wife's influence, he became a Baptist. As a lay preacher he became an exponent of militant protestantism. 'If you want salvation, you have to be born again. You have to go to the life-giving Word of God; the Word made flesh' ('Hansard 5L', 231, 1961, 242). His religious shift was accompanied by support for the Liberal Party, in contrast to his mother who was a stalwart Conservative. He joined the Weston Co-operative Society and became active in the National Association of Local Government Officers. In addition he continued his education at evening classes. Such activities located him very much in the culture of respectable Edwardian Liberalism. As an activist he developed political skills; his work as a lay preacher made him an effective public speaker. In this last field he emulated his maternal grandfather, Francis Thatcher, a well-known Bristol evangelist. 
This stability was broken, perhaps decisively, by the First World War. Alexander volunteered in 1914, but was not called up until 1916, when he joined the Artists' Rifles. Military training affected his health and he saw no active service. Instead he became a posting officer, allocated recruits to their units, and following the armistice served as an education officer. He was demobilized with the rank of captain. A return to Weston-super-Mare and the Somerset education department perhaps seemed a move back to a narrower world. On holiday in London in 1920 he read an advertisement for a parliamentary secretary to the Co-operative Congress. In September 1920 he accepted the post; in November he began work in London. 
Within a year Alexander was associated with a great parliamentary victory. The Lloyd George coalition proposed to impose a corporation profit tax on the undistributed dividends of co-operative societies. Alexander's patient lobbying influenced some government back-benchers. On 19 July 1921 the tax proposal was defeated by 137 votes to 135. This parliamentary success raised Alexander's political status. He was approached by the Co-operative Party in Sheffield to be their parliamentary candidate. The Co-operative Party had emerged in 1917-18; its candidates normally enjoyed Labour Party support. In the general election of November 1922 Alexander was returned as the Labour and Co-operative member for Sheffield Hillsborough. 
Alexander's achievement was distinctive. He had not been a member of any trade union affiliated to the Labour Party, nor had he been active in any socialist organization. Arguably his beliefs showed much continuity with his pre-war Liberalism; he proved a competent and well-informed parliamentary speaker. His administrative skills were evident, and in January 1924 he obtained a junior post in the first Labour government. As parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade, he worked under another dedicated administrator, Sidney Webb. Beatrice Webb described him as 'a new discovery -- a hard-headed administrative socialist, graduating in municipal service and recently identified with the Consumers' Co-operative Movement. He is a singularly good-tempered, sane-minded, direct-speaking person, alike in private and on the platform, with a strain of intellectual curiosity, of great value in social reconstruction. (22 March 1924, 'The Diary of Beatrice Webb', ed. N. I. MacKenzie and J. MacKenzie, 4, 1985, 22)' In the years of opposition from 1924 to 1929 Alexander never stood for election to the executive committee of the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP). Dividing his time between parliament and the Co-operative Congress, he stood therefore outside the formal leadership group. But as an effective parliamentarian he was tipped increasingly for high office in any future Labour government. 
Whatever the distinctive character of his route to Labour politics, Alexander participated enthusiastically in the Sheffield labour movement. From 1922 the city had three Labour MPs, rising to five in 1929; Labour gained control of the city council in 1926. Alexander's campaigns in Sheffield included a strong co-operative element, but his work there and at Westminster was dominated by the depression in the Sheffield steel industry. It might have been expected that any ministerial advancement for Alexander might reflect his economic and social concerns; but the formation of the second Labour government in June 1929 saw him enter the cabinet as first lord of the Admiralty. Cabinet membership indicated his reputation for competence both in parliament and in administration. Beatrice Webb, an admirer, summarized the assessment that brought him to high office: 'a vigorous and masterful personality; with good physique, alert mind, straightforward manner, but without charm or brilliance. Somewhat of the Arthur Henderson build and temperament' (14 Sept 1929, 'Beatrice Webb's Diaries', ed. Cole, 219). 
Alexander's appointment to the Admiralty did not arise from any prior interest in naval matters. Yet this became his specialism for over two decades. Contemporary and historical judgements have varied on how far Alexander acted as much more than the political representative of naval interests. Yet he rapidly developed a mastery over detail -- so much so, that after a meeting in Rome with Mussolini in 1930, the latter assumed that Alexander had been a naval officer. Moreover he was an effective advocate for his case both in cabinet and in the Commons. Within his first year at the Admiralty he was involved in the London Naval Conference. The resulting treaty between Britain, the United States, and Japan presented agreement on both numerical and qualitative limitations on construction. He replied effectively to opposition criticism that the outcome would result in an erosion of British naval supremacy. 
Alexander's departmental commitments meant that he had little involvement in the Labour government's desperate attempts to deal with rapidly rising unemployment. In August 1931, along with other cabinet members, he confronted the crisis precipitated by the publication of the May report on public expenditure and the flight of Britain's gold reserves. His basically liberal sentiments remained powerful. When the cabinet debated the possibility of a revenue tariff, Alexander was one of the five free-traders who backed the thorough opposition of the chancellor of the exchequer, Philip Snowden. He did not question the need for a balanced budget and cuts in public expenditure. A paper from him accepted cuts in naval pay provided that equivalent reductions were made elsewhere in the public services and in unemployment benefit. Alexander seemed impeccably orthodox; and yet in the symbolic cabinet vote on a 10 per cent cut in unemployment benefit he stood with Arthur Henderson and the dissenting minority. 
With the formation of the National Government, Alexander became a prominent member of the Labour opposition. He was elected to the executive committee of the PLP and made a notably vigorous Commons speech opposing the new government's economy measures. Like other former members of the Labour cabinet, he distanced himself from any suggestion that they had been prepared to endorse many of the economies that they now criticized. Together with most of his colleagues Alexander was defeated in the October 1931 general election, and for the next four years concentrated on his work for the co-operative movement. In contrast to his success in 1921, he failed to persuade the National Government not to tax the surpluses of co-operative societies, a change introduced in 1933. 
Prior to his election defeat in 1931 Alexander had been seen, for example by Arthur Henderson, as a possible future leader of the Labour Party. Yet when he regained his Sheffield seat in the general election of 1935 he did not stand for the leadership, and instead backed Herbert Morrison. During his years out of parliament he had tended to concentrate on co-operative affairs at a time when Attlee had strengthened his own position in the parliamentary party, and Morrison had been prominent both as a party policy maker and as leader of the successful Labour group on the London county council. In contrast, Alexander never established a dominant role in the broader Labour Party. He was not a star at party conferences and his increasing concentration on defence issues struck few chords with back-benchers and party activists. From 1935 he was a valued member of the party's Commons leadership; he played a significant part along with Hugh Dalton in shifting the PLP away from its opposition to defence estimates. Within the controversies of the late 1930s he endorsed collective security through the League of Nations, criticized the Munich settlement and the application of the non-intervention policy in Spain, and attacked any hint of a popular front. 
The formation of the Churchill coalition in May 1940 brought Alexander back to the Admiralty. He succeeded the new prime minister, with whom he had been in regular contact on naval matters since the latter's return to the Admiralty in September 1939. Churchill and the chiefs of staff continued to direct operations, and Alexander was denied access to the most secret materials. However, within his allotted sphere he acted with his customary energy and competence. His relationship with the sea lords was good, and his knowledge and zeal made him an effective advocate of the navy's case in the battle for resources. He was also an effective propagandist, speaking at 'warship weeks' to maintain public enthusiasm for the war. Critics suggested that he was too enamoured of naval tradition and too responsive to flattery by the sea lords, but his wartime ministerial career was generally reckoned a success. 
Alexander would have preferred a continuation of the coalition until the defeat of Japan, but the Labour victory in the 1945 election meant that his absence from the Admiralty was brief. His final stint covered the transition from a war to a peace footing. It also involved his absence from Whitehall between March and June 1946 as a member of the cabinet mission to India. His two colleagues were the secretary of state, Lord Pethick-Lawrence, and Sir Stafford Cripps, who had been involved in an earlier Indian initiative in 1942. Alexander was involved as the custodian of British defence interests; he began with slight knowledge of Indian affairs and was at first largely silent. As he became more familiar with the issues his interventions became vigorous, and he tended to side with the viceroy, Lord Wavell, sometimes in opposition to his cabinet colleagues. His responses could be thoroughly imperialist as he encountered Congress politicians. 'I was not prepared to sit down under the humiliation of my country and therefore something better than a policy of scuttle would have to be thought up' (Alexander, diary, 20 May 1946, quoted in Morgan, 221). Along with Ernest Bevin he was unhappy about the eventual decision to withdraw. 
Alexander finally left the Admiralty in October 1946; until December he sat in the cabinet as minister without portfolio, but then became minister of defence in charge of a new department created to reorganize the direction of defence policy. In general he was less successful at defence than at the Admiralty. His old post had harnessed his talents for vigorous advocacy of a departmental case. The strategic perspective necessitated by his new responsibility proved more difficult. He also faced problems in arbitrating between the competing claims of the services. This friction over resources meant that his relationships with the service chiefs were more problematic than had been the case at the Admiralty. This was particularly the case with the chief of the Imperial General Staff, Field Marshal Montgomery, who felt that Alexander 'always sat on the fence' (Montgomery, 483). Away from the recriminations Alexander was a member of the secret cabinet committee concerned with the development of a British atomic bomb. 
Some of Alexander's problems reflected broader political and economic pressures upon the government. He was a thorough supporter of Bevin's foreign policy, a position that provoked criticism among some co-operators, but military spending was necessarily constrained by economic difficulties, not least in summer 1947, when Alexander fought a long battle to limit cuts in defence expenditure. There were also problems with Labour back-benchers. Legislation to introduce peacetime national service for an eighteen-month period was introduced by the government in spring 1947. Opposition came not only from customary Labour critics of government foreign policy but from those influenced by pacifist or broader anti-militarist sentiments. The government responded by reducing the period of service from eighteen months to twelve, an announcement made by Alexander during the bill's committee stage ('Hansard 5C', 437, 1947, 441-53). However, the intensification of the cold war produced a reversal of the policy; further legislation in December 1948 restored the eighteen-month requirement. 
Alexander expressed firm positions in some cabinet debates beyond his own ministerial responsibilities. His constituency interests helped to ensure that he initially supported the early nationalization of the iron and steel industry. On this divisive issue he stood at first, unusually, with what could broadly be characterized as the left within the cabinet. Subsequently, however, he favoured a compromise that fell short of full nationalization. In discussions on the National Health Service he was critical of the proposed dependence of hospitals on central government funds. His support of municipal involvement perhaps indicated the decentralizing strand within the co-operative tradition. 
Alexander took a peerage in the new year's honours list of 1950 and became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster until the government lost office in the 1951 election. In this last ministerial phase he was a strong supporter of United States policy during the Korean War. He backed American moves to brand China as an aggressor in a United Nations resolution. A Foreign Office minister noted that Alexander and another supporter of the American line, Lord Jowitt, were 'like good old High Tories' (Kenneth Younger, quoted in Morgan, 431). In opposition, Alexander became deputy leader of the Labour group in the Lords and succeeded Jowitt as leader in 1955. He was a regular and conscientious participant in Lords debates until his retirement in autumn 1964. He died in Manor House Hospital, Hendon, Middlesex, on 11 January 1965, and was buried three days later at West Mersea, Essex. He was survived by his wife (who was made CBE in 1947) and by a daughter. A son died in infancy, and his title therefore became extinct. 
Alexander was a committed co-operator, a fervent protestant, an energetic administrator, an uncomplicated patriot, and an enthusiast for traditions, especially those of the navy. His route into the upper echelons of the Labour Party was unusual; his contribution above all was to help make the party credible as a potential government, especially in an area such as defence, where Conservatives had traditionally claimed a special competence. Apart from his commitment to co-operation, he articulated little that was ideologically distinctive to the Labour cause. He retained legacies of his Liberal past, and in his later career his views on foreign policy and defence were little different from those of the Conservative leadership. 
Beyond his extensive political activities Alexander was a convivial figure, with several friendships outside the labour movement. A self-taught pianist, his repertory of music-hall tunes provided the basis for relaxation in diverse settings, not least the vice-regal lodge. A second enthusiasm was football. In December 1946 Lord Wavell, increasingly at odds with the Attlee government over Indian policy, visited London. Towards the end of his visit Wavell went with Alexander to watch the minister's team, Chelsea, at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers. The viceroy, in his official discussions, had seen Alexander the defender of empire; at Stamford Bridge he saw Alexander as everyman: 'He is an enthusiastic football fan, shouting 'foul', 'play the game', 'don't mess about' etc as loudly as anyone' (24 Dec 1946, 'Wavell: the Viceroy's Journal', 399). 


@@@@@


doc= 30369


Alexander, Boyd (1873-1910), traveller and ornithologist, born at Willesley Place, Cranbrook, Kent, on 16 January 1873, was a twin son (with Robert Alexander) of Colonel Boyd Francis Alexander, of an Ayrshire family, and his wife, Mary Wilson. After education at Radley College (1887-91) he passed into the army in 1893, joining the seventh battalion rifle brigade. Devoting himself to travel and ornithology, he made two excursions to the little-visited Cape Verde Islands in 1897 to study their ornithology. It was there that he met Jose Lopes, who became invaluable to him as a taxidermist and general assistant, accompanying him in all of his travels. Alexander went, in 1898, on an ornithological expedition to the Zambezi River and its tributary the Kafue, and in 1899 he joined the Gold Coast constabulary. He took part in the relief of Kumasi in 1900, for which he received the medal and clasp, and on his return to England he was offered and accepted a commission in the rifle brigade. Keeping up his studies of bird life in west Africa, he visited Fernando Po in 1902, and made there not only ornithological but also ethnological investigations and a map, and gathered material for a review of Spanish missionary work. 
In 1904 Alexander started on a remarkable expedition from the mouth of the Niger to the Nile delta. It was designed to survey Northern Nigeria and to show that Africa could be crossed from west to east by means of its waterways. Accompanied by his younger brother, Captain Claud Alexander, and by Captain G. B. Gosling, P. A. Talbot, and Jose Lopes, Alexander left Lokoja on the Niger on 31 March, and travelled to Ibi on the Benue. There the party separated for a time. Gosling, a zoologist, went off to shoot big game. Claud Alexander and Talbot carried out a valuable survey of the Murchison Mountains in spite of sickness, scarcity of food, and difficulties with carriers and hostile indigenous peoples; they finally reached Maifoni, where Claud Alexander died of fever, after six weeks' illness, on 13 November 1904, at the age of twenty-six. Boyd Alexander meanwhile travelled alone by Loko on the Benue, Keffi, the Kachia and Panda Hills, and Bauchi to Yo (arriving on 26 October), some 30 miles from Lake Chad. He succeeded in visiting his dying brother at Maifoni, and thence he (now with Talbot, Gosling, and Lopes as companions) reached Lake Chad by way of Kukawa and Kaddai. Some months were spent in the difficult exploration of the lake. Their valuable surveys of the lake, when compared with other surveys, enabled geographers to form an idea of the remarkable periodic variations of level and other physical conditions to which the lake is liable in sympathy with periods of drought or heavy rainfall. 
On 26 May 1905 Alexander, Gosling, and Lopes (Talbot having returned to the west) started up the Shari, making a detailed survey of the Bamingi tributary in September. They then traversed the watershed to the Ubangi, and proceeded across the centre of the continent, following that river and the Welle. At Niangara on the Welle, Gosling died of blackwater fever. Alexander now travelled to N'Soro, turned north to the Lado country, and followed the Yei River and Bahr al-Jebel downward through Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. He surveyed the Kibali tributary of the Welle in July and the Yei in October 1906, besides carrying out important zoological studies. He reached the Nile in December 1906 and from there returned to England. 
For his journey across the continent Alexander received the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society of Antwerp in 1907, and the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society of London in 1908, as well as the thanks of his colonel, the duke of Connaught, on behalf of his regiment. At the close of 1908 Alexander, with Lopes, left England again for west Africa. He visited the islands of Sao Thome, Principe, and Annobon, and, in March 1909, the Kamerun Mountain, whence he proceeded to Lake Chad by way of the upper Benue, intending thereafter to make for Egypt through Wadai and Darfur. The country was known to be in a disturbed condition, and Alexander, on reaching Nyeri, 70 miles north of Abeshr, the capital of Wadai, was murdered by Muslim tribesmen on 2 April 1910. He was buried at Maifoni, by the grave of his brother Claud. Lopes was able to escape and relayed the news of Alexander's death through the French administration in the region. A memorial to Boyd and his brother Claud was placed in the parish church of Cranbrook, Kent. Alexander was an 'astute and persevering naturalist-explorer' ('GJ', 110) who was modest about his remarkable exploits, and showed a 'brotherly willingness' (ibid.) to share the information that he acquired. He published an account of his journey of 1904-7 in 'From the Niger to the Nile' (2 vols., 1907). He also contributed a detailed account of Fernando Po to the 'Ibis' (1903), and a paper 'From the Niger, by Lake Chad, to the Nile', to the 'Geographical Journal' (30.119). 


@@@@@


doc= 30370


Alexander, Sir George (1858-1918), actor and theatre manager, was born on 19 June 1858 at 1 Russell Villas, Russell Street, Reading, the eldest son in the family of at least three sons and one daughter of William Murray Samson (1827/8-1892), a Scottish commercial traveller, and his first wife, Mary Ann Hine, 'nee' Longman. He was educated at private schools in Clifton, near Bristol, and at Ealing in London, but mostly at Stirling high school, which he left when he was fifteen. His intensely anti-theatrical father wanted him to succeed him in commerce, while George himself toyed briefly with a career in medicine. Instead, he was apprenticed as a clerk to the London drapery firm of Leaf & Co. However, this did not dampen his ardour for the theatre and he was soon acting in amateur theatricals. In 1874 and again in 1876 he participated in a benefit performance for the Royal Hospital for Consumption given at the St James's Theatre. He also appeared as Henri de Neuville in 'Plot and Passion' at the Cabinet Theatre, King's Cross, in 1875. These and other early theatrical forays were watched over with avuncular concern by his former Scottish dominie at Stirling, Duncan MacDougall, with whom George Samson corresponded regularly. 
Having abandoned the conventionality of trade in 1879, joined Ada Swanborough and W. H. Vernon's repertory company at the Theatre Royal, Nottingham, and dropped his last two names as being too biblical for the stage, plain George Alexander made his professional debut on 7 September 1879 as Charles in W. B. Bernard's 'His Last Legs' and Harry Prendergast in Sydney Grundy's 'The Snowball'. A few more roles in Nottingham resulted in an engagement for 1879-80 with the T. W. Robertson provincial touring company and juvenile leads in Robertson's 'Caste', 'Ours', 'School', 'Home', 'Society', and 'MP'. Alexander's London debut followed on 4 April 1881 at the Standard, Shoreditch, where he was Freddy Butterscotch in Robert Reece's 'The Guv'nor'. Henry Irving must have discerned some potential in this early, mundane career because he hired Alexander for the Lyceum, over, it must be said, the fledgeling actor's own objections: Alexander thought he would benefit from further experience in the provinces before attempting the West End stage. Irving's perception proved to be acute, since Alexander's performance as Caleb Deecie in the revival of James Albery's 'The Two Roses' (26 December 1881) was an immediate success. Irving was probably drawn by his handsome features, sense of humour, and manliness, since he also cast Alexander as Paris in 'Romeo and Juliet' (8 March 1882). 
Alexander's experience broadened as he bounced among several engagements. First he was at the Court Theatre, followed by provincial tours and Shakespearian roles (Orlando, Romeo, and Benedick) with Ellen Lancaster Wallis. A brief stint at the Adelphi in 1883 led to appearances with Kendal and Hare at the St James's, where one of his roles was Octave in 'The Ironmaster' (1884) by Pinero, later a collaborator and friend. 
Irving then rehired Alexander to play De Mauprat in Bulwer-Lytton's 'Richelieu' (19 July 1884), and Alexander remained with Irving for the next six years, receiving invaluable training from the acknowledged master of the profession. However, Alexander found Irving's methods with his company extremely arduous and verging on the tyrannical: five or six hours of rehearsing with Irving often left him on the brink of tears. He vowed he would be much kinder to his own company when he ventured into management. Alexander accompanied Irving on two American tours, in 1884-5 and 1887-8, on one occasion deputizing for Irving when he fell ill in Boston. He scored a particular success on 9 January 1886 when he took over the title role (which he had coveted initially) in W. G. Wills's 'Faust' from the ailing H. B. Conway, and played it for 384 performances. His other roles (such as Shakespeare's Orsino, Laertes, and Macduff) did not garner any accolades, although his salary increased gradually. 
Doubtless chafing under Irving's regime, and entertaining his own managerial aspirations, Alexander secured the rights to Hamilton Aide's 'Dr Bill', while marking time in 'London Day by Day' (14 September 1889) at the Adelphi for the Gatti brothers. Soon afterwards he leased the Avenue Theatre and launched into management with 'Dr Bill', which opened on 1 February 1890. Once the Gattis finally released him, Alexander assumed the title role in 'Dr Bill' and so joined the ranks of London's actor-managers. His other productions at the Avenue were 'The Grandsire' (21 May 1890), 'The Struggle for Life' (25 September 1890), and 'Sunlight and Shadow' (7 November 1890). The results were mixed, and at one point he had to cope with a business manager who absconded with the box-office takings. Undeterred, however, in November 1890 Alexander signed the lease of the St James's Theatre, which began the most significant phase of his career and that theatre's history. He was to remain there until his death in 1918. 
At this juncture Alexander had only eleven years' professional experience; nevertheless, his managerial policy, production methods, and overall philosophy were already determined. He wanted the best acting, which he achieved by carefully casting performers of high ability; significantly Alexander did not reserve choice roles or the spotlight for himself as did other actor-managers. Stage management had to be thoughtful and natural, and backed by appropriate scenery. Another objective was the encouragement of British dramatists, and of eighty-one productions at the St James's only eight were devoted to foreign writers. Alexander practised careful financial management (perhaps a reflection of his Scottish heritage), but he paid both good salaries and royalties for the finest results. From one perspective, Alexander presented a range of plays: comedy, drama, modern romances, farce, costume drama, tragedy, history plays, the occasional play about provincial life, all found a place on the St James's stage. Nevertheless, his major concern was to present plays which would attract and retain a fashionable society audience, or playgoers interested in the doings of the smart and fashionable. Hesketh Pearson characterized aptly Alexander's productions: 'In a typical St James's play the humorous characters were delightfully playful, the serious characters charmingly sentimental, and the plot savoured of scandal without being objectionably truthful. Adultery was invariably touched on and inevitably touched up; theft was made thrilling and murder romantic. (Pearson, 23)' In these endeavours Alexander was abetted by his able wife, Florence Jane Theleur (1857/8-1946), the daughter of Edward Theleur, whom he had married on 8 August 1882. She acted as his fashion and artistic director, as well as general adviser. She would scout for potential performers, and helped to manage Alexander's affairs, while maintaining a deceptively charming facade. In fact, she possessed a strong personality and was a firm friend. 
Alexander's other methods were similarly focused on success. He consulted with dramatists, often working on their scripts with them, Pinero and R. C. Carton being noteworthy exceptions to this practice. Prior to rehearsal Alexander established the necessary blocking, envisioning exactly what he wanted. Rehearsals began promptly and lasted only three hours (from eleven to two o'clock) since Alexander believed longer rehearsals were unprofitable: his painful memories of Irving lingered on. This also reflected his concern for the welfare of the members of his company, with many of whom he worked repeatedly, for his was virtually a stock company. And, always, he saw himself as but one piece in the theatrical jigsaw puzzle, never the star. 
Alexander opened his St James's management on 31 January 1891 by transferring 'Sunlight and Shadow', followed by several other offerings. His first major achievement came with Oscar Wilde's 'Lady Windermere's Fan' (20 February 1892). Their association was somewhat surprising given Wilde's flamboyancy and Alexander's own intrinsic modesty and fastidiousness. But Alexander could draw on all his diplomatic skills when working with such acerbic, egotistical people. He cajoled Wilde with practical advice for improving the piece, some of which Wilde ignored, until first-night critics justified Alexander's judgement. In the end Wilde enjoyed success and controversy, and went home $7000 richer. 
Equally brilliant was Wilde's 'The Importance of being Earnest' which Alexander produced on 4 February 1895, and which incidentally demonstrated that Alexander, as John Worthing, could act in farcical comedy. Again Alexander advised Wilde about the text itself: for example, he convinced Wilde to compress acts two and three into a single one. Unfortunately, the success was short-lived: Wilde's trial and conviction on charges of homosexual behaviour brought unwonted attention to the St James's. Alexander tried to keep the production going by removing Wilde's name from the production, but the ruse failed and Alexander had to withdraw the play. The incident caused a breach between the two men for several years, although Alexander later paid Wilde small monthly sums, and bequeathed his rights in Wilde's plays to the latter's son, Vyvian Holland. 'Earnest' was successful eventually in 1909, when Alexander revived it and reprised Jack Worthing for 316 performances. Interestingly, in November 1895, Alexander himself skirted the law and social obloquy when he was arrested for soliciting a prostitute. He maintained stoutly he had merely given half a crown to an importunate beggar woman: a reluctant magistrate gave Alexander the benefit of the doubt. 
More compatible in temperament, style, and method was Alexander's association with A. W. Pinero. Their first play together was 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' (27 May 1893), considered at the time a daring treatment of the 'woman with a past', although it did not really exceed the social purview of its audience. The play was significant in establishing the career of the temperamental and caustic Mrs Patrick Campbell (scouted by Mrs Alexander), who was cast as Paula Tanqueray. Alexander played opposite her as her insincere, spineless husband. While the carefully mounted production proved highly successful, Mrs Campbell irritated and annoyed Alexander: she found him distant and too dignified; Alexander thought her insufficiently decorous. They performed together again only rarely. 
Pinero's second St James's piece, 'The Princess and the Butterfly' (29 March 1897), was less successful: it achieved a respectable run, but was expensive to produce. Alexander appeared in one of his typical 'raisonneur' roles, Sir George Lamorant. The production also caused a rift between the two men, largely because Pinero insisted on autocratic rights as a playwright-director. When they eventually became reconciled, the result was 'His House in Order' (1 February 1906), for which Alexander gave Pinero the free directorial hand he required. Its 427 performances provided Alexander with a resounding artistic and financial hit. Interestingly, Alexander, ever closely followed in such matters, set a new men's fashion by wearing a soft-collared shirt with a lounge suit as he played Hilary Jesson. Later collaborations with Pinero were 'The Thunderbolt' (9 May 1908) and 'Mid-Channel' (2 September 1909), both deserving better receptions, the delightful one-act 'Playgoers' (31 March 1913), and the somewhat uninspired 'The Big Drum' (1 September 1915). 
Alexander's association with H. A. Jones produced similarly mixed results. 'The Masqueraders' (28 April 1894) was successful (the cast included Mrs Campbell, capitalizing on her feat as Paula Tanqueray), while 'The Triumph of the Philistines' (11 May 1895) flopped. More sensationally disastrous was 'Guy Domville' (5 January 1895), Henry James's attempt to break into the potentially lucrative theatrical market. While well staged with a good cast, the play itself (despite praise from sympathetic critics) lacked congruity, and when Alexander mistakenly led James forward in response to first-night cries for the author, James was soundly booed off the stage by a segment of the audience. He never wrote another play. 
However, Alexander was undeterred by such set-backs, and pressed ahead with other interests. He encouraged Stephen Phillips, whose work was rather in vogue, to write a poetic tragedy. The result was 'Paolo and Francesca' (6 March 1902), which was received enthusiastically and, incidentally, launched Henry Ainley's career as a Shakespearian and romantic actor, while Alexander himself was a hit as Giovanni Malatesta. The piece ran for 134 performances. However, Alexander's interest in poetic drama was not extensive: he produced only two Shakespearian plays, 'As You Like It' (2 December 1896) and 'Much Ado about Nothing' (16 February 1898), both successful productions. 
Alexander was at his best on stage in such costume romances as Edward Rose's dramatization of Anthony Hope's novel 'The Prisoner of Zenda' (7 January 1896). For 255 performances Alexander was splendid in the dual roles of Rudolf and Rassendyll, roles matched perfectly with his persona as the ultimate matinee idol, projecting immaculate refinement. Audience, play, and actor were similarly suited with J. O. Hobbes's 'The Ambassador' (2 June 1898), with Alexander in the title role. However, there were also notable failures, particularly the $6000 loss Alexander incurred with Jethro Bethell's musical version of 'Turandot' (18 January 1913), given a lavish production. Altogether twenty-seven of his productions actually resulted in losses; nevertheless, he left an estate of more than $90,000 at his death. 
Alexander gave other notable performances. On 16 September 1895 he appeared in a royal command performance of Carton's 'Liberty Hall' at Balmoral and received a silver cigar box from Queen Victoria. For the royal command performance for Edward VII on 4 December 1908 Alexander was Edward Thursfield in Alfred Sutro's 'The Builder of Bridges', while on 17 May 1911 he played Alfred Evelyn in Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money' in a royal command performance for the German emperor given at Drury Lane. Also at Drury Lane, Alexander played, at the playwright's request, in Hall Caine's 'The Prodigal Son' (1905), for which he received $250 weekly. 
Outside the theatre, Alexander found other outlets for his organizational abilities. From March 1907 he represented the South St Pancras division on the London county council for six years, and served diligently on several committees. But for ill health, he might have run for parliament. There was also committee work for the Actors' Benevolent Fund, the Royal General Theatrical Fund, and the Coronation Gala Performance in 1911 (given at His Majesty's), while he was also vice-president of the Actors' Association and president of the Actresses' Franchise League. Only his considerable diplomacy as chairman of the organizing committee for the Shakespearian tercentenary celebration at Drury Lane in 1916 kept the whole affair together. Characteristically he put forward F. R. Benson's name for the knighthood he received on that occasion. Alexander's own knighthood in 1911 had proved a popular award and eminently appropriate for such a dignified leader of the theatre. An honorary LLD from the University of Bristol followed in 1912. 
When the First World War broke out, Alexander's health was already in decline. However, he continued his work at the St James's and also toiled unflaggingly for several charities, notably the Red Cross Society, the League of Mercy, and the order of St John of Jerusalem, organizing fund-raising matinees, fetes, and garden parties. His health failed finally on 16 March 1918, when he died of consumption and diabetes at his country home, Little Court, Chorleywood, Hertfordshire. He was buried there four days later, mourned by such friends as Pinero, Ellen Terry, Irene Vanbrugh, Lillian Braithwaite, and C. Aubrey Smith. The staff of the St James's carried his coffin. A much larger, society-studded congregation attended his memorial service in London on 22 March 1918. 
Alexander was no revolutionary, although a handful of his productions had a contemporary, albeit passing daring aura. However, he applied high standards to every aspect of his art and profession, and he insisted on dignity, refinement, and respectability. He nurtured his performers and encouraged native playwrights, although always with a careful business eye. In short, he knew what a St James's audience wanted and satisfied that demand thoroughly. 


@@@@@


doc= 30371


Alexander, Harold Rupert Leofric George, first Earl Alexander of Tunis (1891-1969), army officer, was born in London on 10 December 1891, the third son of James Alexander, fourth earl of Caledon (1846-1898) and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Graham-Toler (died 1939), daughter of the third earl of Norbury. Alexander's youth was spent at the family estate, Caledon Castle, in co. Tyrone. His father, who had served briefly in the Life Guards but was better known as an adventurous deep-water yachtsman, died when Alexander was six; his mother, eccentric and imperious, held aloof from her children; but their four sons were perfectly happy in one another's company. It was in northern Ireland that Alexander developed both the athletic and the aesthetic sides of his character; he trained himself as a runner and enjoyed all the usual country sports, but he also taught himself to carve in wood and stone and began one of the main passions of his life: painting. After reading Sir Joshua Reynolds's 'Discourses on Art' he decided that what he wanted most in the world was to be president of the Royal Academy. At Harrow School he worked well enough to rise smoothly. His games were cricket, athletics, rackets, rugby, boxing, fencing, and gymnastics and he won distinction at all of them; he is best remembered as nearly saving the game for Harrow in what 'Wisden' called the most extraordinary cricket match ever played, at Lord's in 1910. He also won a school prize for drawing. 
Alexander went on to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned in the Irish Guards in 1911. Although pleased at the idea of spending a few years in a guards battalion, he intended to retire before long and make a living as an artist. These plans were upset by the outbreak of war in 1914. Alexander's battalion went to France in August and he served there continuously until early 1919, being in action throughout except when recovering from wounds or on courses. He was twice wounded, awarded the MC (1915), and appointed to the DSO (1916). Promotion was rapid. A lieutenant when he arrived, he became a captain in February 1915; eight months later one of the youngest majors in the army, with the acting command of the 1st battalion of his own regiment; and in October 1917 a lieutenant-colonel, commanding the 2nd battalion. During the retreat from Arras in March 1918 he was acting brigadier-general in command of the 4th guards brigade. 
The war was a turning point in Alexander's character and career. He had painted in the trenches, and he continued to paint throughout his life, reaching at times a standard only just short of the professional; but during the war he had come to realize the fascination of the profession of arms, and proved to himself and others that he was outstandingly competent at it. His reputation stood very high for courage but also for being cheerfully imperturbable in all circumstances. For four years he lived the life of a regimental officer, without any staff service; he later criticized senior commanders of that war for never seeking to share the conditions of the fighting troops. 
Not wishing to go back to barracks or to the army of occupation in Germany, Alexander applied in 1919 for an appointment to one of the many military missions in eastern Europe. He was first posted as a member of the allied relief commission in Poland under Stephen Tallents and later went with Tallents to Latvia, which was in danger of falling either to Russia or to Germany. The allies had no troops in the Baltic and only a small naval detachment under Sir Walter Cowan. Tallents placed the 'Landwehr', composed of Baltic Germans, under Alexander's command. At the age of twenty-seven he found himself at the head of a brigade-sized formation with mainly German officers. He was good at languages and had taught himself German and Russian; his authority derived from his charm and sincerity and his obvious professionalism. He kept his men steady and resistant to the attractions of the German expeditionary force under von der Goltz and led them to victory in the campaign which drove the Red Army from Latvia. 
Alexander retained all his life a keen interest in Russia. During the First World War he designed a new uniform cap for himself with a high visor and flat peak, on the model of one he had seen a Russian officer wearing. He always wore the order of St Anne with swords which Yudenich awarded him in 1919; when he met Rokossovsky in 1945 the Russian general muttered to him in an aside that he had once had it too. In the Second World War, like Churchill, he admired Stalin and was enthusiastic about the Soviet army. 
After the Soviet Union recognized Latvia's independence in 1920 Alexander returned to England to become second in command of his regiment. In 1922 he was given command and took it to Constantinople as part of the army of occupation. In 1923, after the treaty of Lausanne, the regiment went to Gibraltar and in 1924 it returned to England. In 1926-7 he was at the Staff College, Camberley. He was very senior in rank, a full colonel, but for the duration of the course he was temporarily reduced to the rank of major. After commanding the regiment and regimental district of the Irish Guards (1928-30), he attended the imperial defence college. This was followed by the only two staff appointments in his career: GSO 2 at the War Office (1931-2) and GSO 1 at northern command (1932-4). He was already widely regarded as likely to make the outstanding fighting commander of a future war; the other name mentioned, from the Indian army, was that of Claude Auchinleck. Alexander married in 1931 Lady Margaret Diana Bingham (died 1977), younger daughter of the fifth earl of Lucan; she was appointed GBE in 1954. They had two sons, one daughter, and an adopted daughter. 
In 1934 Alexander was appointed to command the Nowshera brigade on the north-west frontier, one of the most coveted in India. Auchinleck commanded the next brigade, in Peshawar. Alexander surprised and delighted his Indian troops by learning Urdu as rapidly and fluently as he had Russian and German. Next year he commanded the brigade in the Loc Agra campaign (called after a small village north of the Malakand Pass) against invading tribesmen; and not long after, under Auchinleck's command as the senior brigadier, in the Mohmand campaign. Both operations were successful; roads were built, large regions pacified; Alexander was appointed CSI (1936). It was noted not only that he had mastered the difficult techniques of fighting in mountainous country but also that he was always to be seen with the foremost troops. This reflected both his personal courage and his revulsion from the way his senior commanders had behaved in the First World War; it remained to the end a characteristic of his style of leadership. 
Alexander's promotion to major-general in 1937, at the age of forty-five, made him the youngest general in the British army; in 1938 he received command of the 1st division at Aldershot. In 1939 he took the division to France as one of the two in 1st corps under Sir John Dill. In the retreat to Dunkirk his division only once fought a serious if brief battle, when he successfully defended the Scheldt for two days, throwing back all German penetrations; for the rest of the time he was obliged to fall back with other divisions. It was Dunkirk which first brought his name prominently before the public. 1st corps was to form the final rearguard and Lord Gort superseded the corps commander and put Alexander in command. His orders were definite: to withdraw all the British troops who could be saved. The French commander, Admiral Abrial, favoured different tactics, and Alexander confessed that to carry out his orders while leaving the French still fighting made him feel that he had never been in such a terrible situation. During the three days in which he commanded, 20,000 British and 98,000 French were evacuated: Alexander left on the last motor launch, touring the beaches to see that there were no British troops remaining. 
On returning to England, Alexander was confirmed in command of 1st corps, which was responsible for the defence of the east coast from Scarborough to the Wash. Promoted lieutenant-general, he succeeded Auchinleck at southern command in December 1940. He was an admirable trainer of troops, the first to introduce the realistic 'battle-schools' which became so prominent a feature of military life from 1940 to 1944. He was also put in command of a nominal 'Force 110' which was to be used for amphibious operations; he and his staff planned several which never came off, such as the invasion of the Canaries and of Sicily. 
In February 1942 Alexander was suddenly informed that he was to take command of the army in Burma, where the situation was already desperate. The key battle had been lost before Alexander arrived; the Japanese were across the Sittang River in a position to encircle and capture Rangoon. The greatest good fortune, together with the oversight of a Japanese divisional commander, left open one narrow escape route, so Alexander and the bulk of his forces escaped from Rangoon which, obeying ill-considered orders from Sir A. P. Wavell, he had tried to hold almost beyond the last reasonable moment. After its fall Burma had no future military value except as a glacis for the defence of India. Alexander decided that the only success he could snatch from unmitigated defeat was to rescue the army under his command by withdrawing it to India. It was a campaign of which he always spoke with compunction and distaste, except for his admiration for General Slim. Left entirely without guidance after the fall of Rangoon -- not that the guidance he had received previously had been of any value -- Alexander did the best he could. As a further sign of the gifts he was to display as an allied commander, he got on the best of terms not only with Chiang Kai-shek but also with the American General J. W. Stilwell. 
It might be thought that two successive defeats would have ended Alexander's hopes of high command. Churchill had shown no mercy to Gort or Wavell, and was to show none to Auchinleck. But as he wrote in 'The Hinge of Fate' (1951), in sending Alexander to Burma 'never have I taken the responsibility for sending a general on a more forlorn hope' (Nicolson, 126). So greatly did he appreciate Alexander's ability that he immediately confirmed his designation as commander-in-chief of the First Army, which was to invade north Africa under Eisenhower's command in November 1942, when the allies for the first time seized the strategic initiative. But before that could take effect, Churchill felt impelled in early August to visit Egypt. Auchinleck was more impressive in the field than in conversation in his caravan; Churchill decided to replace him with Alexander. It is ironical that one of the main reasons why Auchinleck was replaced was that he declared himself unable to take the offensive until September: Churchill was to accept from Alexander, with but little remonstrance, a postponement until late October. 
Alexander took over as commander-in-chief, Middle East, on 15 August 1942. For the first time he found himself in a position which was not only not desperate but full of promise. He had a numerical superiority, and at last equality of equipment, against an army fighting at the end of a long and precarious line of communication with its bases and debilitated by sickness. General Gott, who was to have been his army commander, was killed; but he was replaced immediately by General Montgomery, who had been one of Alexander's corps commanders in southern command and whose skill in training and inspiring men was well known to him. He had a sound defensive position, strongly manned, and plans had been prepared for the expected enemy assault; they were based on a partial refusal of the left flank while holding the strong position of Alam Halfa, fortified and prepared by Auchinleck to block an advance on Alexandria. Reinforcements in men and tanks continued to arrive. Nevertheless there was a problem of morale, since the Eighth Army had been fighting in retreat since May and had lost one position after another; it was natural for the troops to wonder whether they might not find themselves retreating once more. The first step towards victory in Egypt was when Alexander made it known, as soon as he assumed command, that there was to be no further retreat; the decisive battle was to be fought on the Alamein line. 
The defensive battle of Alam Halfa and the offensive battle of El Alamein were, as Alexander always insisted, Montgomery's victories. Alexander was good at delegating, and generously acknowledged the merits of his subordinates. Indeed, after the failure of the first plan at El Alamein, Lightfoot, Alexander may deserve part of the credit for Supercharge, the modified version. In truth the two generals, the commander-in-chief and the army commander, were aptly suited to their respective roles and played them well. The successful campaign in Egypt, won at almost the lowest point in the allied fortunes, marked the beginning of a period in which British and allied armies knew scarcely anything but success. 
The invasion of north Africa in November meant that after two months a British army -- the First, with a French and an American corps -- was fighting in northern and central Tunisia against a mixed German-Italian army. Meanwhile the German-Italian armoured army of Africa, defeated at El Alamein, withdrew towards southern Tunisia pursued by the Eighth Army. A headquarters was required to command and co-ordinate the two allied armies. Alexander was summoned to the Casablanca conference of January 1943. He greatly impressed President Roosevelt, General Marshall, and the American chiefs of staff; his reputation at home had never been higher. The conference decided to appoint him deputy commander-in-chief to General Eisenhower, with command over all the forces actually fighting the enemy. He set up a very small headquarters, called the eighteenth army group from the numbers of the two British armies which made up the bulk of his command; this was originally located in the town of Constantine, but Alexander moved out into the field as soon as he could and operated from a mobile tented camp. 
The Tunisian campaign proves Alexander's capacity as a strategist. It also demonstrates his great gift of boosting the morale of the troops he commanded, as well as his skill in co-ordinating the efforts of different nationalities. At the beginning he faced a difficult task. The southern flank of his western front had been driven in by a bold enemy thrust which threatened the communications of the whole deployment. Alexander was on the spot, even before the date at which he was officially to assume command (20 February 1943); he was seen directing the siting of gun positions at the approaches to the Kasserine Pass. This was a flash of his old style, but it was not long before he took a firm grip on higher things and reorganized the whole direction of the campaign. He sorted out the confusion into which rapid changes had thrown the First Army, mobilized the ponderous but skilful thrust of the Eighth Army, and directed both in the final victory of Tunis. In this last battle in Africa he employed an elaborate and successful plan of deception, based on an accurate knowledge of enemy dispositions and intentions, and broke through their strong defensive front with a powerful and well-concealed offensive blow. In two days all was over. A quarter of a million enemy were captured. On 13 May he made his historic signal to the prime minister: 'Sir, it is my duty to report that the Tunisian campaign is over. All enemy resistance has ceased. We are masters of the North African shores' (Nicolson, 192). 
Sicily was the next objective on which the Casablanca conference had decided. The forces commanded by Alexander, as commander-in-chief of the fifteenth army group, consisted of the American Seventh and British Eighth armies. The principal interest in the campaign lies in the immense size of the amphibious effort required, larger in the assault phase even than for the invasion of Normandy, and in the elaborate planning which preceded it. It fell to Alexander to decide on the final form of the plan, a concentrated assault on the south-eastern corner of the island, rather than, as originally proposed by the planning staff, two separate attacks in the south-east and the north-west. In this decision he was vindicated, mainly because he correctly assessed the new possibilities of beach maintenance produced by recently acquired amphibious equipment. In the first few days, however, he made one of his few strategic errors by yielding to Montgomery's insistence that the Eighth Army could finish off the campaign by itself if the American Seventh Army were kept out of its way; admittedly Alexander was deceived by inaccurate reports of the progress that the Eighth Army was making. As a result the reduction of the island took rather longer than expected and many German defenders managed to withdraw into Calabria. Nevertheless the capture of Sicily in thirty-eight days was a notable strategic gain. It also encouragingly vindicated the methods of amphibious warfare soon to be used in invading France. 
That invasion was the principal factor affecting the last two years of Alexander's career as a commander in the field, during which he was engaged on the mainland of Italy. His troops were now no longer the spearhead of the allied military effort in Europe. He was required to give up, for the benefit of the western front, many divisions of his best troops on three occasions and his task was defined as to eliminate Italy from the war and to contain the maximum number of German divisions. The first part of this directive was rapidly achieved. In his second task also, which from September 1943 onwards represented the sole object of the campaign, he was strikingly successful. So far from diverting troops from Italy to the decisive front, the Germans continuously reinforced it, not only robbing the Russian front but even sending divisions from the west. To obtain this success, however, in a terrain always favouring the defence, Alexander was obliged to maintain the offensive and to compensate for the lack of superior force by using all the arts of generalship. 
The campaign in Italy was a great holding attack, Alexander stated later in an official dispatch. As is the nature of holding attacks, it was directed against a secondary theatre. Nevertheless it gave scope for daring strategic planning, despite the odds and the forbidding and mountainous nature of the ground. The initial assault at Salerno, simultaneous with the announcement of the Italian surrender, was a good example; a force of only three divisions, all that could be carried in the landing craft allotted to the theatre, was thrown on shore at the extreme limit of air cover. The landing at Anzio was a masterpiece of deception which caught the enemy off balance and forced him to send reinforcements to Italy. It made a vital contribution to the offensive of May and June 1944 in which the Germans were driven north of Rome, with disproportionately heavy losses in men and equipment. For this offensive Alexander secretly redeployed his two armies and mounted a most ingenious plan of deception; his opponent, Field Marshal Kesselring, was unable to react in time, for all that his defensive positions were strong both by nature and artificially. The capture of Rome just before the landing in Normandy boosted allied morale. More importantly for allied grand strategy, this crushing defeat obliged the Germans to reinforce Italy with eight fresh divisions, some taken from their western garrisons; a month later, in contrast, Alexander was ordered to surrender seven of his divisions for the campaign in France. The final battle, in April 1945, again exemplified Alexander's skill in deployment and in deception; by 2 May he had routed the most coherent enemy group of armies still resisting; all Italy had been overrun, and a million Germans had laid down their arms in the first big surrender of the war. 
The Italian campaign showed Alexander at the height of his powers. These included, besides the skill of a strategist, a thorough grasp of the principles of administration. As an allied commander he was supreme; there were no instances of friction anywhere in his command in spite of its varied composition, including at one time or another troops from Britain, the United States, India, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, France, Poland, Italy, Brazil, and Greece. For most of the campaign, as commander-in-chief of the fifteenth army group (later renamed allied armies in Italy), he acted as an independent commander; it had been agreed that the commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, Sir Maitland Wilson, should concern himself primarily with the general maintenance of the Italian campaign and with the security of the other areas of the command. 
On 12 December 1944 Alexander succeeded Wilson. He was appointed to the rank of field marshal, to date from 4 June 1944, when the allied armies entered Rome. But for all his high rank and heavy responsibilities he remembered his criticism of the commanders in the First World War. He always spent more time with the forward troops than in his headquarters. His popularity was immense, and his strategic planning benefited because he knew what the war was like at the point that counted. 
After the war some thought Alexander would become chief of the Imperial General Staff. But W. L. Mackenzie King invited him to be governor-general of Canada, and Churchill pressed him to accept. Alexander's sense of duty was reinforced by a strong attraction to the idea of serving Canada. His extended tenure of office ran from 1946 to 1952. He was the last British governor-general, as popular as any of his predecessors. He was comparatively young and brought a young family with him; he toured the whole country, played games, skied, and painted. To his dignity as the representative of the king of Canada and his reputation as a war leader he added an informal friendliness and charm. While in Canada he produced his official dispatches on his campaigns published in the 'London Gazette'; they have been described by his biographer as 'among the great state papers of our military history' (Nicolson, 295). 
In January 1952 Churchill visited Ottawa and invited Alexander to be minister of defence in his government. When a friend remonstrated he replied: 'Of course I accepted. It's my duty' (Nicolson, 301). To another friend he said, 'I simply can't refuse Winston' (ibid., 302). As he entered on his first political post in that frame of mind it is not surprising that he did not much enjoy his period of office. He was not temperamentally suited to political life, and in any case had few real powers to exercise. Churchill continued to behave as though it was he who was the minister of defence and Alexander his spokesman in the Lords. Nevertheless, Alexander had the assets of his great personal popularity, his charm, and the fact that he numbered so many personal friends among foreign statesmen and military men -- especially in the United States, and especially after the election of President Eisenhower. He made no particular mark as minister of defence because he preferred to rely on discreet persuasion and guidance; but he led a good team and suffered no diminution of his reputation. After two and a half years he resigned at his own request, in autumn 1954. 
In the last fifteen years of his life Alexander accepted several directorates. He was most active as director of Alcan, travelling extensively for the firm. He also served on the boards of Barclay's Bank and Phoenix Assurance. He devoted more and more time to painting. In 1960 the 'Sunday Times' persuaded him to allow his memoirs to be ghosted. They were edited by John North and published in 1962, but were not very favourably received because of their curiously disorganized and anecdotal form. He had agreed to publish because he wanted justice done to the armies in Italy; for himself he preferred to be judged on the basis of his dispatches. For the rest, he devoted himself to his garden and to reunions with old comrades. He died suddenly after a heart attack on 16 June 1969, in hospital in Slough. His funeral service was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor, and he was buried in the churchyard of Ridge, near Tyttenhanger, his family's Hertfordshire home. The headstone of his grave bears at the top the single world Alex, the name by which he was known to his friends and his soldiers. He was succeeded by his elder son, Shane William Desmond ('b'. 1935). 
Alexander was created a viscount in 1946 and an earl in 1952 on his return from Canada. He was appointed CB (1938), KCB and GCB (1942), GCMG on his appointment to Canada, and in the same year (1946) KG. He was sworn of the privy council in 1952 and also of the Canadian privy council. In 1959 he was admitted to the Order of Merit. He was colonel of the Irish Guards from 1946 to his death, constable of the Tower of London from 1960 to 1965. From 1957 to 1965 he was lieutenant of the county of London, and for a further year of Greater London. He was chancellor and then grand master of the Order of St Michael and St George, an elder brother of Trinity House, and in 1955 president of the MCC. He was a freeman of the City of London and of many other cities. His numerous foreign decorations included the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur, and the Legion of Merit and Distinguished Service Medal of the United States. 
Alexander was 5 feet 10 inches tall, slim, muscular, and handsome. His features were regular in the style which was regarded as typical of the army officer when he was young; he wore a trim guardsman's moustache all his life. He dressed with careful and unaffected elegance on all occasions; his Russian-style cap was only the precursor of several variations on uniform regulations, whereas in plain clothes he favoured neatness, fashion, and the avoidance of the elaborate. 
David Hunt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30372


Alexander, Samuel (1859-1938), philosopher, the third son and fourth child of Samuel Alexander, an Australian, and his wife, Eliza Sloman, who came from Cape Town, was born at Sydney, New South Wales, on 6 January 1859. His father, a saddler, died of consumption at the age of thirty-eight, shortly before his birth. His mother died in his house at Manchester in 1917, having gone to live with him there, with the rest of her family, in 1903. 
About 1863 the family left Sydney for St Kilda, a suburb of Melbourne. Alexander was educated at home and at private schools before entering Wesley College, Melbourne, in 1871. There, and in his two years at the University of Melbourne, where he held an exhibition, he gained all the distinctions open to him. In 1877, without completing his degree, he sailed for Britain on a voyage lasting 108 days, with the express purpose, bold in view of the family finances, of winning a scholarship at Oxford or Cambridge. He was advised that a scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, might be beyond his reach, and so prudently entered for one at Lincoln College as well, and did not succeed. But he won his scholarship at Balliol, where he graduated BA in 1881. Lincoln made amends by electing him to a fellowship in 1882. Its choice was amply justified by the sustained distinction of Alexander's undergraduate career, for he obtained firsts in mathematical and classical moderations (1879) and in 'literae humaniores' (1881). According to the 'Jewish Chronicle' this was the first election of a professing Jew to a fellowship in either of the ancient English universities. 
Alexander retained his fellowship for eleven years, living in Oxford except for the period between the end of 1888 and June 1891. The break, originally designed to be permanent, was due partly to his desire to mingle with a wider world, partly to his determination to increase his proficiency in experimental psychology. In pursuit of the latter aim he studied under Hugo Musterberg at Freiburg im Breisgau; in pursuit of the former, he lectured at Toynbee Hall, Whitechapel, and busied himself in other ways with the popularization of academic subjects. These activities were indicative of firmly held beliefs. In Oxford he was one of the rebels who thought that the course in Greats needed quickening from modern science, especially psychology. He lectured on that subject to any, dons or undergraduates, who were sufficiently interested to attend supernumerary courses. The same policy directed Alexander's occasional writings and his first book, 'Moral Order and Progress' (1889), an expansion of his essay for the Green moral philosophy prize which he had won in 1887. In its day it was widely believed to be the best systematic general treatise on evolutionary ethics in the English language. In the preface Alexander expressed his 'present dissent from [T. H.] Green's fundamental principles' (Alexander, 'Moral Order and Progress', vii) and added: 'I have come to the ideas, borrowed from biology and the theory of evolution, which are prevalent in modern ethics, with a training derived from Aristotle and Hegel, and I have found, not antagonism but, on the whole, fulfilment' (ibid., viii). 
In 1893 Alexander became professor of philosophy at the University of Manchester, where he taught for thirty-one years. It was a happy appointment. Even the physical climate of 'dear old sooty Manchester' was tolerably congenial to him. In its university, while he had rather too many courses to give, their variety stimulated him, and, his classes being small, he could think aloud as he lectured. His academic influence soon extended far beyond his lecture-room. His width of interests, his unstudied, notorious, picturesque untidiness, his catholic understanding of whatever was young almost compelled this result. Long before he reached the peak of his fame he had become a focus for admiration and for vast affection in the university and in the city. He was prominent in the university's more public activities, especially in the movement for providing university residences for women. In an extra-academic way his feminist principles made him favour the cause, although not always the tactics, of the local advocates of women's suffrage. He was a left-wing Liberal and an early supporter of Zionism. He was a friend of Chaim Weizmann, whom he introduced to A. J. Balfour. 
As the years passed, many of his friends began to fear that Alexander's wide knowledge and his highly original powers would never find expression in print. A very few articles and an admirable little book on Locke (1908) were inadequate counter-evidence. By 1907, however, according to his own modest statement, he had come to believe that he might have something to say. He took his cue, in a measure, from the realist principle of G. E. Moore's 'Refutation of idealism' ('Mind', 1903) but unlike many contemporary realists he was never content with polemical forays into the theory of knowledge. He was always bent upon a comprehensive system of ontological metaphysics, and this attitude, at the time, raised exceptional interest and expectation in the small world of technical British philosophy. The interest grew as Alexander in a series of presidential addresses to the Aristotelian Society (1908-11: he was again president, 1936-7) and in articles in 'Mind' (1912-13) attempted the exploratory work which, as he always maintained, should precede the composition of a serious philosophical treatise. When the University of Glasgow, shortly before the First World War, invited him to become its Gifford lecturer, there was a general belief that he would use the opportunity to complete the huge task for which he had been preparing so sedulously for at least seven years. 
An elaborate essay, 'The basis of realism' ('Proceedings of the British Academy', 1914), the year after he had been elected a fellow of that body, is an admirable summary of the results that Alexander had reached during this preparatory period. The Gifford lectures themselves, given in the war years 1917 and 1918, were called 'Space, time, and deity'. Strenuously revised, but not very much altered, they were published under the same title (although Alexander much preferred the hyphenated form 'space-time') in two substantial volumes in 1920. By that time the issue of realism had become subordinate in the author's philosophy, although he remained a realist, holding that mind takes its place among the differentiated compresents in space-time. Primarily, Alexander was a metaphysician who attempted to describe and 'identify in concrete experience' 'the ultimates which the sciences left over'. Whatever is, he maintained, is a specification of space-time, either a 'categorial' (or wholly pervasive) attribute of space-time, or, like the neural process which is 'enjoyed' as personal experience, something 'empirical' (that is, non-pervasive) which nevertheless evolves or 'emerges' from the 'continuum of motions' which is the ultimate matrix space-time. Deity is the stage beyond mind, as yet unaccomplished but descriptive of a 'nisus' in space-time towards a specific accomplishment which, just because it expresses the march of things, should receive the reverent acquiescence of 'natural piety'. 
The value of the book has to be estimated by the vision, skill, and resolution with which it pursued its sweeping design. It is only accurate to say that, since Hobbes, no English philosopher, before Alexander, had built in accordance with so ambitious an architectural plan or had given comparable attention to the proportion and solidity of all the parts of his edifice. In less than a decade the general opinion was that the book marked the end of an epoch rather than a fresh beginning, and Alexander himself considered that the future was with A. N. Whitehead, rather than with himself, so far as such a philosophy had a future. He preferred to let his book stand with very few published afterthoughts, although his essay 'Spinoza and Time' (1921) is an important supplement. 
Alexander is acknowledged to be the first in a group of Anglo-American philosophers, comprising most notably Whitehead and John Dewey, who wrote in the first half of the twentieth century and who attempted to construct a metaphysics of experience that would resolve the dualisms of modern philosophy -- such as mind and body, and subject and object -- without resorting to the completed harmonies of idealistic philosophy. The search for an open system that embraces diversity in noncoercive and transmuting unities continues today in such successors of empirical metaphysics as process philosophy and anti-foundationalism. In the period following the Second World War books were written on Alexander's philosophy from the viewpoints of process philosophy, idealism, naturalism, and empirical dualism, reflecting the complexity and the potentialities of his thought for productive reinterpretation. In each case, the commentators drew upon a different strand of Alexander's philosophy and showed its implications, allowing his thought to inform schools with which he had kinship, but with which he could not be fully identified. 
Alexander was modest, although not self-depreciating. He wrote and planned in the grand manner simply because no other manner suited this theme. He resigned his chair in 1924, but continued to live in Manchester in honoured and busy tranquillity. Manchester's pride in him seemed to increase with his years. In its university he presented for honorary degrees until 1930, in a memorably delightful way. His fairly frequent public lectures were eagerly attended in Manchester and elsewhere. At philosophical congresses he held as of right the unofficial position of the foremost British philosopher, distinguished in matter, manner, and beauty of voice, sensitive to the meeting's mind, and overcoming the lifelong handicap of his deafness with charm. His striking head, Roman-Jewish profile, and beard gave him an impressive appearance. His main interest in these closing years was in literature and aesthetic theory. This is shown in several of the essays published after his death in 'Philosophical and Literary Pieces' (1939) and in his last book, 'Beauty and other Forms of Value' (1933). Often humorous, always beautifully written and vividly informed by his psychological interest, his literary pieces include discussions of Dr Johnson, Jane Austen, Moliere, and Pascal. 'Beauty and other Forms of Value' marks a break with Alexander's interest in speculative, albeit scientifically chastened, metaphysical unity, substituting for it concern with analysing the structure of the finite, partial, and heterogeneous syntheses achieved by such cultural activities as the arts, sciences, and moral disciplines. Here Alexander falls in with the governing tendencies toward analysis in the British philosophy of his time, contributing to them cogently and with clarity and elegance. R. G. Collingwood commented in 1928 that Alexander's late writings on aesthetics were the most significant contribution to the philosophy of art in English philosophy since the eighteenth century. 
Alexander's valedictory work, 'The historicity of things', in 'Philosophy and History: Essays Presented to Ernst Cassirer', edited by R. Klibansky and H. J. Paton (1936), is a beautiful and fully mature wisdom essay. Surrendering the last vestiges of rationalism in his doctrine of space-time, Alexander embraces Plato's 'wandering cause', which dooms rationalistic systems to failure. 
Alexander died at Manchester on 13 September 1938, and his ashes lie in the section reserved for the British Jewish Reform congregation in Manchester southern cemetery. He was unmarried. He received honorary degrees from the universities of St Andrews, Durham, Oxford, Birmingham, Liverpool, and Cambridge, and was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1930. He was elected an honorary fellow of Lincoln College in 1918 and of Balliol College in 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 30373


Alexander, William (1824-1911), archbishop of Armagh, was born in Derry on 13 April 1824. His father, Robert Alexander, rector of Termoneeney, Derry, at the time, later to be prebendary of Aghadowey, Derry, was a nephew of Nathanael Alexander, bishop of Meath, and great-nephew of James Alexander, first earl of Caledon. His mother was Dorothea, daughter of Henry McClintock of Ballyarton, co. Londonderry. William was the eldest son in a family of three boys: Henry rose to the rank of rear-admiral and Robert, a soldier, was killed at the siege of Delhi. 
William was educated at Tonbridge School, Kent, winning an exhibition to Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 19 November 1841, graduating (fourth class) in classical honours in 1847. He left Oxford for a time, returning to New Hall and thence to Brasenose College, from which he took the degree of BA in 1854. He distinguished himself by winning the Denyer prize for an essay on the divinity of Christ (1850), and in 1853 received an award for his congratulatory ode to Lord Derby, the new chancellor. His poem 'The Waters of Babylon' received the university prize in 1860, and in 1867 he was a candidate for the professorship of poetry, being narrowly defeated by Sir Francis H. Doyle. In 1867, on his preferment to the episcopate, Oxford awarded him the degree of DD, followed by an honorary DLitt in 1907, the year in which he was elected an honorary fellow of Brasenose. He had already been conferred with an honorary LLD by Dublin. 
Alexander was ordained deacon in 1847 for the curacy of Templemore, Derry Cathedral, where he served until 1850, having been ordained priest in 1848. From 1850 to 1855 he was rector of Termonamongan, co. Tyrone, becoming rector of Upper Fahan (then in the diocese of Derry) in 1850. From 1855 to 1860 he served as rector of Fahan and from 1860 as rector of Camus-juxta-Mourne until his appointment to the see of Derry in 1867. He held the sinecure of dean of Emly from 1864. In 1896 he was translated to the see of Armagh. On 15 October 1850 he married Cecil Frances, 'nee' Humphreys ['see 'Alexander, Cecil Frances], the hymn writer; they had two sons and two daughters. Mrs Alexander died on 12 October 1895. 
Much in demand as preacher and lecturer, in both Britain and America (where he carried out a speaking tour in 1891 in aid of Derry Cathedral), Alexander was select preacher at Oxford on four occasions, twice at Cambridge and once at Dublin. His Bampton lectures appeared in a third edition in 1898, and his published works also included two books of verse: 'Specimens' (1867), privately circulated as part of his canvass for the Oxford chair of poetry, and 'St Augustine's Confessions and other Pieces' (1886). He was capable of some telling phrases, for instance attributing to Swift the capacity to 'carve out a tumour in alabaster' and 'enshrine putrescence under a crystal case'. Yet neither his poetry nor his theological writing has stood the test of time, though as an orator he made significant contributions to several important contemporary debates. 
Alexander's Tractarian outlook, dating from his undergraduate years at Oxford, made him suspect in some Church of Ireland quarters. He took a minority position as a member of the court of the general synod when the court found against the vicar of St Bartholomew's, Dublin, in a case related to an alleged infringement of the canons of the Church of Ireland. His proposals for a diocesan conference in Derry in 1890, when the Revd R. R. Dolling was to be a speaker, caused such a furore that the occasion had to be cancelled. 
Yet Alexander's churchmanship would in a later era be generally regarded as having stood the Church of Ireland in good stead. Forcefully, yet with tact, he argued for the integrity of Anglican formularies at a time when attempts were made from within the newly disestablished church radically to revise the 'Book of Common Prayer'. A contemporary wrote of 'the impassioned rhetoric of the great poet-preacher, with the innate witchery of his superb voice'. 
Alexander was very much in tune with Church of Ireland opinion when he contributed with equal skill, but less success, to two other, and perhaps more important, debates. Disestablishment was abhorrent to him and he spoke vigorously against it in the House of Lords. 'You are condemning the Irish Church of the last century because it did not act upon principles not then recognised.' He also pointed out, with some justification, that since the 'Act of Union' had joined the established churches of England and Ireland 'for ever', the government disestablishment bill struck at a fundamental condition of the union of the two kingdoms. He made an impassioned speech against home rule for Ireland in the Albert Hall, London, in 1893, regarding the proposal with grave apprehension so far as the future of the Church of Ireland was concerned. 
Though a high-churchman Alexander was not insensitive to the feelings of other churches. He deprecated it when terms such as 'apostolic succession' were used in such a way as to cause offence, and he maintained cordial relations with Cardinal Logue, the Roman Catholic primate. 
Archbishop Alexander resigned from his see on 30 January 1911, and lived in Torquay, Devon, until his death at his home, Belton Lodge, Torquay, on 12 September of that year. He was buried on 16 September 1911, beside his wife, in the churchyard of Derry Cathedral. The Synod Hall in Armagh is dedicated in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 30374


Sinclair, Sir Edwyn Sinclair Alexander-, of Freswick (1865-1945), naval officer, was born in Malta on 12 December 1865, the second son of Captain John Hobhouse Inglis Alexander RN (1832-1875) of Southbar and Boghall, Renfrew, and his wife, Isabella Barbara (died 1883), daughter of Thomas Cochrane Hume, of Halifax, Nova Scotia, and Isabella, daughter and heir of William Sinclair, of Freswick and Dunbeath in Caithness. He succeeded his elder brother to the Southbar property in 1892, and in 1894, on succeeding his second cousin as laird to the estate of Freswick, adopted the additional surname of Sinclair. 
After entering the Royal Navy as a cadet on 'Britannia' in 1879 Alexander served on the China station from early 1881 in the armour-plated iron ship 'Iron Duke', flagship of George Willes. He was promoted midshipman in August 1881 and sub-lieutenant in January 1886. After serving in the 'Active' and taking scientific and technical courses he joined the 'Fearless' in the Mediterranean in March 1888, but left her on promotion to lieutenant in January 1890 to become flag lieutenant to Richard Tracey in the channel squadron. When Tracey became admiral superintendent, Malta, in 1892, Alexander accompanied him and gained experience in dockyard and administrative work. On 26 January 1892 Alexander married Julia Margaret (died 1930), daughter of Colonel Charles Vereker Hamilton-Campbell, of Netherplace, Ayrshire. They had two sons and one daughter. On 7 November 1933 he married Maud Kathleen, who survived him, widow of Major William Robinson Campbell, of the 14th hussars, and younger daughter of Captain Samuel Yates Holt Davenport, of the Royal Sussex regiment, Territorial Army. 
From 1893 to 1896 he served in the battleship 'Ramillies', flagship of Sir Michael Culme-Seymour, commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, and from 1897 to 1900 was his flag lieutenant when he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. After his promotion to commander in 1901, Alexander-Sinclair commanded the destroyer 'Albatross' from June 1902 and the dispatch vessel 'Surprise' from January 1904. He was promoted captain in June 1905 at the Royal Naval College, Osborne, where he remained until 1908. From 1909 to 1910 he commanded the second destroyer flotilla in home waters and in 1911 became flag captain to Sir Arthur Moore, the commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. He returned to sea in September 1913, as captain of the battleship 'Temeraire' in the Home Fleet, and was still in command of her at the outbreak of war in 1914. 
As a part of the extensive reorganization of the Grand Fleet which followed the battle of the Dogger Bank in January 1915, Alexander-Sinclair became commodore commanding the 1st light-cruiser squadron with his broad pennant in the 'Galatea'. On 31 May 1916 the 'Galatea' was part of the screen of the Battle-Cruiser Fleet under Sir David Beatty when she altered course to examine a neutral merchant vessel. As Alexander-Sinclair closed this ship he sighted two enemy destroyers approaching from the opposite direction. His 'enemy in sight' signal brought the Battle-Cruiser Fleet, and subsequently the whole Grand Fleet, into the action known as the battle of Jutland. 
Alexander-Sinclair was appointed CB in 1916. In 1917 he was appointed rear-admiral commanding the 6th light-cruiser squadron with his flag in the 'Cardiff'. In November 1917 he played a prominent part in the action with the German second scouting group in the Heligoland bight, after which he was praised by Admiral Beatty, and others, including the Germans, for his 'skill and determination... and resolute manner' in difficult circumstances (Marder, 4.305). Twelve months later he had the role of leading the surrendered German high sea fleet into Rosyth with the British Grand Fleet. For his war services he was appointed KCB. In the spring of 1919 the 6th light-cruiser squadron was transferred to the Mediterranean under his command and renamed the 3rd light-cruiser squadron. 
In 1920 Alexander-Sinclair was appointed admiral superintendent, Portsmouth Dockyard. In 1922 he became vice-admiral commanding 1st battle squadron with his flag in the 'Barham' and for a while, during the illness of the commander-in-chief, Sir John De Robeck, was senior admiral in the Atlantic Fleet. Arthur Marder has described Alexander-Sinclair as a 'first-class sea officer who rose to command a Grand Fleet cruiser squadron. He was, however, not gifted with much brain' (Marder, 2.16). However, in June 1925, he became commander-in-chief, China station, with his flag in the 'Hawkins', and showed a great deal of skill and judgement in handling difficult situations during the advance of the Chinese nationalist armies. At an incident in Wanhsien (Wanxian) in September 1926, the 'admirable restraint imposed upon the British seamen' by Alexander-Sinclair was said to be 'appreciated by impartial observers' ('The Times', 14 Nov 1945, 7). In October 1926 he was promoted to the full rank of admiral and returned to the United Kingdom in 1927 to become commander-in-chief at the Nore. He relinquished his command in May 1930 and became first and principal aide-de-camp to George V. At the end of the year he was placed on the retired list on attaining the age of sixty-five. On his retirement he was promoted GCB. 
A 'dour red-haired Scot from the wilds of Caithness, with a scrub-hammock face' (Marder, 2.40), Alexander-Sinclair, during his naval career of more than fifty years, received several foreign decorations, including the American DSM, the French Croix de Guerre, and was appointed a commander in the Legion d'honneur. He died at his home, Dunbeath Castle, Caithness, on 13 November 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 30375


Alexandra (1844-1925), queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and the British dominions beyond the seas, and empress of India, consort of Edward VII, was born at the Gule or Yellow Palace in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 1 December 1844 and was given the names Alexandra Caroline Mary Charlotte Louisa Julia. She was the eldest daughter and the second of the six children of Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glucksburg (1818-1906) and his wife, Louise, princess of Hesse-Cassel (1817-1898). Although unimpeachably royal, the family lived in modest circumstances, the prince having little income beyond his pay as an officer in the Danish guards. Prince Christian's position, if not his finances, changed in 1852 when he became heir to the Danish throne. King Frederick VII had succeeded his father Christian VIII in 1848 and he had no children. Prince Christian was far from being in direct line of succession but the choice of him as heir was greatly helped by the fact that, unlike other members of his family, he was a sound supporter of Denmark on the Schleswig-Holstein question. 
The young princess's childhood was a happy one, within the security of a loving family. Prince Christian, although devoid of intellectual interests, was a fond husband and father while Princess Christian, the more dominant figure in the family, presided over a domestic world marked by music, a rather hearty gaiety, and simple religious faith. Alix, as she was known within the family, was not particularly close to her elder brother, Prince Frederick, later King Frederick VIII (1843-1912), and there was a big age gap between her and the youngest children, Princess Thyra (1853-1933) and Prince Waldemar (1858-1939). With her second brother, William, later king of the Hellenes (1845-1913), and Princess Dagmar (or Minny), later empress of Russia (1847-1928), Alexandra made up an intimate group within the family. The education the children received was limited, but the princess acquired a reasonable command of French and German, was carefully instructed in religion, and developed her aptitude for music. 
In 1858 Queen Victoria and Prince Albert began to consider the question of a bride for their eldest son, Albert Edward, the prince of Wales ['see 'Edward VII]. It had been decided that, as the carefully planned education given to 'Bertie' had not produced a paragon of virtue, an early marriage was the best hope of curbing his wayward inclinations. There seemed little likelihood of Princess Alexandra being seriously considered. On political grounds she appeared to be ruled out as the sympathies of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were pro-German on the Schleswig-Holstein question. They also considered the Danish royal family to be unsuitable, largely because of the personal life of the thrice-married Frederick VII. The prince of Wales's refusal of a merely dynastic marriage and the shortage of eligible, attractive, protestant princesses led, nevertheless, to the contemplation of a match with the beautiful Danish princess. She was, as the prince's elder sister, Victoria, the crown princess of Prussia, observed to Queen Victoria, 'outrageously beautiful' (Woodham-Smith, 407). A stilted and formal courtship was choreographed by the crown princess, who introduced the potential couple in September 1861 at the cathedral town of Speyer. It was not until the following September that the prince of Wales proposed, and was accepted by Alexandra, at the palace of Laeken outside Brussels. During the year much had happened: the prince's affair with the actress Nellie Clifton had made an early marriage seem even more desirable to his parents, and the prince consort had died in December 1861. 
The princess was immediately approved by Queen Victoria, who had accompanied her son to Brussels, and whose impression of her as a 'dear, lovely being' (Fulford, 2.105) was reinforced by Alexandra's first visit to Britain. Staying at Osborne and Windsor in November 1862, the princess was undaunted by the atmosphere of deepest mourning, and effortlessly charmed the queen. When she returned to Britain for the wedding she was received with great enthusiasm by the public and by the ringing verses of the poet laureate, Alfred Tennyson: '
Sea King's daughter from over the sea, 

Alexandra! 

Saxon and Norman and Dane are we, 

But all of us Danes in our welcome of thee, 

Alexandra! 

' The wedding, in deference to the mourning for the prince consort, took place, not in London, but in St George's Chapel, Windsor, on 10 March 1863. It was, however, preceded by a carriage procession through London which attracted enormous crowds. 
Queen Victoria had hoped that marriage would have a steadying effect on the prince of Wales and that the princess would be 'his salvation'. In the short term marriage did indeed see a faithful and uxorious prince, but the queen found much to disapprove of in the lifestyle of the newly married couple. A court in prolonged mourning found itself a foil to a prince and princess of Wales who epitomized all that was glamorous and fashionable and who were the acknowledged leaders of a high society which the queen disdained. The princess, not unnaturally, revelled in her acclamation as the most beautiful and elegant woman of the day. The invention of photography and the coming of illustrated magazines gave her image a currency denied to beauties of previous eras; her dresses, her hair styles, and the jewelled collars she wore to hide a scar on her neck were widely copied. In the early years of the marriage she was by no means retiring and was as eager as her husband for the round of fashionable occasions that centred on their London home, Marlborough House. 
The couple also devoted much time to the rebuilding of Sandringham House in Norfolk, acquired by the prince a few months before their marriage. It was to become a much loved home for both of them, though the expense of its restoration led the prince into financial difficulties. He was in any case inclined to overspend and his extravagance was matched by that of Alexandra who had no money sense. Any doubts that Queen Victoria had about her daughter-in-law were assuaged, and the princess's popularity with the British public increased, by the birth of a son, Prince Albert Victor (known to the family as Eddy), afterwards duke of Clarence (1864-1892), on 8 January 1864. 
Alexandra's Danish patriotism and loyalty to her family were, however, to cause problems. Throughout her life she was to return frequently to her native land and identified strongly with its interests. Her father succeeded to the Danish throne as Christian IX in November 1863 and in 1864 Denmark was at war with Austria and Prussia over Schleswig-Holstein. Queen Victoria and the crown princess of Prussia were outraged by Alexandra's open support for the Danish cause, especially as the prince of Wales associated himself with that support. The princess was to be, thereafter, vehemently anti-Prussian. So bitter were her feelings that in 1866, during a visit to Germany, she refused to meet the king of Prussia until forced to do so, in an atmosphere of great tension. The incident exacerbated difficulties in the relationship between Queen Victoria and her daughter-in-law. The queen already disapproved of the prince and princess of Wales's role as leaders of the fashionable Marlborough House set, and Alexandra's furious disapproval of Princess Helena's marriage with Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg, who had sided with Prussia in the recent war in Schleswig-Holstein, had further infuriated the queen. 
Prior to her father's accession to the Danish throne, Alexandra's brother William had become King George of the Hellenes in June 1863 and this provided the princess with a second foreign policy interest; she was, to the occasional embarrassment of the Foreign Office, to be the earnest advocate of British support for her brother and his kingdom. 
On 3 June 1865 the princess gave birth to a second son, George, later George V (1865-1936). Four other children were to be born to the prince and princess of Wales: Louise, afterwards duchess of Fife and princess royal (1867-1931); Victoria (1868-1935); Maud, afterwards queen of Norway (1869-1938); and John (born 6, died 7 April 1871). 
The princess of Wales's third confinement, that of Princess Louise in 1867, was complicated by rheumatic fever that left her with a limp. The fever and pregnancy seem to have accelerated otosclerosis, a form of deafness she had inherited from her mother. The limp she was able to cope with, developing a glide rather than a walk and managing to skate, to ride, and to dance; but her increasing deafness was to change her life. She did not curtail her public duties but she could no longer enjoy the social world and withdrew into a private milieu of her family, close friends, and retainers. This resulted in the prince and princess of Wales living rather separate lives. The prince was not a faithful husband and perhaps this did not greatly worry the princess, who was more sentimental than passionate. But her husband's affairs might well not have been so open or on such a scale had it not been for the princess's withdrawal from the social round, which was so important to the restless prince who was denied any real responsibilities by the queen. One beneficial result of the princess's withdrawal into family life was the restoration of the good opinion of Queen Victoria, to whom she became once more a 'real devoted sympathizing daughter' (Hibbert, 150). 
Alexandra's relations with her children were marked by a gushing affection that became less appropriate as they got older. When Prince George was a 25-year-old naval officer, her letters to him concluded: 'With a great big kiss for your lovely little face'. To all her children she was 'Motherdear'. She recreated much of the atmosphere of her own childhood in her family circle: a simple and uncomplicated Christianity, no great pride in being royal, and a sense of fun, much reliant on practical jokes. It was not an environment which provided her children with intellectual curiosity and it was perhaps too suffocatingly cosy, but it was secure and loving, in contrast to the family life of so many royal children. 
The simplicity of the princess of Wales contrasted with her ability to get her own way. Her beauty and elegance and even her unpretentiousness and kindness could all be called upon as assets. Even her disabilities, her limp and her deafness, could be used to advantage. When called to account for her extravagance (in part due to generosity and in part to a self-indulgence that contrasted with her modest Danish upbringing), she would simply not hear. She ostensibly ignored her husband's barely concealed infidelities and gave him public support when he was involved in scandals. She herself attracted loyal male admirers, including her husband's younger brother, Prince Alfred, and Oliver Montagu, the brother of Lord Sandwich, but gave no cause for scandal. 
The death of Alexandra's eldest son, the duke of Clarence, on 13 January 1892, shortly before he was to be married to Princess May of Teck, was a heavy blow. Prince Eddy had not been an adequate heir to the throne, but his mother had loved him dearly. In July 1893 Prince George, who had become duke of York the previous year, himself married Princess May. The duke and duchess of York lived for most of the year at York Cottage, in the shade of Sandringham House, and the shy and serious Princess May (later Queen Mary) did not fit easily into the close, but far from cerebral, family circle of her husband's demanding mother and proprietorial sisters. 
The prince of Wales, notoriously, spent the greater part of his life waiting to ascend the throne, and his wife had to wait thirty-four years from her marriage until she became queen consort. By the nineties Alexandra, having brought up her family, had settled into a quiet domestic routine, delighting in her grandchildren. Although still beautiful, she was fifty-six and very deaf when Queen Victoria died on 22 January 1901. 
Queen Alexandra rose to the challenge of her new position with aplomb and determination. She brooked no interference when it came to choosing her coronation robes, nor would she use the title 'queen consort', preferring to be simply 'the queen'. Her only failing in her new position was her lack of punctuality, which had irritated her husband considerably for many years. Despite the king's reluctance to allow her to take a full share in the social and ceremonial duties of the monarchy, there can be no doubt that Queen Alexandra contributed greatly to the standing of the monarchy during his reign. If the king's taste made his court formal and splendid, the queen added a lighter and gayer touch. Her popularity with the public was enhanced by her association with charitable work. Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service was established in 1902, and she presided over the first council meeting of the British Red Cross Society in 1905. A favourite charity was the London Hospital, which she referred to as 'my hospital'. The Alexandra Rose day in aid of hospitals was instituted in 1913 and continues to commemorate her work. Alexandra must be given much credit for her part in developing one of the most important roles of the modern monarchy, the patronage and encouragement of charitable institutions and societies. 
The king and queen led largely independent lives for much of every year but this was a tacit acceptance of their different tastes -- the king's for a crowded social life and the queen's for a quiet domesticity at Sandringham and holidays in Denmark -- rather than an estrangement. The king's association with Alice Keppel, mistress and companion of his later years, was quietly accepted by Alexandra, who ensured that it did not detract from her position as queen nor encroach on her own harmonious relationship with her husband. 
Edward VII's death in 1910 was a bitter blow and left Queen Alexandra miserable. Influenced by her sister, the dowager empress of Russia, who enjoyed precedence at St Petersburg over the wife of the reigning sovereign, she was reluctant to accept the diminution of her position in the new reign. George V and Queen Mary tactfully acquiesced in breaches of protocol such as taking precedence at her husband's funeral, continuing to fly the royal standard over Buckingham Palace (which she was slow to vacate), and addressing her letters to her son to 'King George' rather than to 'The king'. She took the new title of queen mother, and in her widowhood she lived once more at Marlborough House and retained Sandringham. The upkeep of two large houses would have been beyond her income, even if she had not continued to be extravagant and generous. As it was, the king had to make her a private allowance; her finances improved in 1920 when the Treasury reduced the tax it levied on her income. 
The First World War brought out all Alexandra's fervent anti-German feeling, despite the fact that she had relatives fighting on both sides of the conflict. She was aghast at the shabby treatment of the first sea lord, Prince Louis of Battenberg, because of his German origins; but demanded that the king take down the Garter banners of the enemy sovereigns in St George's Chapel. As her war work, she took on hospital visiting, an activity for which her charm and sympathy made her well suited. Revolution in Russia resulted in the murder of her nephew, the tsar, and his family and concern for the safety of her sister, Empress Maria, who was rescued by a British warship from Yalta. 
By this time Queen Alexandra had become very frail and was completely deaf and almost blind. In the last years of her life she had frequent visits from the Empress Maria and was looked after devotedly by her unmarried daughter, Princess Victoria, and two elderly courtiers, Sir Dighton Probyn and the Hon. Charlotte Knollys. She died of a heart attack at Sandringham House on 20 November 1925, and was buried at Windsor. 
Queen Alexandra remains an icon of feminine beauty. She was described by her prospective sister-in-law in 1861 as having: 'a lovely figure but very thin, a complexion as beautiful as possible. Very fine white regular teeth and very fine large eyes -- with extremely prettily marked eyebrows. A very fine well-shaped nose, very narrow but a little long -- her whole face is very narrow, her forehead too but well shaped and not at all flat. Her voice, her walk, carriage and manner are perfect, she is one of the most ladylike and aristocratic looking people I ever saw! (Fulford, 1.337-8)' Her beauty, which remained remarkably unaltered throughout her life, was probably her best-known characteristic. Far from clever, married to a notorious philanderer, increasingly isolated from all but her family by her deafness, perhaps more than any other royal consort she embodied the importance of the image over the substance of royalty. 


@@@@@


doc= 30376


Alexandra, Princess, 'suo jure' duchess of Fife (1891-1959), nurse and granddaughter of Edward VII, was born Alexandra Victoria Alberta Edwina Louise on 17 May 1891 at East Sheen Lodge, Richmond, Surrey. She was the elder daughter and second child of Alexander William George Duff, first duke of Fife (1849-1912), and of Princess Louise Victoria Alexandra Dagmar (1867-1931), eldest daughter of Edward VII. Her birth followed that of a stillborn son the year before. Her father, formerly the sixth Earl Fife, was created a duke by Queen Victoria when he married in 1889, and in 1900 he was granted letters patent to enable his dukedom to be inherited by Alexandra and then by her sister Maud (born in 1893). 
Alexandra was known as Lady Alexandra Duff until 1905, when the king declared that she and Maud should bear the title of princess and style of highness with precedence after the royal highnesses. Her mother, being reclusive, kept Alexandra and Maud away from the rest of the royal family and they were brought up quietly at home. 
In August 1910 Alexandra's meddlesome spinster aunt Princess Victoria arranged for her first cousin, the myopic Prince Christopher of Greece, to be invited to Mar Lodge, the Fifes' estate near Braemar. Princess Victoria assured the duke of Fife that Christopher would not propose, but neglected to inform the hopeful suitor. During the visit the young couple became secretly betrothed, though the duke of Fife soon forbade the union. Prince Christopher concluded that they were both 'more in love with love than with each other' (Christopher, prince of Greece, 97). 
In November 1911 the Fife family set off aboard the P. & O. liner 'Delhi' for their annual winter holiday in Egypt. In the early hours of 13 December their ship ran ashore off Cape Spartel. They were rescued, but the rescue boat sank and Alexandra was struck by a wave full in the face. She felt the water rush up her nose and swallowed it in gulps. As she wrote later, 'This is death, I thought' (Alexandra, 'Egypt and Khartoum', 9). However, she was rescued by a doctor and dragged, 'a soaking, sodden mess' (ibid., 10), to the beach. They then undertook a 10 mile ride on mules to Tangier, where they rested before continuing to Egypt and the Sudan. 
On their way to Khartoum, Alexandra's father caught a chill and died at Aswan on 29 January 1912. Alexandra succeeded her father as duchess of Fife in her own right. She later wrote: 'I could never have the same love or admiration for any other man, and I never did' (Alexandra, 'Egypt and Khartoum', 54). She assumed responsibility for her mother and sister, and took a keen interest in the welfare of her tenants in Scotland. 
On 15 October 1913, at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, she married her cousin Arthur Frederick Patrick Albert, Prince Arthur of Connaught (1883-1938), and on 9 August 1914, their son, Alastair Arthur, earl of Macduff, was born. The outbreak of the First World War gave her the opportunity to realize a childhood ambition to nurse. She worked at St Mary's, Paddington, and qualified as a state registered nurse in 1919. She was awarded first prize for a paper on eclampsia (convulsions in late pregnancy), and especially enjoyed working in casualty. 
In 1920 Alexandra accompanied Prince Arthur to South Africa, where he served as governor-general until 1923. She found life there restricting, and hated having to be polite when she was shown round badly run hospitals. Her only relief was their annual holiday, hunting big game in Rhodesia. 
In 1923 the Fife family suffered serious financial repercussions from the death of the duke's business partner Lord Farquhar, who had left Princess Arthur a large bequest, including 7 Grosvenor Square, a diamond necklace, and the residue of his property. But Farquhar proved to be bankrupt and, as a co-trustee of the Fife estates, Alexandra's mother was obliged to sell a great number of pictures and other possessions to make good an $80,000 shortfall. Alexandra herself remained a rich woman and continued to run the Mar Lodge estate, near Braemar, where she spent her summers. She became a keen angler and field-sports enthusiast: in 1939 she killed seventy-five stags in a week. Eventually she bequeathed the estate to her husband's nephew Captain Alexander Ramsay, but the furniture to her own nephew Lord Carnegie, who succeeded her as the third duke of Fife. 
On her return to London in 1923, Alexandra became a nurse at University College Hospital and Charing Cross Hospital, using the name Nurse Marjorie. She performed minor operations as well as being a competent operating theatre nurse, and once amputated a patient's thumb. In July 1925 she was appointed a lady of the Royal Red Cross. In the Second World War, by which time she was a widow, Alexandra became sister in charge of the casualty clearing station of the 2nd London General Hospital. Subsequently she opened the Fife Nursing Home in Bentinck Street, which she equipped and financed herself. She served as matron for ten years, caring for patients who included actors, acrobats, film critics, dressmakers, and, as she put it, enigmatically, 'a (great) Prime Minister' (Alexandra, 'A Nurse's Story'). 
After the early death of her husband on 12 September 1938, the tragic death of her son in 1943, and that of her sister in 1945, Alexandra fell victim to crippling rheumatoid arthritis and took no further part in public life after March 1946. She continued to live in Avenue Road, north of Regent's Park, and was taken for drives in her special ambulance car. In the 1950s she renewed a childhood friendship with her first cousin the duke of Windsor, who visited her and arranged for supplies of the drugs hydrocortone and meticorten to be delivered to her from the Schering Corporation in America, with the approval of her doctor, Sir Horace Evans. These alleviated her suffering, though she adjured the duke that her name must not be used for publicity by the manufacturer. During these years, Alexandra was able to publish the volumes of memoirs 'A Nurse's Story' (1955) and 'Egypt and Khartoum' (1956). At the time of her death she was working on a history of big game hunting. 
Princess Alexandra could have been one of the most prominent members of the royal family, but her preference for nursing and a certain inherent shyness kept her largely out of the public gaze, although she did serve as councillor of state during the absences abroad of George VI in 1939, 1943, and 1944. Her official title, Princess Arthur of Connaught, retained a certain resonance and even scored a mention in Sandy Wilson's popular musical 'The Boyfriend'. 
Alexandra died at her home, 64 Avenue Road, St John's Wood, London, on 26 February 1959. She was cremated and her ashes were buried in the chapel at Mar Lodge on 3 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 30377


Alger, John Goldworth (bap. 1836, d. 1907), journalist and historian, born at Diss, Norfolk, and baptized on 7 August 1836, was the only son of John Alger, a corn merchant of that town, and his wife, Jemima, daughter of Salem Goldworth, yeoman, of Morningthorpe, Norfolk. Mary Jemima Alger was his younger sister. Educated at Diss, Alger became a journalist at the age of sixteen. At first he wrote for the 'Norfolk News', afterwards transferring his services to the 'Oxford Journal'. In 1866 he joined the parliamentary reporting staff of 'The Times', and after eight years in that capacity was sent to Paris in 1874 to act as assistant to Henri de Blowitz, the paper's Paris correspondent. There he remained for twenty-eight years, very much the second fiddle to Blowitz's first violin. 
Alger's leisure was chiefly devoted to historical research in the Bibliotheque Nationale and Archives Nationales. He made himself thoroughly familiar with the topographical history of Paris, and threw new light on byways of the French Revolution, investigating with especial thoroughness the part that Britons played in the great movement. His chief publications were 'Englishmen in the French Revolution' (1889); 'Glimpses of the French Revolution' (1894); 'Paris in 1789-94: Farewell Letters of Victims of the Guillotine' (1902); and 'Napoleon's British Visitors and Captives' (1904). He also published 'The Paris Sketch Book' (1887) -- a description of current Parisian life -- contributed historical articles to several leading magazines, and was an occasional contributor to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. In 1902 Alger retired from 'The Times' on a pension, and settled in London. He died from mitral disease, at 7 Holland Park Court, Addison Road, West Kensington, on 23 May 1907; he was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 30378


Algeranoff, Harcourt (1903-1967), dancer and ballet master, was born in London on 18 April 1903, the son of Thomas Richard Essex, a sculptor, and his wife, Alice Kendall. He was named Harcourt Algernon Leighton Essex. He dropped his original name and assumed that of Algeranoff when he joined Anna Pavlova's company in 1921. It was as though he had not only taken on a Russian stage name -- as was usual enough at the time when, in the world of ballet, to be British was to be nothing much whereas to be Russian was to be in the height of fashion -- but had largely assumed a Russian identity; Algeranoff, it seemed, became the most persistent of the many character roles in which he excelled. 
Algeranoff studied at one time or another under the Russians Nicholas Legat and Lubov Chernicheva, but his most formative period was that of the far-ranging tours which he undertook as 'character soloist' with Pavlova. It was then that he became interested in Indian and Japanese dance, about which he subsequently lectured. His experiences of that period, remembered with nostalgia, were eventually put into a book, 'My Years with Pavlova' (1957). Algeranoff married the French dancer Claudie Leonard ('b'. 1924); they had a son, Noel, who, following in parental footsteps, became a mime. Claudie Algeranova later became ballet mistress at the Bavarian State Opera in Munich. 
Algeranoff was a founder member of the Markova-Dolin Company in 1935, joined the De Basil Ballet Russe, the company with the best claim to be the successor to the great Diaghilev ballet, in 1936, and the International Ballet, under Mona Inglesby, in 1943. It was with De Basil and the International that he chiefly made, and consolidated, his considerable reputation as a character dancer or, more specifically, as a character actor; for the roles with which he was memorably associated were those in which dancing counted for less than acting. Algeranoff learned the traditional character roles (Carabosse, Rothbart, Hilarion) from a colleague of his in the International, Nikolay Sergeyev, the one-time regisseur of the Maryinsky Ballet in St Petersburg. Sergeyev's notation of the nineteenth-century classics, which he brought with him when he left the Soviet Union, had enabled the Sadler's Wells (subsequently the Royal) Ballet to present exceptionally authentic versions of those basic works. He had then transferred his allegiance from the Sadler's Wells Ballet to the International. Among the character roles in which Algeranoff excelled were the astrologer in 'Le coq d'or', the magician Kastchei in 'Firebird', Pierrot in 'Carnaval', Dr Coppelius in 'Coppelia', the master of ceremonies in 'Gaiete Parisienne', Carabosse in 'The Sleeping Beauty', and Death in Mona Inglesby's choreographic version of 'Everyman'. 
Algeranoff also conducted outstanding classes in character and national dancing at the International Ballet. However, the ballet 'For Love or Money', which he made for the company in 1951, is remembered only as indicating that, for all his stagecraft, his ability as a teacher, and his exceptional skill as a performer, he lacked the inventiveness of movement which bespeaks a true choreographer. 
After the International Ballet ceased to exist, Algeranoff went to Australia in 1954. There he worked at first in the Australian Children's Theatre. He then became ballet master to the Borovansky Ballet (1959) and a guest artist (1962-3) in the Australian Ballet, which at that time was beginning to take shape under the guidance of Peggy van Praagh. For a time Algeranoff returned to Europe, becoming director of the Norwegian State Opera and Ballet Company. But in 1959 he decided to settle in Australia, making his home in Mildura, where he opened a dance studio. In contemporary Australia there was scarcely the opportunity for Algeranoff's career to prosper conspicuously; but he was one of the pioneers whose example and influence contributed to the growth of an indigenous company in that country where ballet had been previously an intermittent import only. Algeranoff became ballet master for Australia's North Western Ballet Society. 
Algeranoff did not belong to the native and nascent British ballet which, young though it was, sent its missionaries, such as Peggy van Praagh, to the dominions. He was one of the last of those few British dancers who made their way in a world of cosmopolitan ballet still dominated by expatriate Russians. But they too have their place in the story of the widening popularity of ballet in the mid-twentieth century. 
Algeranoff was dapper, talented, youthfully handsome, and took himself very seriously. He played his Russian character role with zest, in public at least, and loved to tell stories about Pavlova. Algeranoff died in a road accident in Robinvale, Australia, on 7 April 1967. 
James Monahan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30379


Alington, Cyril Argentine (1872-1955), headmaster and dean of Durham, was born in Ipswich, Suffolk, on 22 October 1872, the second son of the Revd Henry Giles Alington (1837-1928), an inspector of schools, and his wife, Jane Margaret Booth (died 1910). In 1886 he went with classical scholarships to Marlborough College, where he was in the cricket eleven, and in 1891 he proceeded to Trinity College, Oxford. A first class in honour moderations (1893) and in 'literae humaniores' (1895) was followed by his election at the second attempt to a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, in November 1896. In that year he had returned, as sixth-form master, to Marlborough. He was ordained deacon in 1899 and priest in 1901, and in the former year moved to Eton College where in 1904 he became master in college with a particularly gifted set of boys in his charge. He married, on 5 April 1904, Hester Margaret (died 1958), youngest daughter of George William Lyttelton, the fourth Lord Lyttelton. Of her it is impossible to find any comment but affectionate praise. She kept open house and her advice was available to all. She was devoted to Alington, as he was to her. 
In 1908 Alington was appointed headmaster of Shrewsbury School; he was younger than all except two of his staff. The school was down to 240 boys, but by the end of 1916 the number had recovered to 394. In January 1917 he succeeded his brother-in-law, Edward Lyttelton, as headmaster of Eton; again he was to preside over a recovery of numbers, from just under 1000 to 1150. He retired from Eton in 1933. 
Alington was endowed with almost every gift to ensure a successful career. Extraordinarily handsome, especially in later years when robed and in the pulpit, he impressed the great majority of boys at Shrewsbury and Eton. As a young man he was a very successful cricketer and for years afterwards he maintained a high standard as a player of fives and rackets. He possessed a wide and extraordinarily retentive memory which enabled him to produce the apt quotation for any occasion. He was a most facile and brilliant versifier and he composed some admirable hymns. He was interested in political history and wrote some historical works; probably the best is 'Twenty Years' (1921), a study of the party system, 1815-1835. 'A Schoolmaster's Apology' (1914) gives his views on education and religion at one of the most active stages of his career; he claims that he spent a week on it. Sermons and verses were published. He also wrote a number of detective stories and other novels: clever, witty, but quickly perishable. All these varied publications bear witness to the incredible speed at which his mind, his imagination, and his pen worked. He dispatched the routine business of a headmaster so rapidly that he did not require a full-time secretary either at Shrewsbury, where he employed a young cricket professional, Neville Cardus, or at Eton. He readily dominated masters' meetings, and his conversation was brilliant. 
Alington was not a scholar in any true sense. As a teacher he was least successful with the ablest boys, who recognized his weaknesses. He would prepare lessons in classics where he knew his grasp was shaky, but he felt he could teach English and divinity off the cuff, with unfortunate results. Lack of self-criticism encouraged him to preach too often, with fables at the end of evensong as well as sermons. Yet he was at his best in the pulpit, and he could influence boys even to the end of his life. His Holy Week addresses at Eton indelibly impressed the hushed and crowded chapel; in these addresses his striking presence, his melodious voice, and his theatrical tricks were all at the service of convincing material. 
As a headmaster Alington was not an innovator. He did not regard maths and science as educational disciplines of much value except to scientists. He was a considerable builder at Shrewsbury, though not all his projects were soundly financed. At Eton he brought about less physical change, but at both schools he cared for and improved the environment. His impact as headmaster, however, was above all personal. He knew surprisingly many boys, and took an interest in them; his own zest for life infected them. He was a firm disciplinarian (he reintroduced birching, which had been dropped by his predecessor), but severity could be tempered: boys in trouble and good boys could experience his kindness alike. 
In 1933 Alington was appointed dean of Durham and transferred these qualities to his new job; he displayed the same affection and ready friendship towards Durham miners that he had shown to his pupils. Increasingly affected by arthritis, he retired from the deanery in 1951. The warmth with which he writes of his time at Durham makes that section the most appealing part of his very brief memoir, 'A Dean's Apology' (1952). 
Alington had two sons and four daughters. The eldest daughter died aged thirty, and the younger son was killed at Salerno, Italy, in 1943 -- losses which were met with Christian fortitude. The elder son, Giles, also died before his mother; he was a much loved and respected senior tutor and dean of University College, Oxford. The three other daughters married Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Sir Roger Mynors, and the Revd John Wilkes, warden of Radley College, Abingdon, Berkshire, all of whom had been Etonians under his charge. 
Alington, who had become DD at Oxford in 1917, received other honours: he was chaplain to the king from 1921 to 1933, and he was made an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1926, and an honorary DCL at Durham in 1937. He died at his home, Treago, St Weonards, Herefordshire, on 16 May 1955 and was buried at Durham Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 30380


Alison, Sir Archibald, second baronet (1826-1907), army officer, was born at Edinburgh on 21 January 1826, the eldest son of Sir Archibald Alison, first baronet (1792-1867), historian, and his wife, Elizabeth Glencairn (1799-1873), youngest daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel William Tytler. In 1835 Possil House, near Glasgow, became the family home. The father educated his son privately, until he went to Glasgow University. There, at the age of fifteen, he gained the first prize for an English essay on Sulla, and reviewed Thierry's 'History of the Gauls' in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. Between Alison and his father there was always a very close relationship. They shared the same tastes, and the son replied in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (May 1850) to the criticisms in the 'Edinburgh Review' on the later volumes of his father's 'History of Europe'. 
On 3 November 1846 Alison was commissioned ensign in the 72nd foot (later Seaforth Highlanders); he was promoted lieutenant on 11 September 1849, and joined the headquarters of the regiment in Barbados. Yellow fever was raging there, and his father had arranged for an exchange, but Alison refused to leave his regiment at such a time. He went with it to Nova Scotia in 1851, and came home with it in October 1854, having been promoted captain on 11 November 1853. 
After some months at Malta the regiment went to the Crimea in May 1855 and, having taken part in the expedition to Kerch, was placed in the Highland brigade at the end of June. While serving with the regiment in the trenches before Sevastopol, Alison attracted the notice of Sir Colin Campbell by opportunely producing a sketch plan of the trenches, which he had drawn on an envelope, as well as by his coolness under fire. He was mentioned in dispatches and was made brevet major on 6 June 1856. On 19 December 1856 he left the 72nd for an unattached majority. 
When Sir Colin Campbell left England at twenty-four hours' notice on 12 July 1857 to suppress the Indian mutiny, he took Alison with him as his military secretary, and his younger brother, Frederick, as his aide-de-camp. In the second relief of Lucknow both brothers were wounded, Archibald losing his left arm. He returned to duty early in 1858, but the stump became inflamed, and he was invalided home (10 March). He had been mentioned in dispatches, and was made brevet lieutenant-colonel and CB (28 February 1861). On his arrival in England he dined with Queen Victoria. He published 'Lord Clyde's campaign in India' in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (October 1858), and later other articles. 
Alison was unemployed for the next four years. On 18 November 1858 he married Jane, daughter of James Black of Dalmonach, a Glasgow merchant. She died on 15 July 1909. Jane edited her father-in-law's autobiography, and was a woman of many gifts. They had two sons and four daughters. From 17 March 1862 to 19 October 1867 Alison was an assistant adjutant-general, first with the inspector-general of infantry at headquarters, and three years afterwards in the south-western district. He became brevet colonel on 17 March 1867, and succeeded his father as baronet in May 1867. On 1 October 1870 he was placed on the staff at Aldershot as assistant adjutant-general. 
At the end of 1873 Alison went to the west coast of Africa in command of the British brigade in the Second Anglo-Asante War, with the local rank of brigadier-general. He took part in the battle of Amoaful, the capture of Bequah, the action at Ordahsu, and the capture of Kumasi. At Amoaful the enemy fire was very heavy, and the dense growth made direction difficult, but his staff were struck by his self-possession and the precision of his orders. When abscesses in his only hand made him nearly helpless, he bore his suffering without complaint. He was mentioned in dispatches, received the thanks of parliament, and was made KCB on 31 March 1874. After a few months at Aldershot, he went to Ireland as deputy adjutant-general on 17 October 1874, and was promoted major-general on 1 October 1877. After four months as commandant of the Staff College at Camberley, he was appointed deputy quartermaster-general for intelligence, and helped the headquarters staff to meet the Egyptian crisis of 1882. 
On 6 July 1882 Alison left England to command a force which was assembled at Cyprus to secure the Suez Canal. The bombardment of Alexandria took place on the 11th, and Alison landed there on the 17th with two battalions which were soon reinforced. On the 24th he occupied Ramlah and, receiving instructions to 'keep Arabi Pasha constantly alarmed', made repeated demonstrations towards Kafr el Dauwar, especially on 5 August. Thus Arabi was led to expect that the British advance on Cairo would be from Alexandria, and not from Isma'iliyyah, as was planned. In that advance Alison commanded the Highland brigade, the leading brigade of the 2nd (Hamley's) division in the storming of the trenches at Tell al-Kebir; Alison took a personal part, revolver in hand, in the confused fighting inside. After the surrender of Cairo he was sent to occupy Tanta with half a battalion of the Gordon Highlanders (17 September). He found there an Egyptian force disposed to resist, but by coolness and tact he induced them to surrender. He was mentioned in dispatches, received the thanks of parliament, and was promoted lieutenant-general for distinguished service on 18 November 1882. After Wolseley's departure Alison was in command of the British force in Egypt until 17 May 1883. On his return a sword of honour was presented to him by the citizens of Glasgow, with a tiara for Lady Alison. 
Alison commanded the Aldershot division from 1 August 1883 until the end of 1888, except for part of 1885, when he acted as adjutant-general during Wolseley's absence in Egypt. He received the GCB on 21 June 1887, was promoted general on 20 February 1889, and retired on 12 January 1893. 
He was given the colonelcy of the Essex regiment on 24 November 1896, and was transferred to his former regiment, the Seaforth Highlanders, on 30 March 1897. He was also honorary colonel of the 1st volunteer battalion of the Highland light infantry, and was honorary LLD of Cambridge, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. From 1889 to 1899 he was a member of the Indian council. Alison died at his London home, 93 Eaton Place, on 5 February 1907, and was buried at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, four days later. He was characterized as a man who knew how to combine courtesy with insistence on duty. 


@@@@@


doc= 30381


Allan, Sir William (1837-1903), engineer and politician, born at Dundee on 29 November 1837, was the third son of James Allan (died 1883), machine maker, and his wife, Margaret Dickson (died 1879). After being educated in local schools, Allan served his apprenticeship as an engineer at his father's Seabraes foundry, Dundee. As a journeyman he moved to Glasgow, and in 1856 he went for a short time to Paterson, New Jersey. In 1857 he joined the Royal Navy as engineer, and spent the next three years mainly at foreign stations. In 1861, when the civil war broke out in America, it was said that Allan's 'love of adventure' led him to become chief engineer on board a ship seeking to break through the North's blockade of southern ports. He was in Charleston harbour when ships of the federal government bombarded the city on 21 December 1861, and was captured and taken to the Old Capitol Prison, Washington. Released on parole, he returned to Dundee, resuming work at Seabraes foundry. His varied experience had made him a competent workman, and when the North-Eastern Engineering Company was formed at Sunderland in 1866 he was engaged as foreman over one of the departments. However, by 1868 the company was in difficulties, and Allan was appointed manager. Under his control the concern flourished, especially after its removal to Wallsend-on-Tyne. Allan married, in 1870, Jane, daughter of Walter Beattie of Lockerbie. They had at least one son, Walter B. Allan. 
In 1886 Allan founded his own company, the Scotia Engine Works, at Sunderland, and he remained active head of the firm until 1900. The business was then amalgamated with the firm of Richardson, Westgarth & Co. Ltd, of which Allan became a director. He was also until his death chairman of the Albyn Line Ltd, shipowners of Sunderland. 
From his youth Allan was an advanced radical, and showed practical sympathy with the working classes. He was the first large employer to introduce an eight-hour day in his own works. At a by-election at Gateshead on 24 February 1893 Allan was returned as a Liberal, and continued to represent the town until his death. His speeches in the Commons were known more for their force than their elegance, but were said to display sincerity and common sense. His practical knowledge led him to oppose strenuously the introduction of the Belleville type of boiler into the navy. 
In addition to his other activities Allan was, from 1871, a prolific writer of patriotic Scottish songs and poems, publishing volumes such as 'Heather-Bells' (1875), 'Rose and Thistle' (1878), 'Northern Lights' (1889), and 'A Book of Poems, Democratic Chants, and Songs, in English and Scottish' (1891). His only technical publication was 'The Shipowners' and Engineers' Guide to the Marine Engine' (1880). Allan served as a JP and deputy lieutenant for co. Durham, and was knighted in 1902. He died from heart disease on 28 December 1903 at Scotland House, Sunderland, and was buried in Ryhope Road cemetery, Sunderland. 


@@@@@


doc= 30382


Allbutt, Sir (Thomas) Clifford (1836-1925), physician, born at Dewsbury, Yorkshire, on 20 July 1836, was the only son of the Revd Thomas Allbutt, vicar of Dewsbury, and his wife, Marianne, daughter of Robert Wooler, of Dewsbury. Allbutt was sent to St Peter's School, York, from where he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1855; he gained a classical scholarship there a year later. Profoundly influenced by his reading of Auguste Comte's works on positivism, he turned from studying the classics to medicine. In 1860 he obtained a first-class degree (the only one of the year) in the natural sciences tripos, with distinction in chemistry and geology. After studying medicine at St George's Hospital, London, and taking the Cambridge MB degree in 1861, he went to Paris and attended the clinics of Armand Trousseau, G. B. A. Duchenne, Bazin, and Hardy. 
Allbutt's active professional life falls into three periods: from 1861 to 1889 he was an extremely successful consulting physician in Leeds; from 1889 to 1892 he was a commissioner in lunacy in London; and for the remainder of his long life he was regius professor of physic at Cambridge. At Leeds he utilized the early lean years in wide reading, writing medical essays, and pursuing clinical work at the fever hospital, the general infirmary, where he was physician from 1864 to 1884, and the West Riding asylum. During 1865 and 1866 he treated victims of an outbreak of typhus fever by open-air methods, a management which he later advocated for consumption. 
During his time at Leeds, Allbutt invented a short clinical thermometer, greatly facilitating the routine taking of temperatures. The early thermometers had been extremely cumbersome, approximately 25 centimetres in length, and taking 20-25 minutes to register, whether placed in the mouth or axilla. In 1870 Allbutt wrote an extensive review entitled 'Medical Thermometry', in which he outlined the history of thermometry and described his own contribution to it: a thermometer approximately 6 inches in length that, as he put it, 'Could live habitually in my pocket, and have as constantly with me as a stethoscope'. His version of the thermometer, devised in 1867, was quickly adopted elsewhere. In 1871 Allbutt also wrote a pioneering monograph on the use of the ophthalmoscope in nervous and other diseases, and he contributed equally significant papers on syphilitic disease of the cerebral arteries (1868), the effect of strain on the heart (1870, 1873), and anxiety as a cause of kidney disease (1876). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1880, and, in addition, he initiated and encouraged the practice of consultation between medical witnesses before the hearing of legal cases. He delivered the Goulstonian lectures entitled 'Chapters on visceral neuroses' at the Royal College of Physicians in 1884, and in 1885 he introduced the surgical treatment of tuberculous glands in the neck. In an address at Glasgow in 1888 he began pleading for the study of comparative medicine, believing that a great deal could be learned by observing the physiology and diseases of animals, and that information gained thereby could often be applied to human medicine. Allbutt had the gratification of seeing a professorship of comparative medicine established at Cambridge in 1923. 
The fatigue of consulting practice prompted Allbutt to move to London, to accept a commissionership in lunacy, in 1889. In London he greatly enjoyed the company of the literary and artistic lions of the day. However, in 1892 he was appointed regius professor of physic at Cambridge, though being the first regius professor not previously a resident in Cambridge he did not obtain a footing in Addenbrooke's Hospital until 1900. 
Probably Allbutt's greatest service to contemporary medicine was his 'System of Medicine' in eight volumes (1896-1899), which went into a second edition in eleven volumes (1905-1911). His most outstanding scientific contributions to medicine were his descriptions in 1895 of hyperpiesia or high blood pressure in the absence of kidney disease. In his time he was equally known for his paper in 1894 on the aortic origin of angina pectoris, and he stubbornly held to his views on the subject despite increasing evidence to the contrary. He gave numerous addresses and in his eightieth year he published 'Diseases of the Arteries and Angina Pectoris' (1915), an encyclopaedic but not lasting volume, of only modest consequence; six years later, in 1921, he published 'Greek Medicine in Rome'. These essays were widely acclaimed and can be read with advantage today. His scholarly and meticulous care in the use of words was shown in his 'Notes on the Composition of Scientific Papers' (1904; 3rd edn, 1923), an enduring and still useful volume, if somewhat dated. 
Allbutt was married to Susan, daughter of Thomas England, merchant, of Headingley, Leeds, on 15 September 1869. They had no children. He was created KCB in 1907. He was president of the British Medical Association in 1920 and in the same year was admitted a member of the privy council, a rare if not unique honour for a practising physician. There is good evidence that George Eliot drew on him, in part at least, for the character of Lydgate in 'Middlemarch' (1872). A serious, somewhat humourless man, Allbutt died suddenly on 22 February 1925 at his home, St Radegunds, 5 Chaucer Road, Cambridge; he was buried in the nearby churchyard at Trumpington. 


@@@@@


doc= 30383


Allen, Sir Carleton Kemp (1887-1966), jurist and warden of Rhodes House, was born on 7 September 1887 in Carlton, Melbourne, the youngest of the three sons of the Revd William Allen, nonconformist minister, whose own father, a civil engineer, had emigrated from England in the 1850s. Allen's mother, Martha Jane Holdsworth, of Yorkshire stock, was an Australian born at Maryborough, Victoria. The family moved to New South Wales in 1900 where Allen's father was for many years the minister of the flourishing Congregational church in the Sydney suburb of Petersham. The two elder sons were to spend their lives in the academic profession in Australia but 'C. K.' -- he was always known by his initials -- went to and stayed in England. 
Allen was educated at Newington College, Sydney, and the University of Sydney where he obtained prizes in classics and English. In 1909 he went up on a travelling scholarship to New College, Oxford, and joined a group of able young lawyers, pupils of Francis de Zulueta. Allen gained a first in jurisprudence in 1912. In 1913 he was elected Eldon law scholar. His main outside interests were music and acting. In the Oxford Dramatic Society production he was a memorable Julius Caesar to the Mark Antony of Philip Guedalla and in 1913 he produced and played a leading part in Thomas Dekker's 'The Shoemaker's Holiday'. Before the First World War he rejected several offers to become a professional actor, and he long retained an interest in the Oxford University Dramatic Society, through which he met his wife. After the war he became the society's senior treasurer, producing and playing Jaques in 'As You Like It' and inaugurating the summer productions which became a feature of the Oxford Trinity term. He was, along with J. B. Fagan, a founding member of the Oxford Playhouse theatre. 
Commissioned in January 1915 in the 13th battalion of the Middlesex regiment, Allen was almost immediately thrown into the battle of Loos, in which the battalion had severe losses, and was badly wounded during the attack on the Hohenzollern redoubt. On sick leave he revisited Australia, as it turned out for the last time. He rejoined his battalion in February 1916 and was then almost continuously engaged in battle, being wounded again on the Somme in July 1916, before becoming captain and adjutant of his regiment. In the March 1918 retreat he was awarded the Military Cross. These savage experiences left a deep imprint upon a stoical nature. 
On demobilization Allen was appointed lecturer in law at University College, Oxford. He also acted as assistant to Sir Paul Vinogradoff, whose 'Outlines of Historical Jurisprudence' (1920-22) he helped to see through the press and from whom he derived his interest in legal theory. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1919 but did not practise, for in 1920 he was elected Stowell civil law fellow at University College. In 1924-5 he was the Oxford University junior proctor. He also reviewed novels, and for fifteen years wrote under a pseudonym regular columns in the 'Illustrated London News' and 'The Sketch'. In 1925 his light comedy, 'The Judgment of Paris', was accepted for a London production but never staged, so he converted it to a novel which was published by the Bodley Head and sold reasonably well. 
In 1926 Allen went to India for six months to deliver the Tagore lectures in Calcutta. These formed the core of his 'Law in the Making', published by the Clarendon Press in 1927. To his surprise the book went into seven editions, his last words, as he put it, appearing in 1964. It began with a judicious and well informed sketch of the schools of legal philosophy in the English-speaking world and in Europe. But its core was an account, both historical and comparative, of the way in which law has changed and grown in the past, whether through custom, equity, precedent or legislation, and how those agencies of change operated in England at the time of writing. Composed with verve, it instructed and enlivened two generations of law students and their seniors. In the 1960s, however, jurisprudence took a more philosophical turn, so that Allen's contribution to the subject, as he foresaw, became dated. 
Allen's incursions into public law had more lasting effects. As early as 1923, when most lawyers denied the existence of administrative law in Britain and deplored its existence in France, he was publishing articles to the contrary, later collected as 'Bureaucracy Triumphant' (1931), and arguing that the new system should be rationally thought through. He attacked the growth of administrative tribunals and the obstruction faced by those wishing to sue government departments. In 'Law and Orders' (1945), which went into three editions, he attacked what he called the 'creeping bindweed' of delegated legislation. The tone of his writings, driven by his respect for lawyers and judges, was polemical but also ironical. 'It is only the lawyer who knows how to temper the fierce legalism of the layman' ('Bureaucracy Triumphant', 73). His needling did much to spur on the reforms that have since been made in all these areas. 

'Law in the Making' had led in 1929 to Allen's election to the Oxford chair of jurisprudence in succession to Walter Ashburner, the chair that Vinogradoff had earlier held. He was able to continue as a fellow of University College, Oxford, with which he remained closely associated to the end of his days; on retirement he became an honorary fellow of the college in 1963. His tenure of the chair was, however, brief. He surprised many when in 1931 he resigned it to accept the invitation of the Rhodes trustees to succeed Sir Francis Wylie as Oxford secretary to the trustees and only the second warden of Rhodes House, Oxford. At the time this seemed a loss to the law, since he had been an admirable teacher and most lucid lecturer, who combined serious thought with a light touch. But at Rhodes House administration did not take up too much of his time. He was not primarily concerned with the Rhodes Trust's activities overseas, although he kept in touch with the selection committees in the constituencies from which the Rhodes scholars were drawn and he and his wife travelled widely in consequence. His writings on administrative law continued unabated: 'Legal Duties' appeared in 1931, 'Law and Disorders' in 1954, and 'Administrative Jurisdiction' in 1956. In 'Aspects of Justice' (1958) his combination of practical and theoretical interests and his classical background again showed to advantage. 
As warden of Rhodes House, Allen's own experience of the difficulties of the young who arrive at Oxford from overseas, allied to a shrewdly dispassionate common sense, qualified him to guide Rhodes scholars with the keenest sympathy in their hopes and disappointments. To them he extended an imaginative fair-mindedness along with an exceptional gift for staying outside his own firmly conservative, not to say reactionary, prejudices. He declined, for example, to make use of the National Health Service. 
Hospitality was in the capable hands of Allen's wife, whom he had married in 1922: Dorothy Frances, youngest daughter of Edward Halford, retired customs and excise official, of Oxford. They had a daughter and a son. That she was the more outgoing member of a happy partnership -- C. K. suffered in his later years from a heart condition -- is manifest in her 'Sunlight and Shadow' (1960), which she scribbled for her grandchildren just before her death in 1959 and which Allen subsequently edited for publication. 
The Allens saw three distinct phases of the history of Rhodes House: the spacious and well staffed hospitality of the time before the Second World War; the exhilarating improvisation, with C. K. himself sometimes at the piano, of wartime Oxford with the courses for soldiers on leave for which Dorothy Allen was awarded a British Empire Medal; then, after the war, the return of former servicemen with their wives, while food rationing continued. To each period they brought a note of quiet enjoyment and, particularly on Dorothy Allen's part, a gift of greeting the unexpected combined with a shared sense of community and subdued adventure. 
Allen's own account of his 21-year stewardship of Rhodes House may be found in his contribution to 'The First Fifty Years of the Rhodes Scholarships' (1955), edited by Lord Elton. It was typical of C. K. that when he came to hand over Rhodes House to his successor E. T. Williams in 1952 he secured for him those advantages of which he had felt deprived during his own tenure. 
In the Second World War, Allen undertook civil defence duties and was a member of the appellate tribunal for conscientious objectors. He was appointed a justice of the peace for Oxford late in 1941, took silk in 1945, and was chairman of the Oxford bench from 1952 to 1956. His appearance and learning lent him authority, but his deafness led to criticism as he continued on the bench in his later years. Allen's experience there provided material for his Hamlyn lectures which were published under the title 'The Queen's Peace' (1953). He received various honours: an Oxford DCL in 1932 and an honorary LLD at Glasgow University. He was elected FBA in 1944 and knighted in 1952. His club was the Reform. 
Allen's strength as a legal scholar and propagandist derived from his sound classical education, his ability to relate theory to practice, and his vivid style. He believed in the individual and had a deep distrust for the increasing power of the state. In later years he was uneasily reconciled to giving ministers and government departments limited powers to legislate, but he maintained an eagle-eyed readiness to expose, often in the correspondence columns of 'The Times', the tendency to overbear to which he felt public servants were prone. 
Allen was of short, stocky build but impressive appearance. His strong eyes, striking nose, clipped moustache, and magnificent crop of lint-white hair (he greyed early) reminded one that he had been a soldier. If he came to absorb some, perhaps more than he was aware, of the prejudices of the English with whom he spent most of his life, he retained his quizzical right to poke fun at them. Increasing deafness made him harder to convince but he continued to make his points with the same deliberation with which he would tap away ash from his ever-present cigarette by way of emphasis. Persuaded to give up smoking at the age of seventy-five, he continued to enjoy bridge, at which he did not greatly like losing, and wine, of which he was a good judge. Until his last illness he took little notice of the regimen that his doctors recommended. Austere in appearance, jaunty in carriage, he was a charming companion and staunch colleague. The essence of integrity, a good judge of Oxford and Surrey cricket, Allen was a man of great determination. Beneath a tolerantly wry scepticism lay a solid core of stern, almost puritanical devotion to truth and justice. 
The stoical way in which Allen set about coping with a new existence after Dorothy Allen's death, for they had been a devoted pair, was impressive. To the delight of their friends C. K. remarried in 1962. His second wife, Hilda Mary (died 1969), daughter of Arthur Grose, had been Dorothy Allen's closest friend. The second marriage was also exceptionally contented and 114 Banbury Road, Oxford, where they lived, warm in its welcome. Allen died at home in Oxford on 11 December 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 30384


Allen, George (1832-1907), engraver and publisher, was born on 26 March 1832 at Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, the son of John Allen, a publican, and his wife, Rebecca. He was educated at a private grammar school in Newark, and on his father's death in 1849 he was apprenticed for four years to an uncle (his mother's brother), a builder in Clerkenwell. After becoming a skilled joiner he was employed for three and a half years (1853-7) upon the interior woodwork of Dorchester House, Park Lane, and with another workman spent seventy-nine days on the construction of just one of its interior doors. Ruskin referred to this work in 'Munera pulveris' and used to show a model of it to his friends as a specimen of English craftsmanship. Following the foundation of the Working Men's College in Red Lion Square in 1854, Allen attended Ruskin's lectures and joined the drawing class there; under Ruskin and D. G. Rossetti, he became one of its most promising pupils. Ruskin stated that 'the transference to the pen and pencil of the fine qualities of finger that had been acquired by handling the carpenter's tools', coupled with an 'innate disposition to art', enabled Allen to achieve precise draughtsmanship with great rapidity. Allen was drawn more closely to Ruskin by marrying, on 25 December 1856 at St Jude's Church, Whitechapel, his mother's maid, Ann Eliza Hobbes (known as Hannah). (His occupation was recorded on the marriage certificate as 'carpenter'.) 
From 1 February 1857 Allen acted as an assistant drawing-master under Ruskin at the college (after its move to Great Ormond Street). Following his appointment he was offered the posts of superintendent of the furnishing of the royal palaces of Queen Victoria and, at Rossetti's suggestion, of partner in charge of furniture with Morris & Co., but these he declined in order to devote himself to Ruskin's service, in which he remained successively as general assistant, engraver, and publisher for fifty years. One of his first jobs with Ruskin, late in 1857, was to sort and arrange the drawings and sketches that J. M. W. Turner had given to the nation and which were held at the National Gallery, London. William Ward acted as copyist and Allen as engraver. Ruskin encouraged Allen to specialize in engraving, and he studied line engraving under John Henry Le Keux (the engraver of many of the finest plates in Ruskin's 'Modern Painters') and mezzotint under Thomas Goff Lupton (who engraved some of the 'Liber Studiorum' plates for Turner). Allen demonstrated his knowledge of the two techniques by producing mixed plates for Ruskin's later books, and in all executed more than ninety plates for Ruskin. 
In 1862, when Ruskin thought of settling in Savoy, Switzerland, Allen with his family went out to join him at Mornex, and during this time they travelled together in Italy. His main work in Switzerland was to copy and engrave the work of Turner at full size. He also proved an excellent geologist and mineralogist, so that Ruskin often trusted to his observations; after his death the University of Oxford acquired his mineral collection. Ruskin took no offence when on Sundays Allen engaged in his favourite recreation of rifle-shooting. The death of Ruskin's father, in 1864, ended the Swiss interlude, and through the remainder of the decade Allen acted as a general servant to Ruskin. Many of his reminiscences were of distinguished visitors to Ruskin's house at Denmark Hill to whom he was instructed to show the collection of Turner's drawings. 
Late in 1870 Ruskin decided to set Allen up as his own publisher, and through him developed plans to 'attack what he saw as the three great evils of the bookselling trade: the discount system, underselling and the monopoly of London-based publishers and booksellers over the trade' (Maidment, 'Allen', 6-7). At a week's notice, and without any previous experience, Allen started upon this enterprise at his home at Heathfield Cottage, Keston, Kent, so giving rise to a sarcastic journalistic reference to Ruskin's idea of publishing 'in a field in Kent'. At first he worked mainly as a distributor, especially of Ruskin's 'Fors Clavigera', a monthly publication aimed at 'the workmen and labourers of Great Britain'. However, he was also authorized to launch the 'revised and enlarged' edition of Ruskin's works, which focused attention on his social, cultural, and economic theories rather than his views on the visual arts; this he did in 1871 with 'Sesame and Lilies', in conjunction with Ruskin's existing publisher Smith, Elder. In 1874 Allen secured a loan from Ruskin in order to build himself Sunnyside Villa at Orpington, Kent; he developed his business in an outhouse on the property and tended its garden in his spare time. From that time Ruskin officially dubbed him his publisher, and publication of all of Ruskin's books was gradually transferred to him. 
By then a familiar figure at Ruskinian gatherings, Allen became one of the first 'companions' of Ruskin's Guild of St George. His responsibilities became all the more serious after 1878, when Ruskin began to suffer from bouts of insanity. Ruskin was then less able to control his own interests and became increasingly dependent on income from his books. Allen tried to develop the firm in commercially sound directions while remaining true to Ruskin's ideological objections to mainstream practices. However, concessions were inevitable. In 1882 he was sanctioned by Ruskin to enter into an agreement with booksellers which established fixed discounts and consistent prices for Ruskin's works, and in 1886 he drew up his own agreement with Ruskin according to which he worked for proportionate profits rather than on commission. The resulting expansion of the business necessitated the addition of premises in London. In February 1890 Allen opened a publishing house at 8 Bell Yard, Chancery Lane, and from January 1894 he operated at larger premises at 156 Charing Cross Road. 
Although Ruskin's works remained the principal part of his business, Allen engaged there in general publishing, issuing biographies and travel books and reprinting fairy tales and standard literary works. His approach to books reflected his earlier career as an engraver, for he emphasized illustration and fine printing. He commissioned such leading illustrators as C. E. Brock, Walter Crane, Hugh Thomson, Arthur Gaskin, Phil May, and Thomas Heath Robinson. Despite falling sales, he also persisted in producing lavish editions. A decline in this luxury market made him rely again on the sale of Ruskin's books at a time when they had ceased to appear radical. He was too late to make much money out of the cheaper editions of Ruskin that he had reluctantly introduced in the late 1880s, yet he persuaded both himself and Ruskin's guardians that economically priced volumes best served Ruskin's general purpose and his publishing venture. This led him to issue three publications which were, financially and historically, his most important achievements of the 1890s: a four-volume edition of 'Fors Clavigera' (1896), 'Modern Painters' (1897), and 'The Stones of Venice' (1898). 
Allen's last enterprise was the great library edition, edited by E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, of Ruskin's works (1903-11), of which, however, he did not live to see the completion. He died at his home in Orpington, aged seventy-five, on 5 September 1907, and was buried in the parish churchyard. His wife had died, in her eightieth year, eight months before him. They had four sons and four daughters. The eldest daughter, Grace, and the two eldest sons, William and Hugh, continued the business at 44 Rathbone Place, Oxford Street. The firm entered into receivership in 1913, and a year later its assets were sold to Stanley Unwin, so leading to the formation of a new company, George Allen and Unwin. 


@@@@@


doc= 30385


Allen, (Herbert) Warner (1881-1968), journalist and writer, was born at Godalming on 8 March 1881, the elder son of Captain George Woronzow Allen RN, and his wife, Ethel Harriet, daughter of the Revd Canon John Manuel Echalaz (1801-1877), rector of Appleby in Derbyshire and fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. He was educated at Charterhouse School, where he came under the influence of the classicist T. E. Page. He won a scholarship to University College, Oxford, and obtained a first class in classical honour moderations in 1902, and a third in 'literae humaniores' in 1904. Having had some disinclination towards metaphysics, and a leaning towards a literary career, he had meanwhile taken up modern languages and won the Taylorian Spanish scholarship in 1903. 
When writing his first book, an edition of the translation by James Mabbe of the Spanish 'Celestina' (1908) Allen supported himself by journalism. In 1908 he married Ethel, the daughter of Warwick Pembleton, and they had one son, G. Warner Allen. Also in 1908 he was appointed to the position of Paris correspondent of the 'Morning Post'. He thus became immersed in French life at the end of the 'belle epoque', and reported the sensational trial of Mme Caillaux. Shortly after the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 he was made an official representative of the British press at the French front. In 1917 he accompanied the British divisions diverted to support the Italians, and remained in Italy until the following year, when he was transferred to the American expeditionary force in France, and accompanied it in its occupation of Germany, where he stayed until March 1919. Out of these experiences he published 'The Unbroken Line' (1916) and, with the paintings of Captain Martin Hardie, 'Our Italian Front' (1920). He was made CBE (1920) and chevalier of the Legion d'honneur for his war services. 
As an extramural obligation to his proprietor Allen participated in the cross-channel flight of the 'Morning Post' dirigible, which ended in disaster; but he fortunately escaped almost unscathed. He was foreign editor of the 'Morning Post' (1925-8), and London editor of the 'Yorkshire Post' (1928-30), while at the same time he made many contributions to the 'Saturday Review'. He then retired to Brightwell-cum-Sotwell, in Berkshire, to concentrate on writing books, and produced some of his best and well-respected works on wine, including 'The Romance of Wine' (1931) and 'Sherry' (1934); he had already published 'The Wines of France' (1924). It was also at this time that he produced the first of his detective novels, 'The Uncounted Hour: a Crime Story' (1936), and collaborated with E. C. Bentley on 'Trent's Own Case' (1936), a sequel to Bentley's earlier mystery novel, 'Trent's Last Case' (1913). His writing was interrupted, however, by the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. Although fifty-eight years old, he was then gazetted acting wing commander, Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, and he served as assistant deputy director in the foreign division of the Ministry of Information from 1940 to 1941. 
After the war, Allen returned to writing about wine, publishing 'A Contemplation of Wine' and 'Natural Red Wines' (1951), 'White Wines and Cognac' and 'Sherry and Port' (1952), and ending with 'A History of Wine: Great Vintage Wines from the Homeric Age to the Present Day' (1961). In all of his publications on the subject, vinous information was nicely interwoven with literary and historical allusions. He travelled widely among the European vineyards; his accurate judgement of wine was recognized by all amateurs qualified to assess this, and he was greatly respected by the leaders of the wine trade. 
Allen himself, however, set greatest value on a series of mystical writings such as 'The Timeless Moment' (1946) and 'The Uncurtained Throne' (1951). As a youth Allen had abandoned formal Anglicanism, but T. E. Page had imbued him with the spirit of Plato, and later reading of Plotinus and acquaintance with, among others, T. S. Eliot and Dean W. R. Inge evoked in him a perception of transcendental values and a faith in the immortality of the soul -- attuned to an ethic that was certainly Christian. This gave him great personal serenity and an outward gentleness of address which made him deeply loved, particularly by the young. 
Warner, as everyone called Allen, was a man of rather above average height, with kindly features and, as the French politely put it, a 'leger embonpoint' of the true gourmet. He was a keen Savage in the heyday of the Savage Club, and was naturally elected to the Saintsbury Club, founded in oenophilist memory of Professor George Saintsbury, with its limited membership and precious cellar. At home and at his club he went to great pains to select food and wines that would gratify his guests, who were usually considerable connoisseurs. Although he lived long as a countryman and had a fine garden, he was not addicted to field sports. But with his vast reading, undimmed memory, and facility with words, he had a quick draw and a flawless aim for the clues of the 'Times' crossword puzzles. 
Allen died at his Berkshire home, Iden House, Brightwell-cum-Sotwell, on 12 January 1968, and was mourned by a large circle of friends, and a school of young disciples who were perhaps more attracted by his philosophy of the table than by his spiritual intimations. 
H. W. Yoxall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30386


Allen, Sir Hugh Percy (1869-1946), musicologist and conductor, was born at Reading on 23 December 1869, the youngest of the seven children of John Herbert Allen, who was in business with Huntley and Palmers of Reading. His mother, Rebecca, was the daughter of Samuel Bevan Stevens, a member of the firm of Huntley, Bourne, and Stevens, which made the tins for biscuits manufactured by Huntley and Palmers. 
There is not much evidence that music was seriously cultivated in the home, nor that any particular success was achieved by the boy at Kendrick School, Reading, but the arrival of Dr Frederick John Read as organist of Christ Church, Reading, when Allen was eight, was a milestone in his life. Determined to have lessons from Read, Allen played the organ at local churches -- Coley (1880), Tilehurst (1884), Eversley (1886) -- and in 1887 he combined his post at the last of these with some teaching at Wellington College. In that year he went as assistant to Read, who had been appointed organist of Chichester Cathedral. This provided valuable experience in cathedral services, the training of a choir, and the responsibilities of a cathedral organist. As yet, however, he had no paper qualifications. He therefore took his BMus examinations at Oxford in 1892, and in the same year was appointed organ scholar of Christ's College, Cambridge. Here appeared the first signs of his power to influence others musically when he gave performances of Bach cantatas in the college chapel. The college music society, the college orchestra, the university musical club, performances of Greek plays: all these gained by his infectious enthusiasm and his drive. He graduated in 1895 and in 1896 took his DMus examinations at Oxford, although he was prevented by regulations from taking the degree until 1898. 
In 1897 Allen was appointed organist of St Asaph Cathedral, and in his one year there he vastly improved the standard of singing and radically altered the repertory. The next year he went to Ely Cathedral, where he forged musical links with Cambridge. While there he conducted notable performances of Bach's 'St Matthew passion' and Brahms's 'Requiem' and 'Schicksalslied'. In 1902 Allen married Edith Winifred, daughter of Oliver Hall, of Dedham, Essex; they had one son and one daughter. 
In 1901 Allen was appointed organist of New College, Oxford. Like those at St Asaph and Ely, the choir at New College was soon required to sing much difficult music, and the weekly service lists show both progressiveness and catholicity. In 1908 the college showed its appreciation of Allen's work by offering him a fellowship. But research was not his metier, and he soon resigned the fellowship. More importantly, it was at this time that he was responsible for amalgamating two choral societies (of different traditions and understandable rivalry) into the Oxford Bach Choir, which developed a great reputation; and he formed an orchestra to accompany it. Both choir and orchestra became important in both the university and the city. Appointed choragus to the university in 1909, he began to introduce a new scheme of practical training for Oxford's music students. 
Such was Allen's reputation that he was frequently approached by musical authorities outside Oxford. He became director of the Petersfield Festival (1906), conductor of the London Bach Choir (1907-20), director of music at University College, Reading (1908-18), and director of music at Cheltenham Ladies' College (1910-18). In 1913, 1922, 1925, and 1928 he conducted at the Leeds Festival. In 1918 Sir Walter Parratt resigned the professorship of music at Oxford, and there was no doubt about the identity of his successor. Oxford was glad to have at last a resident professor. But when Sir Hubert Parry died later in the year Allen was appointed director of the Royal College of Music in London, and Oxford thought it would lose him. As usual with Allen, nothing of the sort occurred. He retained his professorship, kept his rooms at New College, and for another seven years conducted the Oxford Bach Choir. However, he undertook practically no other performing engagements. 
Allen's arrival at the Royal College of Music coincided with post-war expansion. The number of students rose from 200 to 600, and many of the director's plans for extension of work, which were made quickly and, as it seemed, temporarily, eventually became permanent. For nineteen years he directed the affairs of the college, but in 1937 he felt he ought to retire. Retirement with Allen meant a change of occupation; to the end of his life he retained his Oxford professorship and made Oxford his headquarters. He continued to press for the creation of a music faculty, which the university granted in 1944. New premises and the setting up of a music school occupied him continuously from this time until his death. 
In Oxford, Allen galvanized generations of undergraduates into musical action. He was criticized for being content with less than perfect performances, but his critics, while having a modicum of truth on their side, failed to perceive his aim. In Allen's mind, rehearsals (where he could talk and teach) were more important than performances. 
In addition, his advice and help were sought by many musical organizations. The Incorporated Society of Musicians owes its reconstitution and its revivification chiefly to him; Kneller Hall sought his help; he was a member of the council of the corporation of the Royal Albert Hall; the Royal Philharmonic Society needed, and got, his advice; the British Broadcasting Corporation made him chairman of its music advisory committee in 1936. There was a time, just before he retired from the Royal College of Music, when it could be safely said that there were few musical happenings in the country about which Allen had not been consulted. 
Although a gifted conductor, Allen undoubtedly 'owed his position less to his musical than to his organizing abilities, and to sheer energy and driving force' (Colles and Turner, 281). He received many honours, being knighted in 1920, appointed CVO in 1926, and promoted KCVO in 1928 and GCVO in 1935. Besides receiving his Oxford doctorate he was made an honorary MusD of Cambridge (1925), DLitt of Reading (1938), LittD of Sheffield (1926), and DPhil of Berlin. He was also an honorary fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge (1926); and in 1937 he was master of the Worshipful Company of Musicians. 
On 17 February 1946 Allen was knocked down by a motorcyclist in Oxford, and the severe injuries which he received caused his death three days later on 20 February in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. 
W. K. Stanton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30387


Allen, Sir James (1855-1942), politician in New Zealand, was born on 10 February 1855 in Adelaide, South Australia, the son of James Allen and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Bax. His mother died when he was very young and his father, a New Zealand businessman and property speculator, soon took him to Dunedin, the provincial capital of Otago, New Zealand. In the early 1860s he and his brother Charles were sent to England and placed in the care of an uncle in Cockhill, Somerset. Their father returned to Dunedin, where he died in 1865. 
After attending a boarding-school in Somerset with his brother, Allen was educated at Clifton College, Bristol (1869-74). He went on to St John's College, Cambridge (followed by his brother), where he specialized in mineralogy and graduated with a third-class degree in the natural sciences tripos in 1878. At university he excelled in rowing and rugby. On 23 August 1877 he had married, at Evercreech, his cousin Mary Jane Hill Richards (died 1939), the daughter of John Richards, a farmer of Alford in Somerset. They had three daughters and three sons. 
Following a teaching stint at Harrow School, Allen returned to Dunedin, where he had inherited considerable property. He gained his first political experience with a seat on the city council from 1880 to 1883, during which time he became a well-known local figure. Back in England between 1884 and 1887, he spent three successful years in London at the Normal School of Science and the Royal School of Mines. When his businesses in Otago called him back to New Zealand he used his new knowledge to add coal- and goldmining to his interests. In 1887 he rose rapidly to national prominence by dramatically seizing the Dunedin East seat in the house of representatives from the premier, Sir Robert Stout. 
Allen was among the conservatives who lost their seats in the Liberal victory of 1890, but two years later he was returned as the member for Bruce at a by-election. His reputation for integrity and hard-working soundness and solidity was eventually rewarded, and in 1903 he was generally recognized as the only possible rival to William Massey when the leadership of the opposition fell vacant. His lack of charisma, even compared with that of Massey, ensured however that he stood no chance; and he slipped easily into the role of the new leader's loyal and dependable deputy. 
Allen became the leading opposition spokesman on defence matters, pursuing an interest long held through training in volunteer defence units (in which he ultimately reached the rank of colonel). He also developed a long-standing interest in education at all levels. His vigorous personal support of the 'bibles-in-schools' movement reflected a lifelong interest in religion. He was the last life member appointed to Otago University's council (1887) and served as its vice-chancellor (1903-9) and chancellor (1909-12). As a member of the senate of the University of New Zealand Allen would -- unusually for him -- take up some progressive causes, such as the appointment of examiners from within New Zealand. But he was more usually to be found attacking the Liberal government's radicalism and its alleged profligacy in spending and borrowing. 
Allen became deputy to the premier when Massey established the Reform ministry in July 1912. In view of his interests he was selected to take up the defence, education, and finance portfolios. In these he found it difficult -- especially in economic matters -- to live up to promises of fundamental change. However, there were initiatives in education, including statutory funding for university colleges and a general educational restructuring in 1914, and developments in defence, such as efforts to increase efficiency in the compulsory military training programme. His most important achievement in peacetime was the procurement in 1913, in the face of 'bullying' opposition by the first lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill (diary, 21 April 1914, Grant-Duff MSS, CAC Cam.), of Britain's consent to dedicated naval forces for New Zealand. Later that year, after initial doubts, he acquiesced in the government's sometimes clandestine use of the military in its determination to crush organized labour during the 'great strike'. 
Allen's particular strength was organization, and his careful shepherding of defence administration enabled the dominion to make a quick and easy adjustment to wartime mode in 1914. A New Zealand expeditionary force seized German Samoa shortly after the outbreak of the First World War in August, and by mid-October the bulk of the main New Zealand expeditionary force had left for the Middle East, in line with Allen's war contingency plans. (Previously, he had vigorously championed the idea of a force ready to react to disturbance anywhere in the empire, a concept even right-wing observers felt to be imperialist 'militarism run mad' (Weitzel, 138).) The creation of a national coalition government in August 1915, the month his youngest son died at Gallipoli, left him able to concentrate solely on the defence portfolio. 
Not only was Allen New Zealand's war leader from August 1916, he was also acting prime minister for a total of nearly two years. This resulted from the frequent absences overseas (on imperial, war, and peace business) of Massey and his 'de facto' co-leader in the National Government, Sir Joseph Ward. His wartime role was, however, punctuated by controversies. In particular, serious opposition to the government's initial reliance on voluntary war service was targeted at the defence minister. Then from 1916 he was under severe attack from the opposite perspective when cabinet did endorse his arguments for the introduction of conscription -- including for the draconian way in which he applied the system. But the views of the commander of the expeditionary force (who did not like his reserved, humourless demeanour) sum up his overall reputation in this period: his pre-war 'efforts to improve the status and organisation of the New Zealand forces' had provided an 'invaluable' base for the war effort. 'I cannot say enough of all the help and support that he gave to me and to all the units of the force' during the conflict (General Sir Alexander Godley, archives of St John's College, Cambridge, ref. 4257). 
Weary of the problems posed by post-war rehabilitation, Allen prepared to leave politics at the 1919 general election. But with the demise of the coalition government in August of that year he was persuaded to stay on and also to take up the finance portfolio again. On narrowly retaining his seat he added to his defence and financial portfolios that of New Zealand's first minister of external affairs. His acceptance of this position, that of administering the dominion's interests in the Pacific, reflected a long-standing fascination in the region; in 1903 he had published 'New Zealand's Possessions in the South Seas'. He now instituted arrangements for exercising his country's League of Nations mandate in Western Samoa. 
But in 1920 Allen finally relinquished politics for diplomacy to become New Zealand's high-profile high commissioner in the United Kingdom. He now championed imperial co-operation and the sanctity of British imperialism with the same enthusiastic conviction which had led him during wartime to secure the highest proportion of men in uniform in the empire. After his return to Dunedin in 1926 he continued to pursue his international interests, presiding for example for a dozen years over the new dominion branch of the Institute of Pacific Relations, as well as serving on its Pacific council. 
As high commissioner Allen had represented his country at the League of Nations, where he had displayed a frugality over financial policy which had increasingly become his characteristic during his years of ministerial responsibilities. His essential conservatism, coupled with his practical experiences, had, however, brought him to believe that international co-operation was a vain hope: the best one could hope for was a 'pax Britannica' resting on the Royal Navy and the might of the British empire. As an active legislative councillor after his appointment to the second chamber on 1 June 1927, he focused on imperial and international affairs. 
Allen was appointed KCB in 1917, for his contribution to the war effort, and GCMG in 1926. He ceased to attend legislative council meetings a year before his wife's death in 1939, and his appointment as a councillor lapsed in 1941. He died on 28 July 1942 at his home, Arana, Clyde Street, Dunedin, and was buried at the city's northern cemetery. He had been a highly efficient -- if unglamorous -- statesman and administrator. He was unfazed by criticism, and his reputation rests principally on his firm organizational control over New Zealand's preparations for and operations of war. It might be said that he epitomized the rather dull conservatism of many New Zealand politicians of the post-pioneering period; it might also be said that he embodied, at a high level of probity and effectiveness, a cautiousness and consolidationism that was virtually inevitable given the temper of his times. Either way, a recent assessment that he 'deserves a more prominent place in New Zealand history than he has hitherto been given' (Baker, 224) is vindicated by a reassessment of the evidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 30388


Allen, John Romilly (1847-1907), archaeologist, born at Park Village West, Regent's Park, London, on 9 June 1847, was the eldest son of George Baugh Allen (1821-1898), a well-known special pleader of the Inner Temple, of Cil-rhiw, near Narberth, Pembrokeshire, and his wife, Dorothea Hannah (died 1868), third daughter of Roger Eaton of Parc Glas, Pembrokeshire. Allen was educated at King's College School, London (1857-60), Rugby School (1860-63), and King's College, London (1864-6). In 1867 he was articled to G. F. Lyster, engineer in chief to the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, with whom he remained until 1870. He was next employed as resident engineer to the Persian railways of Baron Julius de Reuter and then in supervising the construction of docks at Leith, near Edinburgh, and at Boston, Lincolnshire. Meanwhile he was interested in archaeology, and to this pursuit, and particularly to the study of prehistoric antiquities and of pre-Norman art in Great Britain, he devoted the rest of his life. His earliest contribution to 'Archaeologia Cambrensis', the journal of the Cambrian Archaeological Association, appeared in April 1873; he joined the association in 1875, was elected a member of the general committee in 1877, became joint editor of the journal in 1889, and was sole editor from 1892 until his death. The extent of his influence on the standards of the 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' is documented and acknowledged in its pages over twenty years. His article on 'Early Christian art in Wales', which appeared in the January 1899 issue, was the first systematic account of the subject. 
Allen's time at Leith gave him the opportunity to visit Scottish archaeological sites; in 1883 he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland (honorary fellow, 1900), and in 1885 was the society's Rhind lecturer in archaeology. His Rhind lectures, on 'Early Christian Symbolism in Great Britain and Ireland', were published in 1887. In England he became FSA in 1896, editor of the 'Reliquary and Illustrated Archaeologist' in 1893, and Yates lecturer in archaeology in University College, London, for 1898. Allen was comfortably off, but not rich, and it was largely through the support of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and its jubilee research fellowship, endowed by Dr R. H. Gunning, that he was able to fund his work in Scotland. Allen's only salaried employment, after he left civil engineering, was as an editor. Allen's great work 'The Early Christian Monuments of Scotland' (1903, with Joseph Anderson) gave him scope for a general analysis and classification of ornament which put the study of early medieval sculpture throughout the British Isles on a new footing. His unrivalled knowledge of the visual material, and the soundness of his approach, widely acknowledged by fellow workers in his lifetime, continue to command respect. Allen was a tireless fieldworker; in his last book, 'Celtic Art in Pagan and Christian Times' (1904), he was able to claim that he had personally examined nearly all the early Christian monuments of Scotland, England, Wales, and Ireland. Allen pioneered scientific methods of description, but because he was himself an accomplished artist he never lost sight of the aesthetic quality of patterns, and his descriptive writing was fluent and evocative. A passionate advocate of the preservation of monuments, he urged the creation of collections of casts, photographs, and drawings before the monuments themselves had weathered away. Such collections, he pointed out, would not only record the appearance of rapidly disintegrating works of art, but could also be used for study and education at all levels. These views, trenchantly expressed, cropped up regularly in his many contributions to archaeological journals. 
Allen's scholarly expertise extended beyond sculpture. He was what would now be called an art historian, as well as an archaeologist. His detailed knowledge of metalwork and manuscript illumination enabled him to show how comparative study of art in various media could help establish chronology. His iconographical research resulted in his listing examples, anticipating the creation of art indices. Allen's more general interests, particularly in the technical appliances of all cultures, found an outlet in his work for the 'Reliquary and Illustrated Archaeologist'. 
As a freelance scholar, Allen was able to express his views without inhibition. He had hard words to say in print of the curators of the London museums, who he thought neglected early Christian archaeology in Britain and were remote from the general public. But his hot indignation was matched by a keen sense of humour and a kind heart. Well-read and a noted conversationalist, he was regarded with great affection by all who worked with him or benefited from his advice. For most of his life Allen lived in London. He died there, unmarried, at his home, 28 Great Ormond Street, on 5 July 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 30389


Allen, Percy Stafford (1869-1933), Erasmian scholar, was born at 2 Twickenham Park, Twickenham, Middlesex, on 7 July 1869, the younger son and fourth child of Joseph A. Allen (1825-1910), a London bill broker. The Allens were a distinguished and old-established Quaker family, but Joseph Allen had been obliged to leave the Society of Friends on marrying 'out' to Mary Mason (died 1892), youngest daughter of Hans David Christopher Satow and sister of the Anglican diplomat and historian Sir E. M. Satow. Percy Allen was educated at Clifton College (1882-8) and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was a scholar (1888-92), taking a first class in classical moderations (1890) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1892). 
In 1884 Allen had accompanied his father on a visit to Gibraltar, Morocco, and Malta for the Anti-Slavery Society; in 1893 he travelled with a pupil in Australia and New Zealand. After returning to Oxford at the end of that year, he won the chancellor's prize for a Latin essay (on the character of Alcibiades) in the summer of 1894. In 1896 he took his MA and became a master at Magdalen College School. Appointed professor of history in the government college at Lahore in 1897, he visited England in the summer of 1898, to marry on 20 September his cousin Helen Mary (1872-1952), daughter of Arthur John and Agneta Allen, of Chislehurst, where Joseph Allen had built himself a house. They had one child, a daughter, who died at birth in 1906. 
The climate of India seriously affected the health of both Allen and his wife, and in 1901 he resigned his Lahore professorship and returned to Oxford, where the rest of the Allens' life was spent. Initially they were supported by an annual $250 from Allen's father and by small earnings from minor academic and administrative chores; the death of Joseph Allen in 1910 relieved financial pressure. In 1906 a project to make Allen a research fellow of Corpus Christi failed, but in 1908 he was elected to a fellowship of Merton College, which he held until 1924, becoming an honorary fellow in 1925. He filled various college offices, notably that of librarian (1915-24), bringing order into the college archives and early holdings, as well as publishing 'Merton Muniments', a facsimile and edition of some of its earliest documents, with his friend H. W. Garrod in 1928 and having a large part in similar publications by others. The fellowship carried no teaching duties, but for many years Allen continued the lectures he had first given in 1906 on the tradition of the classics. In 1924 he was elected president of Corpus Christi College; he retained this office until his death. 
Allen's name will always be associated with his masterly edition of the correspondence of Erasmus, 'Opus epistolarum Des. Erasmi Roterodami'. His interest in Erasmus dated from 1892 when, immediately after taking his first degree, he competed unsuccessfully for the chancellor's English essay prize. The subject was Erasmus. In 1893-4 he attended the lectures on the life and letters of Erasmus by James Anthony Froude, who influenced him profoundly: he always maintained that 'The Life and Letters' (1894) was better than any other book on Erasmus, and on the day on which Froude died he began to read his 'History of England', which he would never willingly hear disparaged. Allen's first published book was 'Selections from the Writings of James Anthony Froude' (1901). His virtually flawless scholarship and his gentle, impartial temper make his admiration for Froude seem paradoxical. But he was a man incapable of paradox and, on the main issues of the Reformation, he believed Froude to have been right. 
During his four years in India, Erasmus's correspondence continuously preoccupied Allen. On 22 June 1901 he and his wife were cutting up earlier printings of the letters to form, along with the extensive collections he had made in the Netherlands and Germany between 1893 and 1896, a basis for a new edition. After the Allens' return to Oxford in 1901 they regularly (the 1914-18 war years excepted) spent spring and summer in European libraries, collating the known material and bringing to light an immense amount of material hitherto unknown. They were aided in 1904 by a small private gift, part of which was spent on a typewriter, and later by modest financial support from the Clarendon Press, which also intervened to allay anxieties about putative rivals. Every letter was copied fair in the library where the manuscript (or the first printed text) was to be found. The copy so made became the 'printer's copy', with no intervening transcript. The proof of each letter was corrected in the library where the original copy had been made. In the decipherment of difficult fifteenth- and sixteenth-century hands Allen had no rival. Nobody knew the texts of the Reformation as well as he; to nobody were the lives of the great and little men of the Reformation so intimately familiar; he knew them and their writings, and anything that anybody else had written about them, at first hand. Ingram Bywater called him 'the most learned man in Oxford' ('DNB'), and the 'Opus epistolarum' is one of the great monuments of English learning. 
The first volume in this first critical edition of Erasmus's correspondence appeared in 1906, and the eighth was published posthumously in 1934, with Allen's portrait for a frontispiece and his life by Garrod, in Latin, by way of introduction. Allen had left it to his wife, his collaborator since the beginning, and to Garrod to complete the last three volumes; for these he had collected the materials, but without furnishing commentary and introductions. Volumes 9-11 appeared between 1938 and 1947; an index compiled by Barbara Flower, completed and edited by Elisabeth Rosenbaum, was published as volume 12 in 1958. Reissued in the 1960s and reprinted entire in 1992, the edition still holds the field unchallenged for accuracy and comprehensiveness. Text apart, 'Allen' is, in its commentary and introductions, 'a treasure-house of unborrowed learning' ('DNB'), the beginning of a new era in Erasmus scholarship, in which Erasmus is presented, in his own words, fully but sparely and impartially. Moral and historical judgement is left to the reader, who is deemed to share the familiarity of Allen with language, persons, and issues, as well as his affection for Erasmus and his appreciation of Erasmus's situation. The most important single printed source for the intellectual history of western Europe during pre-Reformation and Reformation times, the 'Opus epistolarum' contains more than 3100 letters, 1600 of them by Erasmus himself, as against the 1800 in total printed by Jean Leclerc in 1706. Its texts are based almost entirely on known manuscripts, where Leclerc had often to rely on printed texts. Its datings, on which Erasmus chronology often depends, have stood the test of time remarkably: only a handful of finished letters, with a number of drafts, have since come to light. Its commentary (Leclerc had effectively none), though inevitably now dated, is still indispensable. 'Allen' is the starting point for the correspondence, and for much else, in the edition of the complete works of Erasmus in English issued by Toronto University Press (1974-) and for Toronto's companion biographical register, 'Contemporaries of Erasmus' (1985-7), while in the Amsterdam edition of the complete works in Latin, also in progress, the correspondence has been judged less in need of immediate attention because of 'Allen'. 
Besides the 'Opus epistolarum', Allen published his prize essay (1894), some single lectures, a little volume of 'Selections from Erasmus' (1908), and eleven lectures in 'The Age of Erasmus' (1914). In 1924 he and his wife published jointly 'Sir Thomas More: Selections from his English Writings and from the Lives by Erasmus and Roper' (presenting a view of More which, like their view of Erasmus, was somewhat sentimental); and in 1929 they edited the 'Letters of Richard Fox, 1486-1527', the correspondence of the founder of Corpus. In 1934 there appeared posthumously another volume of Erasmian studies by Allen, 'Erasmus: Lectures and Wayfaring Sketches'. One of his services to scholarship was the suggestion to the department of printed books in the British Museum that they should produce a series of short-title catalogues of books published before 1600 in France, Italy, Spain, the Low Countries, and Germany. The first such to be published, of French books, appeared in 1924. 
Allen received honorary degrees from the universities of Leiden (1922), Birmingham and Louvain (1927), and Durham (1931); between 1909 and 1930 he became, by invitation, foreign, honorary, or extraordinary member of academies or learned societies in Amsterdam, Antwerp, Ghent, Leiden, and Utrecht; in 1923 he was elected fellow of the British Academy. In 1925 his sense of what was required of the head of a college led him to take his DLitt at Oxford. 
Allen was himself an indefatigable letter writer: he wrote easily and copiously, in a minute and precise hand, to family and friends and was prompt in dealing with official correspondence. To Sir Aurel Stein, his closest friend since their meeting at Lahore, he wrote weekly until Stein begged him to write only fortnightly. The selection of letters published in 1939 by Mrs Allen exhibits happily a single-minded scholar of simple tastes, regular habits, personal modesty, care for his friends, and devotion to Erasmus, his works, and his ideals -- Allen was a supporter of the League of Nations -- a man of moral principle and lovable and saintly character. They give only a superficial impression of his presidency of Corpus Christi, election to which the Allens privately called 'the miracle'. The election process was protracted, and Allen's eventual appointment was controversial among both undergraduates and influential fellows. He was well-meaning and conscientious, but he had neither taste nor aptitude for debate or for university administration. To individual undergraduates he was kind, presenting them all with his edition of the letters written by the founder, Bishop Fox. Yet he and his wife seemed remote and unworldly, entertainments at the lodgings were stiff and for some even painful, and there were embarrassing disciplinary problems. There could be no question, however, that Allen's devotion to the college rested upon a deep knowledge of its origins, and his 'Times' obituarist thought that on scholarly grounds he was 'almost the ideal Head of a House'. 
Besides his Latin and Greek, Allen had excellent French and German and could converse in Italian, Spanish, Dutch, and Hindustani. Personally frugal though unobtrusively generous and considerate to others, he defined his recreations as foreign travel and bicycling; both were pursued with a degree of hardiness. In youth he had rowed for his college, and he remained supportive of its boat club. Tall and spare, upright and unhurried but unpompous in carriage as in all things, careful in dress, pale in complexion, he wore his dark hair cut short; like his small moustache it greyed in later life. His eyes were hazel and he habitually wore spectacles. 
For thirty years Allen occupied seat S8 in Selden End of the Bodleian Library, of which he was a curator from 1913 and a benefactor; from 1915 to 1924 he was a curator of the Indian Institute. He died in the president's lodgings at Corpus Christi, after a protracted illness, on 16 June 1933. After a funeral service on 20 June he was cremated at Reading; his ashes were buried near the altar in Corpus Christi chapel, which, as an Anglican with doctrinal reservations, he believed should be the centre of college life. The P. S. Allen junior research fellowship in history at Corpus Christi was founded by a bequest from his widow. Her own contribution to their scholarly collaboration was acknowledged by several honours: she received honorary doctorates from the universities of Basel (1946) and Amsterdam (1948) and an honorary MA degree from Oxford (1932), and was elected an honorary fellow of St Hilda's College, Oxford (1944). 


@@@@@


doc= 30390


Allen, (Reginald) Clifford, Baron Allen of Hurtwood (1889-1939), politician and peace campaigner, was born at St Olave's, Slow Park, Newport, Monmouthshire, on 9 May 1889. As an adult he was always known as Clifford Allen, or by close friends as CA. He had a brother, Walter Godfrey Allen (1891-1986), who became an architect, and two sisters. His father, Walter Allen (1855-1913), owned a drapery business; his mother, Frances Augusta, 'nee' Baker, died in 1903 aged thirty-five and left her son two legacies -- precarious health and moral seriousness. Allen was educated at Berkhamsted School, at University College, Bristol, and from 1908 to 1911 at Peterhouse, Cambridge. He intended to take holy orders but at Cambridge his Anglicanism gave way to secularism and his political Conservatism to socialism, which found expression in the university Fabian Society. After leaving Cambridge, Allen remained an active Fabian and joined the City of London branch of the Independent Labour Party (ILP). He was heavily involved in the emergence of a Labour newspaper, the 'Daily Citizen', demonstrating a flair for organizational work and making many significant contacts within the labour movement, not least with Ramsay MacDonald. The newspaper first appeared on 8 October 1912 but, after the outbreak of war, its persistent financial difficulties led to its demise in May 1915. 
The war transformed Allen's political reputation. His position was uncompromisingly anti-war. He published a speech under the title 'Is Germany Right and Britain Wrong?' Most significantly, he was involved centrally in the formation of the No-Conscription Fellowship (NCF) late in 1914 and identified thoroughly with the ILP's defence of internationalism and its criticism of militarism. With the introduction of military conscription in 1916, the NCF dedicated itself to support for individual resisters. Allen would have been exempted from military service on health grounds, but chose to contest his conscription with the claim that his position as NCF chairman qualified as essential war work. But in August 1916 he was arrested, court-martialled, and gaoled. He chose the absolutist position, and refused to accept the option of non-combatant work. Released twice and rearrested, he was finally sentenced to two years' hard labour. His health deteriorated radically and he was released in December 1917, following an agitation on behalf of the imprisoned absolutists. 
Allen left prison with severely damaged lungs. The remainder of his life alternated between periods of intense political activity and bouts of illness followed by convalescence. Within the ILP Allen's war record gave him a heroic status. His experiences symbolized the principled commitment and suffering of many party members. In 1920 he visited the Soviet Union as a member of a joint Labour Party-Trades Union Congress delegation. He was attracted by the egalitarianism of the Soviet experiment but was also concerned about the threat of bureaucratization. 
Allen thought that in British conditions the transition to socialism could be made without violence. In the early 1920s he saw the ILP as a viable instrument, and he promoted the idea of the ILP as a socialist think-tank developing detailed policies for the wider labour movement. Such an ambition necessitated funds. Allen was elected ILP treasurer in 1922 and demonstrated a talent for raising money from a wide range of progressive sympathizers. Party organization was made more professional; the party newspaper, 'Labour Leader', became the 'New Leader'. Edited by H. N. Brailsford, this became renowned for socialist journalism of a very high quality. The unexpected advent of a Labour government in January 1924 with prominent ILP members in key posts, including MacDonald as prime minister, suggested that Allen's strategy might be effective. 
Allen became ILP chairman in 1923, and at the party conferences of 1924 and 1925 he emphasized the need to develop detailed policies based on thoroughly scientific investigation combined with a strongly moral commitment. The most famous product of this agenda was the doctrine of the 'Living Wage', published by the ILP in 1926. This powerful, if ambiguous, policy represented a serious attempt to provide a response to poverty and unemployment, an alternative to the dominant economic orthodoxy. But Allen had already ceased to count within the ILP, and resigned as chairman, ostensibly on the ground of ill health, in October 1925. In reality, his resignation stemmed from personal and political differences. Experience of Labour in office had deepened the antagonism of many on the left of the ILP towards MacDonald. For such critics, Allen's approach seemed too conciliatory and too remote from working-class experience. Allen, however, felt that a more adversarial policy would damage the prospects for socialism. He became exasperated with some ILP members who indulged in socialist rhetoric but avoided serious thinking. His resignation marked a significant moment in the leftward shift of the ILP. 
Nevertheless, Allen continued his involvement in the labour movement, not least as a director of the 'Daily Herald' from 1925 to 1930. These links were effectively destroyed in the crisis of 1931. Although ill, Allen supported MacDonald in deciding to lead a national government and then in the subsequent election campaign. In letters to 'The Times' he emphasized the need to restore confidence, and criticized the Labour Party for refusing to join a national government. The argument failed to appreciate the sense of solidarity that had kept almost all Labour politicians and many Labour sympathizers united through the crisis. His rarely reciprocated admiration for MacDonald was a powerful factor. Allen's apostasy was confirmed for many former associates when he accepted a peerage as Baron Allen of Hurtwood in the new year's honours list of 1932. His subsequent attempt to develop a significant political presence for the small National Labour group was disillusioning. MacDonald was largely inaccessible, and Allen's view that National Labour could be the socialist leaven in the National Government ignored its numerical weakness in the Commons. Eventually Allen shifted his focus to developing a broad cross-party progressive programme centred on the idea of planning. In February 1935 he played a central role in setting up the Next Five Years group. His most significant collaborators were a dissident Conservative member, Harold Macmillan, and the economist Sir Arthur Salter. The result was the publication in July 1935 of 'The Next Five Years'. Subtitled 'An Essay in Political Agreement', it was supported by 153 political and literary figures. The legacy of 1931 remained potent and the labour movement was almost unrepresented. Allen, in turn, remained hostile to the Labour Party and was suspicious of any collaboration with Lloyd George's Council of Action for Peace and Reconstruction. He still saw the National Government as the only plausible administration. The Next Five Years group offered an agenda without an instrument, a manifestation of the unsuccessful quest for a British new deal. 
Predictably, Allen opposed the Versailles settlement and argued consistently that German grievances should be responded to sympathetically. Late in 1934 he joined the Anglo-German group with the purpose of improving relations between the two countries. He visited Hitler in January 1935 and the following year attended the Nuremburg rally. His search for a peaceful European settlement did not entail blindness to the brutality of the Nazi regime. He campaigned on behalf of political prisoners; his last speech to the Lords, on 27 July 1938, included an indictment of Nazi antisemitism. As the agitation by Czechoslovakia's Sudeten Germans threatened serious international consequences, Allen claimed that they should be allowed to join Germany. He travelled to Berlin and Prague in August 1938 to meet Ribbentrop, the German foreign minister, and the Czech president, Benes, and prime minister, Hodza. The prospect emerged of a four-power conference to settle the issue, and Allen reported this to the British foreign secretary, Lord Halifax. Subsequently Allen was a thorough defender of the Munich agreement. It was his last political intervention. Exhausted and ill, he died in a sanatorium at Montana, Switzerland, on 3 March 1939. His body was cremated at Lausanne three days later and the ashes scattered on Lake Geneva. 
Allen was survived by his wife, Marjory Gill (1897-1976) ['see 'Allen, Marjory], and by their daughter, Polly. They had married on 17 December 1921; she was the sister of Colin Gill, and cousin of Eric Gill, and was a landscape architect. They shared a commitment to experimental education and founded a nursery school in their local village. Allen felt that his wife's support had prolonged his life. 
Allen was a complex figure. His appearance was striking: the handsome head, the auburn hair, the frailty. The impact was deepened by his reasoned yet passionate advocacy. Yet this man of austere principle and firm purpose was an effective organizer and, for some, an assured practitioner of the politician's machiavellian arts. He had a genius for friendship, but broke with political organizations and erstwhile colleagues rather than compromise his principles. One characterization presents him as a Labour renegade whose choice in 1931 condemned him to political marginality. An alternative presentation -- more sympathetic and perhaps more apposite -- identifies him as one committed to liberal, rational, humane values who believed in the feasibility of a better society but who found no effective organization for furtherance of this agenda. 


@@@@@


doc= 30391


Allen, Robert Calder (1812-1903), naval officer, born on 8 August 1812, was the son of William Allen, a master in the navy and presumably a follower of Admiral Sir Robert Calder. He entered the navy as a second-class volunteer in July 1827. In that grade and as second master he served with credit, principally on the west coast of Africa and in China. On 26 August 1841 he was advanced to be master, and in 1842-5 was master of the 'Dido' under Captain Henry Keppel, during her celebrated cruises against the Malay pirates of Borneo. Here Allen demonstrated both courage and high seamanship. In 1850-51 he was master of the 'Resolute' in the Arctic, under Captain Horatio Austin, whom he followed from the 'Blenheim', and had charge of the magnetic observations. In 1854-5 he was master of the blockship 'Hogue' in the Baltic, and rendered efficient service by his survey, often under fire, of the approaches to Bomarsund. In June 1863 he was promoted to the then new rank of staff commander, and in July 1867 to that of staff captain. In 1866-7 he was master attendant and harbour-master at Malta and in 1867 he was appointed in the same capacity to Devonport, before being transferred to Deptford. When that dockyard was closed in October 1870 he retired with the rank of captain. He was a silent, thoughtful man, modest and retiring. The subordinate position in which so much of his service was passed prevented his name from coming prominently before the public but in the navy his reputation as a sound and skilful navigator and pilot stood very high, and was officially recognized by a CB in 1877. 
Allen was twice married. With his first wife he had a daughter and four sons, who all entered the public service, navy, army or marines. His second wife survived him. He died at his home, 72 Shirland Road, Paddington, London on 29 January 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 30392


Allenby, Edmund Henry Hynman, first Viscount Allenby of Megiddo (1861-1936), army officer, was born on 23 April 1861, St George's day, on the estate of his mother's family at Brackenhurst Hall, near Southwell, Nottinghamshire, the second child and eldest son of six children (three boys, three girls) of Hynman Allenby ('c'.1822-1878), a country gentleman, and his wife, Catherine Anne (1829x31-1922), daughter of the Revd Thomas Coats Cane of Nottinghamshire. Married in 1859, Allenby's parents, after the death of Hynman Allenby's father in 1861, established the family home at Felixstowe House, Felixstowe, Suffolk (subsequently demolished); they also bought an estate in Norfolk of some 2000 acres. Brought up the son of a country squire in the countryside, away from the cities, Allenby loved nature and developed a keen knowledge of flora and fauna, a passion that would remain with him all his life. In 1935, aged seventy-four, he went to wildest Patagonia in Argentina on a final fishing trip to see if the salmon really were as big as in his beloved River Tay. 
Allenby's family background and early years did not suggest a military career. After being tutored at home by a governess Allenby went in 1871 to Ashbocking vicarage to be educated by the Revd Maurice Cowell. He then went in 1875 to Haileybury College in Hertfordshire, a former training school for the East India Company resurrected as a public school in 1862. While Allenby showed no remarkable aptitude in schoolwork or sport, his schooling in the classrooms and on the playing fields of Haileybury left its imprint. Rather than intelligence, the public schools at this time emphasized courage, duty, fortitude, integrity, selflessness, self-control, and a 'manly' belief in the virtues of the Christian faith as the vital attributes for 'character' and for a successful career in positions of authority (James, 6). Considering Haileybury's connections with India, Allenby decided in 1878 on a career in the Indian Civil Service, and he went to several 'crammer' schools in London to prepare for the entrance exams. These he failed, twice. Only after this setback did he choose a career in the army. As he later recounted in a public speech, he went into the army in 1881 'because he was too big a fool for anything else' (Savage, 24). 
Having passed out of Sandhurst in December 1881, Allenby was gazetted to the 6th (Inniskilling) dragoons, a not particularly fashionable cavalry regiment, on 10 May 1882. It is unclear why Allenby chose the mounted arm, but it was as a cavalryman that he made his reputation. Military life suited Allenby. While not an automaton, he was loyal, accepted orders without question, and enjoyed outdoor physical activity. When Allenby joined the army, it was beginning a period of transition as the old army gradually reformed to meet the challenges of modern, industrialized warfare. It was, however, in old-style colonial soldiering in southern Africa that Allenby served his apprenticeship as a subaltern. He joined his regiment in South Africa in 1882 before embarking in 1884 on an expedition to eject Boer lodgements in Bechuanaland (now Botswana). In 1886 Allenby returned home for a two-year stint at the cavalry depot at Canterbury and two seasons' fox-hunting. He then returned to South Africa a captain, accompanied by some hounds, joined his regiment, now on active duty in Zululand, and was promoted adjutant. With this appointment there emerged a serious application to soldiering that replaced Allenby's previously good-natured insouciance. While he had seen no actual fighting in southern Africa, he learned much of the basic fieldcraft that he would need in later wars. In this period Allenby also became something of a martinet; when he assumed senior command his withering temper, imposing physical presence (matched by a voracious appetite), and obsession with discipline and orders earned him the nickname 'the Bull'. 
In 1890, when the 6th dragoons returned home for garrison duties, Allenby settled into a rhythm of hunting, sport, socializing, and military duties. He also married: in 1895 he had met Adelaide Mabel Chapman ('c'.1868-1942), daughter of Horace Edward Chapman, and on 30 December 1896 the two were married at the bride's home at Donhead House, Salisbury, Wiltshire. Allenby's wife shared his love of the country and the marriage was intensely happy, lasting until his death in 1936. Adelaide Mabel, along with Allenby's mother, to whom he wrote regularly until her death in 1922, provided a solid foundation on which Allenby built his reputation as a soldier. In 1898 Adelaide Mabel gave birth to a son, Michael, the Allenbys' much loved only child. Michael's death on the western front in July 1917 shattered the typically marmoreal Allenby, who broke down and, inconsolable, wept in front of one of his divisional commanders (General Sir John Shea, recording, IWM SA, typescript, 5.41-2). 
Allenby's reticence masked considerable ambition and drive, and in 1896 he passed by competition into the Staff College at Camberley, a notable achievement at a time when few cavalrymen entered Staff College except by nomination. Allenby's class included another future field marshal, Douglas Haig. The cerebral James Edmonds, another entrant of 1896, recalled that Allenby was 'curiously taciturn' at Staff College and 'rather out of his depth in the very medium company of 1896-7' (Gardner, 23). While Allenby was neither strikingly intellectual nor garrulous, he was more popular than Haig, over whom fellow officers elected him to the prestigious position of master of the drag hounds for the 1896-7 season. A solid rather than outstanding student at Staff College, Allenby showed himself to be tolerant and flexible and, while not a big debater, capable of interesting conversations on a range of topics. His willingness to listen and consider new ideas would prove to be assets as he rose to the pinnacle of his profession. 
Promoted major in 1897, Allenby was made adjutant (equivalent to a brigade major) to the 3rd cavalry brigade in 1898. The next year saw the outbreak of the South African War (1899-1902), and in October the Inniskillings shipped out for service in South Africa against the Boers. This was Allenby's first war. Given temporary command of the Inniskillings in 1900, he emerged at the war's end in 1902 with much credit, a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy, and useful contacts; and in 1902 he was created CB in recognition of his service. Allenby started the war as an unknown major; he ended it with a reputation as a competent, reliable leader, and as someone marked out for possible promotion. While not a brilliant commander, Allenby had suffered no major reverses and, physically tough, had proved himself in the field on lengthy, exacting operations during which British columns swept the veldt for Boer commandos. Allenby also worked well with an attached Australian cavalry regiment, the New South Wales lancers, a portent of future operations during the First World War, when he commanded Australian mounted troops in Palestine. After the South African War, Allenby became a full colonel and in 1905 was made a brigadier-general and given command of the 4th cavalry brigade. In 1909 he rose to the rank of major-general before, the following year, becoming inspector-general of cavalry, a post he held until the outbreak of the First World War. 
As Allenby coped with the pressures of senior command before and during the First World War, he became increasingly irascible, obsessive with discipline, and bad-tempered towards subordinates. Hubert Gough, his chief staff officer when inspector-general of cavalry, recalled that Allenby had a 'great regard for regulations and all sort of detail' and that if Allenby, when inspecting a unit, saw any neglect of detail or orders he was liable to explode (Gardner, 62). Cavalrymen who neglected to do up their chinstraps felt the full weight of Allenby's concern with obeying all orders to the letter. During one inspection an officer remarked 'Very good, Sir', to which Allenby barked back, 'I want none of your bloody approbation' (James, 81). As one of his officers recalled, while Allenby had been an easy-going young officer and a good-humoured squadron leader, he was a strict colonel, an irascible brigadier, and an explosive general (Wavell, 'Study in Greatness', 1.114). This bad temper got worse once war broke out in 1914. One senior western front commander willing to withstand one of Allenby's tirades earned himself the sobriquet 'toreador', before being dismissed (James, 84). Allenby's wicked temper was a result of his having to cope with the strains of command. He was also capable of great kindness, did not bear grudges, and was always willing to listen to his officers as long as they could provide convincing evidence for their arguments. 
Allenby assumed command of the cavalry division on the outbreak of war in August 1914. However, the relationship with his commander, Haig, was far from ideal. While there was goodwill between the two men, both were uncommunicative in each other's company. This made discussions of strategy awkward. Allenby fumbled for words while Haig rambled through a series of unfinished sentences. 
While questions were raised over his handling of the cavalry during the retreat from Mons, Allenby's defence of the Messines-Wytschaete ridge during the first battle of Ypres (October-November 1914), with what was now the cavalry corps of two divisions, showed him at his dogged best: unflappable, reliable, and determined to stick to his orders and hold his ground at all cost against overwhelming odds. In May 1915 Allenby took over 5th corps during the second battle of Ypres before taking charge of the Third Army in October 1915 with the temporary rank of general. He was made a KCB in the same year (a GCMG would follow in 1917, a GCB in 1918, and a GCVO in 1934). In the trying circumstances of the western front, unable to institute manoeuvre warfare, Allenby proved himself a competent rather than inspiring general. 
Allenby's opportunity to prove himself came in April 1917 when his Third Army attacked at Arras. In the planning stages of the battle he reduced the preparatory bombardment to under 48 hours to give his assault troops the element of surprise. But Haig vetoed Allenby's 'hurricane' bombardment in favour of a longer five-day artillery barrage and, under pressure, Allenby acquiesced in the change of plan. While disadvantaged operationally, Allenby instituted a number of measures, such as using the sewers and cellars of Arras as a way of getting troops secretly to the jumping-off points, to achieve tactical surprise. The result was an impressive initial gain of almost 4 miles when the battle opened on 9 April 1917. Thereafter the fighting turned into a series of bitter and costly attritional battles as the Third Army engaged the German defence-in-depth system. Allenby's inability to change Haig's mind once the battle of Arras bogged down, and his willingness faithfully to carry out orders that he must have known would achieve little except cause heavy casualties, show some of his shortcomings. As was noted in his obituary: 'Allenby conscientiously, if clumsily, carried out an operation which, it was recognized, could hardly be decisive, and had been continued mainly with a view to giving the French time in which to recover' ('The Times', 18). The assessment of Gough, commander of the Fifth Army, was that while Allenby's behaviour was 'very just' he also had 'no ideas and when in France would apply orders rigidly without reasoning' (King's Lond., Liddell Hart MSS, talk with Lloyd George and Gough, 28 Nov 1935, 11/1935/107). 
Allenby came unstuck after Arras and, looking for a new commander for Palestine, the British leader, David Lloyd George, dispatched him to the Middle East to command the British-led Egyptian expeditionary force (EEF). While Allenby was desolate at being moved to Palestine, independent command in a peripheral war theatre away from the intrigues of the western front made his name and in October 1919 secured him a field marshal's baton, a viscountcy, and an award from parliament of $50,000. 
When Allenby arrived in Egypt on 27 June 1917 (he assumed command the following day), EEF morale had collapsed. Under the uninspiring leadership of General Archibald Murray the force had been defeated twice at the town of Gaza in spring 1917. Allenby set about rebuilding the EEF into a force capable of taking the offensive. He moved his headquarters to Khan Yunis, just behind the front line at Gaza, and embarked on a series of tours of EEF front-line troops. The tough Australian and New Zealand mounted troops that formed a mobile core to the EEF soon noticed the change in atmosphere. One Australian light horseman remembered how under Murray he and his comrades were 'fed up -- we considered we hadn't had the leadership we were due for and it seemed to be one blunder after another. Then the arrival of Allenby, morale rose' (IWM SA, Trooper Pollock recording, 4200). Allenby's impact resonated through the EEF. Richard Meinertzhagen, an EEF staff officer, recorded how the force was finally awakening from its 'lethargic sleep under Murray' (Meinertzhagen diaries, 15 July 1917), while Ronald Storrs, a future military governor of Jerusalem, noted that under Allenby the EEF was advancing with 'exhilaration into new hope' (Storrs, 270). With the weight of the western front lifted from his shoulders, Allenby rose to meet the challenges of his new post. Unlike Murray, he was no office general and, physically fit, was willing and able to travel over bumpy tracks in the stifling heat to visit units in the desert. Allenby's experience in field command of everything from a troop in southern Africa in the 1880s to an army in France gave him the standing to talk to rankers and lift their spirits. His sheer presence helped lift morale, and, like General Bernard Montgomery before the battle of Alamein in 1942, show his men that the impending battle was winnable (Hughes, 14-17). 
While Allenby's personality remained fundamentally unchanged (Falls, 'DNB'), the different circumstances in Palestine drew out his best qualities and emphasized a more sympathetic and thoughtful side. The Australian official historian Henry Gullett remembered Allenby visiting an Australian unit out in the desert where the canteen had been open for some time before he arrived, with the result that many of the men were drunk. The drunks struck matches on Allenby's car, 'almost leaned on him. The tighter they were the closer they wished to get to him' (Gullett papers, AWM40/69, 'Murray'). Allenby's reaction to this incident was afterwards to write an appreciative note to the unit commander. Major-General George de Symons Barrow, one of Allenby's divisional commanders, compared Allenby favourably to Haig, writing about how Allenby was happy to be contradicted as long as this was backed up by a cogent argument (G. de S. Barrow, 'Fire of Life', 1942, 46). Storrs recalled that being told off by Allenby was like being blown from the muzzle of a gun, but when the victim regained the ground Allenby bore him no malice (Storrs, 270). Allenby's mix of martinet and motivation infused new life into the EEF, transforming it into a fighting force. His first action opened in October 1917 with the third battle of Gaza, the objective being to capture Jerusalem. 
Prior to third Gaza, artillery, aeroplanes, men, and equipment poured into Egypt, turning the EEF into a well-equipped force of ten divisions -- seven infantry and three cavalry. On 12 August 1917 Allenby organized these units into three corps: the 20th and 21st infantry corps and the desert mounted corps. These reinforcements were vital for the offensive to break the Turkish lines that stretched in a ragged line from Gaza to Beersheba. For the third battle of Gaza, Allenby adopted a plan worked out by Murray's staff before his arrival. This plan involved shifting the emphasis of attack away from Gaza, with two of his three mounted divisions, plus four of the infantry divisions available, attacking the weaker eastern extremity of the Turkish lines at Beersheba, before rolling up the enemy defences from the east. The plan worked. Australian light horse troops charged in and took Beersheba on 31 October and moved west to join up with the force at Gaza prior to the push on Jerusalem. The city was finally captured on 9 December 1917. The surrender was taken by two 'cockney' privates from the 60th (London) division out looking for water; they were accosted by the mayor of Jerusalem bearing the keys to the city, and looking for someone to surrender to (James, 140). 
Considering the weak nature of the Turkish defences at Gaza, it has been suggested (Hughes, 43-59) that Allenby would have done better to concentrate his augmented force, which included a substantial pool of artillery, for an assault on Gaza town rather than on Beersheba. This would have led to a more comprehensive victory. As it was, the Turks were allowed the space to retire in good order to a new defensive line across central Palestine just north of Jerusalem from which they were not dislodged until the war's end. This does not, however, diminish Allenby's success at third Gaza: he reversed the two earlier defeats at Gaza and captured the historic city of Jerusalem. While he was perhaps too cautious and methodical at third Gaza, he was also under intense pressure to invade Palestine and take Jerusalem, especially after his supposed failure at Arras. Having examined the plan offered to him on his arrival in Egypt, he felt that this offered the best likelihood of fulfilling the wishes of his political superiors in the time allotted for the task. He was also hampered by having to conduct operations within the context of a protracted struggle between Lloyd George and elements of the military, notably General William Robertson, over war strategy and the question of whether 'side-shows' such as Palestine were worthy of support. Caught in the middle of this acrimonious debate, Allenby had to tread carefully and please both sides. 
With the capture of Jerusalem, Allenby was portrayed as a modern-day Richard Lionheart ('Punch', 19 Dec 1917) finally recapturing the holy city lost to the Muslims in 1187. For Britain the fall of Jerusalem was a notable propaganda coup at a very difficult moment in the war; for Lloyd George it was the Christmas present for the nation that he had demanded of Allenby before he left for Palestine. Allenby's entry into the city on 11 December was a carefully stage-managed show. He entered on foot through the Jaffa Gate, having dismounted outside the walls, in a gesture that compared favourably to the German Kaiser's entry on horseback in 1898, read out a proclamation of martial law, and then left, again on foot. 
After third Gaza the impending German (Ludendorff) offensives on the western front hampered Allenby's plans, as the EEF was a potential reserve force for France. When the offensives broke in March 1918 he lost the bulk of his infantry and some of his cavalry. They were replaced by untrained Indian troops who needed time to be absorbed into the EEF. This restricted Allenby's plans for 1918. From March to May 1918 he launched two 'raids' -- the official nomenclature for multi-divisional attacks -- across the River Jordan towards Amman. Their objectives were unclear and resulted in two comprehensive defeats by Turkish forces (Hughes, 71-88). These defeats shocked Allenby (Allenby MSS, 6/IX-X/40-41) and for a circumspect commander such as Allenby suggest a loss of grip on operations. 
Allenby's finest hour, and the crowning triumph of the Palestine campaign, came with his final offensive against the Turkish armies in Palestine, launched on 19 September 1918 and ending with the armistice signed at Mudros on 30 October 1918. This final battle was given the name Megiddo as Allenby's forces pushed by the ancient mound of Megiddo, the supposed site of the final battle (or Armageddon) revealed in the book of 'Revelation' (16: 16). Megiddo was a cavalry triumph: once artillery and infantry had punched a hole in the Turkish lines, Allenby's British, Indian, Australian, and New Zealand cavalry swept out behind Turkish lines and advanced all the way to Aleppo in northern Syria. Having said this, the poor condition of the Turkish forces in Palestine must be allowed for in assessing Allenby's success at Megiddo. Debilitated by a lack of men and equipment, they were in a much weakened state by September 1918. The Turkish high command from late 1917 had starved the Palestine front of 'materiel', preferring to concentrate resources on a push in the Caucasus. By the battle of Megiddo the Turks in Palestine could do little to resist when overwhelmed by Allenby's superior forces. The scale of the triumph surprised Allenby, who was planning a methodical push into Palestine and Syria (Hughes, 97). While cavalry was used extensively in the Russian civil war, and even the Second World War, the battle of Megiddo marked the swansong of cavalry, and the end of the era of the horse as a decisive weapon of war. 
Throughout the campaign Allenby liaised with Hashemite Arab forces allied to Britain. Directed by Colonel T. E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia), the Arabs were deployed on Allenby's right flank. While Allenby approved Lawrence's operations, the considerable post-war interest in the enigmatic Lawrence should not detract from Allenby's concentration on the main push by the EEF west of the River Jordan. Allenby took little account of the Arab force militarily, although he accommodated the imperial need to promote the Hashemites by ordering his troops to allow the Arabs into Damascus 'first', even though EEF cavalry clearly entered the city on 30 September-1 October 1918 before Arab forces arrived. 
The war's end presented Allenby with new challenges. He was the military commander of a swath of territory stretching from the Sudan to northern Syria before, in March 1919, becoming special high commissioner for Egypt, a post that was confirmed in October 1919 when he returned to London to be raised to the peerage, as first Viscount Allenby of Megiddo and Felixstowe, and promoted field marshal. Allenby was an able colonial administrator at a difficult time for the British empire. In 1919 Egypt rose in revolt and he had to deploy large numbers of troops to suppress the uprising with considerable force. Simultaneously his troops were clamouring to be demobilized, to the extent that some units effectively mutinied and refused to carry out orders (Hughes, 141-3). Meanwhile Australian and New Zealand troops went on the rampage through the Palestinian village of Surafend, beating to death some forty Arab villagers. On another occasion a paraded Australian unit shouted Allenby 'out' in an orchestrated example of disobedience (A. F. Nayton, letter, 'The Times', 29 May 1964). While he was furious at these acts of indiscipline, there was little Allenby could do now that the war was over. Worried by the threat of revolt, he urged the negotiators at the Paris peace conference to bear in mind the consequences of their decisions for the Middle East. Pressures within Egypt after the 1919 revolt for independence were a perennial problem for Allenby, temporarily solved by the granting of some self-rule in 1922. The end of his tenure in Egypt was marred by the assassination of Sir Lee Stack, the governor-general of Sudan, in 1924. He never resolved the dilemma of Egypt's status, an issue that rumbled on into the 1930s and beyond. It was, therefore, with some relief that in June 1925 Allenby left the official residency in Cairo with his wife and returned to Britain and retirement after a long period of service as a soldier and administrator. 
While the king gave the Allenbys rent-free use of Deal Castle, by 1928 they had purchased a more manageable town house at 24 Wetherby Gardens, London, on the fringes of Kensington. Allenby's chief public work was as president of the British National Cadet Force. Otherwise he used the time afforded by his retirement to indulge in bird-watching and travelling. Indeed it was after a trip to buy material for the aviary in his garden that Allenby died at home of a burst blood vessel in his brain on 14 May 1936. He was cremated and buried in St George's chapel in Westminster Abbey on 19 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 30393


Allies, Thomas William (1813-1903), theologian and Roman Catholic convert, born at Midsomer Norton, Somerset, on 12 February 1813, was the son of Thomas Allies, curate of Henbury, Bristol, and later rector of Wormington, and his wife, Frances Elizabeth Fripp, daughter of a Bristol merchant. His mother died a week after his birth, and he was brought up by his father's second wife, Caroline Hillhouse. After education at Bristol grammar school he entered Eton College in April 1827 under Edward Coleridge. There in 1829 he was the first winner of the Newcastle scholarship. He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, in 1828, where he was exhibitioner in 1830-33; he graduated BA with a first class in classics in 1832, proceeded MA in 1837, and was fellow from 1833 until 1841 and humanity lecturer in 1838-9. 
After a religious conversion in 1837 Allies took holy orders the following year and, under the influence of William Dodsworth, became a committed Tractarian. From 1840 to 1842 he was examining chaplain to Dr Blomfield, bishop of London, but the latter found Allies's Tractarian sympathies uncongenial and in June 1842 relegated him to the living of Launton, near Bicester. His pugnacious disposition, which along with his small stature and dapper appearance won him among his friends the nickname of the Bantam Cock, did not endear him to his episcopal superiors. On 1 October 1840 he married Eliza Hall Newman, the sister of Thomas Harding Newman, a fellow student at Oxford. There were five sons and two daughters of the marriage. In June 1842 he first met J. H. Newman, to whom he increasingly turned for guidance. Travels in France in 1845 and 1847 with John Hungerford Pollen quickened his doubt of the validity of the Anglican position, and a statement of his views in his 'Journal in France' (1848) incurred the disapproval of Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford. Study of the fathers, and especially of Suarez's work 'De erroribus sectae Anglicanae', combined with the Gorham decision on baptismal regeneration in 1850, undermined his faith in the established church, and in his work 'Royal Supremacy' (1850) he forcefully presented the Roman Catholic point of view. 
In October 1850 Allies resigned his Launton living and joined the Roman Catholic church -- a step which his wife had taken five months previously. He moved to Golden Square, London, where he took pupils, and then to The Priory, 21 North Bank, St John's Wood, later the residence of George Eliot. From August 1853 until his retirement on a pension in 1890 he was secretary of the Catholic poor school committee in John Street, Adelphi (instituted in 1847), and actively promoted Catholic primary education. To his energy was largely due the foundation of the Notre Dame Training College, Liverpool, in 1855, the Sacred Heart Training College for Women, Wandsworth, in 1874, and St Mary's Training College for Men at Hammersmith. As honorary secretary of the Education Crisis Fund (1870-73) he successfully raised $50,000 to enable the Catholic community to meet the demands of the 1870 'Education Act'. He was appointed in March 1855 the first professor of modern history at the new Catholic University of Ireland, Dublin, under Newman's rectorship. He soon resigned the post because of a dearth of students, but his proposed course of lectures formed the basis of his voluminous 'The Formation of Christendom' (8 vols., 1865-95). The work trenchantly expounds the predominance in history of the see of Peter. 
Among Allies's intimate friends in his last years were Lord Acton, the Catholic historian, and Aubrey de Vere, who addressed a sonnet to him on the publication of the sixth volume of 'The Formation of Christendom' in 1888. In 1885 Pope Leo XIII created him knight commander of St Gregory, and in 1893 he received the pope's gold medal for merit. In 1897 his health declined; he died at his home, 3 Lodge Place, St John's Wood, on 17 June 1903, and was buried at St Mary Magdalene's, Mortlake, by the side of his wife. She had predeceased him on 24 January 1902. Allies, one of the most learned of the Oxford converts to Rome, keenly felt his marginalization: 'My malady has been that I have a mind and education above my station' (Allies, 79). He traced the growth of his opinions in his autobiography, 'A Life's Decision' (1880). His principal works of controversy, in defence of the papal claims, were reprinted in 'Per crucem ad lucem' (2 vols., 1879), and a memoir by his daughter, Mary Allies, was published in 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 30394


Allingham, Margery Louise (1904-1966), writer, was born on 20 May 1904 in Ealing, London. She was the eldest of three children of the journalist and writer Herbert John Allingham (1867-1936), editor of the 'London Journal', and his wife, Emily Jane, 'nee' Hughes (1879-1960). Both parents, who were cousins, produced pulp fiction for serialization in popular magazines and journals. Margery's literary apprenticeship began on her seventh birthday, when she was assigned her own office in the family home at the Old Rectory in Layer Breton, Essex. While her beloved father's encouragement probably influenced Allingham's writerly development most significantly, her conventional education was not neglected, despite an illness which kept her from school for some years. She attended Endsleigh House School in Colchester from 1915 to 1918, then moved to the Perse School for Girls in Cambridge from 1919 to 1920, and completed her education at the Regent Street Polytechnic in London (1921-23), where she studied speech and drama and lost her childhood stammer. 
Although her hope for a career in the theatre was disappointed, Allingham was already launched in what would be her lifelong professions of journalism and writing fiction. By 1922 she had published reviews, stories, and film synopses in the 'Picture Show' and the 'Girl's Cinema', fan magazines edited by her maternal aunt, Maud Hughes, the first of their kind in Britain. Her first novel, 'Blackkerchief Dick', an adventure story, appeared in 1923. She met her future husband, Philip (Pip) Youngman Carter (1904-1969), an art student at the polytechnic, in 1921. The couple married on 29 September 1927. Their amiable, childless marriage was funded by Allingham's increasingly successful fiction. And, although Youngman Carter assisted his wife as a sounding board for plot design, and by producing covers and illustrations for her work, he found it difficult to sell his art. Allingham supported his increasingly expensive tastes until after the Second World War, when Pip came into his own writing society columns for 'The Tatler', which he edited from 1954. 
While the couple retained a base in London, from 1931 their main home was in rural Essex, a region with which Allingham always felt a deep affinity. In 1937 they took up permanent residence at D'Arcy House at Tolleshunt D'Arcy just 5 miles from Allingham's childhood home at Layer Breton. Aside from her affection for her garden, and her first aid and air raid precautions work during the Second World War, Allingham's was a writer's life. During her long career she published twenty-five novels, as well as the posthumous 'Cargo of Eagles' (1968), completed by her husband. In addition she produced four novellas, sixty-four stories, a wartime book on England for American readers, and a great number of reviews and other articles for such publications as 'Time and Tide', the 'Daily Herald', and 'Homes and Gardens'. 
Despite her sunny character, and her success as a novelist, the last part of Allingham's life also contained difficulties and disappointments. The thyroid condition from which she had suffered since her polytechnic days, and which was the reason for her corpulence, was finally diagnosed in 1940. By the 1950s she was increasingly ill, and her condition led to episodes of confusion and depression, for which she was hospitalized. Discovery of Pip's infidelity, and problems with the Inland Revenue caused her distress for many years. In the end, she suffered from breast cancer, and died at Severalls Hospital, Colchester, on 30 June 1966. She was buried at Tolleshunt D'Arcy five days later, in the graveyard of the fourteenth-century church of St Nicholas, and remembered for her warmth, vitality, and humour. 
The significance of Allingham's contribution to the development of detective fiction becomes clearer as time passes. She is rightly judged to be one of the four queens of crime of the golden age of mystery writing along with Agatha Christie, Dorothy L. Sayers, and Ngaio Marsh. Her contribution to the genre is the foregrounding of the kinds of psychological interest which would lead later in the twentieth century to the psychological crime fiction of such exemplary practitioners as Ruth Rendell, P. D. James, and Minette Walters. Allingham's fiction displays a keen sense of place, and in this comparisons are often made between her work and that of Dickens and Robert Louis Stevenson. Her representation of houses and architecture is deft and resonant. She also shares a particular sense of fun and gaiety with P. G. Wodehouse, who is sometimes mentioned in discussions of her dialogue, with its breezy and often zany 1920s English taste for eccentricity, wit, and absurdity. Most of all, however, she is praised for her set of memorable recurring characters, who grow in depth as her career proceeds. The most important of these, her detective Albert Campion, made his first appearance in 'The Crime at Black Dudley' (1929), her second mystery novel after her debut in 'The White Cottage Mystery' (1928). The diffident, languid, aristocratic Campion, with his sensitivity to evil and his passion for justice, becomes an increasingly complex figure over time. Campion's comic manservant, Magersfontein Lugg, an earthy former burglar, and Campion's associate, the earnest policeman Stanislaus Oates, both first appear in 'Mystery Mile' (1930). Lady Amanda Fitton, who later marries Campion and who is one of Allingham's characteristically strong female characters, is introduced in 'Sweet Danger' (1933) as a young woman who combines high spirits with high intelligence and, most unusually, electrical and engineering skills. Another interesting young policeman, Charlie Luke, appears in 'More Work for the Undertaker' (1948). Allingham deploys her ensemble of characters to make intricate observations regarding political, class, gender, and family relations, as well as using them in more conventional ways in the service of her always entertaining mysteries. 
Opinion differs as to Allingham's best book, though there is general consensus that her finest fiction appeared after the Second World War. Her own favourite was 'The Beckoning Lady' (1955), which contained autobiographical elements. 'More Work for the Undertaker', featuring one of Allingham's absorbing eccentric fictional families, is also well regarded. However, it is 'The Tiger in the Smoke' (1952), which has attracted the most critical esteem, with its killer on the loose in fog-bound London, its surreal touches, and its intense drama of good and evil. 
Allingham's work has been adapted for audio cassette, radio, and television. The BBC television series based on her novels in 1989 and 1990 was particularly successful and brought her many new readers. 


@@@@@


doc= 30395


Allman, George Johnston (1824-1904), mathematician, was born on 28 September 1824 at Dublin. He was a younger son of William Allman MD (1776-1846), professor of botany in Trinity College, Dublin, and his wife, Anne (died 1831). He entered Trinity College and after a distinguished career graduated in 1844 as senior moderator and gold medallist in mathematics with Samuel Haughton. He was also Bishop Law's mathematical prizeman and graduated LLB in 1853 and LLD in 1854. He married in 1853 Louisa (died 1864), daughter of John Smith Taylor of Dublin and Corballis, co. Meath. 
Allman was elected professor of mathematics in Queen's College, Galway, in 1853, and remained in this post until he retired in 1893, having reached the age limit fixed by civil service regulations. He was elected a member of the senate of Queen's University in 1877, and in 1880, when the Royal University of Ireland was founded, he was nominated by the crown as a life senator. He was made FRS in 1884, and awarded an honorary degree of DSc by Dublin in 1882. He contributed a few papers on mathematical subjects to scientific periodicals, besides an account of Professor James McCullagh's lectures on 'The attraction of the ellipsoid', which appears in the latter's collected works. He also wrote a number of articles in the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' on Greek mathematicians. His chief contribution to science is his 'History of Greek Geometry from Thales to Euclid' (1889), which first appeared as articles in 'Hermathena'. In this he traced the rise and progress of geometry and arithmetic, and threw new light on the history of the early development of mathematics. With his lifelong friend, John Kells Ingram, he was attracted to positivism, and entered into correspondence with Comte in 1852; in 1854 he went to Paris and made his personal acquaintance. His position at Galway prevented his taking any public part in the positivist movement, but his teaching was much influenced by Comte's mathematical work the 'Synthese subjective', and his general theory of historical development. Allman died of pneumonia on 9 May 1904 at Farnham House, Finglas, Dublin. A son and two daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30396


Tadema, Sir Lawrence Alma- (1836-1912), painter, was born Lorenz Alma Tadema on 8 January 1836 in the small village of Dronrijp, in Friesland, the sixth child of Pieter Jiltes Tadema (1797-1840) and Hinke Dirks Brouwer ('c'.1800-1863). 
Although his family had intended the young Lorenz Tadema to pursue a legal career, at fifteen he was diagnosed as consumptive, given only a short time to live, and allowed to spend his remaining days drawing and painting. At sixteen he began a formal art training at the Academy of Art in Antwerp. In 1857 he entered the studio of Louis Jan de Taeye (professor of archaeology at the academy, whose classes in history and historical costume he had attended), where he remained until November 1858. Influenced by his friendships with de Taeye and the Egyptologist Georg Ebers, he first produced work of a historical character on Merovingian and Egyptian subjects. In 1859 he joined the Antwerp studio of Baron Henri Leys, where he completed his first major painting, a Merovingian subject, 'The Education of the Children of Clovis' (1861; priv. coll.). Although it was criticized by Leys, who compared its depiction of marble to cheese (Alma-Tadema, 204), it received excellent reviews and was acquired by King Leopold of the Belgians. The young artist soon established a reputation on the continent, and in 1864 'Pastimes in Ancient Egypt' (1863; Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston) was awarded a gold medal at the Paris Salon and a second-class medal in the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1867. 
The years 1863 and 1864 marked a turning point in Alma-Tadema's life and career. On 24 September 1863 he married (Marie) Pauline (1837-1869), the daughter of Eugene Gressin, a French journalist living in Brussels, and that same year made his first trip to Italy. The couple's honeymoon visit to Pompeii coincided with the first systematic excavations of the site and Alma-Tadema, inspired by what he had witnessed, embarked on his first paintings depicting the classical world. From 1865 the representation of Roman life dominated his oeuvre. Set in Pompeian-type interiors characterized by vibrant red walls, these Roman pictures appropriate ancient architecture, decoration, and accessories, as well as Latin literature. A striking example of this type of painting is 'Catullus at Lesbia's' (1865); set in a richly decorated Pompeian interior, it evokes the famous poem ('Catullus 3') in which the Roman poet Catullus laments the death of his mistress Lesbia's pet sparrow. 
Influenced by French neo-Grec painters such as Jean-Leon Gerome, who significantly altered the treatment of ancient subjects by eschewing the depiction of well-known heroes in favour of scenes of everyday life, Alma-Tadema concentrated on historical genre subjects showing anonymous Romans engaged in ordinary activities. Favoured subjects included courtship rituals ('A Silent Greeting', 1889; Tate collection), bathing ('A Favourite Custom', 1909; Tate collection), dining ('The Dinner', 1873; William Morris Gallery, Walthamstow, London), and the performance of pagan rites ('A Dedication to Bacchus', 1889; Hamburger Kunsthalle). 
In 1864 Alma-Tadema secured a lucrative commission from the Belgian art dealer Ernest Gambart for twenty-four pictures; five years later he received a second contract for another forty-eight. Gambart exhibited Alma-Tadema's work at the French Gallery in London with the aim of enhancing the artist's reputation in Britain. By the time that Alma-Tadema exhibited his first works at the Royal Academy, in 1869 -- 'A Roman Art Lover' (1868; Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries) and 'A Pyrrhic Dance' (1869; Guildhall Art Gallery, London) -- he was well known in European and British art circles. 
Alma-Tadema and his wife, Pauline, had three children: two girls, Laurense and Anna, and a boy who died soon after his birth. In 1869 Pauline died, after years of ill heath. A year later, at the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, the family moved to London, where Alma-Tadema Anglicized his forename to Lawrence and, in 1873, was granted letters of denization from Queen Victoria. Meanwhile on 29 July 1871 he married his pupil Laura Theresa Epps, youngest daughter of the homoeopathic physician George Napoleon Epps (1815-1874) and his wife, Anne Charlotte Bacon (1813-1890). 
Shortly after moving to Britain Alma-Tadema established himself as a major figure in the Victorian art world, securing election as associate of the Royal Academy in 1876 and as academician only three years later. His first London residence -- Townshend House, near Regent's Park -- was decorated in an eclectic style incorporating Pompeian, Dutch, and Byzantine motifs. In 1886 he moved to a new house in Grove End Road, St John's Wood, an area fashionable among artists. Originally belonging to Jean-Jacques Tissot (also a former pupil of Baron Henri Leys) the house was extensively remodelled to Alma-Tadema's own design and once again incorporated eclectic motifs. A striking and original feature was the domed ceiling of the studio; covered with aluminium paint it cast a silvery light, allowing the artist to simulate a Mediterranean sunlight even in the winter months. Laura Alma-Tadema's studio, by contrast, was fitted with dark wood panelling in the image of a Dutch-style interior. The decoration of his studio had a profound effect on Alma-Tadema's work. The walls of his Antwerp studio were bright red, in Townshend House light green, and in Grove End Road silvery white. Accordingly by the 1880s the settings of his paintings had moved from Pompeian interiors of dark, rich tones to exteriors of glistening marble and bright Mediterranean sea and sky. For example the settings of 'Coign of Vantage' (1895; priv. coll.) and 'Silver Favourites' (1903; Manchester City Galleries), both completed in Grove End Road, with their marble terraces overlooking a clear blue sea, suggest the luxurious holiday villas built by wealthy Romans along the coastline of the Bay of Naples. 
During the 1870s and 1880s Alma-Tadema turned to subjects illustrative of Roman history. However, rather than exemplifying high-minded ideals of moral courage and heroism these works depict inglorious moments in Roman history. 'A Roman Emperor AD' 41 (1871; Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore) shows the proclamation of Claudius as emperor after the murder of his infamous nephew Caligula; and 'The Roses of Heliogabalus' (1888; priv. coll.), the artist's most glorious revel in Roman decadence, depicts a mad emperor in the act of suffocating his dinner guests under a deluge of rose petals. 
Although mainly concerned with Roman subjects Alma-Tadema also turned briefly to Greece. Unlike Frederic Leighton, whose Greek paintings represented mythological or literary themes, or Albert Moore, who utilized Greek-type drapery styles and motifs essentially as embellishment of aesthetic paintings, Alma-Tadema's Greece is a historical world, as meticulously constructed as his Rome from ancient sources. Although depicting an imaginary event, 'Phidias Showing the Frieze of the Parthenon to his Friends' (1868; Birmingham Art Gallery and Museum) shows the newly constructed Parthenon frieze and brings a tangibility to this most elevated symbol of Hellenism in the visual sphere. Alma-Tadema also painted a small number of portraits but avoided formal society commissions and concentrated on intimate depictions of family and friends. '94 degree in the Shade' (1876; FM Cam.), a portrait of Herbert Thompson, the son of Alma-Tadema's friend and doctor Sir Henry Thompson, evokes the balmy heat of a summer afternoon as a boy reads in the shaded corner of a hayfield. Furthermore it is one of the few examples to reveal the artist's skill as a 'plein-air' landscapist. During the 1890s Alma-Tadema also played an important role in the visualization of the ancient world on the Victorian stage. He designed stage sets and costumes for major Shakespearian and modern dramatic productions, including Herbert Beerbohm Tree's 'Hypatia' (1893) -- based on Charles Kingsley's novel of the same name -- 'Julius Caesar' (1898), and Henry Irving's 'Coriolanus' (1901). 
Alma-Tadema's paintings are characterized by soft colour-harmonies, gorgeous textures, and settings of marbled interiors or sunny Mediterranean seascapes. Yet his works also reveal a remarkable knowledge of classical archaeology; it is salutary to note that he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1906 in acknowledgement of the archaeological and architectural distinction of his reconstructions. Testimony to his knowledge of current archaeological developments is the accumulation of a vast library of over 4000 volumes, many of which were publications on ancient art and architecture by contemporary scholars and archaeologists. He also made numerous visits to sites in Italy and Greece, where he was able to take his own measurements as well as make sketches. Many of his paintings present meticulous reconstructions of ancient buildings, including well-known Roman monuments, for example 'The Coliseum' (1896; priv. coll.) and 'Thermae Antoninianae' ('The Baths of Caracalla') (1899; priv. coll.). He also depicted numerous sculptures, statuettes, and decorative objects based on Greek and Roman originals. 
Photographs of ancient sculpture, architecture, and archaeological sites, along with a number of sketches by Alma-Tadema himself, formed part of an extensive reference collection (housed at the Heslop Library, University of Birmingham) of 167 portfolios. This collection assisted the artist in respect of both precision of archaeological detail and composition. Many of his works achieve an instantaneous impression, as found in photography, through the use of cut-off figures and buildings; a sense that the artist has caught a small part of a larger scene that continues beyond the confines of the canvas is conveyed. His method involved working directly on the canvas, from a quick initial sketch up to the final version. A perfectionist, he is known to have made alterations to paintings on the eve of exhibition and even after a work had already found a buyer. 
Unlike other Victorian classical-subject painters, such as Frederic Leighton, Edward Poynter, and J. W. Waterhouse, whose repertoires included paintings of nudes and partially-clothed figures, Alma-Tadema produced few nudes. Those that he did paint are usually female figures set within the appropriate setting of the Roman bathhouse. The erotic potential of 'Tepidarium' (1881; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), depicting a flushed reclining nude, is diminished by its archaeologically-specific title and its tiny dimensions (24.2 cm x 33 cm). One of his few life-sized nudes, 'A Sculptor's Model' (1877; priv. coll.), provoked the bishop of Carlisle to comment: 'for a living artist to exhibit a life-size, life-like, almost photographic representation of a beautiful naked woman strikes my inartistic mind as somewhat, if not very, mischievous' (A. M. W. Stirling, 'The Richmond Papers', 1926, 63). Alma-Tadema, however, was generally more interested in half-hidden suggestive allusions than in unashamed eroticism. For example 'Spring' (1894; J. P. Getty Museum, Malibu) is a seemingly innocent and joyous scene showing a religious procession headed by a group of pretty flower girls. However, in the middle of the crowd a standard bears a Latin inscription, which can be recognized as a verse dedication (known as 'Catullus 18') to the fertility god, Priapus, while at the same time archaeological detail -- silver statuettes of satyrs and decorative paintings of semi-nude frolicking couples -- likewise points to another aspect of Roman religion; the initial, innocent reading of the painting is subverted. 
Reminiscences from Alma-Tadema's contemporaries during the period are peppered with anecdotes relating to his jocular personality and lively sense of humour, though given the strong Dutch accent that he retained throughout his life his own stories and jokes often left his audience baffled. He was a notable member of the high cultural and social milieu of his day. His circle included the prince of Wales (later Edward VII) and the young Winston Churchill, while such illustrious guests as Tchaikovsky and Caruso attended his musical soirees. The painter Frederick Yeames and the critic F. G. Stephens described their meeting with him thus: 'A short sturdily built man with twinkling eyes, cheery smile, hair parted in the middle of a broad forehead and small tawny beard, would hurry forward with an hospitable handshake, and bustling into his studio to look at pictures of Greek and Roman ladies reclining on the most marvellously painted marble, would talk rapid unfluent English telling stories quite outside his art, and beaming when he brought a smile to the lips of his guests. (Swanson, 'Biography and Catalogue Raisonne', 97)' From his time as an art student Alma-Tadema allocated each painting in his large oeuvre an opus number: 'Portrait of my Sister, Artje' (1850), painted at the age of fifteen, is numbered 1, while two months before his death he completed 'Preparations in the Coliseum' (1912; priv. coll.), numbered 408. During his lifetime he enjoyed both commercial success and a respected position in the art world. His patrons were international financiers who included Sir John Aird, the marques de Santurce, and William Walters, and his works are now located in museums founded by such collectors: the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight, Cheshire; and the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore. His standing in the British art world was acknowledged with a knighthood in 1899 and the Order of Merit in 1905. He died on 25 June 1912 at Kaiserhof Spa, Wiesbaden, Germany, where he was undergoing treatment for ulceration of the stomach, and was buried with full ceremony in St Paul's Cathedral, London, on 5 July. 
A memorial exhibition held that year at the Royal Academy provoked unfavourable critical responses. The most scathing attack was by Roger Fry, who likened Alma-Tadema's figures and objects to 'highly-scented soap' ('The Nation', 18 Jan 1913, 666-7). By the second decade of the twentieth century his brand of Victorian classicism was no longer fashionable. However, a renewed commercial and academic interest in Victorian painting during the late twentieth century revived his reputation, and his technical expertise, sensuous appeal, and subversive irony once again attracted a wide audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 30397


Almond, Hely Hutchinson (1832-1903), headmaster, born in Glasgow on 12 August 1832, was the second son of George Almond, incumbent of St Mary's Episcopal Chapel, Glasgow, and his second wife, Christiana Georgina, eldest daughter of Thomas Smith, barrister, of London. His paternal great-grandfather was headmaster of Derby School, and his maternal great-grandfather was John Hely-Hutchinson, provost of Trinity College, Dublin. Precociously clever, he began to learn his letters at sixteen months, and by the age of three was struggling with the multiplication table. After attending the collegiate school, Glasgow, in 1845 he entered the University of Glasgow. At the end of the session he gained the Cowan gold medal in the Blackstone Latin examination, and he also specially distinguished himself in the Greek, mathematics, and logic classes. 
Having been elected in 1850 to a Snell exhibition, Almond proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in both classical and mathematical moderations, but, owing to ill health and other causes, gained only a second in the final examinations. He graduated BA in 1855 and MA in 1862. Almond's experience of Oxford was ambiguous; his impression of his tutors was not entirely favourable, and he underwent a period of religious apathy, which he later lamented. But his experience of college athletics (he rowed in the Balliol eight) made him an admirer of the English system of education for the upper classes with its emphasis on the training of character. 
Almond had, however, no immediate vocation for teaching and became a schoolmaster rather by chance. In 1855 he left Oxford for Torquay, where his father was living in retirement; and it was only after failing to gain a position in the Indian Civil Service that he took his first teaching post. A friend who ran a private tutorial establishment sought Almond's help, and during this temporary appointment Almond acquired an enthusiasm for teaching. In 1857 he took up the offer of a tutorship at Loretto School at Musselburgh, near Edinburgh, made to him by Charles Langhorne, a Balliol contemporary, whose father founded the school. In 1858 he became second master at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh, where he took an active part in rugby football and introduced an English professional to instruct the boys in cricket. 
In 1862, following the death of his father, Almond purchased Loretto School from the Langhorne family. It was then chiefly a preparatory school, and he began with only fourteen boys. In his early years there the financial prospects were bleak, but he gradually built up the school and by the end of the century Loretto had become recognized as a leading public school, catering for boys up to university entry. Almond's position as headmaster and proprietor gave him the opportunity to pursue his own distinctive educational aims. Pupil numbers never reached 150, which enabled him always to know every boy personally, and allowed him to evolve his guiding principle of rule by persuasion, not by force. 'Relations between master and boys were unusually sincere, and the place had rather the aspect of a family than a school' (Mackenzie, 160). 
At Loretto, Almond pioneered the idea of systematic physical exercise and the cultivation of physical hardiness as essential to a healthy adolescence. He attached cardinal importance to fresh air, personal cleanliness, proper and regular diet, the regulation of the hours of sleep and study, and physical exercise in all weathers. Dormitory windows were left open at night, cold baths were the rule, and boys were forbidden to eat between meals. Participation in physical activity was compulsory. Almond also implemented his firm views on rational dress: instead of linen shirts and collars and close-fitting suits, boys wore loose-textured tweed knickerbocker suits and flannel shirts open at the neck, and changed into flannels for all forms of strenuous exercise. Almond's system fostered extraordinary stamina, as testified by the large proportion of Loretto boys who went on to gain athletic distinction at Oxford and Cambridge. 
Almond publicized his views on physical nurture widely, acknowledging the influence at various times of Archibald Maclaren, Herbert Spencer, and John Ruskin. His biographer described his system as informed by a 'Sparto-Christian ideal' (Mackenzie, 247). A lay member of the Episcopalian church, having recovered his faith during his father's final illness, Almond published three volumes of school sermons. A chapel was erected at Loretto to mark his marriage in 1876 to Eleanora Frances, daughter of H. B. Tristram, canon of Durham. His views on the miraculous aspects of Christianity and the divinity of Christ were considerably altered under the influence of T. H. Huxley's writings, and he cannot be simply classified as a muscular Christian. Although, like other headmasters, he promoted team games because they encouraged unselfishness (see his article entitled 'Football as a moral agent', 'Nineteenth Century', 1893), he did not see games primarily as a means either of controlling boys or of moralizing them; rather, they were part of his 'gospel of good health' (Mangan, 54), which owed much to physiological Darwinism. Almond's ideas, which he described in his evidence to the royal commission on physical training (Scotland) (1903), became fashionable in the early twentieth century, in the context of contemporary anxieties about physical deterioration; in particular, his belief in the importance of fresh air anticipated the methods later used in the prevention and cure of consumption. 
Almond's influence on the educational world was more limited, and the phenomenon of 'Lorettonianism' with which Almond was associated found few imitators. A critic of examinations, he spoke of developing in boys an independent interest in study. But his hostility to 'cramming' knowledge was not matched by much positive enthusiasm for alternative forms of intellectual activity -- indeed, Almond disliked bookishness -- and led in practice to low academic standards; and although an innovator in physical education, he was notably slow to develop science teaching. He spoke much of promoting individuality and of his aversion to uniformity, custom, and convention; yet there is little evidence that under his headmastership Loretto avoided the tendency to conformity which was characteristic of public schools of the period. It has been commented that Almond's 'crusade for independence of mind and rational living often appeared to be little more than a preference for open-necked flannel shirts and cold dormitories' (Roach, 189). 
Almond was made an honorary LLD of Glasgow University in 1886. He died of a bronchial condition, after a few years of failing health, at his home, North Esk Lodge, Musselburgh, on 7 March 1903, and was buried in the churchyard at Inveresk. His wife survived him; they had three sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30398


Altham, Harry Surtees (1888-1965), schoolmaster and cricket historian, was born at 8 The Terrace, York Town, Frimley, Surrey, on 30 November 1888, the younger son of Sir Edward Altham Altham (1856-1943), army officer, and his wife, Georgina Emily (1855-1945), daughter of W. Macpherson Nicol, of Inverness. His father was the first university candidate for the army, in 1876, and retired with the rank of lieutenant-general, having served as quartermaster-general in India (1917-19). Altham was educated at Repton School, where he showed himself a gifted cricketer and natural leader, and he remained devoted to the school for the rest of his life. In the opinion of a number of good judges, the side which he captained in 1908 challenges that of 1905 as the best English school cricket eleven ever. He made his debut in first-class cricket, for Surrey against Leicestershire, at the Oval in August 1908, and after the First World War played also for Hampshire from 1919 to 1923. After going up to Trinity College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1912, he gained his cricket blue in 1911 and 1912. In May 1913 he became an assistant master at Winchester College, and apart from war service with the 5th King's Royal Rifle Corps, during which he was appointed to the DSO, awarded the MC, and three times mentioned in dispatches, he lived in Winchester for the rest of his life. On 27 June 1917 he married (Winifred) Alison (1889-1979), daughter of Somerville Reid Livingstone-Learmonth, sheep farmer in Australia; they had one son and two daughters. 
In his chosen profession as schoolmaster Altham found supreme happiness and complete fulfilment. He felt an instinctive sympathy for the young, and for over fifty years infected young Wykehamists with his own vitality and optimism, and with his simple belief that life was there to be lived with zest, courage, and conviction. He had, too, the great teacher's priceless gift of being able to communicate to others his delight in the things he valued -- a play by Shakespeare, maybe, or a poem by Browning or Housman, a trifid spoon, an illuminated capital, a well-executed on-drive, or a well-loved feature in the cathedral at Winchester, which he served as editor of its 'Record' from 1948 onwards. When Altham was 'on form' and involved, his eyes would light up and his hands move, as he caught the humour or the happiness of the moment with an allusive comment, a warm reflection, or a lively quip. 
Altham was, perhaps, most at home, apart from home itself, in the classroom, on the cricket field -- though cricket was only 'primus inter pares' of several games that he enjoyed and excelled at -- and in Chernocke House, or Furley's, as it is known colloquially, of which, wonderfully supported by his wife, he was housemaster between 1927 and 1947. This was for him an especially happy period, when a whole set of shared assumptions had yet to be questioned and when those under him could react instinctively to his concern both for them and for the values he hoped they would accept. 
Altham's influence on cricket was profound. On returning to Winchester after the war in 1919 he quickly showed that that influence would not be parochial, for he found time, while teaching in term and playing for Hampshire in the summer holidays, to write 'A History of Cricket' (1926) which John Arlott found 'remarkable for its scope, perception and mature style'. Subsequent editions were published in collaboration with E. W. Swanton. Altham regarded as of great importance his editorship and authorship of large parts of 'The M.C.C. Cricket Coaching Book' (1952), the outcome of the rhetorical question asked at a meeting of the MCC committee by him and G. O. Allen, 'What does MCC do to encourage and help the young to play cricket?' It was thus a seminal work, used as the coach's bible for several decades. Altham was also joint author of 'Hampshire County Cricket' (1957) and regularly contributed to 'Wisden', 'The Cricketer' (in which his 'History of Cricket' first appeared in serial form in 1922), 'The Observer', 'World of Cricket' (1966), county cricket club handbooks, and various publications in Britain and abroad. 
In addition Altham made a notable contribution to the cricketing scene as an administrator, an after-dinner speaker of real distinction -- at, for instance, the centenary dinners of Hampshire County Cricket Club in 1962 and Yorkshire County Cricket Club in 1963 -- and an unrepentant advocate of what cricket could do for the young in terms of character and enjoyment. He was a successful MCC president in 1959-60, treasurer from 1950 until 1963, and member of the committee for close on a quarter of a century; he was chairman (in 1949) of the MCC cricket inquiry committee which pioneered 'The M.C.C. Cricket Coaching Book' of 1952; and although not himself a test player, he was chairman of the test selection committee in 1954. He helped to found the MCC youth cricket association and became its first chairman (1952-65), being the 'head and right arm' of the coaching courses at Lilleshall, where he was in his element as companion, conversationalist, and coach. He was the first president of the English Schools' Cricket Association (1951-7); and, even more satisfying, perhaps, president of the Hampshire County Cricket Club from 1947 until his death. Hampshire's first county championship win in 1961 owed much to his inspiration. It is fair to say that few people can have given back to a game so much of what they have taken from it. He was appointed CBE in 1957. 
Altham died suddenly at 363 Fulwood Road, Sheffield, on 11 March 1965, some two hours after addressing the Sheffield Cricket Lovers' Society. He was buried on 20 March at Morn Hill cemetery, Winchester. There is a tablet to his memory in the memorial gallery at Lord's. 


@@@@@


doc= 30399


Ambedkar, Bhimrao Ramji (1891-1956), politician, was born at Mhow in central India on 14 April 1891, the youngest of the fourteen children of Ramji Maloji Sakpal, a subahdar-major in the British Indian army and headmaster in a military school, and his wife, Bhimabai Murbadkar. When the boy was barely two his father retired and settled first at Dapoli, then at Satara, where he attended the high school. His family were untouchables, belonging to the community of Mahars, who, though of lowly caste, were reputed to be a spirited people from whom the Bombay army had obtained early recruits. The indignities, humiliations, and hardships to which he was subjected stirred in this proud, intelligent, and sensitive boy a bitter resentment which lingered with him to the end. 
In 1900 he entered his surname in the government middle school enrolment lists as Ambedkar, from a teacher in Satara who had showed him kindness. He next attended Elphinstone high school in Bombay and later Elphinstone College with financial help from the Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda. In 1906 he married Ramabai (died 1935), daughter of Bhiku Dhutre, a railway porter at Dapoli. Of their four sons and one daughter, only the son survived. He graduated in 1912 and in the following year went with a three-year scholarship from the maharaja to Columbia University, New York, where he wrote his first publication, 'Castes in India' ('Indian Antiquary', May 1917), and secured a PhD in economics. He then went to the London School of Economics and was admitted to Gray's Inn. Short of money, he returned to India, where the terms of his scholarship required him to enter the service of Baroda state. Although a junior administrative officer, as an untouchable he found himself treated with contempt by clerks and office boys, unable to obtain accommodation, and even denied food. Consequently, he left Baroda state in disgust and in November 1918 managed to secure a job as lecturer in political economy at Sydenham College, Bombay. Two years later he returned to England, where he was called to the bar in 1923 and in the same year obtained his DSc (London) for a thesis, subsequently published, entitled 'The problem of the rupee'. He returned to India in April 1923 and started legal practice in Bombay. 
Ambedkar soon began to organize the untouchables and to make them socially and politically conscious through the first of a series of Marathi newspapers, a Society for the Welfare of the Depressed Classes with the motto 'Educate, agitate, organize', and 'satyagrahas' (non-violent campaigns) for temple entry. Especially important were many conferences of the depressed classes, the most famous held in 1927 at Mahad, in which the traditional Hindu law book the 'Manusmriti' was burned. Meanwhile, he testified on behalf of untouchables' rights to the franchise committee (1919) and to the Simon commission on constitutional reform (1928), was nominated to the Bombay legislative council (1925), and became a professor at the Government Law College (1928). 
In September 1930 Ambedkar was officially invited to attend the Indian round-table conference on constitutional reform in London as a representative of the so-called depressed classes. His appointment marked a milestone in the socio-political struggle of the untouchables, for never before had they been consulted in framing the future of India. Ambedkar became an all-India figure. He used this vantage-point successfully to question with blunt and militant doggedness the claim of M. K. Gandhi to represent all India including the untouchables. The British government in 1932 announced its own communal award in relation to the newly reformed constitution, which treated the untouchables as politically separate from the Hindus. Gandhi, then in prison, launched on a protest fast, which led ultimately to negotiations with Ambedkar that culminated in the Poona pact of 1932, which conceded far more parliamentary representation to the untouchables than they had been allotted under the British award, but allowed the general electorate to elect 'scheduled caste' representatives, a situation which still exists. Ambedkar's criticism of the Congress Party and of caste Hindus grew increasingly strong and in 1935 he announced his intention to convert, with the words 'I will not die a Hindu'. However, he gave his chief attention to politics and in the same year founded the Independent Labour Party, the forerunner of the Scheduled Castes Federation (1946) and the Republican Party (1956). 
In 1940 Ambedkar published 'Thoughts on Pakistan', which, though critical of some aspects of M. A. Jinnah's thinking, was not hostile to the idea of Pakistan. When in 1942 the viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, decided to expand his executive council, Ambedkar was invited to join it as the member in charge of labour. In 1945 he published his most critical book, 'What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables', and in the same year founded the People's Education Society, which still runs a broad spectrum of educational institutions. 
As independence drew near, Ambedkar turned his attention and energies to the constructive constitutional tasks for which he was well equipped by training and temperament. He became a member of the constituent assembly in 1946 and as chair of the drafting committee became one of the principal architects of independent India's constitution. As law minister in Nehru's first cabinet he also contributed to the drafting of the 'Hindu Code Bill', in the process earning, not without some irony, the accolade of 'a modern Manu' after the legendary Hindu lawgiver. On 27 September 1951 he resigned from Jawaharlal Nehru's government, protesting at the slow pace of reform. 
Ambedkar's first wife died in 1935, and in 1948 he married Sharada Kabir, a Saraswat Brahman by caste and a doctor by profession. In his later years ill health hampered the tempo of his normal activities, and his last days were occupied with the thought of embracing Buddhism, which he did, with many of his followers, at a ceremony in Nagpur in October 1956. In November he attended the fourth conference of the World Fellowship of Buddhists at Katmandu, Nepal. It was his last public appearance. He died in his sleep on the night of 5-6 December 1956 at Delhi, and was cremated, his ashes being interred in Chaitua Bhumi, Shivasi Park, Bombay. 
Ambedkar's fame has increased since his death, with the publication of dozens of books extolling his life and thought and the reprinting of all his writings by the government of Maharashtra. A network of colleges in Maharashtra, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh are credited to his influence, and his followers have succeeded in forcing the renaming of a university as Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University. The conversion to Buddhism continues, although slowly, but 'dalit sahitya', the literature of the oppressed, flourishes in Marathi, Gujarati, and Kannada, a tribute to Ambedkar's inspiration. 


@@@@@


doc= 30400


Ameer Ali, Saiyid (1849-1928), judge and Muslim leader in India, was born on 6 April 1849 at Chinsura, Bengal, the fourth son of Saiyid Saadat Ali Khan (who died of cholera in 1856) of Mohan, Oudh, and his wife, the daughter of Shamsuddin Khan, landowner, of Sambalpur. Ali's family were Shi'i Muslims who claimed descent from the Prophet Muhammad through his daughter Fatimah and the eighth iman, Ali Raza; they were prosperous landowners of Persian descent who had come to India with Nadir Shah in 1739 and settled in Oudh. Ali's father had trained as a physician and was scholarly but restless, peripatetic, and apparently dilettante. Influenced by two British officials, he made the crucial decision to give his sons an English education. 
Ali attended Hooghly College, where the principal, Robert Thwaytes, became 'one of the best friends of my life' ('Memoirs', 16). He read much in English, graduated with distinction in 1867, and in 1868 was the first Muslim to receive a Calcutta University MA, in history and political economy. He also gained a BL degree. Awarded a Victoria scholarship, he left for England in December 1868, arriving in January 1869. 
The legal profession was at this time the favourite and most lucrative career of Calcutta graduates. Ali was admitted a student of the Inner Temple in May 1870, called to the bar in January 1873, and worked for an English law firm. The welcome and hospitality he received in England made him a lifelong Anglophile. He lived with an English family and was treated as 'one of themselves' (Gordon, 62). He told Napoleon III, whom he met at Brighton in 1872, that he loved England. He arrived with letters of introduction from British friends and from the viceroy, Lord Mayo, was admitted into London society, and then and on later visits to England became friendly with liberal politicians. These included the Fawcetts, whom he accompanied to women's suffrage meetings; journalists, including James Knowles of the 'Nineteenth Century'; Captain Shaw of the London Fire Brigade; Lady Hobhouse; and others. John Bright proposed him for the Reform Club, of which he continued a member for nearly half a century; he used the club's address in later life when writing to 'The Times'. 
In 1873 Ali returned to Calcutta. Of short stature, ambitious and capable, proud of his Saiyid and Persian heritage, he was primarily a Muslim devoted to his religion and his co-religionists: according to a fellow Muslim, he was 'a God-intoxicated man who lived by and with the 'Qur'an'' (Aziz, vi). He was also a loyalist, who wrote of 'the necessity of British rule' (Gordon, 72). Although resident in Bengal, he never considered himself a Bengali. He spoke Urdu but wrote in English and published almost all his works in London. A Muslim modernist, influenced by Karamat Ali Jawnpuri (died 1873), he believed that Islam was compatible with modern life and progress, and that Muslims should adopt Western education. He favoured educating Indian women and wanted polygamy prohibited. Indian Muslims were backward in terms of Western education, less literate and with a lower proportion of graduates than the Hindu majority. Ali saw the Hindus as threatening Muslim interests, and the Western-educated Hindus as competing with Muslims for government posts. In February 1873 Ali enrolled as an advocate in the Calcutta high court, and he built up a successful and lucrative practice. A fellow of Calcutta University (1874), he was a part-time lecturer on Muslim law (1875-9) and Tagore law professor (1884). 
Ali believed that the condition of Muslims in India had declined, and that their fortunes could not be revived by their efforts alone; they needed government help, and to gain this they required their own political organization. In May 1877 he founded the Central National Mahommedan Association, of which he was secretary until 1890. A loyalist Muslim pressure group, asserting Muslim interests and wanting government posts filled by nomination not competitive examinations, this organization had members who were largely notables, mostly non-Bengali, and by 1888 it had more than fifty branches in different parts of India. In 1882 it presented a memorial, written by Ali, to the viceroy, Lord Ripon, requesting appointment of more Muslims to government service and more government assistance to Western education of Muslims, and alleging that Hindu prejudicial treatment often prevented Muslims from advancing. Like Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan, Ali opposed the Indian National Congress, regarding it as a Hindu organization inimical to Muslim interests. The 'Congress-wallahs', especially Surendranath Banerjea and his 'Bengalee', criticized Ali. In 1883-4 Wilfrid Scawen Blunt visited India and was entertained by Ali. Later, in his book 'India under Ripon', he alleged that Ali fawned on the British and let down his compatriots. Ali wrote that Blunt had traduced and misrepresented him. 
Ali was presidency magistrate from 1878, and chief magistrate from 1879 to 1881. He was a member of the Bengal legislative council from 1878 to 1883. A continuing issue was the relationship of the ryots (tenant farmers) with the 'zamindars' (landlords) and officials' attempts to protect the former from the latter. The 'Bengal Tenancy Bill' (1882), intended to protect ryots, aroused 'zamindari' opposition and divided the legislative council, with Indian non-officials including Ali advocating the 'zamindars'' cause and the lieutenant-governor and other British officials arguing for the ryots. Although diluted in favour of the 'zamindars', the 'Bengal Tenancy Act' (1885) was an important change in tenancy legislation. Babu (later Raja) Peary Mohan Mookerjee, the champion of the landlords, complimented Ali on his consideration for them. 
In England in July 1880 Ali met 'the lady of my dreams' ('Memoirs', 50), Isabelle Ida, second daughter of Heyman Konstam of 64 Gloucester Place, London, and sister of Gertrude Kingston (1862-1937), the actress. They married on 21 October 1884 at the Unitarian church, Little Portland Street, London, and among the guests were Lord Stanley and Sir Ashley Eden. They had two sons. Ali's wife survived him. Their elder son (Saiyid) Waris (1886-1975), Wellington and Balliol, became a member of the Indian Civil Service and shot for India at Bisley. Their younger son, Sir Torick (1891-1975), Marlborough and Christ Church, became a Bengal high court judge. Both had British wives and retired to England. 
From 1883 to 1885 Ali was a member of the viceroy's legislative council. He contributed to negotiating a compromise on the controversial 'Ilbert Bill' (1883). In 1887 he was made CIE. Recommended by Sir Courtney Ilbert, he was a Calcutta high court judge from 1890 to 1904. He was the second Muslim appointed, and some considered his appointment political. Reportedly his merits as a judge were obscured by a conversational manner in court and a tendency to prolixity in judgment -- superficial faults which increased with advancing years. He gave judgments of far-reaching importance including 'Imambandi v. Mutsaddi' in Muslim law, 'Ramachandra v. Vinayak', 'Buddha Singh v. Laltu Singh', and 'Girjabai v. Sadashiv' in Hindu law. Nevertheless Curzon did not have a high opinion of him as a judge. His publications included 'Personal Law of the Mahommedans' (1880) and 'Mahommedan Law' (2 vols., 1880 and 1884, and later editions). 
During his judgeship Ali spent his vacations in England, and following his retirement in 1904 he settled there, residing at The Lambdens, near Theale, Berkshire, and later at his 'beautiful home', Pollingfold Manor, near Rudgwick, Sussex. He continued actively concerned with Muslim and Indian affairs. He was for some years chairman of the Woking mosque committee, and in 1910 was involved in the project, not then successful, of a London mosque. Muslims supported Curzon's partition in 1905 of Bengal and his creation of a Muslim-majority province. Ali praised Curzon and wrote to him expressing 'great regret' ('Memoirs', 72) at his resignation. During the Swadeshi period Ali supported the forces of order and wanted firmer government action lest the government's authority be lost. 
In 1905 the Unionist government appointed Lord Minto viceroy, and in the new Liberal government John Morley became secretary of state for India. Under pressure from the Hindu-dominated Indian National Congress, the administration wanted to introduce reforms, including more representative government. Alarmed at the perceived Hindu threat, Muslim leaders requested separate communal representation. In October 1906 a Muslim delegation, led by the Aga Khan, attended the viceroy, who agreed to their request for separate representation, more than proportional to their numbers. In December 1906 at Dacca the All-India Muslim League was established, with the Aga Khan as president. In May 1908 Ali and others established a London branch, with Ali as president, which had an important role in the following years. Morley agreed to separate representation but wanted a system of electoral colleges which Ali and other Muslims opposed, and there was further controversy and agitation, in which Ali took a leading role. In January 1909 he led a deputation to Morley. Finally Morley agreed to separate representation without electoral colleges and disproportional to numbers. So in the 'Indian Councils Act' (1909) essentially the Muslims gained what they wanted, and thereafter the communal electoral system was a continuing feature of the raj. Neither Morley nor Minto thought highly of Ali. Morley wrote that he was 'a vain creature, with a certain gift of length' (Koss, 145), eager for a KCSI, a 'windbag' and 'conceited egotist' (Wasti, 183). Minto alleged he was frustrated at not being knighted. Nevertheless Morley, having decided to appoint an Indian judge to the privy council, appointed Ali to this unsalaried and onerous post in 1909. The first Indian member of the privy council, he applied himself keenly to the work of the judicial committee and attended Indian appeals almost until his death. In 1913 he resigned from the Muslim League, regarding it as too extreme. 
Like other Indian Shi'a, Ali supported the Sunni Ottoman caliphate, which he accepted as a 'pontifical' or temporal caliphate. In India his pan-Islamism was quiescent, but in England he was more active. He supported the Turks in the Italo-Turkish War (1911-12), and with others formed the British Red Crescent which helped the Turks. However, in the First World War he was loyal to the British empire, and the Red Crescent supplied a motor field ambulance for Flanders and comforts to Indian troops there. After the war he unintentionally contributed to the abolition of the caliphate. In 1922 the new Turkish assembly abolished the sultanate but elected a new caliph without secular power. In late 1923 the Aga Khan and Ali wrote to the Turkish prime minister requesting enhancement of the caliph's position. This alarmed the Turkish government, which allegedly suspected a British plot, and gave Mustafa Kemal (Ataturk) his opportunity: he instigated the assembly's abolition of the caliphate in 1924. Latterly Ali mournfully reproached the Turks, whom for so many years he had defended in Britain. 
A Muslim modernist and orthodox Shi'i, Ali was in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries a leading polemicist of Islam. His message was both for his co-religionists and for the British. In his publications, notably his 'Spirit of Islam' (1891), developed from his 'A Critical Examination of the Life and Teaching of Mohammed' (1873), and his 'Short History of the Saracens' (1899), partly derived from Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall', both much reprinted, he restated the history of Islam for the West, and he influenced both British readers and Western-educated Muslims in India and Egypt. Like other modernists, he claimed that some Koranic injunctions were relevant only to the prophet's period, though his angelology was cautiously traditional. He argued that Christianity was an 'incomplete religion' and Islam the final stage in the evolution of religion. He claimed that it was superior to Christianity and Hinduism, dismissing the latter as idolatry and fetishism. He idealized the orthodox caliphate of the first four caliphs, and claimed the Muslim failure to conquer Europe was a tragedy, limiting its civilizing mission. He claimed 'the real history of India commences with the entry of the Mussulmans' (Gordon, 70), and that they brought culture to an idolatrous and backward land. 
Ali was awarded honorary doctorates by Cambridge, Calcutta, and Aligarh universities. Following diabetes and a heart attack, he died on 3 August 1928 at his residence, Pollingfold Manor, near Rudgwick, Sussex, and was buried on 7 August at Brookwood cemetery, Surrey. After his death his widow and son compiled from his notes his 'Memoirs', which exaggerated the significance of his political role, and were published in 'Islamic Culture' in 1931 and 1932. He has been called 'one of the greatest Muslims of India' ('Memoirs', vii). Although he died before the concept of Pakistan developed in the 1930s, his Muslim separatism contributed to Pakistan's emergence. With Muslim separatism and partition probably the most contentious subjects in the historiography of the sub-continent, opinions on Saiyid Ameer Ali continue to differ. 


@@@@@


doc= 30401


Amery, Leopold Charles Maurice Stennett (1873-1955), politician and journalist, was born on 22 November 1873 at Gorakhpur in the North-Western Provinces of India, the eldest of the three sons of Charles Frederick Amery (1833-1901), of Lustleigh in Devon, an official in the Indian forestry commission, and his wife, Elisabeth Johanna Leitner ('c'.1841-1908), the daughter of Leopold Saphir and Marie Henriette, 'nee' Herzberg ('c'.1812-1879), who as a child adopted the name of her stepfather, Johann Moritz Leitner (1800-1861), a physician of Budapest. In 1877 Elisabeth Amery returned from India to Britain, and in 1885 divorced her husband, who took up farming in Canada and had no further contact with his family. Many of Amery's maternal family converted to protestantism and migrated to Britain. His Jewish connections were known, but unremarked, by his contemporaries. 
Amery's early schooling took place in his aunt's library, and at small schools in Brighton, Cologne, and Folkestone. From 1887 at Harrow School he moved rapidly, taking the top place in the examinations for a number of years, winning scholarships and prizes, and representing the school at gymnastics. It was here that he first encountered Winston Churchill, a taller though junior contemporary, who pushed Amery into the school swimming pool; they were to be associated, in ever varying relationship (as Churchill put it), for the rest of Amery's political life. An exhibitioner at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1892, Amery went on to take first classes in classical moderations (1894) and 'literae humaniores' (1896), was 'proxime accessit' to the Craven scholar (1894) and Ouseley scholar in Turkish (1896), and won a half-blue in cross-country running. He also had a reputation for rejecting prevailing philosophical and economic orthodoxies. 
In 1897 Amery was elected, at the second attempt, to a seven-year fellowship in history at All Souls College, which he actually held until 1912, studying the Austro-Hungarian and Turkish empires and acquiring a working knowledge of fourteen languages. (From 1939 the fellowship was renewed: for the rest of his life the college was his second home.) He joined the staff of 'The Times' in 1899, and in covering the build-up to the South African War of 1899-1902 was the only correspondent to visit the Boer forces. After narrowly escaping capture with Winston Churchill, he was ordered away from the front to organize the paper's war correspondents. He remained a member of the editorial staff of 'The Times' for the next ten years, having been called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1902. 
In South Africa, Amery had come to regard Alfred Milner with filial devotion. He collaborated with the young men of Milner's staff (the 'kindergarten') on an occasional basis and was spotted by Milner as a promising unofficial agent for empire in London to research the imperial economy and prepare material for the imperial conferences ['see also 'Milner's Kindergarten]. Amery's commitment to the empire as 'the final object of patriotic emotion and action' (Amery, 'Political Life', 1.253) assumed the dimensions of a faith, staunchly defended for more than sixty years, and sustained by a fine mind and (sometimes obdurate) political courage. All Souls, 'The Times', and the patronage of Milner and Joseph Chamberlain gave him contacts and unusual influence, magnified by his appetite and capacity for work. 
Over nine years Amery planned, edited, and largely wrote 'The Times History of the War in South Africa' (7 vols., 1900-1909), which demonstrated the need for reform of the army and the War Office. After extensive discussions with the army chiefs, he advocated its reorganization in 'The Problem of the Army' (1903) and became a forthright lobbyist for compulsory military training and national service. Under the pseudonym Tariff Reformer in 'The Times' he attacked free trade, and he followed this with 'The Fundamental Fallacies of Free Trade' (1906), which he described as a theoretical blast of economic heresy, including the proposition that the total volume of British trade mattered less than the function of trade in balancing the country's deficiency in raw materials and foodstuffs by the export of its surplus manufacturing, shipping, and financial skill. This analysis underlay Amery's lifelong drive for partnership with the empire's primary producers. 
In 1910 Amery married Florence Louise Adeliza (Bryddie) Greenwood (1885-1975), the daughter of John Hamar Greenwood of Whitby, Ontario, and the sister of Hamar (later Viscount) Greenwood, a barrister and Liberal MP. They had two sons, John Amery (1912-1945) and (Harold) Julian Amery (1919-1996), and from 1924 lived in Eaton Square, London, in a large family house which seemed unchanging to those who came to know it over two generations. 
Amery turned down the editorships of 'The Observer' (1908) and 'The Times' (1912) for politics and the struggle for a winnable seat. With the help of the Chamberlain connection he was adopted for the safe seat of South Birmingham (later Sparkbrook), where he was returned unopposed in May 1911. He held the seat until 1945, with his priorities largely unchanged -- to persuade the Conservative Party to adopt a policy of economic and social progress rather than negative anti-socialism; and, for the Commonwealth, to insist on freedom and equality as the condition for effective unity, to be maintained and developed by the indispensable element of economic co-operation. Tariff reform came to have many different meanings for Conservatives; Amery was one of its central economic theorists, linking it to imperial consolidation over the vicissitudes of fifty years. He considered political federation of the empire, as advocated by Lionel Curtis, with whom Amery collaborated in the Round Table movement, both impractical and unhistorical. Union would evolve through co-operation and personal contact. Clear principles should be debated in new imperial institutions modelled on the committee of imperial defence, and each country left to reconcile them with popular consent and public opinion in its own way. (He was later to advance a similar strategy for India and for European union.) 
Amery's diaries, kept more or less continuously from 1910 until his death, are a unique record of a Conservative who represented the imperialist wing of the party for forty years. With gusto, and something of a taste and reputation for intrigue, he threw himself into the thick of political controversy on the right wing of his party. In January 1914 he proposed a British covenant pledged to resist the coercion of Ulster. He served on the joint parliamentary committee investigating the Marconi scandal, and travelled to the southern hemisphere dominions with the first Empire Parliamentary Association in 1913. 
In the First World War, Amery served as an intelligence officer in Flanders and then, on the strength of his languages, in the Balkans, Gallipoli, and Salonika. His analysis then would have held as good for him twenty years later: 'Our political object is the defence and welfare of the British Empire.... We are not a part of Europe. This war against a German domination in Europe was only necessary because we had failed to make ourselves sufficiently strong and united as an empire to be able to disregard the European balance.... We have got to get back to a British point of view. (Amery to Milner, 25 May 1915, Bodl. Oxf., MSS Milner, 350/142)' With Milner's patronage, in 1916 he was appointed assistant secretary to Maurice Hankey at the war cabinet secretariat, where he played a significant role in the successful experiment of dominion participation in an imperial cabinet and war conference, and in the creation of the Supreme Allied War Council. Amery's view of Britain's world role emphasized the Middle East as the link between the African and Asian empires and the southern dominions -- essentially, 'the British geo-political system that endured until the crack-up at Suez in 1956' (Louis, 68). He was a lifelong Zionist -- a supporter of the creation of the state of Israel, having drafted the agreed text of the Balfour declaration (1917) giving effect to a Jewish national home in Palestine, not as a nationalist state but one where (on the analogy of Canada) vigorous but mutually tolerant Jewish, non-Jewish, and Arab national cultures would co-exist with equal rights. 
In 1919 Amery was appointed as Milner's parliamentary under-secretary at the Colonial Office. His scheme of land settlement and assisted empire migration (enacted in the 'Empire Settlement Act') showed his capacity for constructive thought and achievement on a limited budget. When Milner resigned in 1921, Amery was appointed parliamentary and financial secretary to the Admiralty, where he defended the ending of the Anglo-Japanese alliance while privately deploring the tripartite naval agreement between Britain, the United States, and Japan. He was prominent in 'the revolt of the under-secretaries' which played its part in ending Lloyd George's coalition, acting as a vigorous spokesman for the junior ministers at their meeting with Austen Chamberlain on 16 October 1922. 
Amery achieved cabinet office when Bonar Law appointed him first lord of the Admiralty in October 1922. A tenacious defender of naval strength and autonomy, he presided over planning the complex Singapore naval base for the use of the fleet in the Far East. He played a significant role in the choice of Baldwin to succeed Law, and in persuading the Conservative leadership that the solution to Britain's industrial and unemployment problems lay in safeguarding British industry from unfair competition and stimulating a common market of the empire by reciprocal preferences. Like most of his colleagues, he was sceptical of Baldwin's impetuous decision to call an election on the issue prematurely in 1923. The election was lost, Amery believed, because the case had never been properly formulated or explained: he was instrumental in setting up a small policy secretariat (the forerunner of the Conservative Research Department) as a remedy. 
Baldwin gave Amery the colonial secretaryship from 1924 to 1929, the office he coveted and which he held for long enough to record real achievements. Despite the constraints imposed by Churchill at the exchequer, a policy of colonial development was established -- modest in scope, with the creation of an empire marketing board and a new co-ordinated agricultural research service for the colonies. Settler-led development at this time was accepted in Palestine, where Amery insisted on equal rights for all communities; in East Africa, by contrast, his support for white settler government was resisted as a breach of trusteeship obligations to Africans and Indians. In 1925 the achievement of Amery's long-projected institution of a separate Dominions Office with quasi-diplomatic status marked his determination to resolve the anomalies between theory and practice in the dominion relationship (from June 1925 to June 1929 he held the secretaryship of state for the dominions concurrent with the colonial secretaryship). 
At the imperial conference of 1926 the final formula squaring dominion independence with Commonwealth unity was Balfour's, but much of the background thinking was Amery's. Yet the symbolism of Commonwealth was less important to Amery than its practical functioning as a strong British imperial economic and strategic unit, and he declared his intention to move in 1928 to a policy on empire trade with or without his colleagues. As the first colonial secretary to tour all the dominions, sitting with the various cabinets and (as he put it) 'quickening the consciousness of Empire' in more than 300 speeches (published as 'The Empire in the New Era', 1928), he believed he had 'strengthened my personal equipment in fact and in public esteem for tackling the really big job' ('Amery Diaries', 1.529, 3 Feb 1928). He found little support from his colleagues. 
Amery later argued that a cabinet of overworked ministers 'is quite incapable of either thinking out a definite policy, or of securing its effective and consistent execution' ('Thoughts on the Constitution', 1946, 86). Few, if any, in the cabinet had his versatility and breadth of experience of the world, but he did not command commensurate influence. Contemporaries maintained that he was ineffective in discussion, speaking too often and for too long, the inherent interest of his content diminished by the unvarying pace and pitch of his delivery; it was said that he might have been prime minister had he been half a head taller and his speeches half an hour shorter. His face would carry the unchanging half-smile of a Buddha as he spoke in perfectly constructed sentences which somehow lacked edge. On occasions he appeared resolutely independent. No place was found for him in the governments of the 1930s; in any case, his inclusion would not have found favour among Labour members of the coalition. He alluded to this elliptically in his autobiography, with the hope that it might have 'its encouraging aspect [for younger men], in so far as it shows what appreciable results can be achieved even by an unknown young man, provided he knows what he wants done, and is well content that the actual doing and the credit should rest with others. (Amery, 'Political Life', 1.14)' The copious detail of his diaries recorded a version of events that did not hesitate to explain his own role fully. He never bore grudges, and would easily shrug off disappointments by escaping from Westminster to climb a mountain. (Three were named in his honour.) Lord Brand later said of him, 'What courage and what simplicity and what strength, physical and other. He was all of one piece' (Brand to Bryddie Amery, 4 Dec 1955, CAC Cam., MSS Amery 454/2). He was also the last -- and perhaps the only -- privy councillor to knock another member to the floor of the House of Commons on a matter of honour. 
On the back benches, Amery kept in political trim with sustained, purposeful activity -- at first experimenting with fiction ('The Stranger of the Ulysses', 1934), then updating the case for empire ('The Forward View', 1935), and familiarizing himself with aircraft production and air defence, strategic raw materials, supply. In 1932 he rejoiced that tariff reform had at last been adopted as a policy; the imperial element would follow. He attended the Ottawa conference in a minor advisory capacity only, a chained Prometheus who was acknowledged as one of the few people to understand the preference problem, but whose discussions with the dominion representatives were interpreted by his party colleagues as obstructive intrigue. 
In the international confusions and dangers of the 1930s Amery has been absolved from the taint of appeasement. It is perhaps more accurate to say that he was deeply sceptical of idealistic internationalism and disarmament, of the League of Nations and later the United Nations, and took his stand on realities as he saw them: Britain had no further interest in Europe than to see peace and stability; the empire was over-committed, unable to face a challenge from both Germany and Japan together; America, inherently opposed to British protection and imperial economic consolidation, was at best an uncertain ally. The few cards Britain held must therefore be played to maximum advantage. Amery was sufficiently pragmatic to acknowledge that dominion self-government would ultimately come to India, placing strain on the 'frontier empire' from the Middle East to Afghanistan. The eastern Mediterranean was a weak link, but would be secure if Italy could be wooed from commitment to Germany, despite the invasion of Abyssinia. Germany might be given elbow room in eastern Europe, short of Yugoslavia and the Balkans, but there must be no surrender of colonies. 
The fall of Austria and the Czechoslovak crisis in 1938 made it clear that Britain's involvement in Europe could not, after all, be avoided. Amery abstained in the Munich debate, torn between war and an ignominious peace; decision came in December when he analysed the facts of the military, naval, and air position. From then on he was committed to gearing the country for war, working with Churchill (their third war, he remarked) to press for a national government and war cabinet and then to harass the government on the conduct of the war. The moment for which he is best remembered came in the debate on the invasion of Norway on 7 May 1940. Speaking with the authority of a former first lord of the Admiralty and the advantage of a Birmingham political background, and sensing the sympathy of the house, he quoted Cromwell's injunction to the Long Parliament: 'Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of God, go' ('Hansard 5C', vol. 360, 1940, col. 1150). The effect was annihilating. On the following day the government lost a division of the house; Neville Chamberlain resigned. 
Throughout their political lives, Amery and Churchill had seldom seen eye to eye -- whether over free trade, the gold standard, naval strength, the empire, or America. Above all they diverged on Indian self-government, which Churchill passionately opposed. Amery had hoped to return to high office in defence or economic policy, and was deeply disappointed by Churchill's offer of the India Office -- a position defined as cabinet rank minister outside the war cabinet -- though he was to serve on the strategic Middle East and Indian committees. The Indian portfolio grew in importance and challenge as the struggle for Indian self-determination, and the danger of civil war between the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League, interacted with the vital war role of the Indian army in the Middle and Far East. Amery entered office determined to cut through the uncertainties that beset the 'Government of India Act' of 1935. The survival of the empire depended on the Indian war effort; India needed a resolute policy, consistently applied. He demanded the maximum expansion of Indian troops and production, proposing to reciprocate with a clear-cut statement promising Indian self-government, with a home-made constitution, at the end of the war. 
The relationship between prime minister and secretary of state got off to a bad start and continued stormily. Churchill did not hide his mistrust of Amery, and demanded he modify his 'revolutionary' policy; Amery admired Churchill as a war leader sufficiently to comply, but otherwise regarded him as an incorrigible whig and resented his unprecedented interventions in the affairs of the department. Often goaded to the brink of resignation by what he called Winstonian harangues, he stuck to his post at the cost of his own health, tenacious rather than adroit, defending the authority of frustrated viceroys before a cabinet that did not scruple to override them, confronting Churchill and conciliating him by turns, endlessly redrafting documents in his own hand in the attempt to find a constructive way forward. Colleagues in the office remembered his tireless presence, his diminutive frame perched on a tall stool, adjusting his spectacles like an old man but with a very young mind that illumined new aspects of a question. 
Amery personally prevented Linlithgow from banning the Indian National Congress and dissuaded Churchill from seeing India for himself. In order to secure Muslim support against the advancing Japanese after the fall of Singapore, Amery introduced the possibility of local secession from an Indian dominion into the terms authorized for the Cripps mission in 1942, thus inadvertently laying the basis for partition, which he deplored. He engineered Wavell's appointment as viceroy. While he agreed with the progressive Indianization of the viceroy's council and its evolution to something like a cabinet, his instincts were conservative: he would not dilute the powers of the viceroy and held no brief for the tactics of the Indian political parties; he deplored 'the internationalist tripe which has, of necessity perhaps, been talked during the war' ('Amery Diaries', 2.864); he opposed concessions to Gandhi on hunger strike. He battled in cabinet, having to fight his corner even over the need to relieve the Bengal famine and to forestall the repudiation of Britain's wartime indebtedness to India. 
In the hope of a dramatic gesture to break the deadlock caused, Amery believed, by nationalism and India's sense of subjection, he amended his original proposal: India should acquire full independence on the basis of her existing constitution on VE- (or VJ-) day, with the viceroy's powers reserved to prevent the Hindus on his council overriding the Muslims -- 'a superficially daring but really cautious and practical policy' ('Amery Diaries', 2.1023). The interest of the plan lay in the fact that it did not presuppose (or rule out) a Westminster-style democracy for India. It found no favour and was never put to the cabinet, although Amery believed the formula might have averted partition, and that his proposal later influenced Mountbatten's tactics. Thereafter he backed Wavell's plan for a conference of Indian leaders, but left office with the Indian question deadlocked after the Simla conference of June 1945 broke up over Jinnah's insistence that the Muslim members of the proposed executive council be drawn exclusively from the membership of the Muslim League. 
In the landslide election of 1945 Amery lost Sparkbrook. He described the Conservative Party's election campaign as 'sordid': 'unless [the party] recovers an ideal and a method it will never again enthuse the country' ('Amery Diaries', 2.1047, 1049). In the same year he was appointed Companion of Honour, having refused the offer of a peerage to leave the way open for his son Julian's parliamentary career. In October 1945 the Amery family faced the trial and execution for treason of John Amery, the elder son. His father afterwards circulated a pamphlet among friends, 'John Amery: an explanation'. Though a man of strong feelings and capable of deep affection, Amery was never demonstrative. His family life was unusually close, Julian's family living in the Eaton Square house, and father and son sharing a study. Bryddie's health gave way; his friends remarked on the extraordinary fortitude that enabled Leo to carry on apparently as before. At the age of seventy-one he could find election defeat rejuvenating, and hoped to find a new seat. He was to be seen on the platform of every Conservative Party conference, the conscience of the party, encouraging and gently directing youthful aspirants such as Peter Walker and Alan Lennox-Boyd, much as Milner had educated him. As late as 1948 he could still announce, 'We have got to be quite clear about it. Empire Preference is a foundation for our whole economic life' (Goldsworthy, 170). But according to his son Julian he came to accept that the analysis he had in the first place adopted from Joseph Chamberlain -- the need for a wider area of trade and investment -- might in some senses be met by the move into the European Economic Community. 
In the twentieth century few, if any, British politicians who built their careers round a vision of a consolidated empire or Commonwealth gained recognition at the highest level, Amery among them. But Westminster had never bounded his life. In public he could seem austere; in private he was stimulating and lively company. He was a skilled mountaineer and skier (and wrote about his experiences in 'Days of Fresh Air' [1939] and 'In the Rain and the Sun', 1946), and served as president of the Classical Association, the Alpine Club, and the Ski Club of Great Britain. He read and wrote prodigiously -- from a treatise arguing that Goliath's Philistines were the remnants of Agamemnon's expeditionary force ('The Times', 23 Nov 1973) to his stimulating and influential analysis of the constitution delivered in 1946 as the Chichele lectures in All Souls ('Thoughts on the Constitution'), commemorated there fifty years later as of enduring relevance. He produced four volumes of memoirs (three of which were published as 'My Political Life') and a stream of other works, on international trade, the balanced economy, and Britain's role between the Commonwealth and a more closely united Europe. He had served from 1919 on the Rhodes Trust (becoming chairman in 1933), where he had used his influence to bring research into closer relation with policy through the Beit, Smuts, and Rhodes chairs in imperial history that he had helped to found in Oxford, Cambridge, and London universities, as well as the Chichele chair of military history at All Souls. Balliol, his old college, rewarded him with an honorary fellowship. He died in London on 16 September 1955. On 22 November 1973 Julian Amery commemorated the hundredth anniversary of his father's birth with a dinner attended, as Isaiah Berlin put it, by 'some of those splendid pillars of the past, whose like, I suspect, we may never see again' (Berlin to Julian Amery, 26 Nov 1973, CAC Cam., MSS Julian Amery 578/1). 


@@@@@


doc= 30402


Amherst, William Amhurst Tyssen-, first Baron Amherst of Hackney (1835-1909), book collector, was born at Narford Hall, Swaffham, Norfolk, on 25 April 1835, the eldest son of William George Daniel-Tyssen (1801-1855), who had added Tyssen to his surname in 1814 on his marriage to Amelia, daughter of Captain John Amhurst RN, a native of Kent, and Mary, eldest daughter of Andrew Fountaine, of Narford. His maternal grandmother, Mary Tyssen, was daughter and heir of Francis John Tyssen, from whom the family inherited extensive property in Hackney. Together with his father he took by royal licence, on 6 August 1852, the name of Tyssen-Amhurst, for which he substituted Tyssen-Amherst on 16 August 1877. 
A relationship with the Amhersts of Kent, descendants of the general, was remote. More direct was one with Sir Andrew Fountaine, the eighteenth-century virtuoso, among whose collections of books, coins, and works of art Tyssen-Amhurst grew up at Narford. He was educated at Eton College and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 19 May 1853. He was still an undergraduate when his father died in 1855, bequeathing him large properties in London and Norfolk. His country estates at Didlington Hall, near Brandon, and elsewhere totalled 9488 acres in the returns for 1881; he farmed on a large scale and was a noted breeder of Norfolk polled cattle. He was Conservative MP for West Norfolk (1880-85) and for South-West Norfolk (1885-92); he also served as high sheriff of his county in 1866. Tyssen-Amhurst married, on 4 June 1856, at Hunmanby, Yorkshire, Margaret Susan (1835-1919), only child of Robert Mitford, of Mitford Castle, Northumberland, and of Hunmanby Hall. They had seven daughters, of whom six survived him. These included Alicia Margaret Amherst (1865-1941). 
Collecting books and antiquities was Tyssen-Amhurst's chief interest, and he gathered a library rich in ecclesiastical history, especially of the Reformation and the Church of England, and in editions of the English 'Bible' (of which his collection was inferior only to that of Lord Ashburnham). Equally strong was his interest in the history of the spread of printing, and historic bookbindings. He bought steadily from the 1860s, often in friendly rivalry with the earl of Carysfort, and had the benefit in the saleroom of the regular agency of Bernard Quaritch. His library included seventeen Caxtons, in its day one of the two or three best collections in private hands, and his early printed books illustrated the spread of typography in practically every European country. He was a member of the Roxburghe Club and presented to his fellow members an edition (by I. H. Jeayes) of 'Norfolk Letters of Philip Gawdy, 1579-1616' (1906); he also presented volumes to the Hakluyt Society and the Scottish Text Society. 
A detailed catalogue of Tyssen-Amherst's collection was in preparation by the distinguished bibliographer Seymour De Ricci, who gratefully recorded that he owed to Tyssen-Amherst's 'kind lessons in English bibliography... my own earliest interest in that difficult science'. However, owing to the dishonesty of Charles Cheston, the solicitor entrusted with the administration of Tyssen-Amherst's estate and trust funds, a sale of the library at Didlington proved urgently necessary. De Ricci's 'catalogue raisonne' had to be reduced to a much abbreviated (though still substantial) hand-list, speedily produced for private circulation in 1906. A major sale by Sothebys was organized: its two sections commenced on 3 December 1908 and 24 March 1909, and the total realized was $32,592. The seventeen Caxtons were sold privately to John Pierpont Morgan for $24,000. (Later sales were held by Sothebys on 12 December 1911, and on 17 January and 14 November 1921.) 
Tyssen-Amherst also took a pioneering interest in Egyptian antiquities by collecting some important papyri, of which two catalogues were issued: by P. E. Newberry on the Egyptian papyri in 1899, and by B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt on the Greek in 1900. Both sections were eventually bought by Pierpont Morgan in 1913. Tyssen-Amherst's other antiquities included old Gobelins and other tapestries, French and English furniture, Limoges enamels, and English maiolica; these were sold by Christies on 11 December 1908 for $38,796, with a further $3500 being raised from prints and paintings. 
Tyssen-Amherst, who had made little mark in the House of Commons, but who was rich and well connected, was created Baron Amherst of Hackney in Lord Salisbury's dissolution honours in 1892, with a special remainder to his eldest daughter, Mary Rothes Margaret, wife of Lord William Cecil, a son of the third marquess of Exeter, and their children. Lord Amherst was 'of middle height and sturdy appearance, of genial and unassuming manners' ('DNB'). He died suddenly on 16 January 1909 at 23 Queen's Gate Gardens, London, and was buried on 20 January in the family vault at Didlington. 


@@@@@


doc= 30403


Amos, Sir (Percy) Maurice Maclardie Sheldon (1872-1940), judge, was born at East Street, Gray's Inn Road, London, on 15 June 1872, the eldest child and only son of Sheldon Amos (1835-1886) and his wife, Sarah Maclardie Amos (1840/41-1908), daughter of Thomas Percival Bunting of Manchester. He was educated privately in England but mainly abroad, especially in France and Germany, partly by tutors and partly by his mother. In 1880 he and his younger sister Bonte went with their parents to Australia for his father's health. Finding the country uncongenial, they set out to return to England. However, when they reached Egypt Sheldon Amos was invited by Lord Dufferin, British adviser to the Porte, to be his legal adviser, and they remained in the country. After Sheldon Amos's death in 1886, his widow and children travelled on the continent. When Maurice Amos was sixteen he spent six months with Sir Flinders Petrie in Egypt at the Hawara pyramid excavation. In 1891 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge. He had originally intended to read history, but after a talk with Bertrand Russell, who became a lifelong friend, he changed to moral sciences. He gained a first in part one, and spent a semester at Tubingen to improve his German, and in 1895 he gained a first in part two. His circle of friends at Cambridge included Ralph Vaughan Williams, Ralph Wedgwood, Theodore Llewellyn Davies, and G. E. Moore. 
Amos had been admitted a student at the Inner Temple in 1893, was called to the bar in May 1897, and started work as a pupil in conveyancing chambers in Lincoln's Inn. However, he decided to apply for a legal post in Egypt because the family income could not support him through his early years at the bar. He applied to be an inspector in the Egyptian ministry of justice. To qualify to work in the Egyptian mixed courts, he had to learn Arabic and gain the French 'licence en droit'. Once in Egypt, as well as learning his new job he lectured at the Khedival School of Law, Cairo. In 1903 he was appointed a judge in the Cairo native court and in 1906 was promoted to the court of appeal, where he remained for seven years. With his colleague William Brunyate, he successfully countered proposals which would have threatened judicial independence in Egypt. On 11 July 1906 he married Lucy (1880-1958), daughter of Sir Colin Scott-Moncrieff and his second wife, Margaret Sturge; they had two sons and three daughters. 
In 1912 Amos incurred the disapproval of the British community in Cairo by acquitting an Egyptian who had been accused of assaulting a British child. It was felt that he should withdraw from the bench, and in 1913 he became director of the Khedival School of Law. Here he initiated a course of postgraduate studies and proposed the institution of an Egyptian doctorate of laws, but this was vetoed by the sirdar, Lord Kitchener, on political grounds. Amos returned to the court of appeal in 1915. As a judge he attempted, though unsuccessfully, to reform the system of civil procedure and chaired a committee to revise the civil code. 
In May 1915 Amos returned to England on leave to join Ralph Wedgwood at the new Ministry of Munitions. Because of his fluent French, he was appointed liaison officer between the ministry and the French military mission in London. In late 1915 Amos was appointed to the War Office to handle the question of priorities in ordering supplies, and in 1916 he became a delegate on an international board to mediate on munitions purchase in America. The following year he was asked to join the Balfour mission to America as a specialist in priority problems. 
Amos returned to Egypt in August 1917, where he still held office as a judge, to work again with Sir William Brunyate, by then judicial adviser, as a member of the capitulations commission, which was comprehensively investigating the administration of justice. Despite its extensive work, which was published, the recommendations of the commission came to nothing. Four months later Amos succeeded Brunyate as judicial adviser to the residency, in effect, the minister of justice. In 1921 he advised on treaty negotiations between England and Egypt, but the negotiations failed, and in 1922 the British protectorate was ended. Amos remained in Egypt for another three years as legal adviser. Similarly to his father, who had drafted the constitution of 1882, Maurice Amos helped draft the first constitution of a semi-independent Egypt, and he also dealt with the consequences of British withdrawal. 
On his return to England in April 1925 Amos took up practice at the bar, receiving briefs on Egyptian affairs and from the Treasury solicitor as counsel for the British government. He appeared in numerous cases brought under the treaty of Lausanne before the Anglo-Turkish mixed arbitral tribunal at Constantinople. In 1928 he was invited to be Liberal candidate for Cambridge, but came bottom of the poll in the 1929 general election. He was made KBE in 1922 and the following year was allowed to accept the grand cordon of the order of the Nile. He was made king's counsel in 1932 and was awarded an honorary LLD by Lausanne University in 1936. 
In 1932 Amos was appointed Quain professor of comparative law and historical jurisprudence at University College, London, thus renewing a family connection with the college through his grandfather Andrew Amos. In 1933 he became senior British representative on the Comite International Technique d'Experts Juridiques Aeriens, which dealt with international conventions to control air transport. 
On retirement from Egypt Amos lived in Cambridge and in Ulpha, near Broughton in Furness, Lancashire. Maurice Amos was a tall, heavily built man, with a vigorous and lively personality and with interests which ranged far outside the law. At heart he was a scholar, who spent his leaves from Egypt being tutored in electromagnetism and mathematics. As well as writing for the 'Law Quarterly Review' and the 'Journal of Comparative Legislation', he helped to found the 'Modern Law Review', and contributed reviews and articles to the 'Contemporary Review', the 'New Statesman', and the 'Times Literary Supplement'. He wrote several books, including 'The English Constitution' (1930), 'Introduction to French Law' (with F. P. Walton, 1935), and 'Lectures on the American Constitution' (1938). He died in Ulverston Cottage Hospital, Ulverston, on 10 June 1940, and was buried at Ulpha. His wife died in 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 30404


Anderson, Sir Alan Garrett (1877-1952), public servant and shipowner, was born in London on 9 March 1877, the only son of James George Skelton Anderson and his wife, Elizabeth Garrett Anderson (1836-1917), the first woman to qualify as a doctor in Great Britain. He had two sisters, one of whom, Louisa Garrett Anderson, was a noted suffragette and surgeon. A scholar at Eton College from 1890 to 1895 (and later a governor), Anderson went to Trinity College, Oxford (where he was later an honorary fellow), in 1896. He left in his second year to fulfil a promise to enter Anderson, Anderson & Co., the family shipping business, when his father needed him. The call came in 1897 on the death of his great-uncle, James Anderson, the founder of this London shipbroking business. J. G. Skelton Anderson and his associate Frederick Green jointly formed the Orient Steam Navigation Company in 1877, and managed its passenger and cargo service between Britain and Australia. 
As a boy Anderson visited Australia with his parents; in 1900 he went again as a partner in Anderson, Anderson & Co., and spent two years there. With unremitting competition worldwide, and severe droughts in Australia between 1895 and 1904, Orient Line had twice to combine with others to avoid bankruptcy. But in 1910, the line shared in the unprecedented prosperity in the shipping industry, and, with good seasons and substantial support from the commonwealth, was able to stand alone. 
Government service and heavy losses during the 1914-18 war made it difficult for small shipping companies to survive. In 1919, the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P. & O.), which had always worked closely with the Orient Line, bought a controlling interest in it, and its two original companies were merged into Anderson, Green & Co. This reorganization took place under the aegis of James Lyle Mackay, the first earl of Inchcape. He had a high regard for Anderson and brought him on to the boards of P. & O. and British India Steam Navigation Company (BI), another large company in the P. & O. group. Anderson had already spread his business interests: he became a director of the Midland Railway Company (1911-23), and of the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway from 1923, when this company was formed. 
During the First World War Anderson's services to the government were manifold. Under Walter Runciman (1870-1949), president of the Board of Trade, he was involved with blockades and claims (while the USA was neutral) that arose from treating as contraband cargoes in American vessels consigned to the enemy. His next task, as vice-chairman of the royal commission for wheat supplies, was to set up a wheat executive to control the distribution of grain among the western allies; and as soon as the USA entered the war, he accompanied Arthur Balfour on a mission to Washington, DC, to help establish the marketing of wheat in the United States and Canada. His appointment as Admiralty controller, dealing with both the Royal Navy and the merchant navy, was the last of these important national and international engagements for which, in 1917, he was made a KBE and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and received an honour from the Italian king. 
Although Anderson had looked forward to returning to his shipping business after the war, demands for his business acumen and efficiency came from many quarters. He chaired two government inquiries, one on the training of naval officers, the other on the pay of civil servants, and was a member of the royal commission on national debt. 
Anderson was elected to the board of the Bank of England in 1918, and although he professed that he knew nothing about banking, the governor, Montagu Norman (1871-1950), thought otherwise, and chose him as the next deputy governor. At the end of 1924, before Anderson had entered this office, Norman took him to New York to discuss the imminent return of the UK to the gold standard. The decision was announced a few weeks after he became deputy governor. 
Anderson retired in 1926, before the end of the normal two year period of service. There was no sign that Norman was about to retire; and he did not allow his deputy to show his talents, for fear that his own authority might be discredited. However, Anderson remained an ordinary director of the bank until 1946. His colleagues appreciated his freshness of outlook and shrewd judgement. His stature in the wider shipping world was recognized when he was selected to sit on the board of the Suez Canal Company (1927-52) as one of its British directors. He was made a GBE in 1934. 
In 1935 Anderson reluctantly agreed to stand for parliament to represent the City of London; he was returned unopposed twice more, but did not like the atmosphere in the House of Commons and resigned in 1940 to concentrate on war work. He chaired the cereals control board as soon as the war began, and in 1941 became head of the railway executive and controller of railways, holding these posts until 1945. 
Anderson had a special interest in bringing shipowners together to resolve their problems amicably. Using his presidency of the chamber of shipping in Britain as a stepping stone, he was instrumental in the formation of the international chamber of commerce and played an outstanding part in its development, serving successively as vice-president, president, and honorary life president. His experience led him to become one of the earliest post-war 'Europeans', seeking a future in which some form of political unity could be constructed among all European countries. At a conference in Lisbon in the summer of 1951, where he made his last major speech, he spoke of his vision: a Europe without closed borders or national jealousies. 
Anderson's greatest interest outside the shipping industry was the Royal Free Hospital and the London School of Medicine for Women, both of which were his mother's creations. He was their treasurer, and in the inter-war years, he organized various fund-raising schemes for London's hospitals. He was also a trustee of the Seamen's Pension Fund. He was a deputy lieutenant for the City of London and high sheriff of the county of London in 1922. 
Anderson married Muriel Ivy, daughter of G. W. Duncan of Richmond, Surrey, in 1903. They had two sons, the younger of whom, Sir Donald Forsyth Anderson (1906-1973), became prominent in the shipping world, and two daughters. In his spare time he was a keen oarsman and sportsman: his love of sailing began in the waters around Aldeburgh, Suffolk (his mother's family home). His favourite relaxation in later life was to sail his own yacht, often going in it to shipping conferences in European ports. Tall and vigorous, he was said to have had a magnetic personality and a fine sense of humour, and his capacity to absorb details without forgetting their wider context was formidable. He was impatient with colleagues if their minds did not work as quickly as his, but he was always ready to admit a mistake. 
Anderson died at 20 Devonshire Place, London, on 4 May 1952, and was survived by his wife. 


