@@@@@


doc= 30405


Anderson, Alexander (1845-1909), poet, was born on 30 April 1845 in the village of Kirkconnel in Upper Nithsdale, Dumfriesshire, the sixth and youngest son of the seven children of James Anderson, a quarryman, and his wife, Isabella Cowan. When the boy was three, the household moved to Crocketford in Kirkcudbright, and Anderson was educated at the village school there, where he also began to make rhymes. At sixteen he was back in his native village working in a quarry; some two years later (1862) he became a surfaceman or platelayer for the Glasgow and South-western Railway Company there. 
It was while working there that Anderson began in free moments the course of self-culture which influenced his life. He read Shelley, Wordsworth, and Tennyson; and with the help of 'Cassell's Educator' and an elementary grammar acquired French enough to puzzle out Racine and Moliere. In the same way he later managed to read Goethe, Schiller, and Heine in German. Anderson also learned a little Italian, and acquired a smattering of Spanish and Latin. He began writing serious poetry in 1864, and between 1869 and 1872 was a prize-winner in every Christmas issue of the 'People's Journal', Dundee. Its sub-editor, A. Stewart, brought Anderson's work to the notice of George Gilfillan and advised the publication of a volume of collected pieces, 'A Song of Labour and other Poems' (1873). This was reviewed very favourably. Gilfillan provided an appreciative memoir of the Surfaceman for a second volume, 'The Two Angels and other Poems' (1875). This volume contains some of Anderson's best 'cuddle doon' poems (lullabies) for children. He went on to publish from time to time in 'Good Words', 'Chambers's Journal', 'Cassell's Magazine', and the 'Contemporary Review'. In 1875 he also published the sonnet series 'In Rome' and subsequently travelled to Italy, Belgium, and Germany with Archibald Cameron Corbett (later Lord Rowallan). He met Carlyle, Roden Noel, Lord Houghton, Dinah Mulock Craik, and Alexander Macmillan. His next venture, 'Songs of the Rail' (1878; 3rd edn, 1881), was largely composed of railway poems from the two earlier collections. 'Ballads and Sonnets' (1879), published by Macmillan, also contained a selection from the earlier volumes with new pieces. In his best poems, the vernacular of the south-west of Scotland is manipulated skilfully. 
In October 1880 Anderson left manual labour to take up the post of assistant librarian in Edinburgh University but learned leisure failed to stimulate his poetic impulses. He therefore wrote little except for occasional verses for periodicals, mainly when on holiday among old friends at Kirkconnel. He printed some translations from Heine for private circulation, and from time to time he revised, amended, or extended a long blank verse poem on the experiences of Lazarus of Bethany. In 1883 Anderson left the university to become secretary to the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution, a library and lecture society. But in 1886 he returned to the university library as chief librarian. He died, unmarried, at his home, 22 Gillespie Crescent, on 11 July 1909, and was buried at Kirkcommen church, Kilbrae, on 14 July. A memorial was erected at Kirkconnel in 1912. In that year a collected volume of his 'Later Poems' was published. 


@@@@@


doc= 30406


Anderson, Elizabeth Garrett (1836-1917), physician, was born on 9 June 1836 at 1 Commercial Road, Whitechapel, London, the second of the nine children of Newson Garrett (1812-1893), grain merchant and maltster of Aldeburgh, Suffolk, and his wife, Louisa (1813-1903), daughter of John Dunnell; her father's elder brother, Richard Garrett (1807-1866), was a leading agricultural engineer ['see under 'Garrett family]. She was brought up mainly in Aldeburgh, being educated by a governess at home, from 1846, and then, from 1849 to about 1854, at the boarding-school for ladies at Blackheath, Kent, which was run by the aunts of the poet Robert Browning. During the mid-1850s she became friends with Emily Davies, who later founded Girton College, Cambridge, for women. With Davies she became an active member of the Langham Place circle ['see 'Langham Place group], a group of middle-class women associated with the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women, and with the 'Englishwoman's Journal'; she was hence at the core of the emerging mid-Victorian women's movement. Through these activities Garrett met Dr Elizabeth Blackwell in 1859. Blackwell was an Englishwoman brought up in the United States where she had, after much difficulty, obtained a medical degree. Blackwell was the only woman able to have her name entered on the newly established General Medical Council's register (under temporary provisions for overseas qualified doctors immediately after the passage of the 1858 'Medical Act'). She was visiting London to do this and to promote the cause of medical women, a cause which Garrett was inspired to take up. 
Supported by Blackwell and, once she had overcome his initial disapproval, by her determined and wealthy father, Garrett set about obtaining a medical education and a registrable medical qualification, but she faced many difficulties. She applied to enrol formally as a medical student at several London teaching hospitals and to matriculate at the universities of Edinburgh, St Andrews, and London. All these attempts were unsuccessful except for a brief period in 1860-61 at the Middlesex Hospital in London, where pressure from some of the male students, possibly jealous of her academic prowess, led to her being excluded from further study there. However, under threat of legal action, the Society of Apothecaries conceded that they could not refuse her access to their examinations if she completed the requisite courses of study as a private student of teachers from recognized medical schools and served her apprenticeship under a licensed apothecary. In 1865 she obtained the licence of the Society of Apothecaries which entitled her to have her name entered on the medical register, the first woman qualified in Britain to do so. She remained as such on the medical register until 1876. 
In 1870 Garrett supplemented her relatively low-status qualification with an MD from the University of Paris, the first woman to obtain this degree. In 1873 she was admitted to membership of the British Medical Association. Resisting pressures to resign when the association voted against the admission of further women in 1878, she remained the only woman member for nineteen years. This was one of several instances where Garrett, uniquely, was able to enter a hitherto all male medical institution which subsequently moved formally to exclude any women who might seek to follow her. 
After qualifying Garrett set up in practice in Upper Berkeley Street, London, not far from the fashionable medical district around Harley Street. In 1866, supported by some prominent philanthropists as patrons, she established the St Mary's Dispensary for Women and Children, in the Marylebone district of London, and a provident fund for poor women seeking her services. In 1870 she obtained an honorary appointment at East London Hospital for Children. In November 1870, in the first election to the London school board in which women were eligible to stand, she stood as a candidate for the Marylebone district. She obtained the vigorous support of Robert Browning and her dispensary patients' husbands, and recorded the highest number of votes of all candidates across London. The chairman of her election campaign was James George Skelton Anderson (1838/9-1907), of the Orient Steamship Line and son of Alexander Anderson, clergyman, whom she married on 9 February 1871. They had one son, Alan Garrett Anderson, and two daughters, Margaret, who died of meningitis in 1875, and Louisa Garrett Anderson, who went on to become a distinguished doctor herself. 
Marriage and motherhood did not apparently impede the development of Garrett Anderson's successful medical career, although she did not seek re-election to the school board and resigned her appointment at the East London Hospital. In 1871 Garrett Anderson opened ten beds above the dispensary as the New Hospital for Women. This was to be the first hospital in Britain with only medical women appointed to its staff. Initially, and perforce, Garrett Anderson appointed unregistered women with overseas medical degrees as house officers. The New Hospital moved to a larger site in the Marylebone Road in 1874, and, in 1890, to a purpose-built building with forty-two beds in Euston Road. Renamed the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital in 1918, this hospital continued to have only female medical staff until its absorption into a larger hospital in the 1980s. 
Through her work at the New Hospital for Women Garrett Anderson had opportunities to undertake major surgery, sometimes controversially. In 1872 her decision to undertake the then high risk procedure of ovariotomy herself for the first time led to the resignation of her house officer, Frances Hoggan, and the refusal by the hospital's management committee to have the operation performed on the premises. (The operation eventually took place in rented premises and the patient survived.) Alongside her work with poorer women, Garrett Anderson had, by 1880, built up a successful private practice, comparable to that of her leading male peers. She believed that prevention was better than cure, and her bedside manner was reported as being like her natural manner in private, 'dry, witty and often brusque. Her will was indomitable and she never suffered fools gladly' (Manton, 261). 
This successful medical practice was, at least formally, limited to the care of women and children. In doing this, Garrett Anderson was reflecting the important part that calls for preserving women's modesty and delicacy played in the Victorian campaign for women to enter the medical profession. She set a precedent that was to be followed by almost all British medical women until the First World War. However, one male patient whom Garrett Anderson did attend, at least in emergencies and on his deathbed, was her brother-in-law, the economist and politician Henry Fawcett (1833-1884). He had once unsuccessfully proposed to her and subsequently married her younger sister, Millicent (1847-1929) ['see 'Fawcett, Dame Millicent Garrett], who became a leader of the constitutional campaign for women's suffrage. 
Garrett Anderson's success in professional practice and the example she set in combining marriage and motherhood in themselves would probably have made her a role model for those women who wished to follow her into medicine. But from her first qualification she was conscious of her responsibilities towards those women who sought to follow her into medicine. Initially this took the form of taking several young women as apprentices, including Edith Pechey (later Pechey Phipson), and Frances Morgan (later Hoggan). They planned to follow Garrett Anderson's example by obtaining the licence of the Society of Apothecaries, through private study if necessary. But in 1868 the society closed its examinations to all but students enrolled at recognized medical schools, thereby apparently excluding women from any access to the medical register. 
For the next few years the campaign for women's entry to the medical profession was fought on several distinct fronts. One was in Edinburgh, where in 1869 the 'Edinburgh Seven', a small band of women led by Sophia Jex-Blake, and including Pechey, were permitted to matriculate as medical students in the university. But as opposition to the women's being permitted to graduate grew within the university, the sharp confrontations between Jex-Blake and some of her opponents turned the issue of medical women into a major public controversy by 1873. Meanwhile, several British women, including Morgan, had taken medical degrees at the universities of Zurich and Bern, which had been recently opened to women. Their strategy was to persuade by individual example. By demonstrating that women could practise successfully as medical practitioners (despite being unregistered), they hoped to obtain public and professional approval and, eventually, General Medical Council recognition for their overseas degrees, a move which would have required parliamentary legislation. It was this quiet, non-confrontational, back-door route that Garrett Anderson initially favoured. Following the final defeat of the 'Edinburgh Seven' in the Scottish court of appeal in 1873, she wrote to 'The Times' (5 August 1873) declaring that the time was not yet ripe for women's medical education in Britain. At the time she opposed Jex-Blake's proposal to establish a separate women's medical school on the grounds that such a school was likely to be, or to be regarded as, inferior to men's schools. Although no less determined in character than Jex-Blake, Garrett Anderson had learned to adopt a more discreet manner in her negotiations with the medical profession. This incident was one of several clashes of personality and preferred tactics between Garrett Anderson and Jex-Blake. 
Nevertheless, when the London School of Medicine for Women opened in 1874, largely as a result of Jex-Blake's efforts, Garrett Anderson gave it her support. She joined the school's permanent council and the teaching staff. She also offered the students clinical experience at the New Hospital for Women. Although insufficient to meet the General Medical Council's requirements for the school's recognition, this provided invaluable opportunities for students. After qualification the house posts and other positions at the New Hospital were much sought after by young medical women, who faced many obstacles in obtaining posts in other hospitals. 
For the rest of her professional life, Garrett Anderson's activities revolved mainly around the London School of Medicine for Women and the New Hospital. She forged the close relationship between these two institutions which were central to the small network of English medical women in the nineteenth century. In 1883, despite the opposition of Jex-Blake, she was appointed dean of the school, a post she held until 1902. As dean she oversaw the considerable expansion of the school, its legal incorporation, its renaming as the London (Royal Free Hospital) School of Medicine for Women (a formal recognition of the links with its associated teaching hospital) and its becoming a college of the University of London. She continued as senior physician at the New Hospital for Women until 1892, when, having successfully overseen its rebuilding on a new site, she resigned from the honorary staff but remained a consultant. 
To her students Garrett Anderson offered, through precept and personal example, a model of female professionalism in which 'the first thing women must learn is to dress like ladies and behave like gentlemen' (quoted in Manton, 311). She wrote a short medical textbook, 'The Student's Pocket Index', in 1878, and contributed notes on several cases for the 'British Medical Journal', two articles to a 15-volume 'Encyclopaedia medica' (1899-1910), and many letters and short articles for newspapers on medical matters and the women's cause. 
In 1902 Garrett Anderson and her husband retired to Aldeburgh, where she was elected the first woman mayor in England in 1908 (until 1910), a position previously held by her husband who had died in March 1907. This enabled her to pursue her interest in housing and sanitation. Between 1908 and 1911, to the consternation of some Aldeburgh town councillors, she actively supported the Women's Social and Political Union led by Mrs Pankhurst. But by 1912 she had publicly renounced militant tactics in favour of the suffragist approach favoured by her sister Millicent Fawcett. Garrett Anderson died at Alde House, Aldeburgh, on 17 December 1917 after a long illness and was buried in the parish churchyard there. 
Garrett Anderson's contribution to medicine was not primarily as a clinician or contributor to new medical knowledge. An outstanding administrator, she was, above all, sponsor and mentor to the vast majority of British women who qualified in medicine in Britain in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 30407


Anderson, George (1826-1902), cricketer, was born at Aiskew, near Bedale, Yorkshire, on 20 January 1826. He early showed aptitude as a high and long jumper and as a cricketer. His cricketing ability was first noticed when the All England eleven visited Bedale in 1848 under their captain, the eminent bowler William Clarke. After some years employed as a clerk, Anderson became a professional in 1850. Thereafter, he played regularly for Yorkshire (1850-69), for the Players against the Gentlemen (1855-64), and for the All England eleven in their annual matches against the United All England eleven (1854-64). He visited Australia with George Parr's team (1863-4) but achieved little and often suffered from the effects of seasickness. In three of the nineteen matches he captained an eleven against one led by Parr, the twelve tourists being augmented by locals. On his return he had, in 1864, his best season, achieving his highest score, of 99 not out, for Yorkshire against Nottinghamshire. 
The county club had been formally constituted in 1863. Anderson, who had been captain in the earlier years, no longer held office and, indeed, dropped out of the side on several occasions because of a dispute with Surrey over the nature of bowling actions. However, a law allowing the arm to be raised above the shoulder was introduced in 1864. His benefit match in 1869 at Dewsbury was marred by bad weather. 
Anderson was a kindly, handsome man of fine physique; he was 6 feet tall, weighed over 14 stone, and was very strong. As a batsman he was described as 'the model of manliness'; he had a good defence, and though he took time to get set, he was in his day one of the hardest and cleanest hitters of good bowling. In 1862 he hit a drive for eight runs at the Oval when playing for the North of England against Surrey. On retiring from professional cricket, Anderson became actuary of the Bedale Savings Bank (1873), and held the office until the bank's failure in 1894. He was described as a property agent at the time of his death from bronchitis at Aiskew, on 27 November 1902. He left at least one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 30408


Anderson, Sir Hugh Kerr (1865-1928), physiologist and university administrator, was born at Frognal Park, Hampstead, on 6 July 1865. His great-grandfather was a surgeon in the Royal Navy; his grandfather was a doctor at Peterhead, who died young, leaving a family. The second son, James Anderson (1811-1897), Hugh Anderson's father, set out in 1828 for London, where he joined and ultimately became senior partner in a shipping firm which was later incorporated into the Orient Steam Navigation Company. James Anderson married Eliza, daughter of Surgeon-General John Murray, and Hugh was the third son of their family of four sons and seven daughters. 
After four years (1880-84) at Harrow School, Anderson went in 1884 to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, with the Sayer scholarship in classics, but then turned to the study of natural science. He became a scholar of his college in 1886 and gained a first class in both parts of the natural sciences tripos. On taking his degree (1887) he might have entered his father's business, but he preferred a career in science, and proceeded to St Bartholomew's Hospital in London in 1889 in order to complete his medical qualification. 
After taking the degree of MB in 1891, Anderson returned to Cambridge, to begin active scientific work. He married, in 1894, Jessie Mina ('b'. 1861/2), daughter of Surgeon-General Francis William Innes; with her he had one son and one daughter. He was appointed university lecturer in physiology, and elected a fellow of Gonville and Caius College in 1897. With John Newport Langley he was the author of some fifteen papers of major importance, and by himself of about six more. The joint papers dealt with the opening of the pupil of the eye under sympathetic stimulation, with the nerve supply of the lower viscera, and with other nerve-fibre problems. Langley was zealous that each fact and each conclusion drawn from it should be rigidly established, while Anderson brought to the partnership a philosophic outlook and considered each new fact in its relation to general biological principles. Though the technique of the authors was subsequently superseded, it yielded a succession of results which formed an established part of neurology. The principal paper of which Anderson was sole author dealt with the development in their later phases of nerve-cells and their fibres, and he showed that trophic nutrition and functional reaction were separable and largely independent. Other work began to press upon him and, although he continued to follow and to encourage biological research, he ceased to be an active contributor to scientific literature from about the year 1907, when he became a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Anderson's college and university having discovered his business ability, he became more and more immersed in administration. He was appointed a member of the medical board of the university and of the press syndicate in 1907, of the financial board in 1908, and of the council of the Senate in 1910, and so continued until his death, becoming chairman of the press in 1918. Anderson was engaged in teaching and lecturing, in a way that was very stimulating to the better students, until he was elected master of Gonville and Caius College in 1912. During the First World War he resumed lecturing in medicine, while doing much in his college for the comfort of the staff officers who then filled its buildings. 
In 1919 Anderson was appointed a member of the royal commission on the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. That body reported in 1922, and when in 1923 two commissions, one for Oxford and one for Cambridge, were appointed to give statutory effect to the recommendations of the earlier body, Anderson was called upon to continue as a commissioner for Cambridge. He became a governor of Harrow in 1922 and was an original member of the committee of selection for the Commonwealth Fund fellowships (1925). In 1927 and 1928 he acted for the university in negotiations with the international education board of the Rockefeller Foundation with respect to their offer of buildings and endowment for the biological sciences and for a new university library. The Anderson Room in the new library commemorated this work. 
Anderson was of a sensitive nature and often distrustful of his own powers. His strengths lay in the laboratory, in the study, and in the committee room; his influence came from the width of his outlook, from his capacity for amassing and assembling detailed information, and not least from his great gift of sympathy. In addition to his scientific qualities he had a strong artistic sense and a love of music. He was knighted in 1922. Anderson died in the Home Hospital, 16 Fitzroy Square, London, on 2 November 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 30409


Anderson, John, first Viscount Waverley (1882-1958), civil service administrator and politician, was born at 1 Livingstone Place, Edinburgh, on 8 July 1882, the only surviving son of David Alexander Pearson Anderson (1855-1948), a fancy stationer who later became a director of a well-known firm of printers and publishers, Valentine & Sons of Dundee, and his wife, Janet Kilgour (1850-1929), the daughter of Charles Wildgoose Briglmen and Catherine Beveridge. He was educated at George Watson's College for Boys and Edinburgh University, where he graduated BSc in 1903 with special distinction in mathematics, natural philosophy, and chemistry, and MA with first-class honours in mathematics and natural philosophy. 
Anderson intended to be a scientist, and spent a year at Leipzig University, where he made a special study of the chemical properties of uranium. However, he wished to marry his childhood sweetheart, Christina (Chrissie) Mackenzie (died 1920), the daughter of Andrew Mackenzie, a commercial traveller, of Edinburgh, and his wife, Mary, and he was advised by his father that the civil service would offer a more certain and financially rewarding career. In 1905 he won the first place in the civil service examination and on 23 October entered the Colonial Office. At that date he spoke such broad Scots that colleagues had great difficulty in understanding him. He married Chrissie on 2 April 1907. They had one son, David Alastair Pearson (1911-1990), who became a physician, and one daughter, Mary Mackenzie ('b'. 1916), who became director of the Women's Royal Army Corps in 1967. 
At the Colonial Office Anderson served as secretary to committees on Nigerian lands (1908) and west African currency (1911-12). In 1912 it seemed doubtful whether Lloyd George's national health-insurance scheme would be ready to start on the due date, and in February Anderson was one of a group of promising young civil servants who were hastily recruited to the National Health Insurance Commission, becoming its secretary in May 1913. He struck up a successful partnership with the commission's chairman, Sir Robert Morant, and his organizational ability marked him out for further advancement. 
The outbreak of war in 1914 interrupted imports of medical supplies from Germany, and Anderson was asked to deal with the problem, which he did through the Medical Research Committee that had recently been set up in connection with the national health-insurance scheme. He successfully promoted collaboration between the principal British drug-manufacturing firms to discover the formulae for German patents, including aspirin. He was government representative on an advisory committee set up by the Royal Society to organize chemical research for wartime needs, and he impressed senior scientists with his grasp of scientific detail. Although he was of military age, he was urged not to volunteer since his work was of national importance. One day, as he crossed Whitehall, a young woman presented him with a white feather -- a badge of cowardice that hurt him to the quick. He registered his willingness to serve under the Derby scheme of October 1915 and was placed on the army reserve, but was never called up. The white feather incident rankled, however, and, according to his biographer, John Wheeler Bennett, may well have influenced his later career. 
On 8 January 1917, when the German U-boat campaign was threatening Britain's food supplies, Anderson was appointed secretary to the new Ministry of Shipping under Sir Joseph Maclay, and he quickly won the confidence of the shipowners who served on the minister's advisory committee. In March 1919 he moved to the Local Government Board as an additional secretary, and when, four months later, the board and the Health Insurance Commission were merged in a new Ministry of Health, he became second secretary of the ministry. On 1 October of that same year he was appointed chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue. He quickly mastered the technical aspects of the board's work and in February 1920 was able to give a very impressive performance as a witness before a select committee of the House of Commons appointed to consider the controversial question of whether to levy a duty on wartime increases in wealth. 
At this point in his career Anderson suffered a heavy blow: his wife died on 9 May 1920, aged thirty-three, during an operation for cancer. Her sister, Nellie Mackenzie, took charge of his children and household. Within a week of becoming a widower, Anderson was offered, and accepted, the post of joint under-secretary to Sir Hamar Greenwood, the new chief secretary for Ireland, at a time when 'the troubles' were at their worst. As a member of the British cabinet, answerable in the House of Commons for the government's Irish policy, the chief secretary was normally in London, and relied greatly on the advice of the under-secretaries in Dublin. Anderson was also the Treasury's representative in Ireland, exercising control over government expenditure, and he was, in effect, the senior under-secretary. For security reasons Anderson and his colleagues in the Irish administration were advised to live within the cramped confines of Dublin Castle, where their offices were situated. He took up riding for exercise and, although he suffered frequent falls, he always remounted, undaunted. He was equally unperturbed in the face of the threat of assassination by the IRA. After the treaty that brought the troubles to an end, he established a good rapport with the IRA commander, Michael Collins, during discussions on how to hand over the administration to the provisional government of the Irish Free State. 
Throughout his time in Ireland Anderson had continued to be nominally chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, and it was to that post that he returned in January 1922. However, two months later, aged forty, he was appointed permanent under-secretary at the Home Office, where he remained for ten years, serving no fewer than seven home secretaries in a period of political turmoil. In 1924-5 he chaired a subcommittee of the committee of imperial defence on air-raid precautions, whose recommendations formed the basis of measures taken in 1939. A more pressing problem in 1925 was the threat of a general strike, and Anderson chaired the committee controlling preparations for the emergency that materialized in 1926. He attended the cabinet committee that met daily during the strike and on one occasion, when Winston Churchill advocated sending troops, armed with ball cartridges, to London docks to protect paper supplies for the government newspaper, the 'British Gazette', intervened with the words: 'I would beg the chancellor of the exchequer to stop talking nonsense' (Wheeler-Bennett, 106). Anderson's committee of officials maintained supply and transport efficiently while avoiding provoking violence by strikers. 
In 1931 Anderson was asked to become governor of Bengal, a province of India troubled by terrorism directed at the British authorities. He told his son that he was willing to accept the risks because, unlike the majority of his contemporaries, he had not served in the war. Anderson twice narrowly escaped assassination during his period in office (1932-7) and won admiration from opponents in the Indian National Congress Party as he continued to go about freely, unperturbed, among the Bengali population. He saw that their poverty was aggravated by regressive taxation and a catastrophic fall in the prices of rice and raw jute as a result of the world depression. Thus, although he gave notice of his intention to suppress terrorism by placing on a permanent basis existing anti-terrorist legislation and by extending the system of collective fines imposed on areas where terrorists had been sheltered and supported, he tackled successfully the problem of the distribution of revenue between the province and the central government of India, which was adjusted in the former's favour. He also arranged for people who had been detained as suspected terrorists to be trained in agriculture and manufacture before being released. Under Anderson's administration terrorism was all but suppressed, the province became financially solvent, and its economic and social problems were addressed: jute production was regulated through voluntary restriction; legislation was introduced for scaling down debts of farmers; and compulsory primary education was introduced. His normal five-year term of office was extended by six months to enable him to supervise the implementation of the 'Government of India Act' of 1935, whereby self-government within provinces was granted from 1937. 
On his return to Britain Anderson was invited by the Scottish Unionist Party to be a candidate for the Scottish Universities seat, which had become vacant on the death of Ramsay MacDonald, and agreed, providing that he could stand as a National Government candidate without any party label. He won the election in February 1938, and remained an independent MP until university seats were abolished in 1950. In May he was appointed by the home secretary to chair a committee to inquire into the problems of evacuating civilians from cities in the event of war, and the committee's report in July became the basis for measures taken in the Second World War. Meanwhile, in September 1938, during the Munich crisis, he was appointed regional commissioner responsible for air-raid precautions in London and the home counties. On 31 October he joined the National Government as lord privy seal with responsibility for co-ordinating civil defence measures and for organizing a national register of people willing to serve voluntarily in the armed forces or for civil defence, including the police, the fire services, and nursing. Anderson saw the need for mass production of small domestic shelters that could protect families from bombing, and early in November he asked an old friend, William Paterson, an engineer, to design a model, from which was developed the Anderson shelter which was to be erected in millions of gardens during the war. Delivery of the shelters began in February 1939. From March to July Anderson piloted through the House of Commons the 'Civil Defence Bill', which gave considerably greater powers in peacetime to both government and local authorities. 
At the outbreak of war Anderson became home secretary and minister of home security, with responsibility for civil defence, evacuation arrangements, internment of aliens, and other measures required in war. Although he was not a member of the war cabinet, he attended its meetings regularly. When Churchill formed a coalition government on 10 May 1940 he asked Anderson to continue in office, notwithstanding the differences that the two men had had at the time of the general strike. Hitherto Anderson had resisted calls by Conservative back-benchers and in the press for mass internment of German and Austrian aliens, many of whom were refugees from Nazism, but, as the war situation deteriorated in May and June, he had to give way, and refugees previously classed by the Home Office as reliable, and women and children, were rounded up and sent to the Isle of Man or to Canada and Australia. The panic was fed by reports of fifth-column activities by Nazi sympathizers in Norway and the Netherlands, and Anderson felt obliged to order the detention of British subjects, notably members of Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists, who might be a danger in the event of invasion. Anderson commented in a letter to his father on 15 June: 'there is a whispering campaign going on which puts the witch-hunts of the Middle Ages completely in the shade. Everyone tends now to look askance at his neighbour -- very unfortunate, I think' (Wheeler-Bennett, 247). 
When heavy bombing of London began in September 1940 Anderson was criticized by press and parliament because the government was not building deep shelters. He had agreed with a report in April 1939 that such shelters would require a great diversion of labour and materials from other defence preparations, and would create a 'shelter mentality' that would interfere with war production, and he refused to give way. Churchill decided that someone with more experience of handling parliament was needed to deal with the criticism, and took advantage of Neville Chamberlain's resignation as lord president of the council in October 1940 to move Anderson to that office, and to replace him at the Home Office with Herbert Morrison. 
As lord president Anderson was a member of the war cabinet and chaired the lord president's committee, which co-ordinated the work of the war cabinet's other civil committees. Churchill told Anderson on 28 January 1941 that it was 'essential that the larger issues of economic policy should be dealt with by your committee and primarily by you' (Churchill, 102). Given the prime minister's preoccupation with strategic and military problems, Anderson found himself virtually in charge of what was coming to be known as the 'home front', handling and settling much of the business that the war cabinet would otherwise have had to manage. During 1941 the major issues before his committee included prices and wages, rationing, concentration of industry, and mobilization of manpower; during 1942 the committee extended its remit to food policy and social services. Anderson was often asked to arbitrate upon interdepartmental disputes or to advise the war cabinet on issues of policy that concerned several departments. He had the gift of anticipating problems. By informal talks with cabinet colleagues, whether or not they were members of his committee, he was able to bring questions to the committee in a form in which they could be discussed without acrimony and settled without delay. In particular, the allocation of manpower was the key to wartime planning. Such was Anderson's success in handling manpower issues that, when he left the office of lord president to become chancellor of the exchequer in 1943, responsibility was transferred from the lord president's committee to a new ministerial manpower committee under his chairmanship. Anderson also undertook secret work for which his scientific training equipped him, including negotiating with the Americans in summer 1943 on co-operation in the development of the atomic bomb, and he retained responsibility for atomic energy while chancellor of the exchequer. 
Although held in the highest regard in Whitehall, Anderson was not at his best in the House of Commons. When he spoke for the government in a highly charged debate on 16 February 1943 on Sir William Beveridge's report, 'Social Insurance and Allied Services', he emphasized that his conclusions were provisional and subject to reconsideration, and he was frequently interrupted. It required a spirited speech three days later by Herbert Morrison to dispel the impression that the government had almost rejected the report. Within Whitehall, however, Anderson chaired a committee on reconstruction priorities which called for a report by officials and economists that would allow ministers to judge whether Beveridge's assumption that unemployment would be no worse on average after the war than the lowest level between the wars was justified. He had supported the employment of economists in the economic section of the war cabinet offices and, perhaps because he had attended lectures in economics at Edinburgh while preparing himself for the civil service examination, he seems to have been better able to cope with economic analysis than most ministers. On one occasion in March 1943 the section produced a particularly indigestible paper on post-war employment policy that led Keynes, then an adviser to the chancellor of the exchequer, to remark: 'I should like to offer a prize for any minister who reads it through without his attention wandering. Possibly John Anderson would win it, but there would be no 'proxime accessit'' ('Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes', 27.317). The economic section took a leading part in the inquiry, and the eventual outcome was the 1944 white paper on employment policy, in which the government accepted that one of its primary responsibilities after the war would be the maintenance of a high and stable level of employment. 
Meanwhile, Anderson had been appointed chancellor of the exchequer in September 1943, following the death of Sir Kingsley Wood. Wood had died on the day when he was to have introduced the 'Wage Earners' Income Tax Bill', which was to establish the PAYE ('pay as you earn') system, and Anderson quickly mastered its complexities and piloted it through the House of Commons. His budget in 1944 foreshadowed the first major change in the Inland Revenue's way of handling depreciation of industrial assets: Anderson proposed that during the reconstruction period after the war ordinary provision for wear and tear should be rescheduled, with 'initial allowances' of 20 per cent of expenditure on plant and machinery and 10 per cent on industrial buildings and mining works in any year to be written off at once against the profits of that year. As chancellor, Anderson had to deal with controversial questions relating to Anglo-American discussions on post-war commercial and monetary policy. Professor Lionel Robbins, the director of the economic section, noted on one occasion how the chancellor, with 'one puff of common sense', was able to provide a lead out of a diplomatic tangle arising from the need to keep both parliament and the US Congress informed about discussions on what was to become the International Monetary Fund (Pressnell, 146). In January 1945 Churchill advised the king that, if he and the foreign secretary, Anthony Eden, were to die at the same time before the end of the war, Anderson should be invited to form a coalition government. When the coalition broke up in May Anderson continued as chancellor in Churchill's caretaker government until Labour's election victory in July 1945. 
Although Anderson sat on the opposition front bench, he was appointed by Clement Attlee to chair the United Kingdom advisory committee on atomic energy in 1945, and he was very much involved in policy making for about a year; thereafter the disadvantage that he did not attend ministerial meetings led to the creation of a new standing committee, the atomic energy official committee. The importance of his committee waned, and it was wound up when he resigned in January 1948. When Churchill returned to power in 1951 he offered Anderson a peerage and the post of chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, with a view to his acting as 'overlord' to the economic ministries: the Treasury, the Board of Trade, and the Ministry of Supply. Anderson thought, however, that the proposed arrangement would conflict with the responsibilities to parliament of ministers in charge of these departments, and he declined the post. He did, however, accept a peerage in January 1952, entering the House of Lords as Viscount Waverley of Westdean in the county of Sussex. In 1952 his appointment as chairman of a royal commission on taxation of profits and incomes was announced, but, although he was well qualified by experience for the task, he was criticized by the Labour Party as someone who would not be sufficiently impartial, and he resigned. In 1953 he was asked by Churchill to chair the committee that recommended the establishment of the Atomic Energy Authority in the following year. 
Anderson became chairman of the Port of London Authority in 1946, and he was a director of a number of companies, including the Canadian Pacific Railway, the Hudson's Bay Company, Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), and Vickers Ltd. He was also a director of the Midland Bank in 1937-8, but, whereas in 1945 he resumed other directorships that he had resigned when he became a minister in 1938, he felt that it was improper for a former chancellor of the exchequer to be associated with a bank. He succeeded Keynes as chairman of the Covent Garden Opera Trust in 1946. 
Anderson's career as an official, pro-consul, and minister was probably unique in its range, certainly in the twentieth century. It was generally agreed in Whitehall that he was the greatest administrator of his age, perhaps of any age. He exemplified the qualities required of a civil servant: sound judgement, an ability to give objective advice, and a willingness to delegate. He had an exceptional memory and capacity for hard work, and his native shrewdness was reinforced over time by unrivalled experience. He preferred to give advice orally rather than in detailed memoranda, and consequently the full impact of his influence cannot be followed in official papers in the Public Record Office. His exceptional powers of concentration enabled him to limit his working day to 10.15 a.m. to 6.15 p.m., with an hour and a half off for lunch. As he once told a royal commission on the civil service: 'A man cannot work very long hours if he thinks really hard' (Wheeler-Bennett, 87). He never took official files away to work on at home, although he read a lot of blue books -- indeed, he was reputed to read nothing else. He was able to make himself the master of a subject quickly, and at meetings he would silently absorb information and listen to opinions before making summaries of the discussion that left room for only one possible decision. During the Second World War he took on vast responsibilities without creating a large new office of his own, preferring to work through existing agencies of government. 
In the words of his biographer, Anderson was 'serenely possessed of the Roman virtue of 'gravitas', a natural moral power exuding from him in the shape of visible dignity and authority' (Wheeler-Bennett, 384). He never tried to get on friendly terms with subordinates. He did not entertain colleagues at home, and only rarely asked them to lunch at his club. As a minister he was exceptionally efficient, and he was heard with respect, but his aloofness prevented him from becoming a great parliamentarian. Although his serious manner could give the impression of pomposity, he had a pawky sense of humour and could relax with friends. 
Anderson was brought up a Presbyterian, and he was ordained an elder in the Church of Scotland in St Andrew's Church, Calcutta, in 1933, and when in London he attended St Columba's, Pont Street; when he lived in Sutton (1912-32), however, he attended the Congregational Church and, after his second marriage, he took communion in the Church of England (although he was never confirmed). He married, on 30 October 1941, Ava ['see 'Anderson, Ava Courtenay], the daughter of the writer John Edward Courtenay Bodley, and the widow of Ralph Follett Wigram, of the Foreign Office. He was elected FRS after his work on atomic research. Anderson was appointed CB (1918), KCB (1919), GCB (1923), GCIE (1932), and GCSI (1937), and was sworn of the privy council of Ireland (1920) and of the United Kingdom (1938). The Order of Merit was conferred on him during his last illness, a few weeks before his death, at St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 4 January 1958. He was buried in the churchyard of Westdean, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 30410


Anderson, Sir Kenneth Arthur Noel (1891-1959), army officer, was born at Dhazwar, Madras, on 25 December 1891, the only son of Sir Arthur Robert Anderson (1860-1924), a Scottish railway engineer, and his wife, Gertrude, daughter of J. D. Fraser of Tiverton. He was educated at Charterhouse School ('c'.1904-1910) and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In 1911 he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Seaforth Highlanders. He joined the 1st battalion in India, went with it to France in 1914, and served on the western front. Anderson was promoted captain in 1915, and at the end of the year was appointed adjutant of the 23rd Northumberland Fusiliers (Tyneside Scottish). On 1 July 1916, the first day of the Somme, he was seriously wounded; he was awarded the MC. It was nearly a year and a half before he was fit enough to rejoin his regiment, then in Palestine, where he served in Allenby's campaign in Palestine. He married on 12 February 1918 Kathleen Lorna Mary, daughter of Sir Reginald Gamble, comptroller and auditor-general in India; they had a son and a daughter, and his wife survived him. 
Anderson was promoted major in 1923, and entered the Staff College in 1926 (graduated 1928). In 1930 he commanded the 2nd Seaforths in operations on the north-west frontier (mentioned in dispatches); he then commanded the troops in Palestine (1930-32). He was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1930 and colonel in 1934. From 1938 to 1940 he commanded the 11th infantry brigade, a period which included the retreat to Dunkirk. In the final stages of the evacuation he took over command of the 3rd division from General B. L. Montgomery (later Viscount Montgomery). 
After promotion to major-general in 1940 Anderson spent two years in the home forces, commanding in succession the 1st division, 8th corps, 2nd corps, and the eastern command. 
In the autumn of 1942 Anderson commanded the eastern task force which was being prepared for the allied landings (Operation Torch) in French north Africa. Under Eisenhower's command these took place successfully on 8 November 1942, and three days later Anderson took command of the British First Army, which consisted at first of only four brigades, and of the 2nd United States corps; the 19th French corps came under his orders a little later. His mission was to dash eastwards from Algiers as rapidly as possible to secure Tunis over 500 miles away. As there had been no assault landing east of Algiers, it was doubtful from the first that Tunis could be reached before it had been reinforced by the Germans. French co-operation was not at first forthcoming, the American troops were inexperienced, communications through the mountainous country were sparse, and there was a shortage of motor transport and aircraft. Another handicap was Eisenhower's lack of experience in the field and his preoccupation with political rather than military matters. By 28 November Anderson reached a point only 12 miles short of Tunis, having overcome slight German resistance, which he first encountered near Bone. He undertook an assault on 22 December, but was held up by torrential rain. The attack then had to be postponed until the spring, since it had become clear that much larger forces would be required and a more deliberate operation planned. Strong German forces were pouring into Tunisia by sea and air as well as by land from Rommel's army as it withdrew before Montgomery's victorious advance from Alamein. 
The winter was spent in reorganizing and reinforcing the allied forces and in repelling German counter-attacks, the most serious of which penetrated the line at the Kasserine Pass in February 1943. Allied intelligence misjudgement, due to difficulties in interpreting available ULTRA intelligence, had led to Anderson's deploying the main allied reserves further north, leaving a weak, mostly American, force to guard the pass. Rommel's force smashed through the pass, inflicting heavy casualties on the Americans, but later withdrew. In February, too, the Eighteenth Army group headquarters was set up under General Sir Harold Alexander (later Earl Alexander) to co-ordinate the operations of all the ground forces. He moved round powerful reinforcements from the Eighth Army and resumed the offensive at the end of March. After some clearing-up operations the final attack was launched on 6 May. 
Pressure was applied along the whole front of the axis, now about 130 miles in length. Then a concentrated attack was made under Anderson's command, up the Mejerda valley direct on Tunis, supported by intense bombing and by the fire of over a thousand guns. Two infantry divisions broke through on a frontage of 3000 yards. These were followed by two armoured divisions which occupied Tunis on the following day. A quarter of a million men (125,000 Germans) surrendered unconditionally. The allied casualties were fewer than 2000 men. 
After Tunis, Anderson commanded the Second Army, which was preparing for the landing in Normandy (June 1943 to January 1944), but soon after Montgomery's arrival to command the Twenty First Army group for the invasion, Anderson was transferred to the eastern command and replaced by General Miles Dempsey, a sad disappointment for Anderson. His last military appointment was as general officer commanding-in-chief, east Africa (January 1945 to October 1946). He was appointed CB in 1940, KCB in 1943, and promoted general in 1949. He also received US, French, Moroccan, Tunisian, and Ethiopian honours. 
From 1947 to 1952 Anderson was governor of Gibraltar, and oversaw improvements in housing conditions and the introduction of constitutional and administrative reforms, including the establishment of a legislative council. 
Anderson was a courageous, competent, energetic commander, with a high sense of duty and much common sense. He could be forceful and frank, almost rude, in argument, but his shy, reserved manner made him difficult to know well and he lacked those characteristics which catch the public eye. His later years were saddened by illness and personal tragedy. His only son, Michael Ian ('b'. March 1927), was killed in action serving with the Seaforth Highlanders in Malaya on 12 November 1949 and his daughter died a few years later. Anderson died at King George V Hospital, Gibraltar, on 29 April 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 30411


Macarthur, Mary Reid (1880-1921), women's labour organizer, was born at Glasgow on 13 August 1880, the eldest daughter of John Duncan Macarthur, proprietor of a drapery business, and his wife, Anne Elizabeth Martin. She was one of six children, of whom only three survived. Educated at Glasgow Girls' High School, she also studied in Germany before working as a bookkeeper for her father. She initially endorsed her family's Conservative politics and was a member of the Primrose League, but was unexpectedly impressed by a meeting she attended in 1901 to discuss the establishment of a branch of the Shop Assistants' Union in Ayr and became an advocate of trade unionism. Within months she was chairing the new Ayr branch. 
Mary Macarthur rapidly graduated to presidency of the Scottish national district council of the union and by 1903 was the first woman on its national executive. She moved to London and became honorary secretary of the Women's Trade Union League (WTUL). She encouraged trade unions with women members to affiliate and dramatically increased membership. Her colleagues and friends included Sir Charles and Lady Emilia Dilke and Margaret Bondfield. She travelled to the International Congress of Women in Berlin in 1904. For a time she was the only woman delegate to the London Trades Council. Mary Macarthur is perhaps best known for founding the National Federation of Women Workers (NFWW) in 1906. She began as president, but then exchanged offices with Gertrude Tuckwell (1861-1951) to become general secretary. By the end of its first year the NFWW boasted seventeen branches in Scotland and England and about two thousand members. Mary Macarthur was especially concerned about the relationship between low wages and women's lack of organization. In 1907 she began (and edited) the monthly paper the 'Woman Worker', which was soon transformed into a weekly with a circulation of about 20,000. 
A tireless campaigner on behalf of sweated workers, Mary Macarthur sat on the executive of the Anti-Sweating League, gave evidence to the select committee on homework (1908), and advocated a legal minimum wage. She regarded the establishment of trade boards as a legislative revolution, and helped to set up the lace-mending and finishing board in Nottingham and sat on the chain-making board; she then helped to organize the Cradley Heath women chainmakers when they struck to secure implementation of their rightful new rates. In the summer of 1911 she organized an estimated 2000 women involved in twenty concurrent strikes in Bermondsey and elsewhere. The character of Miss Doremus in Kathleen Woodward's story 'Jipping Street' (1928), set in the Bermondsey area, is allegedly based on Mary Macarthur. As an adult suffragist, and honorary secretary to the People's Suffrage Federation, she saw her primary commitment as providing protection for working-class women rather than concentrating on the voting rights of women. 
Mary Macarthur was a member of the national council of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) from 1909 to 1912. On 21 September 1911 she married William Crawford Anderson (1877-1919), a self-educated, working-class journalist, who chaired the executive committee of the ILP. Their first child died at birth in 1913 but two years later a daughter, Anne Elizabeth (Nancy), was born. From 1914 to 1918 William Anderson was MP for Attercliffe, Sheffield. Once she was enfranchised, Mary Macarthur stood for parliament. She was defeated as Labour candidate for Stourbridge, Worcestershire, in 1918; some attributed this to the fact that although she had campaigned as Mary Macarthur the returning officer had insisted on describing her on the polling card as Mrs W. C. Anderson. By 1919 she was on the executive of the Labour Party and the following year became one of the pioneer women magistrates. During the First World War she had been the WTUL representative on the War Emergency Workers' National Committee and sat on many committees in addition to her work for the NFWW. Through her position as secretary to the queen's Work for Women Fund she struck up a working friendship with Queen Mary. 
William Anderson died suddenly and prematurely in February 1919. In the following year Mary Macarthur made several trips to America, one as a British representative to the International Labour Organization. Although she was instrumental in negotiating the transfer of the NFWW into a mixed general union, the General and Municipal Workers' Union, she did not live to see this. She developed cancer in 1920 and after two unsuccessful operations died at home, 42 Woodstock Road, Golders Green, Middlesex, on new year's day 1921, being cremated at Golders Green crematorium three days later. She was only forty at her death. The Mary Macarthur Educational Trust and Mary Macarthur Homes for Working Women were established in her memory. 
Mary Macarthur's contemporaries were well aware of her vitality, motivation, and ability to act as a catalyst for change. Gertrude Tuckwell, who first met her in 1903, commented that 'with Mary, something great was always going to happen, and she created an atmosphere in which it did' ('Labour Woman'). Nevertheless, both Gertrude Tuckwell and Mary Macarthur faced severe difficulties in organizing working-class women, who still encountered enormous obstacles to being accepted as an integral part of the workforce. As members of trade unions they allayed the suspicions of some male workers, but convincing most men and women of the importance of women's trade unionism was never an easy task, particularly for a woman from a middle-class background. At the same time some feminists were concerned about Mary Macarthur's sense of priorities, which was manifested, for example, in her commitment to adult suffrage. Yet her ability to work effectively with people of all classes facilitated her huge task and this, combined with her personal energy and commitment, helped to ensure the importance of the National Federation of Women Workers in peace and especially in war. As Beatrice Webb noted, Mary Macarthur was 'the axle round which the machinery moved' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 30412


Anderson, (Alfred Charles) Stanley (1884-1966), printmaker and watercolour painter, was born on 11 May 1884 at 11 North Road, Bristol, the son of Alfred Ernest Anderson (1859-1939), of Heavitree, Devon, who started his own business as a skilled general and heraldic engraver, and his wife, Emma Bessie, 'nee' Mitchell (1862-1936). He had a twin sister, Rosa, and a younger sister, Irene. He was educated at the Merchant Venturers' Technical College, Bristol, where he became a great reader, developed a love for music, and determined to become a professional artist. His mother had less precarious ambitions for him and persuaded him against his will at the age of fifteen to be apprenticed to his father. During this apprenticeship he learned to engrave on metal with exacting precision on, for example, salvers, tankards, and cutlery. While earning only 6 shillings a week (then the normal rate), he paid for tuition of one evening a week at the Bristol School of Art. In 1909 he won the British Institution open etching scholarship of $50 a year, with the etched portrait stipulated. 
Having received neither encouragement nor money from his parents, Anderson arrived in London on 1 January 1909 to study at the Royal College of Art, under the expert technical instruction of Frank Short in the wider freedoms of etching and drypoint, with general drawing. To these Anderson applied himself diligently, while also attending classes at Goldsmiths' College, New Cross. He found art classes distracting and did his most rewarding study in the print room of the British Museum, as the visitors' book confirms. There he formed an abiding love for Durer (whose line engraving 'St Jerome, in his Study with a Lion' was ever to influence his pictorial attitude and technique) and for Rembrandt, Goya, and the later masters J. F. Millet and C. Meryon. Anderson exhibited two works in the Royal Academy in 1909, the first of 214 he was eventually to show there. Frank Short, always on the lookout for 'likely men' for the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers, of which he was president, welcomed Anderson as associate in 1910 and as fellow in 1923. 
Although Anderson was encouraged by artists and was able to get a deal of small hack work to eke out his resources, his life was hard. His habit of work, dedication to his calling, and tenacity of purpose helped him surmount difficulties of finance and health and maintain himself until the outbreak of war in 1914. On 10 August 1910 he had married Lilian Phelps (1884-1967), the daughter of a master builder in Essex. A woman of fine character who had been a nurse at St Thomas's Hospital, she was calm, practical, and entirely selfless in all her relationships. Throughout their married life she provided a confidence in her husband's talents and a well-ordered home. After the war she returned at times to private nursing in order to augment their income while bringing up their two sons, Ivan Phelps (1911-1995) and Maxim (1914-1959), who was to earn a considerable reputation as a director of documentary films before his early death. Anderson engraved a dignified portrait of Lilian in nursing uniform, 'The Sister', in 1931. 
During the First World War the family moved to Eltham, near Woolwich, where Anderson was engaged on munitions work, having been rejected as unfit for active service (he had severely strained his heart in his youth). In Chelsea again after the war, he resumed his uphill struggle with views of London and etched portraits. He became one of a formidable quartet of etchers and drypointists who were to achieve fame, the others being Henry Rushbury, Gerald Brockhurst, and Malcolm Osborne, young men of common purpose. They were inspired by Muirhead Bone, Francis Dodd, and William Strang, who were to the fore in the renascence of British etching. Anderson admired Strang's wide range of subject and media, composed with well-realized emphasis on the human content (in the Millet-Legros tradition), which he found helpful and affinitive. 
Since, in the 1920s, there was a growing market for topographical prints, Anderson and Osborne often visited France and Spain. By the age of forty Anderson had set his course, with self-imposed disciplines through which to exploit his talents. He had always felt and now saw life as a whole. His compositions show the contiguous relationships between man and his surroundings, with objects made and used by man, such as tools, implements of agriculture, buildings, and places of worship. Consequently his predominantly topographical subjects -- townscape, market, harbour, or landscape -- are animated by people in appropriate groups or activities. Conversely, predominantly figure subjects include their authentic setting. Anderson always acutely observed people's actions, attitudes, and peculiarities, and recorded these in sketchbooks. He had great sympathy with the underdog, from the going down to the down and out, the aged, or the blind. Although many of his subjects show his social sympathies, a certain wry, humorous irony creeps in, as in his few oil paintings, which depict 'types' -- those who, for example, frequented the bookshops in Farringdon Road. 
At first Anderson worked more often in boldly designed drypoint, using its full richness of 'burr' -- through luminous half-tones to silvery greys. Notable examples are 'The Goose Fair, Albi' (1927), 'Les Arcades, Dieppe' (1928), a town he loved, and 'St Nicholas, Prague' (1929), which Campbell Dodgson considered one of the finest architectural drypoints of the century. These prints were invariably signed on the plate, at the bottom left or right, 'S. Anderson', and then signed in the margin, below the plate mark in ink or pencil, 'Stanley Anderson'. However, Anderson became convinced, when he pushed the burin with his early acquired mastery, that only in line-engraving, with its incised clarity, could he truly express his well premeditated designs. That this formal method might deaden movement or atmosphere is immediately belied by such examples as 'The Fallen Star' (1929) and 'Morning on the Seine' (1930). This return to his first training was to come to fruition in his last forty plates, in which he maintained his consistently high standards of composition and intensity of understanding. 
In 1925 Anderson succeeded Malcolm Osborne as visiting instructor in the etching department of Goldsmiths' College School of Art, then directed by Clive Gardiner. There he found a small band of students who were already seriously attracted to etching, among whom were Edward Bouverie-Hoyton, Paul Drury, Graham Sutherland, and Robin Tanner. To quote one of their number: 'As a teacher Anderson was always anxious to help in any way, but he never sought to divert us from our own predilections. He was diffident in general criticism, but demonstrably exact about technical matters. His highest words of praise (behind anyone's back) were 'sterling, probity and guts'. They were his own qualities, and his students held him in high esteem and affection. (private information)' He was warmly regarded for his sympathetic and tirelessly helpful teaching, patience, and goodwill. Until 1940 he continued on the visiting staff of Goldsmiths' College, where he also taught wood-engraving, a medium which he admired. 
With the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Anderson gave up his studio in London and went to live in the cottage which he had bought in 1933. It was in the small village of Towersey, not far from Thame on the eastern boundary of Oxfordshire and Long Crendon in the adjacent county of Buckinghamshire. In this quiet, undeveloped agricultural country, Anderson found the subjects which were increasingly dear to him and which were the basis of his last contribution as a print-maker and the final flowering of his creativity. He was never so happy and relaxed as when making exhaustive studies of craftsmen pursuing their callings, often out of doors and in all weathers. These included a basket-maker, blacksmiths, chair makers, hurdle makers, a saddler, thatchers, a wheelwright, and farm labourers, surrounded by and using their tools. From 1934 until his last engraving in 1953, Anderson produced editions of forty or fifty, later of sixty-five, proofs, which he sold for 3 guineas each. The full editions were often sold out, and not only at the annual exhibitions at the Royal Academy -- 'a very good shopwindow', as he described it. Anderson had a loyal following of admirers who bought from him directly. He kept meticulous records of his sales. These later prints were signed on the plate with his initials, 'SA', in a monogram within a triangle. Such subjects as 'Brook Farming' (1936), 'Willow Lopping' (1939), with its strong diagonals, and 'The Lacemaker' (1940) provide lasting records of English rural life and its crafts before their disappearance and may well be considered his most important achievement. 
Around Towersey, Anderson also found the subjects for his evocative watercolours, which were eagerly sought by collectors. This part of his work found a place in 'Recording Britain', the scheme launched at the suggestion of Kenneth Clark and Arnold Palmer in 1939 under the auspices of the Pilgrim Trust and the committee on the employment of artists in wartime. Anderson was one of the most prolific contributors, working at Painswick in Gloucestershire, Witney in Oxfordshire, and, nearer home, at Thame, each of his essentially topographical subjects being characteristically filled with local figures and activity. 
In 1938 Anderson was the sole representative of British line-engraving at the Venice Biennial International Art Exhibition. He was a member of the engraving faculty of the British School at Rome from 1930 to 1952. In 1934 he was made ARA and in 1941 RA. He was appointed CBE in 1951. His work was widely exhibited and is represented in Britain, the USA, and Europe, and examples are held in the British, Victoria and Albert, Fitzwilliam, and Ashmolean museums. It is in the last of these that the most comprehensive collection of Anderson's print-making is to be found. It is the most instructive collection because of its many 'states', the working proofs before the published one, the artist's studies and notes, and letters from Anderson which reveal the pains he took with those who were interested in his prints, together with an explanatory catalogue. Moreover, many prints by the British etchers mentioned in this notice are also to be found in the Ashmolean Museum. 
Anderson was shy, reticent, and vulnerable, but in the company of fellow artists and craftsmen he could be relaxed and expansive. Affectionate and generous in disposition, he could be a stern critic of the meretricious or slovenly of mind or manners, although his self-criticism was harsher. He had no liking for modern art and satirized Herbert Read. He was of middle height, quietly eager, and brisk in mind and movement. He died at his home, Darobey, Church Lane, Chearsley, Buckinghamshire, on 4 March 1966. 
Four self-portraits of Anderson are known: each seems to mark a milestone in his artistic development. The earliest was etched in 1910. The next was an exercise in sandpaper mezzotint and drypoint (1913), in which he was encouraged by William Strang. 'Portrait of the Artist' (1920), made at the age of thirty-six, emphasizes his intent eye and craggy determination, while the fourth was produced at the height of his powers in 1933, when he had completed more than 150 plates. It shows him, burin to hand, as he was about to undertake his last work, the series of country craftsmen, clear-eyed, confident, experienced -- a true likeness. 


@@@@@


doc= 30413


Benson, Stella (1892-1933), writer, was born at Lutwyche Hall, Wenlock Edge, Shropshire, on 6 January 1892, the younger daughter and third child of Ralph Beaumont Benson (1862-1911), landowner, of Lutwyche Hall, and his wife, Caroline Essex (1861-1934), second daughter of Richard Hugh Cholmondeley, rector of Hodnet, later of Condover Hall, Shropshire, and younger sister of the novelist Mary Cholmondeley. Benson spent an isolated, lonely, and sickly childhood in the care of a succession of nannies, and she watched uncomprehendingly as her parents' marriage deteriorated because of her father's alcoholism and womanizing. She found consolation in her dog Pepper, in a secret 'imaginary world filled with imaginary people' (Grant, 19), and in her diary, begun in 1901 and kept throughout her life. Attempts to have her educated foundered, always ending 'in illness and great nervous unhappiness' (Roberts, 14). She was educated at home, then at a private school at Hindhead, Surrey, and in 1906-7 at a boarding-school in Eastbourne. In 1910 she attended a girls' school in Freiburg, Germany. Despite her frailty, she fared better with travel, spending a happy seventeen months in Switzerland and the south of France from 1910 on, before sailing to the West Indies for the winter of 1913-14, the latter experience providing material for her first book, 'I Pose' (1915). 
Benson's experiences leading up to and during the early part of the First World War working for suffragists' organizations and for charities in the East End of London also contributed material for this 'post-impressionist' novel. Its originality lies in its radical subversion of the traditional closure of romance in marriage: Benson has the suffragette heroine defiantly hurl a bomb at a church altar. After the financial success of this effort (which netted her $60) Benson wrote another novel set in the East End, 'This is the End' (1917), that centres on unrequited love and conveys a broad range of attitudes towards the war as well. During the latter years of the war Benson continued to work for the Charity Organization Society, though she satirized members' self-righteous attitudes in her third novel, 'Living Alone' (1919), and then worked for the war effort as a gardener in Berkshire. 
In 1918 for health reasons Benson voyaged to the USA, and travelled from New York to California. After a year there working at various odd jobs she felt so alienated by the vulgarity of America that she decided in December 1919 to travel to Hong Kong, where she taught at an Anglican boys' school, and then to Peking (Beijing), where she worked in a medical institute. 
In China, where she would spend much of the rest of her life, Benson met James Carew O'Gorman Anderson (1893-1946), known as Shaemus, who was employed by the imperial Chinese maritime customs service. She married him in London on 27 September 1921, exactly one year after meeting him. There were no children of the marriage. They spent their honeymoon making the daring journey between New York and California in a Model T Ford, affectionately named Stephanie. All the while Stella worked on a fourth novel, 'The Poor Man' (1922), which included satirical treatment of her first stay in California that provoked outrage among some Californian friends. 
Though Benson was often depressed in China, partly because of the narrow-minded colonial mentality and partly because of marital difficulties, she was quite productive as a writer. Along with three more novels, she began to publish whimsical and amusing short stories, and well-regarded travel books ('The Little World', 1925; 'Worlds within Worlds', 1928). With her novel 'The Far-Away Bride' (1930; published in the UK as 'Tobit Transplanted' in 1931) she achieved both popular success and critical acclaim, winning the A. C. Benson silver medal of the Royal Society of Literature and, more important to her, the French Femina Vie Heureuse prize in 1932. This carefully crafted novel develops the theme that most obsessed her -- loss of identity and resulting isolation -- in tracing the plight of the White Russians exiled in Manchuria. 
On returning alone to England in January 1932 Benson found herself a literary celebrity. She had her portrait drawn by Wyndham Lewis, and renewed her friendship with, among other writers, Virginia Woolf, who described her as: 'quiet, as controlled, white, drawn as usual, also deaf: with steady honest eyes... a very weak but persistent voice; she coughs; & then goes on with a mild persistent patience. She is bleached; even her blue eyes are bleached. But at the same time she's practical; realistic.... All this serious, weary, intent. ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 117-18)' By August she was off to rejoin her husband, Shaemus, now in Hong Kong. In Hong Kong she helped organize a successful campaign against its system of licensed prostitution. With him on a visit to Hongay in Tonkin, French Indo-China, she contracted pneumonia and died in hospital at Baie d'Along, near Haiphon, on 6 December 1933. She was buried on 7 December in the French cemetery on the Ile de Charbon, near Hongay. 
Collections of Benson's poems and short stories and an unfinished novel about colonial life were published posthumously. L. P. Hartley wrote of the novel 'Mundos' (1935) that '[Stella Benson's] talent never found more brilliant expression than in the haunting, disturbing cadences of her swan song' (Grant, 293). It seems probable that had she lived she would have surpassed her already notable achievement. 
Stella Benson had a unique ability to blend fantasy and reality, especially evident in her earlier novels and in her short stories. Her impish humour and wicked wit, frequently directed towards a satirical end, masked an underlying compassion. Benson's novels (especially her later more realistic ones) and stories often treat serious social issues and reflect her travails as a twentieth-century woman: supporting female suffrage, witnessing the tragedy of the First World War, and living in a hostile, volatile colonial setting. Despite her very modern, ironic treatment of the theme of individuals lost, isolated, and alienated in strange and frightening situations, she has not garnered much contemporary critical attention, and deserves reappraisal. 


@@@@@


doc= 30414


Anderson, Sir Thomas McCall (1836-1908), physician and dermatologist, was born at 159 St Vincent Street, Glasgow, on 9 June 1836. One of eight children, he was the second son of Alexander Dunlop Anderson (1794-1871), a medical practitioner in Glasgow and former president of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Thomas McCall of Craighead, Lanarkshire. His father's family was related on the maternal side to William Dunlop (1649?-1700) principal of Glasgow University (1690-1700), and in the male line he was descended from John Anderson (1668-1721) defender of Presbyterianism, and collaterally from John Anderson (1726-1796) founder of the Andersonian Institute, Glasgow. 
After school in Edinburgh, Anderson graduated MD with honours at Glasgow University (1858) and later became a licentiate and then fellow of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. After about two years' residency in Glasgow Royal Infirmary and a similar period studying in Paris, Wurzburg, Berlin, Vienna, and Dublin he was appointed lecturer (1861) and professor (1865) of practice of medicine in the Andersonian Institute with clinical facilities in the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, where he was later appointed physician. 
In 1861 the Glasgow Skin Dispensary was founded with Anderson and Andrew Buchanan (died 1865) as physicians. Anderson remained in charge until his death in 1908. He married Margaret Richardson, daughter of Alexander Ronaldson, merchant of Glasgow, on 20 July 1864. Their son, Thomas, practised medicine in New York, while the eldest of five daughters was twice decorated in the South African War and became matron successively of Newcastle Infirmary and St George's Hospital, London. 
Anderson became Glasgow University's first professor of clinical medicine in 1874, a post which he held in conjunction with that of physician to the new Western Infirmary. In 1900 he succeeded Sir William Tennant Gairdner as regius professor of practice of medicine. As dean of the faculty of medicine in 1900 Anderson represented the university at several international conferences and, from 1903, on the General Medical Council. Between 1897 and 1901 Anderson was the first non-London examiner in medicine and pathology for the British and Indian military medical services, resulting in increased recruitment of Glasgow graduates to those services. Knighted in 1905, he was appointed honorary physician to the king in Scotland in 1907. 
The lucidity and skill of Anderson's clinical teaching, his broad concept of medicine, his understanding of his own capabilities, and his intelligent advice attracted large numbers of students. His demonstration classes were clear, systematic, concentrated on the subject in hand, and stressed the practical aspects of the discipline. He reminded his pupils that, while medicine was a liberal profession, the physician's business was to cure the sick. 
Anderson's papers include 'Lectures on Clinical Medicine' (1887), papers on tuberculosis (1877, 1905), 'Syphilitic Affections of the Nervous System' (1889) and eleven papers on diseases of the middle ear (1861-7). His interest in skin diseases was aroused by Ferdinand von Hebra in Vienna. Anderson wrote brilliantly on 'Parasitic Affections of the Skin' (1861), on eczema (1863), and on fungal diseases of the skin (1866). These are among at least ten important contributions made by Anderson to the dermatological literature. A careful observer, he sought constantly to explain what he saw. He emphasized the importance to dermatologists of a sound knowledge of general medicine, anticipating modern opinion by at least fifty years. His ability attracted a large consulting practice, enabling him to publish 'A Treatise on Diseases of the Skin' (1887), a well-received textbook on dermatology. 
A Conservative in politics (he was president of the Glasgow Conservative Association (college division)) and a Church of Scotland elder, Anderson had a genial and obliging, though reserved, disposition. Somewhat below average height, his distinguished appearance was enhanced by a flowing moustache. He enjoyed cycling and golf. Anderson died suddenly of a heart attack (the second within a year) on 25 January 1908 after addressing the Glasgow Ayrshire Society at their dinner in St Enoch's Hotel, Glasgow. A public funeral in the university's Bute Hall was followed by burial in the Glasgow necropolis on 29 January 1908. 
In 1909, the Glasgow Skin Dispensary moved to the Western Infirmary, where Anderson had earlier secured twenty beds for skin patients. A university lectureship and, later, a chair named after him were established and were funded, as were the beds, by endowments from the skin dispensary. 


@@@@@


doc= 30415


Anderson, Sir (Warren) Hastings (1872-1930), army officer, was born at the barracks, Aldershot, on 9 January 1872, the eldest son of Lieutenant-General David Anderson, governor of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1886-8), and temporary commander of the Aldershot garrison, and his wife, Charlotte Christina, daughter of David Anderson of St Germains, East Lothian. Hastings Anderson was educated at Marlborough College and Sandhurst. He was gazetted to his father's regiment, the Cheshire, in October 1890. Both Anderson and his father were colonels of the regiment, the son attaining that honour in 1928. Anderson served with the 2nd battalion as adjutant throughout the South African War, except for a short period in 1900 when he was appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general under the military governor of Johannesburg. He passed out of the Staff College, Camberley, in 1905, and spent four years from January 1906 at the War Office in the mobilization and training and staff duties directorates. Thereafter his career seems to have stalled. Anderson's capacities as a staff officer were never in doubt. But he never commanded soldiers in war; he did not command the Cheshire regiment. Hastings Anderson's distinguished career was spent entirely on the staff. 
During Anderson's nine years as staff captain and major he met and then, on 16 February 1910, married Eileen Hamilton ('b'. 1887/8), the only daughter of Hamilton Osborne of Chippenham, Wiltshire. The marriage was a happy one, but there were no children. In February 1914, after three years at southern command, Anderson joined the directing staff of the Staff College as a general staff officer, grade 1 (GSO1) instructor, with the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel. In August, on the outbreak of the First World War, he went with a number of the students to France in order to finalize the details for the transport by rail of the British expeditionary force (BEF) to Mauberge. He returned to England and was posted to the western front in November as GSO1 (colonel), with the 8th division formed of regular troops from abroad under Major-General Francis Davies. In October 1915 Anderson was promoted brigadier-general, general staff in the 11th corps commanded by Lieutenant-General Sir Richard Haking. He remained with the 11th corps until September 1916, when he was transferred to 15th corps. Five months later Anderson was promoted major-general, general staff, First Army. As effective chief of staff, it was his responsibility to complete the final preparations for the attack on Vimy Ridge in April 1917. Anderson was rewarded for his part in this action with the CB in February 1918. 
During Ludendorff's offensive in March 1918 the First Army front was held by tired divisions from the Third and Fifth armies and some Portuguese troops. The staff at headquarters in Ranchicourt were placed under great pressure, but Anderson's cool head and capacity for hard work ensured that they worked efficiently and their morale remained high. Some shells actually fell on Ranchicourt at this time, but the headquarters (unlike many others) did not retire. By July-August 1918, when the initiative was seized back by the allies, Anderson, in his gentle but determined way, had forged a most efficient staff, and the advance of the First Army was continuous throughout the Last Hundred Days (September-November 1918). This series of successes, so often overlooked, constitutes one of the signal triumphs of British military history. 
It was appropriate that a soldier of Anderson's staff experience should be chosen as commandant of the Staff College on its reopening in March 1919. He held this important post for three years. Throughout his tenure he set a conservative tone to the college. Anderson was not an innovator by nature, and as a dedicated infantryman he was sceptical of the claims made by the new 'mechanical' arms. He dedicated himself to restoring the Staff College to what he remembered were its glories before 1914. He revived social life and the drag hunt, and coped admirably with the results of four years of neglect: not least with the Staff College's perverse and troublesome hot-water system. Consequently, although Anderson was a much liked commandant, he had little impact on the staff course. The first three staff courses after the war were dull and lacklustre, and have been much criticized (especially by Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery, who was a student in 1920). This is not to suggest that Anderson was a plodding reactionary -- he was not. He had a real interest in military history, and gave lectures on this subject to the staff course. His later book, based on his lectures, 'Outline of the Development of the British Army' (1920), reveals his strengths and limitations. It is very strong on fact, and weak on interpretation and extrapolation. Anderson's 'Outline' is very typical of his unadventurous pre-1914 caste of mind. 
In 1922 Anderson was created a KCB and appointed chief general staff officer to General Sir Charles Harington, general officer commanding-in-chief the allied army of the Black Sea. Anderson's great experience and shrewdness were valuable during the Chanak crisis. The British forces avoided war with Turkey by patience, tact, and diplomatic skill, to which Anderson contributed. The following year he was appointed deputy quartermaster-general at headquarters army in India. In March 1924 he was posted to Quetta as commander of the Baluchistan military district. He returned to England in March 1927 and received the appointment of quartermaster-general to the forces, with the rank of lieutenant-general and a seat on the army council. Anderson thus became involved in the pressing issues of mechanization and structural reform. He veered towards the conservative side of the argument. Like many senior officers of his generation he regarded the conserving of the regimental system as of a higher priority than the creation of a doctrinal revolution, based on new and unproven weapons technology. He was looked upon by some as a 'safe pair of hands', and a potential chief of the Imperial General Staff before his death, after an operation for appendicitis, in Queen Alexandra's Military Hospital, Millbank, London, on 10 December 1930. At the time of his death he was nominated to command Aldershot. 
Hastings Anderson was essentially a late-Victorian gentleman, unruffled, understated, and moderate in all things. He was dignified but not pompous, and he never lost the grace which led him always to observe a gentle and chivalrous attitude towards those who worked for him. He was very fair-minded, and had an engaging sense of humour. He was devoted to the Cheshire regiment, and published 'The History of the 22nd Cheshire Regiment, 1689-1849' (1920). In 1927 he became a vice-president of the Society for Army Historical Research, and contributed to the first issue of its journal. 


@@@@@


doc= 30416


Andrewes, Sir Frederick William (1859-1932), pathologist and bacteriologist, was born at Greyfriars House, Friar Street, Reading, on 31 March 1859, the eldest of the four sons of Charles James Andrewes, an engineer, who was mayor of Reading, and his second wife, Charlotte Parsons. He began his education at Oakley House School, Reading, and among his schoolfellows were Edward Bagnall Poulton, W. F. R. Weldon, and Owen Seaman. Andrewes formed then, and kept throughout his life, a special friendship with Poulton; they had like interests, as boys and young men, in field entomology and geology, and shared many expeditions in school holidays and, later, in vacations. Andrewes always retained his interests as a field naturalist, and Poulton records with pride that he was able later to include in the university museum at Oxford entomological varieties of great interest which Andrewes had taken in school holidays when he was between thirteen and fourteen years old -- early evidence of a skill and an alertness of observation which were later to serve him well in other areas. 
Andrewes entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1878; his essay is said to have made an especially favourable impression upon his examiners. In 1881, with biology as his subject, he was placed alone in the first class of the final honours school of natural science. In 1883 he was awarded the Burdett-Coutts university scholarship in geology. In 1886 he was elected to the Sheppard fellowship at Pembroke College, the holder of which was under obligation to study either law or medicine. Owing to his biological background he had already chosen medicine as his career, having won an open entrance scholarship at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, and he began his studies there in 1885. After qualifying as MRCS, London, and BM at Oxford in 1887, Andrewes spent a short time in Vienna as a preliminary to entering upon a career as a consulting physician. He became FRCP in 1895. In the same year Andrewes married Phyllis Mary, daughter of John Hamer JP, publisher; they had a son and a daughter. 
Andrewes had now become increasingly interested in pathology and bacteriology. The latter, undergoing vigorous development on the continent through the schools of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch, had reached Great Britain rather late. One of its pioneers in this country was Edward Emanuel Klein, lecturer on physiology at St Bartholomew's medical school, and when Andrewes first made contact with the pathological laboratory there in 1885 Klein was already examining material from the wards for the tubercle bacillus, discovered by Koch some three years earlier. In 1893 Alfredo Auturus Kanthack was appointed lecturer in pathology and pathologist to the hospital, and Andrewes worked in increasingly close association with him until, on Kanthack's departure to Cambridge in 1897, Andrewes was appointed to succeed him. 
Over the next thirty years (during which his post of lecturer at St Bartholomew's was raised to that of professor by the University of London in 1912), Andrewes saw the department change from a single laboratory to a separate building with three floors of laboratories and an additional one for post-mortem examinations. His tenure of office had begun at a time when pathology and especially the new science of bacteriology were developing an essential relationship with public health and with clinical medicine, and he was an important agent of that development. His reputation, which grew steadily with the years, depended more on his influence as a teacher, on his wide knowledge and experience, and on his care and wisdom as an expert and consultant on special problems, than on such new developments of knowledge as arose from the researches which he had always in hand. In pathology he added something of permanent value to the differential histology of lymphadenoma and to a more exact knowledge of arteriosclerosis. In bacteriology he took particular interest in variations within a bacterial species, as recognized by reactions with specific, immune sera. During the First World War he made a valuable classification on these lines of the variant strains of dysentery bacilli. He was one of the first to recognize the importance of healthy or mildly affected persons carrying such infections as diphtheria. 
Andrewes was a man of quiet, friendly personality, readily accessible, generous with his help, and prone to flavour his wisdom with a sly humour. Throughout life, in work and recreation, his instinct and habit were those of a born naturalist; in his later years especially, these tastes found expression in the creation and tending of a rock garden, well known to all his friends. He had a great gift for the effective, though apparently free and informal, exposition of intricate problems, and was known as a forceful lecturer outside his own department. To the Royal College of Physicians he delivered the Dobell (1906) and the Croonian (1910) lectures, as well as the Harveian oration (1920). His deep knowledge and wide experience made him a valuable member of various public committees and of the Medical Research Council. He was elected FRS in 1915. In 1919 he was appointed OBE in recognition of his services during the First World War, and he was knighted in 1920. 
Andrewes died at his home, Windy Gap, Merton Lane, St Pancras, London, on 24 February 1932. He was survived by his wife; his son, Sir Christopher Howard Andrewes, went on to become deputy director of the Medical Research Council. 
H. H. Dale', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30417


Andrews, Sir James, baronet (1877-1951), lord chief justice of Northern Ireland, was born in Comber, co. Down, on 3 January 1877, the third son of Thomas Andrews, flax spinner, of Ardara, Comber, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of James Alexander Pirrie and sister of William James Pirrie, Viscount Pirrie. Thomas Andrews was president of the Ulster Liberal Unionist Association from 1892 and was sworn of the privy council of Ireland in 1903. James Andrews was a brother of Thomas Andrews, shipbuilder, who perished in the 'Titanic' disaster in 1912, and of John Miller Andrews (1871-1956), prime minister of Northern Ireland, 1940-43. He was educated at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast, and then at Stephen's Green School, Dublin. At Trinity College, Dublin, he had a distinguished career: he became a senior exhibitioner (1897) and a prizeman in civil and international law (1898), and graduated in 1899 with honours in ethics and logic. He was also gold medallist and auditor of the college historical society. 
Although his family was closely associated with the shipbuilding and linen industries, Andrews's decision to read for the bar was no break with family tradition since his uncle William Drennan Andrews (1832-1924) had a distinguished career in Dublin as a barrister and then as a judge. At King's Inns, Dublin, James Andrews proved himself an industrious student; in 1900 he was called to the Irish bar and joined what was then the north-east circuit. He built up a lucrative practice and soon established himself as a sound lawyer and a shrewd and capable advocate. In 1918 Andrews took silk; in 1920 he was elected a bencher of King's Inns; and in 1921 he was appointed a lord justice of appeal in the new supreme court of Northern Ireland set up under the 'Government of Ireland Act', 1920. In 1922 he married Jane Lawson (died 1964), daughter of Joseph Ormrod, of Bolton, and widow of Captain Cyril Gerald Haselden RE. They had no children. 
In 1924 Andrews was sworn of the privy council of Northern Ireland. In 1926, on its foundation, he was made a bencher of the inn of court of Northern Ireland, and in 1928 he was appointed deputy lieutenant for co. Down. In 1937 he succeeded Sir Willeim Moore as lord chief justice, an office which he held until his death. In 1938 an honorary LLD from his old university reflected the general satisfaction with which this appointment had been received, and in 1942 he was created a baronet. 
Throughout his career on the bench Andrews maintained the firm grasp of legal principles which he had gained as a student and at the bar. This, together with an alert intelligence, a marked capacity for taking pains to master the facts of a case, and the ability to express himself simply and clearly, made him a competent and businesslike judge. But his undoubted success also owed much to the quality of his character and his constant anxiety to do justly and love mercy. Although firm in his rulings and capable of rebuking error, the essential kindness of his nature was never obscured. His patience and care were matched by a courtesy which was the same for all, from the humblest to the greatest, from the rawest junior to the most experienced silk. He did not often show the exasperation which all judges must feel on occasion, and when he did he was not given to sarcasm. Whatever their disappointment, those who lost before him as a trial judge seldom left his court with a sense of grievance or injustice, for he had the natural gift of presiding in a manner which was manifestly fair. 
Andrews's interests were not confined to the law. The cause of higher education was also close to his heart, and he was active on the senate of the Queen's University of Belfast and on many of its committees from 1924 and he was a pro-chancellor from 1929. During the Second World War he devoted himself to promoting the savings movement in Northern Ireland and was chairman and later president of the Ulster savings committee. 
Physically, Andrews was a tall man, of dignified appearance. He had a pleasant speaking voice and spoke fluently and well; he had a good command of language, a sense of the appropriate, and a sincerity which informed all he said. He liked the open air and enjoyed shooting and golf. But perhaps his keenest outdoor pleasure was sailing on Strangford Lough or promoting the fortunes of the North Down cricket club either as an enthusiastic spectator or on the field, for in his day he was an enterprising batsman and in 1904-7 captained the first eleven. While holding in private as in public life to the highest standards, he remained the most companionable and approachable of men, with few enemies and many friends. Andrews died at Comber on 18 February 1951. 
MacDermott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30418


Andrews, Thomas (1847-1907), metallurgist and ironmaster, was born at 19 Carver Street, Sheffield, on 16 February 1847, the only son of Thomas Andrews and his wife, Mary Bolsover. Thomas Andrews senior was a partner in the Wortley ironworks and the Wortley Silkstone colliery, situated about 10 miles north-west of Sheffield. 
The younger Andrews was educated at Broombank School and then received private tuition. He was carefully trained in metallurgy, mining, and chemistry (under Dr James Allan), before taking control of the Wortley forges (which had been at work since the seventeenth century) on the death of his father in 1871. Andrews took an active part in running the business, but he never 'evinced any ambition to embark on any extensions or improvements beyond what were necessary to maintain the old quality and workmanship in the limited output he cared to cope with. His mind and energy were devoted to the field of scientific research. (Andrews, 53)' He married on 7 September 1870 Mary Hannah, the daughter of Charles Stanley of Rotherham, oil manufacturer; the couple had three sons and a daughter. 
Andrews developed a steady routine: after opening the morning's letters and consulting his managers, he devoted the remainder of the day to his metallurgical research, working usually from 9 a.m. until midnight. An equally steady stream of scientific papers issued from his pen, which meant that -- as one trade journal noted -- 'a review of his work is apt to develop into a catalogue of the titles of his contributions to contemporary scientific literature' ('Engineering', 864). To the publications of the several engineering societies of which he was a member, and to the periodical press, he contributed some forty papers. These publications arose from Andrews's interest in the properties of iron and concerned such subjects as the electrochemical action of sea and river water upon iron and steel, and the effects of temperature on the strength of railway axles (one of the main products of his ironworks). He was much concerned with the problem of the accidental fracture of railway materials. In his researches, he was one of the first to study metals with the aid of a microscope, thus extending the pioneering metallography of Henry Clifton Sorby. 
In 1888 Andrews was elected FRS and was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and of the Chemical Society, and a member, respectively, of the Institution of Civil Engineers and Society of Engineers. Among his other honours were the Telford medal of the Institution of Engineers in 1884 and the gold medal of the Society of Engineers in 1902. 
In his day Andrews was recognized as one of the country's leading metallurgical experts. He was employed as a consultant engineer to various railway companies and the Admiralty also made use of his services. At Cambridge University he delivered lectures to engineering students. In Sheffield he was a consistent advocate of technical education directed to industrial ends; and by serving on its council he assisted in establishing and developing Sheffield University. On the other hand, his business was engaged in a losing battle with its new rival, the mild steel produced by the Bessemer and Siemens processes. Andrews's concentration on iron as an area of research also meant that his work has slipped more rapidly into obscurity than that of some his contemporary metallurgists, who worked with steel. 
Andrews died at his home, Ravencrag, at Wortley, on 19 June 1907, aged sixty (his death hastened, according to his son, by overwork). Two of his sons died in childhood and the other, C. Reginald Andrews, was the chairman until 1918 of a small Sheffield tool steel firm owned by the family. This business was to survive the Wortley ironworks, which closed in 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 30419


Angell, Sir (Ralph) Norman (1872-1967), peace campaigner and author, was born on 26 December 1872 in the Mansion House, Holbeach, Lincolnshire, the sixth of seven children of Thomas Angell Lane JP, who owned a small chain of shops, and his wife, Mary Ann Abbot ('nee' Brittain). Almost nothing is known about his parents; and many details of his own life remain uncertain because it was lived almost entirely outside record-keeping organizations and because he was casual about personal information, particularly dates. For most of his life he believed himself to be two years younger than he was, and therefore gave the wrong year of birth in every 'Who's Who' entry from his first appearance in 1912 until 1960. He allowed inconsistent information to appear both in reference books and in his own writings. And he rarely dated his private letters, with the result that even the studies based on the personal archive he sold to Ball State Teachers' College (later University) at Muncie, in Indiana, cannot resolve all the problems. A comprehensively researched biography is still much needed. 
It seems likely that the unconventional and limited education which Angell described in his memoirs helped him become an effective propagandist, but stopped him gaining the recognition as an intellectual which he subsequently craved. After an unhappy experience at the preparatory school to which he was sent at the age of nine, he was educated first at a local school kept by an Anglican clergyman and then, from about 1884, at the Lycee de St Omer, in France, where he became proficient in French and was, or so he later claimed, first influenced in a rationalist direction by reading John Stuart Mill's 'Essay on Liberty'. (He later joined the Rationalist Peace Society, an obscure and short-lived body founded in 1910.) About 1887 he returned to England, and attended a business college in London before working as a journalist on the 'Southern Star' in Weymouth. Thereafter he went abroad again, spending a year (probably 1888-9) working on an English-language paper, 'The Telegraph', in Geneva, where he also attended lectures at the university and consorted with revolutionary Russian emigres. On returning to his home country, he briefly edited the 'Ipswich Times'; but, failing to make a success of journalism, he soon emigrated (almost certainly in late 1891) to the United States, where he spent almost a decade. He worked as a rancher and applied for naturalization, though he failed to complete the process after being cheated out of a homestead claim. He ended up taking journalistic jobs in San Francisco and St Louis before returning home (probably late in 1897, but possibly the following year). 
After a short time in England, Lane moved in 1898 to Paris, where he spent fourteen years undertaking a variety of journalistic tasks. At first he worked on a long-established English-language newspaper, 'Galignani's Messenger' (later the 'Daily Messenger'), reviewed the English press for the 'Eclair', and also acted as a correspondent for American papers -- a combination of jobs which improved his facility as a writer and brought him modest prosperity. He acquired an option to purchase the ailing 'Messenger', and tried to interest Lord Northcliffe in financing it; but instead the latter persuaded him to become managing editor of a new continental edition of the 'Daily Mail', a position he held from 1905 until 1912. 
For at least part of his time in Paris, Lane lived at 36 rue du Sentier with Beatrice Cuvellier (died 1955), the daughter of a New Orleans lawyer, whom he had married either shortly before leaving the United States or soon after arriving in Paris. Lane came to regard his marriage as a disastrous mistake, informing Evelyn Wrench half a century later that he had entered into it 'for what seems to me now an absurd scruple' and that, although he should have divorced Beatrice 'as soon as I discovered the nature of her previous life and the character formed by it', he had declined to do so for a number of reasons, 'among them the assurance by doctors that she would shortly be certified insane' (Marrin, 46). He apparently parted from her in 1912, dropped her from his 'Who's Who' entry the following year (though she remained in the American edition until he lapsed from it in the early 1920s), and omitted all reference to his marriage from his autobiography, though it seems that he did not legally separate from her until 1932 and supported her until her death. For the last fifty-five years of his life he lived alone, and was regarded by most of his acquaintances as a confirmed bachelor, an impression which his enthusiasm for the Boy Scout movement may have confirmed. 
It was during his Paris years that Lane embarked on his career as a commentator on international relations. His experience of chauvinistic behaviour in Britain, the United States, and France, and his reading of Gustave Le Bon's 'Psychologie des foules', had led him to dispute J. A. Hobson's emphasis on financial influence as a cause of war and to insist instead on the role of non-economic factors such as the emotionalism of the mass mind. However, his book on this theme, 'Patriotism under Three Flags', published in 1903 under his baptismal name (Ralph Lane), had little impact. 
Six years later Lane tried again, having become concerned less about mass emotions than about the economic complacency of the political elites in both Britain and Germany, who seemed to assume that their naval rivalry could result in war without serious financial repercussions for both countries. In September 1909, using his middle names (Norman Angell) to conceal his identity as a Northcliffe employee, he published a pamphlet, 'Europe's Optical Illusion', to warn that 'the complex financial interdependence of the capitalists of the world' ('Europe's Optical Illusion', 44) made even a successful war of conquest counter-productive because of the high costs of the attendant economic dislocation; and a year later he issued a book-length version under the title 'The Great Illusion'. Though Lane was later embarrassed to discover how much of its argument had been anticipated by writers such as Novicow, whose work had not then been translated into English, this book became a best-seller, selling over a million copies, being translated into twenty-five languages, and transforming its author's life. 
In addition to achieving celebrity as a peace pundit, Lane found himself in receipt of a steady stream of royalties and book contracts. By 1912 he felt able to become a full-time publicist: he left the 'Daily Mail', adopted Norman Angell as his everyday identity, and acquired an apartment in London, first at 4 Tudor Street and then at 4 King's Bench Walk, Temple. (His wife apparently remained in the rue du Sentier.) He received administrative support from the Garton Foundation, a body set up for the purpose by the second Viscount Esher, who hoped his book might have a favourable effect on German attitudes, in collaboration with A. J. Balfour and the industrialist Sir Richard Garton: it helped to form International Polity and War and Peace clubs at several universities. In addition, an independent periodical, 'War and Peace: A Norman Angell Monthly', was launched in the autumn of 1913, though Angell did not edit it. 
However, Angell's ideas had given rise to a movement partly because they were thought to offer reassurance at a time of growing international tension, and a widespread belief developed that his thesis was that war was no longer possible. Although some of his own statements encouraged this interpretation, it was a misreading of 'The Great Illusion', and became extremely embarrassing for him after the outbreak of the First World War. He spent much of his life trying to rehabilitate his reputation on this point, justifying his acceptance of a knighthood in 1931 as a belated contribution to his exoneration. However, he eventually came to realize that his book suffered from another and more serious defect which had been generally overlooked by critics -- its failure to ask: 'How shall a political truth, once established, be translated into workable policy?' (Angell, 318). 
Forced by the 1914 crisis to attempt such a translation, Angell showed himself to be emotionally and intellectually torn both between isolationism and internationalism, and between left-wing ideas and orthodox liberalism. At first isolationism and leftism prevailed: on 28 July 1914 he formed an abortive Neutrality League; and after Britain's declaration of war he co-operated with a group of isolationist radicals to launch the Union of Democratic Control (UDC). However, by the end of 1914 -- apparently after a brief spell as a stretcher-bearer in France -- he was arguing that the war had to be won, and noting that the wartime alliance against Germany and Austria offered a possible model for a future international organization. 
After crossing the Atlantic in the spring of 1915 and making contact with circles close to President Wilson, Angell came to doubt whether, in view of German attacks on neutral shipping, genuine neutrality was possible even for the United States. On 31 May he published an article in the American magazine 'New Republic' suggesting that the United States and certain other neutrals join with the allies in 'an international control of the world's supplies for the purpose of withholding them from Germany', which might prove to be 'the beginnings of the world organization of our common resources' (reprinted in 'War and Peace', September 1915, 185-6). Despite his recent neutralism he was thus beginning to see the war as potentially a means of reforming the international system. 
However, as an ambitious public figure with the common touch, Angell could also see himself returning to Britain to lead the peace campaign on which the Independent Labour Party was already embarking. Indeed, when the Garton Foundation finally severed its connection with him in October 1915, he toyed briefly with the idea of a 'straight-out anti-militarist campaign among the more revolutionary of the Labour people -- with a possible capture of the ILP', even though aware that this 'would amount virtually to a preaching of non-resistance' (Hafer, fol. 161), a policy he had previously repudiated. To the relief of most of his closest associates, he resisted this temptation to plunge into socialist and pacifist politics, and with conscription imminent returned to Britain to offer himself for military service. On being turned down he returned to America, though the British government briefly denied him a passport, because it was embarrassed by an article which he had tried to send to the 'New Republic' claiming that American help to Britain already went beyond the bounds of neutrality. He remained in the United States for the rest of the war, advocating the creation of an international organization (and thereby, it has been claimed, contributing to President Wilson's espousal of this cause) but not taking a leading part in the movement for a league of nations. 
When the armistice came, Angell returned to Paris to cover the peace conference. Disillusioned by what he saw, and not greatly enthused by the league as it was to be constituted, he moved some way back towards his former isolationism and -- albeit in much less controversial circumstances -- made the left-wing commitment which had tempted him in the autumn of 1915. He returned to King's Bench Walk, attacked the Versailles treaty in terms similar to Keynes, who praised his efforts, and helped launch a Fight the Famine Council. He felt that European conditions justified his prediction of the consequences of war, and in 1921 published 'The Fruits of Victory: a Sequel to 'The Great Illusion'', in which he argued that as 'interdependence increases, the limits of coercion are narrowed' ('The Fruits of Victory', 7), thereby implying that French attempts to enforce Versailles would be counterproductive. He also joined the Labour Party, being adopted as a parliamentary candidate for the Ruschliffe division of Nottinghamshire in 1920, though failing to win it at the general election of 1922 or Rossendale at that of 1923. Perhaps in an attempt to increase his credibility as a socialist politician he began making remarks in the early 1920s which implied a personal sympathy for a policy of non-resistance. 
However, even during this 'left turn -- with doubts', as he was to call it in his autobiography (Angell, 3), Angell avoided the extremes of isolationism and hostility to France and the League of Nations which characterized many of his Labour colleagues, most notably his UDC co-founder E. D. Morel. For example, at the time of the first Labour government in 1924 Angell tried unsuccessfully to persuade the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, another UDC co-founder, of the merits of the draft treaty of mutual assistance, an attempt to strengthen the league and thereby reassure France, which was on that account anathema to much of the left; and in 1925 he joined the executive committee of the League of Nations Union, which was in need of Labour members. 
In the mid-1920s Angell bought Northey Island in the Blackwater estuary, Essex, as a country retreat, from where he continued to produce frequent articles and books, which were sometimes repetitive and rarely based on sources more substantial than the press cuttings which he accumulated in his house and for which he had an uncritical regard. In 1928 he took on the editorship of the UDC's journal 'Foreign Affairs', though it folded in 1931. In 1929, at the third attempt, he entered parliament, as the member for Bradford North, but did not enjoy the experience and, being sympathetic to his old associate MacDonald, who had recently given him a knighthood, stood down in the general election which followed the formation of the National Government in 1931. Although he loyally agreed to be Labour candidate for the London University seat in 1935, safe in the knowledge he was not expected to campaign and had no prospect of winning, he drifted back to his original ideological attachment: by 1940 he was privately admitting to Gilbert Murray that, 'having tried to make the best of all the Socialist slogans and Marxist incantations, I have been pushed more and more to the conviction that it is your type of Liberalism which alone can save us' (Murray MSS). 
After leaving parliament Angell returned to the life of the independent foreign-policy commentator, and gradually developed into a stalwart member of the League of Nations Union. In 1933 he defended the legitimacy of international force against aggression, while insisting -- presumably in an effort to win the sympathies of those whose initial reaction to Hitler's coming to power was to protest against any repeat of British involvement in the First World War -- that in his personal views he remained a pacifist. In 1934 he was belatedly awarded the Nobel peace prize for the previous year after an energetic campaign by his friends to overcome the view of some European intellectuals that his work was superficial and derivative. During the Abyssinia crisis of 1935-6 -- understandably, in view of the fact that a central argument of 'The Great Illusion' had been that additional territory did not bring with it additional prosperity -- he became a leading critic of the Italian claim that the acquisition of colonies could solve the problems of a 'have not' nation. He supported collective security and rearmament, and by 1937 had become so alarmed at the National Government's apparent willingness to make concessions to Hitler, even at the cost of British imperial strength, that he published 'The Defence of the Empire', justifying his apparent abandonment of the view that colonial possessions brought no advantage to their owner by insisting he was now concerned with the preservation of order rather than, as formerly, with material benefits only. He was in touch with the small group of supporters which Winston Churchill described as his 'focus': in 1938 he was involved in its purchase of the League of Nations Union's periodical 'Headway' in an effort to enhance its influence as a critic of appeasement. 
Forced to leave Northey Island in the invasion scare of 1940, Angell moved to the United States with government blessing. He resided at 501 West 113th Street, New York, where he remained for a decade, doing his best through his writings to encourage strong Anglo-American relations. In 1951, the year in which he published his memoirs, 'After All', he returned to England, living at the Stone Cottage, Fernden Hill, Haslemere, Surrey. He continued to write, taking the Western side on cold war issues, supporting the Suez invasion, and managing a two-month tour of the United States at the age of ninety, but regretting the diminution in the public attention paid to his views. 
Not much over 5 feet tall, with a spare frame, broad forehead, penetrating blue-grey eyes, and a high-pitched voice, Angell was liable to insomnia, headaches, and moodiness, but relaxed through yachting, and was generally held in affection by those who encountered him. He died in a nursing home at 33 Birdhurst Road, Croydon, on 7 October 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 30420


Angus, Joseph (1816-1902), Baptist minister and educationist, was born on 16 January 1816 at Bolam, Northumberland, the only son of John Angus, a farmer and later a leather merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Wanless. His first schooling was at the free grammar school, Newcastle, under George Ferris Whidborne Mortimer, who wanted to send him to Cambridge. As a nonconformist and a member of a Baptist church, Angus preferred Edinburgh University, which he entered in 1834, after spending a year at King's College, London. In 1835 he studied for the Baptist ministry at Stepney College (which later became Regent's Park College, Oxford). Returning to Edinburgh with a scholarship he graduated MA with distinction in 1837, and won the gold medal in moral philosophy and the university English essay prize. 
Early the next year Angus accepted a call to New Park Street Chapel, Southwark. From 1838 to 1844 he was secretary of Stepney College and negotiated its affiliation with the new University of London. In 1840 he was appointed joint secretary with John Dyer of the Baptist Missionary Society, and became sole secretary on Dyer's death in 1841. He was heavily involved in raising the jubilee fund of some $32,000, which allowed the society to repay its debts, extend mission operations, and construct a new headquarters. 
Angus married on 3 March 1841 Amelia (died 1893), fourth daughter of William Brodie Gurney, treasurer of the Baptist Missionary Society; they had nine surviving children. Amelia Angus served as foreign secretary of the Baptist Zenana Mission from 1869 to 1893. On her death, two of their daughters, Amelia and Edith, filled the office as joint secretaries. Another daughter, Isabel Marion (1858-1939), was a missionary in India for the Baptist Zenana Mission from 1882 to 1907, when she was appointed the society's general secretary in India. 
In 1849 Angus was appointed president of Stepney College. During the forty-four years of his presidency, he increased the importance of the college within the denomination and raised a special fund of $30,000 to equip it with new professorial chairs and scholarships. The college moved to palatial premises in Regent's Park in 1856. In connection with his academic work Angus published handbooks to the 'Bible' (1853), to the English language (1864), and to English literature (1866), as well as an edition (1855) of Butler's 'Analogy' and 'Sermons' and Francis Wayland's 'Elements of Moral Science' (1858). The handbooks were especially popular. In recognition of his achievements at Regent's Park College, he was elected president of the Baptist Union in 1865. 
From 1859 to 1869 Angus was examiner in English to London University, and in 1865 to the civil service commissioners. From 1870 to 1880 he devoted much time to the committee revising the 'New Testament'. He was elected in 1870 for Marylebone to the first London school board, held office for ten years, and was re-elected for the period 1894-7. Along with W. H. Smith MP, he supported non-denominational 'Bible' reading in schools. He took the greatest interest in the bibliography of Baptist authors; his own collection of such works was unsurpassed, and forms the core of the Angus Library housed at Regent's Park College. His summary account, 'Baptist authors and history, 1527-1800', was printed in the 'Baptist Hand-Book' in 1894, and was issued separately in 1896. The hallmark of his ministry and educational career was a firm, typically evangelical, reliance on the 'Bible'. He was the author of several prize essays, and published many of his lectures and sermons. He died at his home, Ellerdale, in Hampstead on 28 August 1902 and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30421


Angwin, Sir (Arthur) Stanley (1883-1959), electrical engineer, was born in Penzance on 11 December 1883, the son of the Revd George William Angwin, a nonconformist minister, and his wife, Lucinda Cambellock. A change of circuit brought the family nearer London, and Angwin went to school in Chatham and Rochester. He obtained a Whitworth exhibition and studied engineering at East London (later Queen Mary) College, obtaining his BSc (Eng) in 1907. His first practical experience was with Yarrow & Co., shipbuilders on the Clyde, but when still in his early twenties he entered the Post Office engineering department. He was sent back to Glasgow, where he was engaged in telephone installation work. While in Scotland he raised the lowland division telegraph company of the Territorial Army which was mobilized in 1914 as the 52nd divisional signal company. Angwin commanded it in Gallipoli, Egypt, Palestine, and France, and was awarded the DSO and the MC, and was five times mentioned in dispatches. After the war he commanded the 44th (Home Counties) divisional signals and subsequently retained a close association with army signals for many years. In 1921 Angwin married Dorothy Gladys, daughter of Walter H. Back, of Exeter. There were three sons and a daughter of the marriage and they were an exceptionally united family. 
Angwin's identification with radio began after the war. His seniors in the Post Office recognized that they had a young engineer with knowledge of mechanical, civil, and electrical engineering, and used his ability to the full in the design and construction of the large radio stations at Leafield (Oxfordshire), Rugby, and Cairo. It was during this period that Angwin began his association with other radio engineers in the Post Office, such as George Lee, Edward Shaughnessy, and Archibald Gill. Together they built up the reputation of the engineering department's radio branch. Angwin took charge of it in 1928, and under his leadership they went on to develop the shortwave radio installations which gave Great Britain a predominating position in world telephony. 
In 1932 Angwin became assistant engineer-in-chief, in 1935 deputy, and in 1939, three months before the outbreak of war, engineer-in-chief. He was responsible for maintaining Post Office communications throughout the period of bombing. Furthermore, his wide knowledge of military requirements enabled him to be of exceptional assistance to the fighting services: he knew and helped to find the kind of equipment and the kind of engineers they needed. During these years of strain, which must have taxed a constitution which was never robust, those who were close to him did not once see him rattled. He continued to study calmly each problem submitted to him and, having done so, made his decision. 
Angwin's service in the Post Office was always in a technical capacity, but as engineer-in-chief he was also an assistant director-general and as such played an important part in shaping Post Office policies. His association and friendship with Sir Raymond Birchall, who later became director-general, and others did much to draw together the administrative and engineering sides of the Post Office. 
Early in 1945 Angwin accompanied Lord Reith on a tour to discuss with Commonwealth governments the future of the then privately owned Cable and Wireless Company. The trip was extremely arduous and involved flying 44,000 miles in six weeks. The government took over the company on 1 January 1947 and Angwin then retired from the Post Office to become its chairman. He had the difficult task of merging a private enterprise into a government-owned organization, but his understanding of the feelings of the staff did much to ease their resentment. He remained chairman until 1951 when, following Lord Reith's resignation, he was unanimously invited by all the Commonwealth governments concerned to become chairman of the Commonwealth Telecommunications Board. For the next five years he filled this office with distinction, furthering Commonwealth co-operation in all spheres of telecommunications. Lady Angwin did much to support her husband on his travels when, as chairman, he visited various Commonwealth countries. In 1954 he headed a delegation of the board to Australia and New Zealand. This was his last major overseas task; in 1956 he felt obliged to retire owing to ill health. 
Angwin was widely known in international circles. He made his name as chairman at the telecommunications conference at Madrid in 1932. Thereafter he represented the United Kingdom at international conferences at Lucerne, Lisbon, Bucharest, Cairo, Montreux, Bermuda, Moscow, and Atlantic City. His abilities as a chairman were outstanding. Despite the rival or vested interests with which delegates came to a meeting -- and these were many when frequency allocations were under discussion -- they went away feeling that his judgments had been fair. At home he was chairman of the Radio Research Board in 1947-52, and was also very much in demand for government and official committees, among them the first (1934) and subsequent committees dealing with television, in the development of which he was keenly interested. 
Angwin was always interested in the education of young engineers, and for some years was a member of the board of studies of the University of London. He was a member of council of the Institution of Civil Engineers and of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. In the latter he was chairman of the wireless section (1931-2), vice-president (1939-42), and president (1943-4), and was awarded the Faraday medal (1953), and made an honorary member (1956). Other honours included a fellowship of his old college, and the honorary degree of DSc (Eng) from London (1953). He was knighted in 1941, appointed KBE in 1945 and KCMG in 1957, and was awarded the Haakon VII cross of freedom for services to Norway in the Second World War. 
A great engineer, who did much to advance telecommunications, Angwin also held posts of high administrative responsibility. He had the rare gift of being able to inspire a team to work harmoniously together, and his staff always remembered him with affection. His counsel and kindly wisdom helped many of them round difficult corners. Angwin died at his home, 32 Guessens Road, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, on 21 April 1959. 
Gordon Radley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30422


Annandale, Thomas (1838-1907), surgeon, was born at Northumberland Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 2 February 1838, the second son of Thomas Annandale, surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Johnston. Annandale was educated at Bruce's academy in Newcastle, and was afterwards apprenticed to his father. He continued his professional studies at the Newcastle Infirmary and then matriculated in 1856 at Edinburgh University; he graduated MD in 1860 and received the gold medal for his thesis on the injuries and diseases of the hip joint. In 1860 Annandale was appointed house surgeon to James Syme at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, and he was Syme's private assistant from 1861 to 1870. In 1863 he was admitted FRCS (Edinburgh) and he became a junior demonstrator of anatomy in the university under John Goodsir. He was also appointed in 1863 a lecturer on the principles of surgery in the extramural school of medicine, and he gave an annual course of lectures there until 1871, when he began to lecture on clinical surgery at the Royal Infirmary. 
Annandale was admitted MRCS (England) on 15 July 1859, and FRCS on 12 April 1888; in 1864 he won the Jacksonian prize for his dissertation, 'The malformations, diseases and injuries of the fingers and toes, with their surgical treatment' (1865). He was appointed assistant surgeon to the Royal Infirmary at Edinburgh in 1865, and acting surgeon there in 1871. He then became regius professor of clinical surgery at the University of Edinburgh, in 1877, in succession to Joseph Lister. He was made honorary DCL of Durham University in April 1902, and was surgeon-general to the royal archers, the king's bodyguard in Scotland, from 27 May 1900 until his death. He had joined the corps as an archer in 1870. 
Annandale kept himself abreast of all the scientific changes which affected his profession. He took a keen interest in university matters and especially in the welfare of the students; he was prominent at the students' union and in the athletic club. 
In 1874 Annandale married Eveline, the eldest daughter of the Edinburgh publisher William Nelson ['see under 'Nelson family]; they had a family of three sons and three daughters. Annandale died suddenly on 20 December 1907, having operated as usual at the Royal Infirmary on the previous day. He was buried in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. The Annandale gold medal in clinical surgery was founded in his memory at Edinburgh University. 


@@@@@


doc= 30423


Anson, Sir William Reynell, third baronet (1843-1914), politician and college head, was born at Walberton, Sussex, on 14 November 1843, the eldest son of Sir John William Hamilton Anson, second baronet (1816-1873), and his wife, Elizabeth Catherine (died 1903), daughter of Major-General Sir Denis Pack. After three years at a private school at Brighton he went to Eton College, in 1857, becoming there after a time the pupil of Edmond Warre, later headmaster. In 1862 he matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, and after taking first classes in classical moderations and in the final classical school he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College in 1867, an event which was to determine his subsequent career. 
Anson was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, London, on 17 November 1869 (and became a bencher in 1900), and practised on the northern circuit. He succeeded to the baronetcy in 1873, when his father died in a railway accident, and in 1874 he was appointed Vinerian reader in English law at Oxford, the first of a notable series of appointments which led to a golden period for the Oxford law school. Anson at this time wrote 'Principles of the Law of Agency in its Relation to Contract' (1879). 
The Selborne royal commission of 1877 encouraged much thinking about the future of All Souls. Anson was one of the two college representatives who negotiated with the commissioners about new statutes for the college. Anson was a moderate liberal in politics and stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for West Staffordshire in the 1880 general election. In the university he was also a moderate reformer and he protected the college from the more dramatic proposals for its future (including the idea of C. H. Robarts that there should be a fusion between the college and the Bodleian Library). Anson's recommendations were seen by many fellows as radical in their day, though some observers have seen them as a chance missed. The new statutes gave the opportunity to All Souls to become a place of research by reforming the system of prize fellowships by examination, creating more research fellowships; they also altered the tenure of fellowships and the disposal of college revenues (a critical matter with the onset of the agricultural depression). One of the statutes advantaged the Bodleian financially when the college could afford it. Anson's own approach may be seen from his comment on his colleague J. A. Doyle: he believed 'that there was room for a college of an exceptional type, devoting itself through its professoriate and its library to university purposes, encouraging advanced study by the endowment of research, securing through a system of prize fellowships the continued interest in academic life of men engaged in public work, and yet retaining its old character as a collegiate society' ('Memoir', 71). 
In 1881 Anson was elected warden of the college, defeating Ernald Lane, the candidate of the college conservatives, who resented the new statutes. Anson was young, liberal, and the first lay head of the college. A lifelong bachelor, his sisters Elizabeth, Florence, and Gertrude lived with him in the warden's lodgings throughout his long tenure of office. His wardenship consolidated and extended the work he had already done through statute revision, and his guidance of the college's finances in developing its estates in north-west London protected it from the fall in agricultural rents and land values which severely affected many of the Oxford colleges. He was a careful and dedicated warden, secretly using his salary to benefit individuals (he personally paid the salaries of the research fellowships of S. R. Gardiner and C. H. Firth) and the Bodleian Library. His wardenship regained for All Souls a significant role both in Oxford and in British intellectual life. He promoted research among the fellows and attempted to make the college less self-regarding. Anson opened the college for university lectures and he encouraged the fellows to teach undergraduates, for many years personally tutoring Trinity College law students. From 1912 until his death he tutored the prince of Wales (later Edward VIII) on the constitution. Between 1874 and 1898 Anson was, in A. V. Dicey's view, 'the best teacher of English Law to be found in Oxford' ('Memoir', 86). He continued to write and was closely associated with the 'Law Quarterly Review'. The first volume of his 'Law and Custom of the Constitution' was published in 1886, with two further volumes in 1892 and 1908. Anson also edited the autobiography and correspondence of Augustus Henry Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton, in 1898, and he had privately printed as 'Ballads 'en termes de la ley'' (1894) some of the light verse -- often humorous -- which he wrote for the 'Oxford Magazine' (where it was signed XXX). 
Anson became vice-chancellor for Oxford University in 1898, but he resigned after a year to become one of the two MPs for the university; he held his seat unopposed until his death. He continued to be a moderate reformer in the university, chairing in 1897 a committee on degrees for women, which proposed a diploma -- a half-way house which pleased neither side; Anson also without effect suggested a national women's university, to remove women from the existing universities. He organized Curzon's defeat of Lord Rosebery for the chancellorship in 1907 (Curzon and Charles Oman being the first prize fellows elected under Anson's wardenship; Curzon was subsequently a strongly reforming chancellor). 
Like his colleague A. V. Dicey, Anson was a passionate opponent of home rule, the question which in 1886 was the occasion for his move away from the Liberal Party. He strongly opposed the 'Finance Bill' in 1909 and the 'Parliament Bill' in 1911, and in a letter to 'The Times' (31 March 1914) he was not far short of encouraging Ulster to armed resistance. But despite his authority as a constitutional expert he played little constructive role in the vigorous constitutional debates of the Edwardian period. He made something of a parliamentary name (though his weak voice made him an ineffective orator) supporting the 'Education Bill' in 1902. Midway through its passing, in August 1902, he became parliamentary secretary to the Board of Education and took day-to-day charge of the bill. He was ill at ease in the violently partisan debates on the bill (for whose original drafting he had had no responsibility). In 1903 he saw the 'London Education Bill' through the house and he was responsible for the implementation of the 1902 act, which provoked widespread civil disobedience by respectable nonconformists. He resigned with Balfour's government in 1905 and spoke for the Conservative opposition against subsequent Liberal educational measures. Although not partisan by character Anson, though continuing to be warden of All Souls, became a tory party spokesman in a period of exceptionally partisan politics. His loyal Conservatism was recognized, perhaps belatedly, by membership of the privy council in June 1911, in the coronation honours. 
Anson's works both on contract and on the constitution gained an enduring place in English legal writing. 'Law of Contract' was frequently revised, first by Anson himself, then by Maurice L. Gwyer and others, and latterly by A. G. Guest, under whose editorship the book in 1979 reached its twenty-fifth and centenary edition; it went on thereafter to a twenty-sixth edition. Anson himself revised 'Law and Custom of the Constitution'; the second volume was updated by A. Berriedale Keith in 1935, and again by Maurice L. Gwyer in 1957, who had also earlier revised the first and third volumes. Anson's works are characterized by judicious practicality. Whereas Dicey worked from general principles and argued sweeping interpretations, Anson was more historicist and more cautious. He directly attacked John Austin, but he implicitly commented on Dicey. Anson set out to delineate the general principles of contract through the analysis of a working system and he 'endeavoured... to state the law relating to existing institutions, with so much history as is necessary to show how they have come to be what they are' ('Memoir', 'Law of the Constitution', 1886, preface). His works were therefore in their day better guides than Dicey's, but they lack excitement for posterity. Anson was conscious of this point, remarking that Dicey 'has done the work of an artist. I have tried to do the work of a surveyor' (ibid.). Moreover, though historical in approach 'Law of the Constitution' in particular was based on a rather limited range of sources, sufficient for the time but confirming rather than advancing contemporary understanding. However, by setting out so clearly and cogently the usage and habit of contract and of the constitution Anson performed a notable service for a country and an academic and legal community notoriously hostile to synthesis. 
Anson was an active citizen, especially in institutions where state met church; he was chancellor of the diocese of Oxford from 1899 to 1912, a fellow of Eton College, and chairman of the council of Oxford House in Bethnal Green, London (he distrusted the Balliol initiative of Toynbee Hall); he was a trustee of the British Museum and of the National Portrait Gallery and was chairman of Oxfordshire quarter sessions from 1894 to 1914. A spry and always youthful-looking person, Anson suffered 'a severe personal loss' by the death on 5 March 1912 of P. F. Willert, his contemporary at Balliol and law tutor at Exeter College, Anson's 'dear and intimate friend', which distressed him greatly: 'he was part of one's life and associated with it in so many ways' ('Memoir', 214). Anson died at Oxford on 4 June 1914 after a short illness and was buried locally in Holywell cemetery. A recumbent effigy by John Tweed was placed in All Souls Chapel in 1918. Anson was a substantial benefactor of All Souls and of the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 30424


Anstey, Francis George (1865-1940), politician and author, was born on 18 August 1865 in York Road Hospital, Lambeth, London, the only son of the recently deceased Samuel Anstey (1837/8-1865), master shoemaker, and his wife, Caroline Martha (1840?-1922), daughter of Francis Gamble, distillery foreman. Anstey's childhood was unsettled. At three he was sent to live with the Ansteys near Witheridge, Devon, an area which lingered in his imagination. After Caroline had married the labourer John Lank on 25 September 1869, she reclaimed young Frank and the new family began a precarious working life on the railway extension from Settle to Carlisle, tramping through the north and midlands until finally settling at Silvertown, London. Caroline had two sons with Lank: Thomas Gamble, who was born on 10 January 1871 at Settle and William Wallace, born 27 April 1877 at London. Soon afterwards, in an act of youthful rebellion, Frank stowed away in the Blackwall clipper 'Melbourne' at the Victoria docks, before eventually jumping ship at Sydney; from there he worked as a cabin boy throughout the south Pacific and, later, as a seaman along the east coast of Australia, an experience he subsequently embellished into racy political parables. 
As a wharf labourer in Sydney, Anstey interested himself in the burgeoning labour movement's radical nationalism. In 1888 he settled in Melbourne, where, it appears, he married Catherine Mary Bell McColl (1865-1937) on or about 1 January 1889. Despite unemployment and temporary separation enforced by the economic slump, they had two children: Ward Eugene, who was born on 23 September 1889 at Melbourne and Daron, born on 31 May 1891 at Sale. Driven by adversity and restless energy, Anstey became a trade union and Labor Party activist: he helped to establish the labour weekly 'Tocsin' in 1897 and, in 1898, the Victorian Labour Federation, a short-lived co-operative modelled on the Belgian Workers' Party. 
Anstey won the Victorian legislative assembly seat of East Bourke Boroughs for Labor in 1902, then Brunswick in 1904, a seat he held until 1910. A stocky figure, given to extravagant gesticulation, Anstey was a forceful, occasionally vitriolic, parliamentary orator. He was particularly severe on moral reformers' attempts to restrict gambling and the liquor trade, conducting a robust defence of masculine working-class culture. An indefatigable organizer, he undertook several country recruiting tours, some with the English socialist Tom Mann. These informed his grand plan for the 'closer settlement' of rural Victoria by small farmers, inspired partly by an idealized Devonish yeomanry, and published as 'Monopoly and Democracy' (1906). In 1907 he returned to Britain, where he campaigned in the Jarrow by-election and reported on the Stuttgart congress of the Socialist International. 
In 1910 Anstey won the seat of Bourke in the commonwealth parliament, where he further developed his interest in the monetary system. In 1914 his socialist-inspired opposition to war brought him into conflict with old friends such as W. M. Hughes, whom he bitterly opposed in the 1916 Labor split over conscription. During the war he elaborated a populist political economy of finance capital, arguing that the 'money power' was a sinister, 'behind the scenes' force in modern capitalism. These publications began with 'The Kingdom of Shylock' (1915; rev. edn, 1917), and concluded with 'Money Power' (1921). He secretly departed for London, via the United States, in 1918, was appointed to an Australian press mission to Ireland and the western front, visited Paris during the peace conference, and went to Scandinavia to gather material for his book 'Red Europe' (1919). This dramatic account of the Russian revolution and civil war established him as a leader of Labor's left in the post-war 'red dawn'. In 1922 he was elected assistant leader of the opposition in the house of representatives, where he developed a robustly adversarial relationship with Stanley Melbourne Bruce, who calmly deflected Anstey's biting sarcasm, mocking irony, or gentle wit. But the passionate intensity that drove Anstey's theatrical oratory was unsuited to the steady, purposeful work of parliamentary leadership. In 1927, disgusted by factional intrigue, he returned to the back benches and, having no superannuation, took an interest in a New Guinea goldmine with the shadowy businessman John Wren. 
When the Labor government headed by J. H. Scullin was elected in 1929, Anstey was given the health and repatriation portfolio, which he conducted with reasonable competence under the guidance of talented public servants. However, he was dumped from the ministry in March 1931 because he supported the Lang plan in opposition to the deflationary fiscal policy recommended by the Bank of England's Sir Otto Niemeyer. Thereafter he retreated into an embittered cynicism, barely survived the December 1931 electoral landslide against Labor, and resigned his seat in 1934. He retired to a Bondi flat in Sydney, where he wrote fragmentary memoirs and tendentious historical sketches until his wife died on 21 November 1937. He returned to Melbourne to live with an old friend, Harriet Middlecoat, at 46 Park Street, West Brunswick, where he died of cancer on 31 October 1940. He was cremated at Fawkner cemetery, Melbourne, on 1 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 30425


Antal, Frederick (1887-1954), art historian, was born in Budapest on 21 December 1887, the only child of Alajos Antal MD and his wife, Sofia Gerstl. He first studied at the university of his native city, where he graduated as a doctor of law, but later he went to Vienna to study art history under Max Dvorak, for whom he wrote a thesis on French painting of the neo-classical and early Romantic periods. From 1914 to 1919 he worked in the print room of the Museum of Fine Arts at Budapest where, with Professor Johannes Wilde, he catalogued the collection of drawings. In 1917-18 he was sent to Udine by the Austro-Hungarian government to look after the works of art in Italian territory occupied by the Austro-Hungarian army. In 1919 -- at the time of the communist regime -- he was commissioned to make a record of paintings by old masters and the nineteenth-century French painters in private collections which had been confiscated by the state, and he organized a remarkable exhibition of them in Budapest. After the collapse of the communist regime he left Hungary, going for a short time to Florence and Vienna before settling in Berlin in 1922. In 1933 he went to England, where he lived for the remainder of his life, becoming a naturalized citizen in 1946. 
In Berlin, Antal devoted himself primarily to the study of sixteenth-century Italian and Flemish painting and was one of those who first clarified the meaning of the word 'mannerism'. He was deeply interested in the method of art history and was one of the founders of the 'Kritische Berichte', a short-lived journal which was mainly devoted to the critical examination of the literature of art history. In this and in other periodicals he published a series of important articles devoted to the stylistic examination of mannerist painting. 
At the same time Antal was working on what was to be the major undertaking of his life, a history of sixteenth-century Florentine painting. The text of this was finished in the late 1920s, but Antal decided not to publish it for two reasons. First, he had become increasingly interested in the Marxist interpretation of history and its application to his own special field of art history, and as a result he felt that he must master the social and economic history of Florence before he could write a full history of Florentine art. Second, he realized that the crucial revolution in the development of Florentine art had occurred in the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and that, in order to see the later history of Florentine art in correct perspective, it was essential to begin with an account of the earlier period, particularly since he saw Florentine mannerism as in some ways a revival of late Gothic art. By 1933 he had finished the draft of the first volume dealing with the period up to about 1430, and he spent much of his first years in England reworking it and collaborating with various English art historians in the difficult task of translating it. Publication was held up owing to the Second World War, and the book appeared in 1948 under the title 'Florentine painting and its social background: the bourgeois republic before Cosimo de' Medici's advent to power'. This work constituted a major contribution to knowledge of the early Renaissance, but it was also intended as a demonstration of how the Marxist interpretation of history could be applied to the arts. Its importance is widely recognized and it was translated into a number of languages; however, critics attacked it for being over-rigid in its attempt to link artistic phenomena with social and economic causes. 
During the war Antal devoted much time to the study of Italian sixteenth-century drawings in the Royal Library at Windsor Castle, the results of his research being incorporated in the catalogue published in 1949 by A. E. Popham and Johannes Wilde. 
In his last years Antal returned to his early interest in the eighteenth century and published a volume of studies on Henry Fuseli and his contemporaries, in which he analysed perceptively the connections between Fuseli's works and sixteenth-century mannerism. Even more important was his study of Hogarth, who fascinated him as an expression of English middle-class morality and culture. In his book on this artist (which was not published until 1962, after Antal's death) his methods were applied more flexibly and more subtly than in his book on Florentine painting. It has been described by a later scholar as 'the only serious and sustained' critique of Hogarth before the 1970s, 'a mine of insights' (Paulson, xxi-xxii). 
Many of Antal's most original ideas were published in the form of articles. The most important of these were republished in 1966 in a volume entitled 'Classicism and Romanticism, with other Studies in Art History'. This volume included his 'Remarks on the method of art history', originally published in 1949, which is a statement of his own credo. Antal never held a regular teaching post in England, although he occasionally lectured at the Courtauld Institute of Art in the University of London; but he exerted considerable influence on a small group of students, to whom his enthusiasm and his astonishing range of knowledge were an inspiration. 
In appearance, Antal was very tall with dark hair; his gaunt face, from which protruded very bushy eyebrows, generally wore a rather severe and vigilant expression. On 14 October 1936 Antal married Evelyn Foster ('b'. 1903/4), daughter of the Revd Thomas Foster Edwards, a Presbyterian minister. Three previous marriages had been dissolved. He had one son by his third marriage. Antal died at his home, 59C Marlborough Place, London, on 4 April 1954, and was survived by his fourth wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30426


Appleton, Sir Edward Victor (1892-1965), physicist, was born in Maperton Road, Bradford, Yorkshire, on 6 September 1892, the eldest child of Peter Appleton, of Eccleshill, Bradford, a warehouse clerk on the staff of Charles Senior & Co., and his wife, Mary Wilcock. 
In 1903 Appleton won a scholarship to Hanson School, Bradford, where he absorbed everything that his teachers put before him and showed a remarkable talent for grasping the significance of a subject as a whole. He obtained a first class in the London matriculation examination at the minimum allowable age of sixteen, and he passed the London intermediate examination the next year, again at the minimum age. Realizing the unusual ability of the young Vic (as his family always called him) his parents helped him to continue at school as long as possible. 
Music in the home, and sport outside -- especially cricket -- were Appleton's main interests until the age of sixteen when he became interested in physics and mathematics, largely through the influence of his school physics master, J. A. Verity. By then the fame of the Cavendish Laboratory as a centre for modern physical research, under Sir J. J. Thomson, was even reaching the schools and he was firmly determined to go to Cambridge. In 1910 he was awarded the Isaac Holton scholarship tenable at Cambridge and in 1911 he was awarded an exhibition at St John's College, Cambridge, where he read for the natural sciences tripos. He gained first classes in part one in 1913 when he received the Wiltshire prize, and in part two (physics) in 1914, when he also received the Hutchinson research studentship in mineralogy and the Hicken prize in physics. 
Appleton immediately began research with W. L. Bragg and helped in the unravelling of the structure of one or two metallic crystals. In 1914 he joined the 6th West Yorkshire battalion as a signals officer. His training with the Royal Engineers introduced him to the thermionic valve (then a new device which was little understood) and to problems of radio-wave propagation caused by interference. It was as a second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers that he married, on 23 May 1915, Jessie Longson-Range (1890/91-1964), a distant cousin, the daughter of the Baptist minister John Longson, sometime of Huddersfield, later of Canada; they had two daughters. 
In 1919 Appleton returned to Cambridge as a fellow of St John's College and in 1920 he became an assistant demonstrator in physics at the Cavendish Laboratory. Rutherford supported his research with Balth van der Pol into the behaviour of thermionic valves, vacuum tubes, and radio atmospherics which originate in lightning and cause signal distortion. He worked on the theory of free electrons colliding with heavy particles, particularly in a magnetic field, and did laboratory experiments to determine the radio frequency properties of ionized gases. 
In 1902 Oliver Heaviside and A. E. Kennelly had postulated a reflecting atmospheric layer of ionized gases to explain Marconi's 1901 transmission from Newfoundland to England. Appleton was aware of radio signals fading. In 1924 Miles A. F. Barnett helped Appleton's detailed experimental investigation, using the night-time availability of the new BBC transmitter at Bournemouth. A constantly varied frequency resulted in fading in and out over a distance of 70 miles. Altering the signal to achieve phase (coincidence of the ground wave and reflected sky wave) gave a direct estimate of the height of the 'E' or Heaviside layer at about 50 miles. This December 1924 result was confirmed by a polarization experiment which determined the angle of the reflected beam. Their crucial experiment was a breakthrough which demonstrated, for the first time, that radio waves were reflected when they fell steeply on the ionized part of the upper atmosphere (later called the ionosphere), and proved the existence of the Heaviside layer. Experimenting with long wavelengths, Appleton deduced that some variations were not usual double reflections off the E-layer, but direct reflection from an F-layer which he proved to be at 170 miles, now the Appleton layer. He then commenced a lifelong systematic investigation of the structure and electrical properties of the upper atmosphere. Between 1924 and 1929, to obtain critical radio frequencies to investigate the upper atmosphere, Appleton adopted the American method of using pulses over a selected range of frequencies. He had developed the Lorentz-Larmor electron theory, published in 1925, a magnetic-ionic theory, and the refractive index for propagation of radio waves along field lines. His 1937 Bakerian lecture showed how radio waves revealed conditions of atmospheric density and electron temperature and linked them to ionospheric magnetic variation controlled by the sun. These researches, the first distance measurements by radio, were of great technological significance for radio communication, and his experimental methods were used later by Robert Watson-Watt in the development of radar. For this long series of researches Appleton was awarded the Nobel prize in 1947. 
Appleton had been appointed in October 1924 to the Wheatstone chair of physics at King's College, London, and from there he set up an experimental field station near Peterborough where Barnett and others conducted researches under his direction. In 1932 the work was moved to a house in Hampstead. There were laboratories on the ground floor and a residence for Appleton and his family on the upper floors; since many of the experiments had to be made during the night this arrangement proved particularly convenient. 
In 1936 Appleton returned to Cambridge to the Jacksonian chair of natural philosophy; this was attached to the Cavendish Laboratory under Lord Rutherford, and on Rutherford's unexpected death, in 1939, Appleton found himself acting, for a short time, as head of the laboratory. 
When Bragg was appointed as the new director of the Cavendish, Appleton took the crucial step of leaving active scientific work to become secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR). Almost his first task was to turn the attention of the department from peacetime to wartime activities. He firmly believed that work on fuel, roads, buildings, engineering, and the like, would continue to be necessary, and he emphasized that it was not in the national interest to drain off all the best of the department's staff to service laboratories. His teams were turned to work on the protection of stored foodstuffs from insect attack, on the design of civil defence protection of buildings, and on studies with models for bombing attacks on enemy objectives. He was closely concerned with the wartime development of radar. 
As secretary of DSIR Appleton had control of the Tube Alloys project, Britain's organization of autumn 1941 for practical work on nuclear fission, initially directed by Sir Wallace Akers. Appleton was the link between the cabinet and Akers' teams. His demanding role was administration, securing and requisitioning rare materials and equipment, then arranging the relocation to Canada. His was an essential function in an untidy chain of interests until the whole project was handed to the Americans by the Quebec agreement (Clark, 120-28). 
When the war was over, Appleton returned, in 1949, to academic work as principal and vice-chancellor of the University of Edinburgh, positions he held until his death. There he proved to be an inspiring and imaginative leader, diplomatic, and responsive to students. However, he faced much criticism of his handling of the university building programme, and he failed to mollify the opposition. 
Up to 1939 Appleton was pre-eminently the leader in ionospheric research: in practically every point of importance his was the leading paper and it is fair to say that what was known about the ionosphere up to that time was almost entirely due to him, or to the research schools which he started and inspired. In 1950 he started the 'Journal of Atmospheric and Terrestrial Physics' and remained its editor-in-chief for the rest of his life. 
Appleton was an internationalist. Realizing that the observed behaviour of the ionosphere would depend on the position of the observer, Appleton played an important part in encouraging its study on a worldwide basis. He used the International Union of Scientific Radio for this purpose, and he was its president for eighteen years, from 1934 to 1952. 
Appleton never lost his deep interest in the ionosphere. Until the end of his life the little notebooks that he carried around with him contained ideas and suggestions about it, interspersed with suggestions and stories for his speeches. When an ionosphere worker visited him in his office some new results would probably be produced from a drawer and, forgetting the worries of the principal of a great university, Appleton would discuss and argue again, just as he had once done with members of his research teams. 
Appleton became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1927. He was appointed KCB in 1941 and GBE in 1946, and received decorations from France, the United States, Norway, and Iceland. He held honorary degrees from ten British and six foreign universities, and was honorary member or honorary fellow of several British and foreign scientific and engineering societies; he received medals from seven British and five foreign institutions. He published widely and in 1956 he gave the Reith lectures on the subject 'Science and the nation'. 
Appleton's wife died in 1964 and on 24 March 1965 he married Helen Shannon Allison ('b'. 1919/20), the widowed daughter of John Gordon Lennie. She had been Appleton's secretary for thirteen years, and had helped him to keep a little time for his own researches during the pressure of his other work. He died suddenly at his Edinburgh home, Abden House, Marchhall Crescent, on 21 April 1965, of heart failure, just one month after his second marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 30427


Arber, Agnes (1879-1960), botanist, was born at 26 Regent's Park Road, London, on 23 February 1879, the eldest child of Henry Robert Robertson (1839-1921), an artist, and Agnes Lucy Turner, a descendant of Robert Chamberlain (died 1798), ceramicist, of Worcester. Her brother Donald Struan Robertson (1885-1961) became regius professor of Greek at Cambridge University (1928-50) and her sister Janet, a painter. 
Agnes Robertson entered formal education at the age of eight and attended the North London Collegiate School for Girls, run by Frances Mary Buss, a leading proponent of education for girls. While at school Agnes came into contact with Ethel Sargant, in whose private, home-based laboratory she later worked during vacations. On leaving school Agnes commenced a degree course at University College, London (UCL), where she was one of many women students to study under Francis Wall Oliver. Agnes Robertson was awarded a first-class honours degree prior to winning an entrance scholarship to Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1899. Women were not awarded degrees by Cambridge University until 1948, but Robertson did achieve a further first-class pass in the natural sciences tripos in 1902. 
After working for a year in Sargant's laboratory Robertson returned to UCL, funded by a Quain studentship, and was awarded a DSc for her research. In 1908 she was, in addition, appointed to a lectureship alongside Oliver, Arthur Tansley, and Marie Stopes. However, the following year she left UCL to marry Edward Alexander Newell Arber (1870-1918), on 5 August, and join him in Cambridge, where he was demonstrator in the department of geology. He was the son of Edward Arber, emeritus professor of English literature. The couple had one child, Muriel Agnes ('b'. 1913), who became a teacher and geologist. 
Arber's research centred on the form of plants, both living and fossil specimens, for its own sake, and the light this could shed on subjects such as classification and evolution. The main body of her work (which in total included seventy scientific articles and four morphology books) was on the form of the major groups of flowering living plants. Her publications were characterized by distinctive diagrams and a thorough grounding in the history and philosophy of botany. Though allied to the 'new botany' of the late nineteenth century, Arber's comparative studies of plant form contrast with both the ecological and the mechanistic approaches that grew out of the new botany. 
The philosophy of plant form not only underpinned Arber's laboratory but was also reflected in a range of historical and philosophical publications (including four books) which have perhaps had a wider and more enduring impact. The first of these was 'Herbals: their Origin and Evolution' (1912), which looks back to the origins of botany. One of her later books, 'The Mind and the Eye: a Study of the Biologist's Standpoint' (1954), sets out a methodology for biological science. It is based on Arber's own research, which integrated detailed morphological studies with reflection on broader philosophical issues, such as Goethe's ideas on plant forms and archetypes. 
At UCL, Agnes Arber had worked with those who would go on to hold the most prestigious academic posts in British botany. Though well integrated into the professional botanical community through publication and educational background, she carried on her research work outside the expanding laboratories of a university. From 1910 to 1927 she worked in the Balfour Laboratory of Newnham College, one of the two women's colleges in Cambridge. 
The Balfour Laboratory was set up in 1884 with funds from Newnham students and benefactors to provide for the practical scientific education of the students of Newnham. Women were then not permitted to attend practical classes in the Cambridge University laboratories, though they were admitted to lectures alongside male students. During and after the First World War women were gradually admitted to practicals and due to the resulting fall in fee income the Balfour Laboratory went into decline. Arber continued to work in the Balfour, for much of the time unfunded, until in 1927 its sale to Cambridge University was finally completed, though not without acrimony. Professor Albert Seward, head of the botany school, offered Arber space in the botanic gardens (then not a research site) but she turned this down, preferring to set up a laboratory at home. 
Despite involvement early on in her career in the institutions and societies of the botanical establishment, Arber's later contact hints at a similar detachment to that shown by lack of institutional affiliation. Arber was active, before and after her marriage, in the botanical section (Section K) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) and was a fellow of the Linnean Society. Such was her standing that in 1921 she was appointed to the prestigious post of president of Section K. However, shortly after accepting this honour she was persuaded by Professor Seward to tender her resignation on the grounds that a certain portion of the male botanical community would not welcome a second female president the year after it had appointed its first, Edith Rebecca Saunders. 
The failure of the Royal Society to accept women as fellows until 1945 may have delayed further recognition of Arber's contribution to botany. However, in 1946 she was elected as fellow, only the third woman to be admitted to this prestigious scientific institution, and the first female life scientist to be awarded this honour. Her nomination was signed by many of the leading figures of British botany who cited her philosophical critique as well as her exact morphological studies as being important contributions to science. Arber died on 22 March 1960 at the Hope Nursing Home, Cambridge, and was buried at Girton. 


@@@@@


doc= 30428


Arber, Edward (1836-1912), literary scholar, was born on 4 December 1836 at 29 George Street, Hanover Square, London, the youngest of five children of Thomas Arber, architect, and his wife, Eleanor ('nee' Newell). He was educated first in London, then at the Institution Bellaguet, Paris (1852-3,) and King's College School, Strand, London (1853-4). He worked as a clerk in the Admiralty (1854-78), and entered night school at King's College, London, in 1858 where Henry Morley had a lasting influence on him. He became an associate of the college in 1867. 
On 4 December 1867 Arber announced a series of the English classics, 'designed to place the Masterpieces and the minor works of our mighty Past, in their original dress, within the easy reach of every reader of the English tongue' (advertisement in Milton's 'Areopagitica', 1868). The first 'English Reprints' (30 vols., 1868-71) 'price sixpence: post free, seven stamps' (ibid.) were published by Alexander Murray & Son, but in January 1869, Arber told W. C. Hazlitt that he no longer had 'business transactions' with Murray, 'only friendly relations', and in July he announced to the trade: 'Mr Arber is about to publish as well as edit [his 'English Reprints'] and has taken a house, no. 5 Queen Square... for the purpose' ('The Bookseller', July 1869). 
So friendly were the relations between publisher and editor that on 11 August 1869 Arber married Murray's daughter, Marion ('b'. 1838/9). They had two sons, Edward Newell Arber (died 1918), a Cambridge palaeobotanist, and Thomas Henry Arber, a clergyman. 
The 'English Reprints' were followed by 'An English Garner: Ingatherings from our History and Literature' (8 vols., 1877-96); 'The Scholar's Library of Old and Modern Works' (16 vols., 1880-84); 'The British Anthologies' (10 vols., 1899-1901); 'Selections from the English Poets' (10 vols., 1901); and finally, 'A Christian Library: a Popular Series of Religious Literature' (3 vols., 1907), the last of which displayed a fervent evangelical bias. Arber's aim throughout was to spread culture and love of English literature. 
On resigning from the Admiralty in 1878, Arber was appointed lecturer in English literature under Morley at University College, London, and when the Mason Science College (later the University of Birmingham) was founded in 1881 he became professor of English. He looked on teaching as an extension of his 'share in the great march forward, of the last 15 years in the availability of literature through cheap reprints, I [now] endeavour to carry out this work by 'speech'' (Arber to Henry Bradshaw, July 1884, CUL, Bradshaw MSS). He started with a mere handful of students -- 'Birmingham is more scientific than literary', he told Bradshaw (ibid.) but he worked with dedication, introduced Old and Middle English texts into the syllabus and in 1891 wrote: 'Our English department... now numbers 100 systematic students; to whom I am giving this Session 500 lectures in nine months... next session the number will be 140 or 150; 100 of whom will be women. Add to this, my share in the Examination of 4000 candidates annually... at the London University, and I think you will wonder that I have thought or effort for 'any' printing work. (Arber to Bradshaw, 25 Jan 1891, CUL, Bradshaw MSS)' Arber was made honorary fellow of King's College, London, in 1880 but in 1889 he failed to obtain the chair of English at University College, London. 
Arber resigned from Birmingham in 1894 to return to London and devote his time to research and publishing; Birmingham made him professor emeritus and he continued to examine for Manchester University and King's College, London. For many years he read for his friend James Murray's 'New English Dictionary' and supplied the earliest uses of hundreds of words, technical as well as literary. Arber encouraged the despondent lexicographer in many ways; an enthusiast for new technology, he advised that a typewriter 'would keep down the frightful cost of corrections... I consider this suggestion as good as giving you $100 towards the cost of the dictionary' (Arber to Murray, 29 Nov 1884, Bodl. Oxf., MSS Murray). 
In 1873 Arber took over the task from F. J. Furnival, with limited encouragement from the Stationers' Company, of transcribing the earliest registers and court books (1554-1640), amplifying them by a wealth of contemporary documents in the British Museum, Public Record Office, and elsewhere. He had to decide, against his principles, on a limited edition of 230 copies issued on subscription. Four volumes were in print by 1877, but the final index volume waited until 1894. He then turned to the early booksellers' quarterly lists, the 'term catalogues', which he considered 'a continuation of the literary record of... your Company's Registers, 1553-1640' (Arber to the master, 1 Oct 1900, Stationers' Company Archives). It was 'a great undertaking for a single-handed Scholar to carry out unaided' (Arber, 'Term Catalogues', 1.x) involving the checking of 'some 30,000 personal names' (ibid.) of printers, booksellers, and authors against copies of the books in the British Library, Lambeth Palace Library, the Bodleian Library, and Cambridge University Library. 'The Term Catalogues, 1668-1709' was privately printed in three volumes (1903-6). In 1905 Oxford made him a DLitt in recognition of his work. 
Arber's vast output of cheap reprints of literary works, both the well known and the obscure, filled the kind of student need later supplied by cheap facsimiles, but his reprints were overtaken by more scholarly editions and have become of mainly historical interest. 'The Transcript of the Stationers' Registers' and 'The Term Catalogues' are another matter; edited without the guidance and resources now available to scholars, they are, for all their idiosyncratic arrangement and typography, enduring research tools and a monument to Arber. 
Edward Arber was knocked down by a taxi on Kensington High Street, London, on 23 November 1912, and died of his injuries on the way to hospital. His burial took place six days later in Putney Vale cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30429


Arberry, Arthur John (1905-1969), orientalist, was born at 37 Beeston Street, Buckland, Portsmouth, on 12 May 1905, fourth of the five children of William Arberry, signal boatswain in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Sarah Ann Bailey. Arberry won a scholarship to Portsmouth grammar school and in 1924 went up as a scholar to Pembroke College, Cambridge. At school he had shown a talent for mathematics, but he decided to specialize in classics, having, as he wrote, 'read everything worth reading in Greek and Latin'. At Cambridge he attended the lectures of A. E. Housman. These lectures, which for Enoch Powell opened the door into the world of scholarship, Arberry found 'prodigiously erudite and prodigiously dull' (Arberry, 234). 
As an undergraduate Arberry coincided at Pembroke with the great Islamic scholar E. G. Browne, who died in 1926, and it was Browne's friend, Ellis Minns, who suggested that Arberry, who had just taken a first in both parts of the classical tripos (1925-7), should apply for the newly established Browne studentship in Arabic and Persian. Financed by this and by additional scholarship awards, he took a first in both parts of the oriental languages tripos simultaneously in 1929, and, after two years' work supported by Wright and Goldsmiths' studentships, in 1931 he was elected to a research fellowship at Pembroke. In 1932 he married Sarina Simons (died 1973) of Braila, Romania, and left Cambridge as he 'could not hope to support a wife on the slender dividend of a junior research fellow' (Arberry, 237). For two years he acted as head of the department of classics at the University of Cairo, where their only daughter was born. On their return to England in 1934 he took the post of assistant librarian at the India Office, where he remained until the outbreak of war in 1939. For most of the war he served in the Ministry of Information, but in 1944 he returned to academic life on being appointed to the chair of Persian at London University. In 1946 he became professor of Arabic and head of the Near and Middle East department, and in 1947 he left London to return to his old college at Cambridge, as Sir Thomas Adams's professor of Arabic, a post which he held for the remainder of his life. 
The years that followed were not only the most successful but, probably, the happiest of Arberry's life. He was elected as a professorial fellow of his old college and enjoyed singing in the chapel choir and sharpening his wits among his peers, including Ellis Minns, at high table. He had already obtained the degree of LittD at Cambridge (1936), and in 1949 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy, distinctions to which were later added an honorary DLitt from the Royal University of Malta and the Persian Nishan-i-Danish, first class, in 1964. At the start of his career he had worked in the field of Arabic-Greek translation, but he had been deterred by a hostile review and never returned, even though he later transcribed part of a hitherto unknown manuscript of Aristotle's 'Nicomachaean Ethics'. He claimed an early enthusiasm for neo-Platonism, which developed into a general interest in mystical philosophy under the guidance of his 'beloved master', R. A. Nicholson, who had perhaps the deepest influence on his career. It was Nicholson's failing eyesight which convinced Arberry that textual edition in Arabic and Persian was a young man's task, and his excellent edition of the 'Mawaqif and Mukhatabat' of al-Niffari had been published in his early years (1935). 
At Cambridge, Arberry was fond of drawing a comparison between the position of Arabic and Persian studies in the West and that of classical studies at the start of the Renaissance, with huge numbers of manuscripts uncatalogued and important texts unedited or at least untranslated. As far as Western scholarship was concerned, the magnitude of the task put it out of the range of the handful of professional academics who were being produced in each generation, and to Arberry the answer lay in a broadening of the appeal of the subject to attract interest and, eventually, recruits. He wrote: 'The most abiding lesson taught me by my four years under Brendan Bracken [in the Ministry of Information] was the relevance of publicity, in the broadest sense of the word, to oriental studies' (Arberry, 239). 
Arberry's personal contribution here was to be a series of translations from Persian, Arabic, and, in one case, Maltese. This played to his strength, in that he was a far faster worker than most of his colleagues and, as he would count on finishing what he was writing with a single revision of the original draft, he hoped to produce a book a year. This led to problems. He was criticized by colleagues for his easy choices, where he would pick works that had already been translated, and he left himself no time for extended analysis or the thorough development of ideas. His style as a translator was described as 'reminiscent of a large proportion of nineteenth century minor versifying' (private information) and, in particular, his reworking of 'Umar Khayyam was badly received. More importantly, however, the twelve-hour working day that he set himself could not be sustained indefinitely by his constitution, and after the completion of his translation of the 'Koran' (published in 1955), considered by some as his masterwork, his health gave way. He did not stop working and at times he could show his old quickness, but he felt himself that a spark was missing. 
Arberry had always disclaimed any liking for administration, although he threw himself into the work of planning and development which followed the acceptance by parliament in 1947 of the report of the committee on the provision for oriental studies, headed by Lord Scarbrough. Undergraduate teaching was something of a distraction; he refused to lecture on general topics and confined himself to going through set texts. By contrast his reputation attracted record numbers of research students and for those of them who knew him at his best he was an inspiring teacher. His achievements in the oriental faculty included the introduction of modern Arabic into a tripos that had until then been entirely classical, and the setting-up of a post in Turkish. Here his main hopes were centred on the establishment of a Centre for Middle Eastern Studies, which he saw as the extension of his life's work in the fields of Arabic, Persian, and Turkish. This, however, involved him in one of his two major disappointments. He had been put forward as a candidate in a Pembroke mastership election and, although he would have been in no state to act as master, he saw his failure in the election as an act of rejection and he complained that the college was no longer the friendly refuge that it had been. Then his Middle East Centre was not granted established status, which deprived it of an automatic source of funding. This he saw as a denigration of his life's work, and he could not even reflect with satisfaction on his publications. Some months before his death he is reported to have told a colleague: 'If I could have my time over again, I would not publish the things that I have done' (private information). 
This sad comment reflects what many of Arberry's friends felt at the time. To set against it, however, it must not be overlooked that his sixty or so books have reached a remarkably wide audience, in Britain, the Middle East, and, more recently, in eastern Europe, where they have done for his subject exactly what he hoped. More generally, he should perhaps be seen not as a modern scholar, but as a Renaissance man -- a lover of music, an artist who would enliven meetings by producing lightning sketches of his colleagues, a quick talker who enjoyed suggesting exotic solutions to improbable problems that he had raised, and a man who apparently saw no limits to his powers. He enjoyed paradox, both in language and in behaviour, refusing to read J. R. R. Tolkien, who, he said, had too Celtic an imagination, but describing in matter-of-fact terms the ghosts that he claimed to see. It is this Renaissance man that his friends remembered, with his bushy moustache and eyebrows, thick spectacles, and broad full face lit with a mischievous gleam of humour. No one who met him, even at his lowest point, can have failed to be struck by the fact that this was a remarkable man. Arberry died in Cambridge on 2 October 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 30430


Arbuthnot, Sir Alexander John (1822-1907), administrator in India, was born on 11 October 1822, at Farmhill, co. Mayo, the third son of Alexander Arbuthnot (died 1828), bishop of Killaloe, and his second wife, Margaret Phoebe, daughter of George Bingham. General Sir Charles George Arbuthnot (1824-1899) was his younger brother, and his uncles included Charles Arbuthnot, General Sir Robert Arbuthnot, and General Sir Thomas Arbuthnot. His father died suddenly in 1828, and his impoverished mother settled at Rugby in order that her sons might be educated by Dr Arnold. Alexander entered Rugby School as a foundationer in April 1832; among his friends and contemporaries were Arthur Stanley, Tom Hughes, and Matthew Arnold. The influence of the great Rugby headmaster remained with him for life, and it was Arnold who recommended his appointment as a junior writer in the service of the East India Company. 
Arbuthnot studied at the company's college, Haileybury, for two years (1840-41), winning distinctions in classics and Telugu. He left England in May 1842, arriving in Madras on 22 September. The following June, after winning an award of a thousand pagodas for distinction in Telugu and Hindustani (Urdu), he was assigned to active service, first as assistant collector in Chingleput and then in Nellore. On 1 February 1844 he married Frederica Eliza (died 1898), daughter of General R. B. Fearon. They had no children. In early 1845 he became head assistant to the registrar of the 'sadr' ('diwani' and 'faujdari') 'adalat', the institutional precursor of the high court. Here he compiled and published a selection from reports of criminal cases which had been heard before the 'sadr adalat' between 1826 and 1850, for which he wrote a historical preface. With his 'sadr adalat' appointment, he also held that of secretary to the so-called university board, which had charge of what later became Presidency College; and in 1855 he published 'Papers Relating to Public Instruction in the Madras Presidency'. This documented the developments in education since Sir Thomas Munro launched his survey of educational institutions in 1822, and coincided with the arrival of Sir Charles Wood's important education dispatch of July 1854. This fortuitous concurrence immediately led to Arbuthnot's appointment in March 1855 as the first director of the newly formed department of public instruction. Here he laid the foundations of the modern educational system for the entire presidency, organizing an inspectorate, opening district schools, and introducing the grant-in-aid system. He then worked out the scheme under which the University of Madras was incorporated in 1857. As one of its original fellows, and as vice-chancellor in 1871-2 (he was also vice-chancellor of Calcutta University, 1878-80), he was an avid champion of the policy of educating Indians to fill positions of public responsibility and service. The success of the educational system in Madras compared to elsewhere in India owed much to Arbuthnot's role in its early years. 
In October 1862 Arbuthnot was appointed chief secretary to the government of Madras, at Fort St George, becoming 'ex officio' a member of the legislative council. From 1867 he was a member of the executive council, and was senior member of the council when the governor-general, Lord Mayo, was assassinated in February 1872; Lord Napier went to Calcutta temporarily to serve as acting governor-general, and Arbuthnot stepped in as acting governor of Madras between 19 February and 15 May 1872. Having finished his term on the Madras council on 28 October 1872, he went to Britain on furlough, and two years later resigned from the Indian Civil Service. In 1873 he was gazetted KCSI, having previously declined the CSI, which he considered an inadequate recognition of his services. 
In the spring of 1875 Lord Salisbury, secretary of state for India, appointed Arbuthnot to the governor-general's council. He returned to India and took up his new post on 6 May, serving under Lord Northbrook and then Lord Lytton. In September 1876 Lytton nominated him lieutenant-governor of Bengal, but, having resigned from the Indian Civil Service, he was ineligible for the post. Arbuthnot swallowed his deep disappointment and continued to serve as home member of the governor-general's council. In that capacity he was largely responsible for coping with the great famine which afflicted southern India in 1877-8. On 1 January 1877 he took part in the great durbar at Delhi at which Queen Victoria was proclaimed empress of India, and his name headed the list of 'counsellors of the empress', a new order intended to function as an Indian privy council, but which in fact was never so constituted. He was made CIE in 1878. Much attached to the governor-general, Lord Lytton, he nevertheless exercised his judgement independently. In December 1877, due to dire financial circumstances, he objected to the reduction of duties on salt in Bengal and northern India, and consistently opposed attempts to reduce cotton duties, despite pressure from the Lancashire textile lobby. In March 1879, when he again voted with the majority against such a reduction, Lord Lytton overruled the council, and Lytton's veto was upheld by the Council of India in London. Arbuthnot also opposed Sir Louis Cavagnari's expedition to Kabul with a small escort, and in October 1879 his disapproval of Lytton's aggressive policy towards Afghanistan was formally minuted. Having supported the 'Vernacular Press Act' in 1878, he strongly disapproved of its repeal by Lord Ripon's government in January 1882, although Arbuthnot had already left India by this time. 
Arbuthnot's term of office ended in May 1880 and he returned to England, settling for the rest of his life at Newtown House, near Newbury, Hampshire. A generous local benefactor, he built a parish room and enlarged the village school before handing it over to the National Society. A staunch Conservative and churchman, he served for many years as a member of the Winchester diocesan conference and as chairman of the Andover division Conservative Association. India remained a preoccupation. In 1883, as chairman of the London committee to resist the 'Ilbert Bill', he spoke out vehemently and wrote against Ripon's government in India. He was much engaged in this period in journalistic and literary activity, regularly studying records at the India Office. Perhaps his most impressive publication, which appeared in 1881 (only a year after his return from India), was 'Sir Thomas Munro, bart., governor of Madras: selections of his minutes and other official writings'. This, accompanied by an introductory memoir which was republished separately in 1889, stands as his monument. He was also a regular contributor to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', from its first volume in January 1885; his fifty-three entries included those on Clive, Wellesley, Canning, and Munro. His biography of Clive, written for the 'Builders of Greater Britain' series (edited by H. F. Wilson), came out in 1898. 
On 1 November 1887, on Lord Cross's nomination, he joined the Council of India. During his ten years' term on the council he steadfastly supported the reimposition of cotton import duties in India. Assiduous in attendance at the India Office, he was outspoken in council deliberations to the day of his final retirement, 31 October 1897. He had served for fifty-five years, throughout which he had acquired a reputation for administrative energy and for blending courtesy and tact with a somewhat despotic nature. His wife died in 1898, and the following year (6 June 1899) he married Constance Angelena (died 1936), daughter of Sir William Milman, third baronet, and niece of Robert Milman, bishop of Calcutta. Arbuthnot died from heart failure on 10 June 1907 at 11 Duchess Street, Marylebone, London, and was buried in the churchyard at Newtown. At the time of his death he was compiling his own memoirs, which were subsequently completed and published by his widow, as 'Memories of Rugby and India' (1910). No serious study of Arbuthnot has ever been undertaken, nor does one seem likely. 


@@@@@


doc= 30431


Arbuthnot, Forster Fitzgerald (1833-1901), orientalist, was born at Belgaum, Bombay, India, on 21 May 1833, the second son of Sir Robert Keith Arbuthnot, second baronet, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Field Marshal Sir John Forster Fitzgerald (1784/5-1877). He was educated privately on the continent, at Anhalt and Geneva. He received a nomination to East India College, Haileybury, in 1851. 
Arbuthnot went out to India and joined the Bombay civil service in 1853. In 1879 he married Ellinor, daughter of Admiral Sir James Stirling and widow of James Alexander Guthrie of Craigie, Forfarshire. There were no children of the marriage. Arbuthnot retired in 1878. His last appointment was that of tax collector for Bombay city and island. He was remembered by his contemporaries for his carriage driving and for his seaside residence at Bandra, outside the island, where he entertained the explorer and scholar Sir Richard Francis Burton and his wife in 1876. 
Arbuthnot had already been initiated into oriental literature by Edward Rehatsek, an eccentric but learned Hungarian who led the life of a faqir at Bombay. Shortly after his return to England he associated himself with Burton in founding the Kama Shastra Society, for the issue to private subscribers of unexpurgated translations of oriental classics. He was active in commissioning the translation of Jami's 'Beharistan' and of Sa'di's 'Gulistan'. Burton dedicated the fourth volume of his 'Arabian Nights' to him, commending his critical appreciation of oriental literature. Arbuthnot's own books were popular compilations, the two most important being 'Persian Portraits' (1887) and 'Arabic Authors' (1890). A work of more permanent value was his inauguration of a new series of publications by the Oriental Translation Fund in 1891, which he launched with some translations by Rehatsek, and which was continued after his death through his bequests. 
Arbuthnot was a member of council and also a trustee of the Royal Asiatic Society, and he took a prominent part in organizing the reception of the international congress of orientalists that met in London in 1892. He was well known for his hospitality, both at his town house in Park Lane and at his country residence near Guildford. He took a lively interest in his village neighbours. His memory was preserved by the Arbuthnot Institute, Shemley Green. He died in London at the Grosvenor Hotel, Buckingham Palace Road, on 25 May 1901. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30432


Arbuthnot, Sir Robert Keith, fourth baronet (1864-1916), naval officer, was born on 23 March 1864, the eldest son of Sir William Wedderburn Arbuthnot, third baronet (1831-1889) and major, 18th hussars, and his wife, Alice Margaret (died 1889), fourth daughter of the Revd Matthew Carrier Tompson, rural dean and vicar of Alderminster, Worcestershire. He entered the navy as a cadet in 1877 on the training ship 'Britannia', and was promoted to sub-lieutenant in 1883, lieutenant in 1885, and commander in 1897. He succeeded his father as fourth baronet in 1889 and in 1897 married Lina (died 1935), only daughter of Colonel A. C. Macleay, Seaforth Highlanders. They had one daughter. 
Arbuthnot was in the naval intelligence department (1897-8) and badly injured in a gun accident in November 1901. Promoted to captain in 1902, he served as flag captain (1903-4) to Admiral Sir John Fisher when the latter was commander-in-chief, Portsmouth. In 1910, when captain of the battleship 'Lord Nelson', certain of his injudicious remarks about the German menace appeared in the press and were the subject of a formal German protest. The first sea lord relieved him of his command only to appoint him promptly to the Admiralty submarine committee (March-December) and then commodore of the third destroyer flotilla, a position he held from 1910 to 1912. He was aide-de-camp to the king (1911-12) and was promoted to rear-admiral in July 1912. In September 1913 Arbuthnot became second in command in Vice-Admiral Warrender's second battle squadron with his flag in the dreadnought 'Orion'. 
Arbuthnot had an awesome reputation as one of the great characters of the Royal Navy, feared by many if not most, but also given grudging admiration and respect. He is generally described as a martinet who insisted on following regulations to the letter without deviation and his harsh discipline on a few occasions got him in trouble with the Admiralty. His publication 'A Commander's Order Book for a Mediterranean Battleship' (1900), over 300 pages in length, became notorious. Nevertheless officers with distinguished careers ahead of them, such as Ernle Chatfield and Andrew Cunningham, came to respect him and the former found him a good friend. Much of this respect was due to the fact that Arbuthnot would not ask anything of anyone that he was not prepared to do himself. He was probably best remembered for his passion -- some would say obsession -- with physical fitness, which many thought was carried to seemingly grotesque lengths. When commander in a cruiser on the South American station he had midshipmen as part of a seven-point daily exercise run over the mast-head while he timed them with a stop-watch. As commodore in the destroyer flotilla he required ships' companies to land under arms and cover 5 miles in a set period of time. He excelled in a variety of sports and was also a passionate devotee of motorcycling. 
On 16 December 1914 Arbuthnot was in a position where initiative might have achieved important results; but his rigid adherence to discipline stifled his naturally aggressive instincts and a rare opportunity was lost. The Admiralty knew from intelligence that German battle cruisers would raid the north-east coast and they attempted to spring a trap with Admiral Beatty's battle cruisers and Rear-Admiral Goodenough's light-cruiser squadron supported by Warrender's dreadnought squadron. However, the Admiralty's intelligence was incomplete for they failed to realize that the high sea fleet would also be out in support and at one point the six dreadnoughts of Warrender and Arbuthnot were perilously close to fourteen dreadnoughts and eight pre-dreadnoughts. Fortunately, the Germans in the squally weather and poor visibility turned away after clashing with Warrender's advance screen of destroyers, convinced that this was the entire Grand Fleet. Warrender's squadron might have intercepted one group of German light cruisers and destroyers returning from the raid. Arbuthnot reported them in sight but, despite the entreaties of his flag captain Frederic Dreyer, who had trained their turrets on the leading German cruiser, refused to open fire until he had received orders from Warrender to do so. Warrender, however, merely reported the sighting and sent three armoured cruisers in pursuit. The Germans escaped and Dreyer believed from his subsequent silence over the incident that Arbuthnot regretted his rigid adherence to orders. 
In January 1915 Arbuthnot received command of the 1st cruiser squadron, four large but now obsolete armoured cruisers. After several months Jellicoe noted that there was trouble in the squadron, probably caused by Arbuthnot's excessively high ideals, but still expected he would be invaluable in any action and had the highest opinion of him. At the battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 Arbuthnot, flying his flag in 'Defence', showed that this time he was not lacking in initiative, but his judgement was questionable and the results were tragic. Arbuthnot's squadron had been screening the starboard half of the Grand Fleet's front and, while the fleet was deploying and Beatty's battle cruisers and the 5th battle squadron were in the process of rejoining Jellicoe after their initial engagement with the German battle cruisers, Arbuthnot moved out into the space between the major fleets with three cruisers to engage the advancing German light cruisers. Unfortunately he came into close contact with the German battle cruisers and dreadnoughts, who poured a devastating fire into his cruisers. 'Defence' blew up and sank with all hands, 'Warrior' survived badly damaged but later sank while under tow. Exactly what Arbuthnot had been trying to accomplish has been a matter of debate ever since. Much has been made of an earlier conversation with Chatfield (then captain of the 'Lion') in which Arbuthnot declared his intention in battle of taking up his assigned position at the rear of the battle fleet by proceeding down the engaged rather than disengaged side, but Jellicoe's deployment to port would have eliminated the need to do this since Arbuthnot's squadron would have been close to its assigned position. He may have thought that his duty was to assist Beatty although he actually disturbed the latter's movements by interrupting his fire and causing a near collision with the 'Lion'. He was apparently concentrating his fire on the crippled light cruiser 'Wiesbaden' when the heavy German ships appeared. Arbuthnot's end was spectacular and, while none can deny his great gallantry, the sacrifice of his life and over a thousand of his men was unnecessary. He was posthumously made KCB in the Jutland honours. 


@@@@@


doc= 30433


Arch, Joseph (1826-1919), trade unionist and politician, was born at Barford, Warwickshire, on 10 November 1826, the son of John Arch ('b'. 'c'.1793), a shepherd, and Hannah Pace ('c'.1783-1845). Before her marriage his mother worked as a domestic servant in Warwick Castle, and she and John Arch (her second husband) were married on 12 October 1818 at Barford. 
Arch was the youngest of four children, and his childhood, though by no means easy, was not marked by the terrible poverty of some of his contemporaries. Although his father was occasionally out of work, the fact that the family (unusually) owned their own cottage probably saved them in the region of $3 per year in rent, and the large garden that went with it gave them a degree of independence. As a result, Joseph was able to attend Barford endowed school for three years from the age of six until nine, and there learned to read and write. However, like those around him he was then forced to work scaring crows. After a year he became a ploughboy and later a stable-boy. During these years, and for many afterwards, he continued his education at home, deriving his learning, with his mother's aid, from the 'Bible' and 'The Pilgrim's Progress'. 
Arch's mother was a strong-willed and determined woman, and her death in 1845 affected Arch deeply. In February 1847 he married Mary Anne Mills, a domestic servant, the daughter of Isaac Mills, a carpenter. Between their wedding and 1864 they had seven children, four boys and three girls. Marriage forced Arch to look for better-paid work and in the late 1840s he became a hedger and ditcher. At this he excelled, winning prizes in agricultural shows in the early 1850s. Additional work as a self-employed roofer and carpenter, allied to the freehold of a cottage, gave him real independence of master and squire. Soon after his marriage he became a Primitive Methodist preacher, and in 1849 he was involved in the purchase of land for a Methodist chapel in Barford: an act which angered local churchmen and farmers. In the 1860s he became active in Liberal politics, especially at the election of 1868 where he used his freeholder's vote for the first time, and, more importantly, seems to have built up contacts with local Liberal 'grandees'. 
In 1872 Arch's name, already probably well known in his own area of Warwickshire, was pushed into national attention. On 7 February that year, at the invitation of a group of labourers, he addressed a meeting in the nearby village of Wellesbourne with the object of forming a trade union for farm labourers. The meeting was a great success and in the next two months Arch, who gave up his other work, tramped around north Warwickshire addressing meetings and building the union. In this his local contacts with Liberalism helped. J. E. Mathew Vincent, Liberal proprietor of the 'Royal Leamington Chronicle', gave detailed coverage of the meetings in the pages of his paper. At the end of March the 'Daily News' sent Archibald Forbes, its best-known correspondent, to cover the movement, ensuring Arch national coverage. 
The movement grew rapidly, especially in the midlands and East Anglia, and often raised wages on a local basis. However, a number of tiny local disputes and strikes ended in bitterness and defeat. On 29 May 1872 at the new Hippodrome, Leamington Spa, a conference was held to create a national union with Arch as president. In the next year the National Agricultural Labourers' Union (NALU) spread through much of midland and eastern England, bringing into its fold many of the local organizations created spontaneously in the early months of 1872. By mid-1873 it had 71,835 members and by the following year 86,214. In addition there were probably another 30,000-40,000 unionized farmworkers in other organizations. In all this Arch was a central figure. He was a superb orator, who drew on the common culture of the King James 'Bible' and religious nonconformity which had shaped him and many of his hearers. He was also an able publicist, seizing any opportunity to use a local injustice or disagreement to push forward the union's cause. The growth of the union had something of the fervour of a religious revival in these years. 
In the spring of 1874, however, a group of Cambridgeshire and Suffolk farmers decided to take on the union. In response to a local strike at Exning in Suffolk in February 1874, the Newmarket Farmers' Defence Association, which extended throughout the eastern counties, instructed its members to sack all trade unionists. By 23 March 2500 men were locked out, and by May this figure had grown to 5000 nationally. Despite a 'procession' of locked-out labourers to the major industrial areas and widespread support from the urban labour movement, Arch came increasingly to believe that the battle was lost. By August the lock-out had cost the union the enormous sum of $24,432 and Arch and the committee urged the men to return to work. It ceased to issue strike pay on 10 August. The bitterness of the eastern counties' lock-out broke the union as a national industrial force, and the movement was split, with many members returning to local unions and blaming Arch for over-ambition. In consequence, the membership of the NALU declined rapidly and by 1880 had fallen to less than 20,000. Continued problems and the onset of agricultural depression in 1879 further weakened its resolve; and despite a brief revival in the early 1890s it collapsed totally in 1894 and was formally dissolved in 1896. 
Arch himself, however, became increasingly involved in national politics. As early as 1868 he had been attached to the Liberal cause in Warwickshire and prominent Liberals had been supporters of the union movement from the start (Frances, Lady Warwick, became a friend and, effectively, a patron). With the increasing demand for the enfranchisement of the farm labourer this mutual support was obviously beneficial to both. In 1880 Arch stood unsuccessfully for Wilton in Wiltshire, a borough seat which nevertheless contained a fair proportion of farm labourers who had the franchise under the 1867 act. During the next three years Arch pressed on other political fronts, most notably land reform and game law reform, but it was the vote for the rural labourer, granted finally in 1884, which most concerned him and the union. At the general election of 1885 he successfully contested North-West Norfolk as a Liberal, beating Lord Henry Bentinck by 640 votes. 
Arch's parliamentary career was cut short by the defeat of Gladstone's ministry in June 1886. Arch returned to fight North-West Norfolk to find, as elsewhere, that his support of home rule was not as popular as he had thought, and he was beaten by Bentinck by twenty votes. The defeat was a blow and for the first time a note of bitterness at what he saw as his betrayal by the labourers began to creep into Arch's speeches. To him the place in parliament and the friendship of the powerful and great was the logical end of what had begun in Wellesbourne and to be denied it angered and hurt him. He continued to speak and act for the union but many began to feel his personal style was becoming autocratic and vain. He easily regained North-West Norfolk in 1892 and this time he stayed, holding his seat against national trends in 1895. As an MP who stood firmly within the Liberal Party, Arch believed, like other so-called 'Lib-Lab' members, that the interests of the working classes were best served there rather than with independent labour representation. 
In parliament, however, Arch made little impact. His genuine power as a speaker seems not to have worked in the chambers of Westminster and he became little more than an ornament to the Liberal Party. He was also ageing and the years of struggle were beginning to make their mark. In March 1894 his wife died and the continuing decline of the union threatened to remove his only source of finance. That at least was dealt with by the purchase of an annuity of $157 presented to him by his Liberal friends in 1897. In 1898 he published his autobiography, edited for him by Lady Warwick. He continued in parliament but in May 1899 'The Times' spoke of him as 'exceedingly feeble and aged' and he retired at the dissolution of 1900. He was succeeded by Sir George White, also a Liberal, when Norfolk as a whole went against the national trend in the 'khaki' election. 
On 27 December 1899 Arch married his former housekeeper, Miriam Blomfield, and they returned to the cottage of his birth, living there until his death. In his retirement Arch withdrew completely from politics and grew bitter about the labourers who he claimed had deserted and betrayed him. He showed no interest in the re-forming of the union in Norfolk in 1906, and in fact dismissed it as temporary. Significantly, he also broke his connections with Methodism. He had ceased to be a trustee of the Wesleyan chapel in Barford in 1890 and his second marriage took place in the Church of England. 
Arch was a remarkable man with a striking appearance: tall and powerful, with a beard outlining his jaw, he always wore a tweed suit and billycock hat to parliament, marking himself out by his origins. His contribution to the history of the rural poor was fundamental, yet has often been exaggerated. Vanity led him to overestimate his role, and this has been reinforced by the reliance placed by many historians on his own account of his life and the union published in 1898 as 'Joseph Arch: the Story of his Life'. Nevertheless, the men and women who followed him forgave that. As a Norfolk labourer, Josiah Sage, a member of his union and its successor, wrote, 'never before the days of Arch, nor yet since, have the ranks of the agricultural labourers produced such a man' (Sage, 50). Arch died at The Cottage, Barford, Warwickshire, on 12 February 1919, and was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30434


Archer, James (1822-1904), painter, was born in Edinburgh on 10 June 1822, the eldest child of Andrew Archer, dentist, and Ann Cunningham, his wife. His sister was Georgina Archer (1827-1882). He was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh. Afterwards he entered the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh, studying under William Allan and Thomas Duncan. In November 1840 he was accepted as a student at the life school of the Royal Scottish Academy and he attended classes there until 1852. His association with this school continued in the role of visitor between 1858 and 1862. He was, together with James Drummond and Joseph Noel Paton, a signatory to the 'Report on the Conduct of the Life Academy' (1858), which proposed the future direction of the academy's life school. It stressed the absolute importance of drawing as opposed to colour and composition, which Robert Scott Lauder had propounded at the Trustees' Academy, and Archer's own painting reflects this emphasis with its carefully worked line and meticulous attention to detail. 
James Archer first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1842, with the biblical 'The Child St John in the Wilderness'. However, from the very beginning of his career he built up a successful practice in portraiture. He worked in oil, pencil, and chalk and among his sitters was Professor William Edmondstoune (1855; Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh). Although he also painted a few Scottish landscapes during this period he turning increasingly to biblical and literary subjects as the years went by. As a sign of early success he was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1850 and an academician in 1858. His diploma work, 'Rosalind and Celia' (1854; Royal Scottish Academy, Edinburgh), is characteristic of his work of this period. Taken from Shakespeare's play 'As You Like It', it enabled Archer to portray two elegantly dressed young women in sumptuous surroundings. The drawing and detail are finely worked, reflecting the work of his contemporary William Fettes Douglas, and of John Everett Millais, whose painting 'Mariana' (1851; Tate collection), had been exhibited in the Royal Scottish Academy in 1852, thus bringing Pre-Raphaelite painting to the notice of artists in Scotland. 
In 1859 a group of artists decided to establish their own artillery unit in response to the patriotic volunteer movement which spread across Britain from the fear of possible invasion from France. Thus the no. 1 company of the City of Edinburgh Volunteers (Artists' company) was formed. James Archer was appointed its second lieutenant and was involved in its organization and ceremonial functions. He resigned in May 1860 because he had plans to leave Edinburgh and, like many of his contemporaries, he chose to settle in London where he continued his portrait painting practice. 
During this period he painted three portraits of Professor John Stuart Blackie of Edinburgh University, Greek and Celtic scholar, the most important of which (1873; Royal Scottish Academy) depicts a full-length view of the windswept academic, wrapped in a plaid and before a fast-flowing stream in a wild, moorland setting. Reminiscent of Millais's portrait of Ruskin at Glenfinlas (1854; priv. coll.) it lacks the fineness of detail of Millais's painting but successfully places the sitter in context. During this period Archer became particularly interested in Arthurian legend. Starting with 'La Morte d'Arthur' (1861; Tate collection), a romanticized costume drama in a landscape setting, Archer moved on to paint for example 'The Parting of Arthur and Guinevere' and 'The Dying King Arthur' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy 1865 and 1880 respectively). Other late subjects included Jacobite themes and stories of early Christianity, for example 'St Agnes, one of the Early Christian Martyrs' (1886) which he wished to swap with 'Rosalind and Celia' as his Royal Scottish Academy diploma work. This former work, as with most of Archer's paintings, was signed with his monogram, JA transfixed by an arrow. 
In the 1880s Archer travelled abroad in an attempt to bolster his career. He visited the United States in 1884 and there painted Andrew Carnegie's portrait. In 1886 he set sail for India in the hope of finding more patronage there. As well as portraits he painted the landscape and colourful costumes of India. He had returned to London by 1891. 
In the late 1840s in Edinburgh Archer had been a member of the Smashers Club. This was an informal association of artists who met to sketch together, to criticize each others' work, and to enjoy each others' hospitality. The other members at this date were John Ballantyne, William Crawford, William Fettes Douglas, John and Thomas Faed. It foundered when most of its members moved to England, but was re-formed again in London in 1863 as the Auld Lang Syne Club. Later, in the 1880s and 1890s, Archer served as secretary to another group called the London Scottish Artists. This body of expatriate Scots met each year at a dinner held to coincide with the Royal Scottish Academy's banquet at the opening of each year's annual exhibition. In 1891 Archer made a series of sketch portraits of the London Scottish Artists which he presented to the Royal Scottish Academy. These included William Orchardson, John Pettie, and John MacWhirter (Scottish National Portrait Gallery). 
James Archer married Jane Clerk, daughter of James Lawson, writer to the signet, on 1 August 1853, and they had one son and three daughters. He was a dapper, stylish dresser, bearded, and of slender build. When he moved to London, Archer first settled at 21 Lower Phillimore Gardens, later moving to 7 Cromwell Place, South Kensington. In the 1890s he moved to Milford, Surrey, and by 1903 settled in Haslemere. He died at Shean, his home at Haslemere, on 3 September 1904, and was buried in Haslemere. He was survived by his son and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30435


Archer, William (1856-1924), theatre critic and journalist, was born at 6 North Methven Street, Perth, Scotland, on 23 September 1856, the eldest son of the nine children of Thomas Archer (1823-1905) of Glasgow and his wife, Grace Lindsay Morison (1832-1911), the daughter of James Morison of Perth. 
An inveterate itinerant, Thomas Archer roamed Norway, Australia, and California before his marriage in 1853 in Perth, Scotland. He then returned to Gracemere (named for his wife) in Australia for the three years before William was born. The Archers belonged to the separatist Glasite sect with its emphasis on individualism, moral principles, rationalism, and anti-clericalism, which left their marks on the boy; fortunately, he was untainted by the sect's anti-theatricalism. Influential, too, were his father's treks around Britain to find employment. Consequently, Archer was educated at numerous schools: the Perth and Dollar academies (Scotland), Solent grammar school (Lymington), Reigate grammar school, and George Watson's College (Edinburgh). He read widely, and, through visiting relatives in Larvick, Norway, became fluent in Norwegian. When he was twelve and his family was living near London, he discovered the theatre and became an avid theatregoer. He was particularly entranced by pantomimes at Drury Lane. 
When his family returned to Gracemere in 1872, Archer remained in Scotland, having secured a bursary to study English literature, moral and natural philosophy, and mathematics at Edinburgh University. In Edinburgh he saw bad stock theatre at the Princess's Theatre as well as much better London touring companies which exposed him to T. W. Robertson's plays, in which he witnessed the glimmerings of an English dramatic revival. While still at university, he secured a position in 1875 at the 'Edinburgh Evening News', writing leader articles for an annual salary of $80. After graduating with an MA in 1876, he visited his family in Australia for a year; the trip was not successful since the entire family was reticent and emotionally undemonstrative. Archer agreed reluctantly to his father's proposition to study for the bar as a secure and respectable profession. 
Archer returned to Edinburgh and the 'Evening News' (1877-8) while awaiting his move to London. He and two friends created a minor furore with their 'The Fashionable Tragedian' (1877), in which they attacked Henry Irving and his style of acting for preventing real growth in the theatre. Interestingly this immature work advocated a national theatre, one of Archer's enduring goals, and marked the beginning of his missionary zeal for reforming the theatre. 
Archer moved to London in 1878 and was admitted to the Middle Temple. He studied law grudgingly and qualified for the bar in 1883, but never practised. He preferred the reading-room of the British Museum, and supported himself as the theatre critic of the 'London Figaro' (1878-81). He subsequently held similar positions at 'The World' (1884-1906), 'The Tribune' (1906-8), 'The Nation' (1908-10), and 'The Star' (1913-20), and over the years contributed countless books reviews and articles to the 'Pall Mall Gazette', 'Daily Chronicle', 'Morning Leader', 'Daily News', and many other newspapers. 
The English stage was still finding its way after Robertson's efforts to establish realism. Melodrama, farce, and adaptations from the French remained the vogue, and no English playwright matched Ibsen's achievement in social drama, which Archer embraced as the model for serious theatre. His own translation of Ibsen's work usually known as 'The Pillars of Society' (entitled 'Quicksands') received a matinee performance at the Gaiety Theatre on 15 December 1880, but the production was hurriedly mounted, was not well received, and created little interest. The following year he met Ibsen during a tour of Italy, and thus began an enduring relationship of mutual respect, fostered by Archer's translations and productions of Ibsen's plays. 
During that same Italian tour Archer met Frances Elizabeth Trickett (1855-1929), the youngest of the eight children of John Trickett, a retired engineer. Frances was accomplished, speaking French, Italian, and German, and, with her family, she and Archer journeyed through France and Switzerland. They married on 23 October 1884, and had one son, Tom (1885-1918), who was killed in action in the First World War. Frances was a sympathetic and supportive wife, but the marriage was never a passionate one, particularly from 1891 onwards, when Archer began a relationship (lasting for the rest of his life) with the actress Elizabeth Robins (1862-1952) (herself an ardent theatre reformer), and Frances devoted herself to her Nerve Training Colony in the Hertfordshire countryside. 
Another profound long-standing relationship began in 1883 when Archer encountered George Bernard Shaw in the British Museum. They attempted a collaboration on a play, which Archer quickly abandoned but which Shaw later turned into 'Widowers' Houses' (1892). Archer also procured various journalistic assignments for the impecunious Shaw, including in 1886 that of art critic of 'The World'. Their intimate friendship could also be very turbulent, since both men were forthright and honest. Shaw respected Archer's intelligence and integrity, and penetrated his formality and deliberately cultivated dour Scots facade. Archer thought Shaw brilliant if perverse, and concluded that he never achieved his great potential because he was too much a jester. 
In 1882, in 'English Dramatists of Today', Archer argued that the prospects for the English theatre resided with Henry Arthur Jones and Arthur Wing Pinero, although neither playwright had then written a serious drama. However, Pinero soon fulfilled Archer's prophecy with 'The Profligate' (1889) and 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' (1893), plays produced in the mainstream theatre. Archer (by now a handsome, tall, well-built man with a moustache) was also becoming more prominent and significant as a critic with his books 'About the Theatre' (1886), 'Masks or Faces?' (1888), and the five-volume collection of his 'World' articles entitled 'The Theatrical 'World'' (1894-8). Concurrently he helped direct his translation of Ibsen's 'A Doll's House', staged at the Novelty Theatre on 7 June 1889 for twenty-four performances. He was meticulous in his attention to expressive details, concerned always at achieving thoroughly realistic effects. He did so again with the Independent Theatre's notorious production of 'Ghosts' (Royalty, 13 March 1891), and with 'Hedda Gabler' (Vaudeville, 20 April 1891), in which Elizabeth Robins gave a brilliant performance as Hedda. Interestingly, he scrupulously refused payment for the use of his translations and successfully camouflaged his close involvement in the productions. 1891 also saw the completion of Archer's five-volume edition of Ibsen's prose dramas (Archer's 'The Collected Works of Henrik Ibsen' appeared in eleven volumes, 1906-8). 
Another theatrical venture with Elizabeth Robins was the New Century Theatre, one of several fringe theatre societies spawned in this period to stage plays not acceptable in the regular commercial theatre. Their first production in 1897 was Ibsen's 'John Gabriel Borkman', but neither this nor the two following productions were successful and the organization languished. 
A visit in 1899 to America, which had always entranced Archer, yielded a series of articles of social and political observations for the 'Pall Mall Gazette', published collectively as 'America Today: Observations and Reflections' (1900). Later overseas travels resulted in 'Through Afro-America: an English Reading of the Race Problem' (1910) and 'India and the Future' (1917); neither embraced particularly tolerant attitudes towards native customs and practices, although Shaw characteristically praised the latter work for its necessarily painful incisiveness. Far more palatable was Archer's investigation of the Spanish government and Catholic church's culpability in the death of the radical teacher Francisco Ferrer, published in 1911 as 'The Life, Trial and Death of Francisco Ferrer'. Theatrical matters suited Archer best: for example, he wrote a manual on how to write plays, 'Play-Making: a Manual of Craftsmanship' (1912), which began bluntly with 'there are no rules for writing a play'. Earlier, he had collaborated with Harley Granville Barker (1877-1946) on a proposition for the establishment of a national theatre, published privately in 1904 as 'Scheme & Estimates for a National Theatre', which considered all the practical aspects of such an enterprise as well as possible repertories. 
Archer regarded Granville Barker, with whom he enjoyed a father-son relationship, as a true man of the theatre and greatly admired his plays. Chief among these was 'The Voysey Inheritance' (1905), produced during Granville Barker's joint management with J. E. Vedrenne of the Royal Court Theatre from 1904 to 1907. The same seasons also established Shaw as a major dramatist. The banning of Granville Barker's 'Waste' by the censor in 1907 plunged Archer again into the censorship controversy. Unlike an earlier foray in 1892, more dramatists sided with Archer, and by 1909 yet another government committee of inquiry was instituted, which resulted predictably in inaction. Such setbacks were balanced when, in 1908, the king of Norway conferred on him the honour of knight first class of the order of St Olav. 
When the First World War erupted, Archer wanted to help his country as he had done during the South African War, when he had enlisted in the Inns of Court Rifles. Then he was still young enough to drill and take part in manoeuvres, although he was a conspicuously poor soldier. Now his age confined him to the War Propaganda Bureau, while his son, Tom, faced active duty with the London Scottish regiment. So, although dissatisfied, he produced a series of propaganda pamphlets and hoped the war might be succeeded by socialism. He also wrote a propagandistic play about the 1914 German destruction of Louvain entitled 'War is War', published in 1919 but unperformed. After the war he worked with various precursor organizations to the League of Nations, and became, for example, part-time secretary for the League of Free Nations Association. 
Archer was, however, unimpressed by post-war drama, although he saw potential in John Galsworthy's 'The Skin Game' (1920). Ironically, when Archer himself wrote a play in this period it was the melodramatic and highly successful 'The Green Goddess' (Philadelphia, 1920; London, 1923). He candidly admitted the play, inspired by a dream, had little literary value and that it was essentially a money-spinner for his old age. He was still advocating improvement in the theatre, as his work in revitalizing the Memorial Theatre at Stratford upon Avon and his 'Old Drama and the New' (1923) attest. 
Archer's career ended rather abruptly when a cancerous tumour was discovered in his left kidney. On 20 December 1924 he underwent an operation in a London nursing home (56 Hallam Street) to remove it, and he died there of post-operative complications on 27 December. Against his wishes, his wife arranged a small funeral three days later at All Saints' Church, Kings Langley, where he was buried, which was attended by only a few family members. Elizabeth Robins and the theatrical profession (except for E. A. Baughan representing the Critics' Circle) were absent. 
Archer was a clear, logical man whom some saw as too narrowly rationalistic; however, he possessed perception, intuition, and imagination. As a drama critic he was enormously influential, not least because he reviewed plays for virtually all his professional life. He had his blind spots, as in his failure to understand Chekhov, Strindberg, and Shaw, but he was incorruptibly honest and unwaveringly committed to the improvement of what fascinated him most, the theatre. His pioneering advocacy of Ibsen in England cannot be underestimated (he wrote more than 175 pieces about Ibsen), although his other contributions to the theatre are equally valuable. 


@@@@@


doc= 30436


Hind, Richard Dacre Archer- (1849-1910), classical scholar, was born at Morris Hall, near Norham, Northumberland, on 18 September 1849 and came of an ancient Northumbrian family. He was the third and youngest son of Thomas Hodgson (1814-1911), a learned horticulturist and graduate of Trinity College, Cambridge, and his wife, Mary Ann, his first cousin and second daughter of John Thomas Huntley, vicar of Kimbolton. On the death of a brother in 1869, his father succeeded to the estates of Stelling and Ovington and assumed the surname of Archer-Hind. Richard Hodgson received his early teaching in Latin and Greek from his father, and even when he was at Shrewsbury School (1862-8), where he was the pupil of Dr B. H. Kennedy and Dr H. W. Moss, his father continued to assist his studies. In 1868 he went into residence at Trinity College, Cambridge, living with his parents, who established themselves at Cambridge, as they had at Shrewsbury, so that he could enjoy the comforts of a home life while pursuing his education. He was elected to a college foundation scholarship in 1869 and to a Craven university scholarship in 1871. In 1872 he was placed third in the first class of the classical tripos and won the first chancellor's medal for classical learning. He was elected to a fellowship in his college in October 1873 and was appointed assistant lecturer in April 1877 and assistant tutor in December 1878. On 17 March 1888 he married Laura, youngest daughter of Lewis Pocock. At Easter 1899 he was made a senior lecturer, and in December 1903 he retired from the staff. During the last two years of his life Archer-Hind was an invalid. He died at his home, 2 Gonville Place, Cambridge, on 6 April 1910. He was cremated at Golders Green, and his ashes were buried at Cambridge. He was survived by his widow and one son, Laurence, born in 1895. 
Both in Latin and in Greek the exceptional quality of Archer-Hind's scholarship was recognized from the beginning of his Cambridge career. But Greek came to interest him more than Latin. At a later time, while his love of Pindar, Aeschylus, and Sophocles never diminished, his admiration for Plato grew. In 1883 he published an edition of the 'Phaedo', in which he investigated the argument of the dialogue and traced its relations to the rest of Plato's writings. A second edition appeared in 1894. In 1888 he brought out his 'magnum opus', an original and complete edition of the difficult, important, and at that time still neglected 'Timaeus', which gave a new impetus to Platonic studies. The translation is exact and scholarly; the commentary is helpful, learned, many-sided; and in the introduction Archer-Hind sets out the results of his profound study of Plato's metaphysic. After a century his views on difficult passages in the Greek text are still taken seriously. Papers in the 'Journal of Philology' (especially 24, 1896, 49; 29, 1904, 266; 31, 1910, 84) supplemented the editions of the 'Phaedo' and the 'Timaeus'. 
An industrious teacher and a singularly efficient examiner, Archer-Hind took no prominent part in the affairs of the university; but his occasional allocutions at university discussions and college meetings were incisive and epigrammatic. He was always an earnest supporter of the movement for the education of women, and gave much time to the affairs of Newnham College and the instruction of its students. He loved his garden, and kept an exact record of the rare plants which it contained. He took a passionate interest in music; his knowledge of certain favourite composers was intimate and minute. He had made a careful study of Greek music. Like many of his academic generation he was a member of the Alpine Club. His quiet, retiring manner covered strong convictions tenaciously held. 


@@@@@


doc= 30437


Ardagh, Sir John Charles (1840-1907), army officer, was born at Comragh House, co. Waterford, on 9 August 1840. The second son of William Johnson Ardagh, vicar of Rossmire, of Comragh House and Stradbally, and his wife, Sarah Cobbold of Ipswich, he was educated at the endowed school in Waterford under Dr Price. He had intended to take holy orders when he entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1857, but after gaining a prize for Hebrew and honours in mathematics Ardagh decided on a military career, passing first in both the entrance and the final examinations of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Commissioned as a lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 1 April 1859, he completed the usual training at Chatham before superintending the construction of Fort Popton for the defence of Milford Haven. During the Anglo-American crisis over the 'Trent' affair in 1861 he was ordered to embark on the transport 'Victoria' at Queenstown (26 December 1861) with stores to construct a telegraph line through the colony of New Brunswick to the St Lawrence River. The vessel, however, was driven back to Queenstown. On 13 February 1862 it left port again, nearly foundered, and was saved only by the efforts of Ardagh and his sappers. The vessel reached Plymouth on 12 March and Ardagh's conduct was highly praised by the duke of Cambridge, the officer commanding-in-chief of the British army. 
Ardagh, who remained at home, was required to build a new fort at Newhaven, for which he invented the equilibrium drawbridge. After employment on the southern defences, he was appointed, in April 1868, as secretary of Sir Frederick Grey's committee to report on the fortifications being constructed under the 'Defence Act' of 1860. Commended by Grey for his work on this committee, Ardagh accompanied Sir William Jervois on a tour of inspection of the defence works at Halifax and Bermuda. He witnessed the entry of German soldiers into Paris in February 1871 and inspected the defences of the city. After three months in Malta and a year at Chatham he was promoted captain on 3 August 1872, joining the Staff College in February 1873 and passing the final examinations in December 1874. In April 1875 he was attached to the intelligence branch of the War Office, serving in the Netherlands on intelligence duty (10 January - 8 February 1876) and becoming a deputy assistant quartermaster-general for intelligence on 13 July 1876. 
In August 1876 Ardagh commenced a tour of duty in the Balkans. Attached as a special service officer to Nisch, the headquarters of the Turkish army operating against Serbia, he was summoned, in October, to Constantinople to report on the defence of the city. In fifteen days he demonstrated his gift for topographical drawing, preparing sketch-surveys of nearly 150 square miles, including the position of Buyk-Chekmedje-Dere, with projects for the defence of the Bosphorus, the Dardanelles, the Bulair lines, and Rodosto. These works were subsequently built by the Turks. Ardagh also reported to the Foreign Office on the operations in Herzegovina and Montenegro, and in December 1876 reported on Tirnovo in Bulgaria. After an attack of fever he recuperated in Egypt and Greece before resuming his duties in the War Office (April 1877), where he completed a survey and report on the sea defences of the Lewes and Laughton levels. 
From December 1877 to March 1878 Ardagh served on a Foreign Office assignment in Italy, and in the summer attended the congress of Berlin as the technical military delegate under General Sir Lintorn Simmons. Ardagh's knowledge of the Turkish provinces proved of great value, and in July he was created CB (civil). Between September 1878 and September 1879 he accompanied Colonel Home on the international commission to determine the frontiers of the new principality of Bulgaria. On 30 November 1878 he was promoted a brevet major and was later promoted regimental major (22 September 1880). On 14 June 1881 he was appointed British commissioner for the delimitation of the Turco-Greek frontier, and in spite of local difficulties completed the work by the end of October. 
In February 1882 Ardagh was appointed instructor in military history, law, and tactics at the School of Military Engineering at Chatham, but on 5 July was sent to Egypt, where he was required initially to oversee the restoration of Alexandria's defences after the British bombardment and to take charge of the intelligence department. On 21 August he was appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general and was employed on railway administration at Isma'iliyyah. Present at the battle of Tell al-Kebir (13 September 1882), he was mentioned in Lord Wolseley's dispatch at the end of the campaign and was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel (18 November 1882). He also received the British war medal with clasps for Tell al-Kebir, the khedive's bronze star, and the fourth-class order of the Osmanieh. 
Ardagh remained in Egypt as deputy assistant adjutant-general to the British army of occupation, and was largely employed in making surveys. In July 1883 he went home on leave, but returned to Egypt almost immediately to assist administratively during an outbreak of cholera. In February 1884 Ardagh, as commanding royal engineer and chief of the intelligence department, accompanied the British force under Sir Gerald Graham, which was sent to the eastern Sudan. He served at the battle of al-Teb (29 February) and at the relief of Tokar (1 March), where he arranged the removal of 700 Egyptian inhabitants. After the change of base to Suakin (8 March), Ardagh completed a reconnaissance of the nearby terrain with mounted infantry, and, after the battle of Tamai (13 March), when the road was opened to Berber, he shared his general's opinion that an advance should have been made to Berber to support Major-General Gordon in Khartoum. As he later wrote, 'Berber was then in the hands of an Egyptian garrison, and, had we gone across, the subsequent operations for the attempted relief of Gordon at Khartoum would not have been necessary' (Malmesbury, 187-8). Graham's force returned to Cairo in April, whereupon Ardagh was mentioned in dispatches on ten occasions and made a CB (military). 
When Wolseley launched his relief operation in the autumn Ardagh was appointed commandant of the base at Cairo with the grade of assistant adjutant-general. Although the campaign proved a disaster, for which Ardagh largely blamed 'the continued stupid mismanagement of foreign affairs' by the Gladstone government (Malmesbury, 195), he was promoted to a brevet colonelcy (15 June 1885) and awarded the third-class order of the Mejidiye. On 30 December, as chief staff officer of an Anglo-Egyptian force, he participated in the defeat of an invading Mahdist army at the battle of Giniss, where a bullet passed through his helmet. Ardagh was again mentioned in dispatches, and later promoted to a regimental lieutenant-colonelcy (17 December 1886) and made a colonel on the staff on 26 January 1887. 
In 1887 Ardagh returned to the War Office as assistant adjutant-general for defence and mobilization, and he duly devised schemes for overseas mobilization and for home defence. From 1888 to 1895 he was aide-de-camp to the duke of Cambridge, and in October 1888 became private secretary to Lord Lansdowne, viceroy of India. Save for a period of illness in 1892, he remained with Lord Lansdowne throughout his term of office. After briefly serving his successor, Lord Elgin, he returned to England. He was made a CIE in 1892 and KCIE in 1894. 
On 16 April 1895 Ardagh began his appointment as commandant of the School of Military Engineering at Chatham before rejoining the War Office on 27 March 1896 as director of military intelligence, with the temporary rank of major-general. In this post he benefited from his reputation as the army's 'foremost politico-military officer' (Fergusson, 105), enjoying close friendships with senior political and military figures and cordial working relations with the Admiralty, Colonial Office, and Foreign Office. His staff were impressed by their industrious, monocled, and generally taciturn director, who could write 'beautifully expressed far-seeing memoranda on the most abstruse questions' (Gleichen, 176). 
Ardagh, promoted major-general on the establishment (14 March 1898), incurred much criticism after the early reverses of the South African War. Yet, in spite of a limited staff and inadequate funds, he had collected, produced, and disseminated military intelligence thoroughly, compiling a full statement on the number and resources of the Boer forces for the government. He had estimated that 40,000 men would be required to defend the British colonies, and that 200,000 men would be required to take the war into the Boer republics. At Ardagh's request, copies of this paper were eventually laid on the tables of both houses of parliament. The intelligence department's secret work, 'Military notes on the Dutch republic', fell into Boer hands after the battle of Talana (20 October 1899) and was published. When the royal commission on the war subsequently reviewed these documents, and other supporting evidence, it described the information as 'remarkably accurate' ('Report', 128). 
In addition to his War Office duties Ardagh was a member of a committee on submarine telegraph cables and, in 1899, military technical adviser to the British delegates, Sir Julian Pauncefote and Sir Henry Howard, at the first Hague peace conference. There he robustly defended Britain's use of dum dum ammunition in warfare against 'savages' and participated in drawing up the 'Rules respecting the laws and customs of war on land'. In 1900 he was awarded the distinguished service pension. 
After leaving the War Office, Ardagh served as the British agent before a commission which was investigating the claims of foreign powers on account of the deportation of their subjects and families to Europe from South Africa during the war. From December 1901 to June 1902 he was in South Africa, settling miscellaneous claims in connection with the war, and later in the year returned to South Africa, with the temporary rank of lieutenant-general, as a member of the royal commission for the revision of martial law sentences. Awarded the queen's medal for the South African War, he retired from military service, at sixty-two years of age, on 9 August 1902. He was still employed by the Foreign Office, succeeding Lord Pauncefote on the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague, and becoming a British government director of the Suez Canal. In October he served as a member of the British tribunal on the Chile-Argentina boundary arbitration, helping to draft the final award, and in December 1902 was created KCMG. 
Ardagh became a member of the council of the British Red Cross Society in 1905, and in June 1906 served as one of four British government delegates at a conference held by the Swiss government to revise the Geneva convention of 1864. The new convention was signed in the following month. In his last public duty Ardagh served as a delegate of the central committee of the society at the eighth international conference in London (June 1907). On his deathbed he received from Empress Maria Feodorovna of Russia the Red Cross commemoration medal for his services to the committee during the Russo-Japanese War. Ardagh died on 30 September 1907 at Glynllifon Park, Caernarfon, and was buried at Broomfield church, near Taunton. He was survived by his wife, Susan (1854-1935), widow of James Howard Harris, formerly Hamilton, third earl of Malmesbury, and daughter of John Hamilton of Fyne Court House, Somerset, whom he had married on 18 February 1896. They had no children. 
Ardagh served on the council of the Royal Geographical Society, and was an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers and a member of the Royal Society's geodetic arc committee in 1900. A student of many languages, he was made honorary LLD of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1897 and wrote occasionally for various periodicals, including an article entitled 'British rule in Egypt' for the 'Quarterly Review' (October 1904). He was a skilful artist, and a collection of nineteen watercolour drawings by him was presented by his widow to the Royal Engineers Institute at Chatham. 


@@@@@


doc= 30438


Clarke, Sir Charles Noble Arden- (1898-1962), colonial governor, was born in India on 25 July 1898, the eldest son of the Revd Charles William Arden Clarke, a Church Missionary Society missionary in India and the principal of Noble College, Masulipatam. (The hyphen in his surname was added later by deed poll.) Educated at Rossall School, he was just old enough to serve in the First World War, enlisting in the machine-gun corps in 1917. By the time he was twenty, he was already a captain and had earned a mention in dispatches. A serious breach of discipline while stationed in post-war Germany, in which he, the divisional heavy weight boxing champion, struck a senior officer after a row in the mess, led Arden-Clarke to volunteer for the south Russia expeditionary force mounted by the allies in support of the White Russian army. But coming to the conclusion that the army was not the career for him, he set aside the classical scholarship he had won at Emmanuel College, Cambridge (his father's college), where he had hoped to read medicine, and joined the colonial service in 1920. He attributed this decision partly to the inspiration of the career of Sir F. J. D. Lugard, also an old Rossallian. On 6 September 1924 Arden-Clarke married Georgina Dora (Gina), daughter of Robert N. H. Reid, civil engineer. They had one son and two daughters. 
After a sustained spell as a district officer in the northern provinces of Nigeria, where he earned recognition as an able administrator, in 1934 Arden-Clarke was transferred on accelerated promotion to the secretariat in Lagos. There, in the native affairs department, he quickly improved on his growing reputation by his work for the new governor, Sir Donald Cameron, on the reorganization of the northern emirates. In 1936, after serious illness, he was offered the post of assistant resident commissioner in the more temperate climate of one of the South African high commission territories, Bechuanaland. A year later he was promoted resident commissioner. In 1942 he became resident commissioner of Basutoland, still on secondment to the Dominions Office from the Colonial Office. 
At the end of the Second World War, when the Labour government decided to assume responsibility for Sarawak from Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, the last of the so-called white rajas, it was Arden-Clarke whom the Colonial Office chose for this pioneer governorship in 1946. To set the seal on its status, he was immediately knighted. To the problems of rebuilding an economy ravaged during the Japanese occupation of the East Indian archipelago was added a measure of local resentment against a crown presence. Arden-Clarke survived an attempt on his life only because he had left the country; his successor as governor, D. G. Stewart, was assassinated in 1949. 
Advanced to the class 1 governorship of the Gold Coast colony in June 1949, it was in his uninterrupted eight years of guiding the Gold Coast from dependent territory to independent Ghana that Arden-Clarke reached the summit of his reputation as an outstanding modern colonial administrator. His brief to channel rather than check the vigorous nationalist spirit was a turning point in the annals of Britain's colonial administration in Africa. Arriving in Accra in the aftermath of the 1948 riots, which had shaken the Colonial Office both by the threat they posed to the new, liberal policies of Arthur Creech Jones, the colonial secretary, and his right-hand official in the Africa division, Andrew Cohen, and by the outspoken tenor of the ensuing commission of inquiry chaired by Aitken Watson, Arden-Clarke soon found himself confronted by the proconsular nightmare of a vociferous political party (in his case the Convention People's Party (CPP) under a demagogic leader, the charismatic Kwame Nkrumah) gathering strength in support of a campaign for 'Full Self-Government NOW' through 'Positive Action' -- violent if need be. In the strikes which followed, violence was indeed used, and Nkrumah was imprisoned for sedition. However, despite his leadership, at one remove, the mass party CPP triumphed in the Gold Coast's first general election. On his own initiative, Arden-Clarke released Nkrumah and, summoning him from gaol to Government House, invited him to form a government. Although their first meeting was characterized by mutual suspicion, they soon developed a real feeling of friendship and partnership. Nkrumah's impression was of 'a man with a strong sense of justice and fair play, with whom I could easily be friends even though [he was] a symbol of British imperialism' (Nkrumah, 113). Arden-Clarke's own feelings after the initial meeting were perceptive and prophetic, identifying 'a streak of weakness that may prove his undoing' (Oliver, 416). 
Arden-Clarke was the first, and one of the most effective, of that small group of final or penultimate colonial governors who, by establishing close personal links with the nationalist leadership, were as much part of the successful transfer of power as the African prime ministers themselves (Sir James Robertson in Nigeria, Sir Maurice Dorman in Sierra Leone, and Sir Richard Turnbull in Tanganyika were others). On Arden-Clarke's death, the arch-nationalist Nkrumah testified to this relationship in exceptional terms: 'It can be truly said that independence for Ghana might have been seriously delayed but for Sir Charles's readiness to co-operate with the forces of nationalism' ('West Africa', 22 Dec 1962). 
Arden-Clarke's governorship of the decolonizing Gold Coast remains a monument to the new style of colonial administrator which was in such great demand, yet at the very top initially in such short supply, in the immediate post-war years of British rule in Africa. In recognition of Arden-Clarke's role in helping Ghana to become, in March 1957, Britain's first African colony to attain independence, Arden-Clarke was invited to stay on as its inaugural governor-general. He left, however, within two months. 
In retirement Arden-Clarke remained active in African affairs. In 1958 he acted as chairman of the United Nations good offices committee on Namibia; the recommendation for partition was not accepted. In 1959 he became chairman of the Royal African Society and of the Royal Commonwealth Society for the Blind, and a year later accepted the challenging chairmanship of the important National Council for the Supply of Teachers Overseas. Wisely, Whitehall did not part with his skills and experience. He was a member of the 1960 advisory commission on central Africa chaired by Lord Monckton of Brenchley, and in 1961 was invited to return to the high commission territories, where he had first served twenty-five years earlier, to act as constitutional adviser to Swaziland on its final stages towards independence. 
Arden-Clarke was appointed CMG in 1941, KCMG in 1948, and GCMG in 1952. He was made a knight of the order of St John of Jerusalem in 1952, and awarded the honorary degree of DCL by Durham University in 1958. Philately and gardening were among his hobbies. In appearance he was tall, well-built, and imposing. Hence Elspeth Huxley's description of his 'rock-like solidity' (Huxley, 87). Arden-Clarke died from cancer at his home, Syleham House, Syleham, Suffolk, on 16 December 1962, having spent over half his thirty-seven years in the colonial service in a gubernatorial capacity. He was survived by Lady Arden-Clarke. 


@@@@@


doc= 30439


Close, Sir Charles Frederick Arden- (1865-1952), surveyor and geographer, was born on 10 August 1865 at St Saviour's, Jersey, the eldest of the eleven children of Captain (later Major-General) Frederick Close (1830-1899) and his second wife, Lydia Ann Stevens. He was educated at a dame-school in Rochester, then at Thompson's school, Jersey, and at a crammer, passing second into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1882. He excelled in mathematics, and in 1884 he passed out first, with the Pollock memorial medal, was commissioned in the Royal Engineers, and joined the School of Military Engineering, Chatham. After a year (1886) in Gibraltar he was first attached to and later commanded the balloon section at Chatham (1887-8). He was next posted to India where he served one year on battery construction for the Hooghly defences and then four years (1889-93) with the survey of India, engaged on topographic work in Upper Burma and geodetic triangulation on the Mandalay primary series (Toungoo-Katha) and the Mong Hsat secondary series up to the Siam border. 
Returning to Chatham, Close was sent in the next year (1895) to west Africa to survey the boundary between the Niger Coast Protectorate and the German Cameroons. On his return he was appointed to the Ordnance Survey and in 1898 was made British commissioner to delimit the frontier of British Central Africa and Northern Rhodesia with German East Africa for over 200 miles between lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika. He collaborated with David Gill, HM astronomer at the Cape, in relation to longitude fixation of points on the German frontier. He was appointed CMG in 1899. Next year he led a small survey detachment for the South African War, for which practically no maps existed. It is claimed that this survey unit produced the first multicoloured map to be printed by lithography in the field by the British army. In 1902-5 he was chief instructor in surveying at Chatham. There he introduced new methods and revised his earlier work, 'Text Book of Military Topography', part 2 (1898), to produce the 'Text Book of Topographical and Geographical Surveying' (1905) which, with later revisions, remained the standard work for the next half-century. 
By 1905 Close had very wide practical experience of surveying, both geodetic and topographic, in three continents, as well as firsthand knowledge of international boundary surveys and settlements. In that year he became head of the topographical (from 1907 geographical) section, general staff, at the War Office, of which a major concern was overseas maps. He pressed, with success, for the formation of the colonial survey committee (August 1905) and for surveying in British colonies. Close and his directors in MI4, having experienced in South Africa the disadvantages of waging war without maps, took the unprecedented step of preparing maps of a probable European theatre of war. He was to recall that: 'it was whilst we were drawing these maps that Mr Haldane, the Secretary of State, came round the GSGS. When he saw the maps of France and Belgium he turned to me and said 'You will never want those'. (Institution of Royal Engineers, May 1933)' Thanks to the foresight of the geographical section, the British army entered the First World War better supplied with maps than in any previous conflict. An even wider project was the 'Carte Internationale du Monde au Millionieme' -- first proposed in 1891 and exhaustively discussed later but with little progress. With support from the War and Foreign offices, Close arranged a meeting of the newly formed international map committee at the Foreign Office in 1909, attended by delegates of the great powers, at which concrete proposals were made. The large number of maps eventually published on this system is a tribute to Close's driving power. 
Close was appointed director-general of the Ordnance Survey on 18 August 1911. He found the organization 'rather out of touch with the scientific world'. He proceeded with a second geodetic levelling of the United Kingdom, creating 'fundamental' bench marks which have been of lasting value. He also established three mean-sea level tidal stations -- at Dunbar, Newlyn, and Felixstowe, of which the second remains in operation. Close also turned his attention to the cartography of the Ordnance Survey with the intention of revolutionizing the appearance of the one-inch map. His first attempt, the 'Killarney District' map (1913), was crowned with success. For artistic achievement in colour printing it remains unsurpassed by the Ordnance Survey. But the processes involved were too expensive in post-war Britain, and a simpler model was adopted for the one-inch map. This new style lacked the coloured layers, hill-shading, and hachures of the Irish sheet, but, with a smaller contour interval and revised road classification system, it set the pattern for all subsequent one-inch series. In 1919, Close secured the appointment of a civilian archaeology officer, O. G. S. Crawford, resulting in a highly acclaimed series of historical maps of which the first was 'Roman Britain' (1924). In 1913 Close had married Gladys Violet (died 1953), daughter of Theodore Henry Percival, formerly of the India Office. They had one daughter and two sons. Close had become a parent in later life but, even in his late fifties and early sixties, was always ready to play football with his sons. This thoughtfulness for the well-being of others extended from his own family -- he had been constant in giving financial help to his mother and siblings -- to those in his employ. He was affectionately known as Pa Close in the army, and he instituted the system of staff rewards for innovative ideas in the Ordnance Survey. 
In 1914 Close delivered the Halley lecture at Oxford which was incorporated in his 'Notes on the geodesy of the British Isles' (Ordnance Survey professional paper no. 3). During the First World War the Ordnance Survey printed 32 million maps for the armies in France and elsewhere. Close, who had been promoted major (1901), lieutenant-colonel (1908), and colonel (1912), periodically visited the western front. After the war Close had the disagreeable task of implementing drastic cuts in the Ordnance Survey establishment which had been recommended by the Geddes committee. A direct result of this was that the large-scale plans fell massively into arrears by the 1930s. 
Close retired in 1922, and in the many productive years still before him he devoted himself to his family and to work on geographical and kindred matters. In 1911 he had been president of section E (geography) of the British Association, giving a controversial address in which he stated that much of the subject matter then studied by geographers was more properly the province of other disciplines ('Report 18', 'British Association', 1911, 436-43). It was regarded by his professional geographical contemporaries as 'geographical heresy' (RGS, Close MSS, 1911). However, he served on the council of the Royal Geographical Society (1904-40), and was Victoria gold medallist (1927) and president (1927-30). He was chairman of the national committee for geography and general secretary of the International Geographical Union, being president in 1934-8. He was first treasurer (1919-30) then chairman of the Palestine Exploration Fund (1930-45), and president of the Hampshire Field Club (1929-32 and 1935-6). In 1927, when president of the Geographical Association, he addressed that body with a lecture entitled 'Population and migration'. He was the author of about fifty publications on topics ranging from geodesy and map projections, history of cartography, and meteorology to population studies. Among these were: 'The Early Years of the Ordnance Survey' (1926), 'The Map of England' (1932), 'A fifty years retrospect', 'Empire Survey Review' (vol. 1, 1932, and vol. 2, 1933-4), and 'Our crowded island', 'Eugenics Review' (April 1948). He was president of the International Union for the Scientific Investigation of Population Problems in 1931-7. He also taught mathematics at Winchester College during the Second World War, standing in for staff who were employed on military service. 
Close was elected FRS in 1919; received an honorary ScD from Cambridge (1928); and was an honorary member of the Russian, German, Belgian, Dutch, Spanish, and Swiss geographical societies. He was appointed CB in 1916 and KBE in 1918; he was an officer of the order of Leopold, and a member of the Afghan order of Astaur. He changed his name to Arden-Close by deed poll in 1938 in order to comply with the terms of a bequest. Arden-Close died at the Enniskerry Nursing Home, Sleepers Hill, Winchester, on 19 December 1952. His contribution to the cartography and history of the Ordnance Survey was recognized in 1980 with the formation of a society named after him: The Charles Close Society for the Study of Ordnance Survey Maps. 


@@@@@


doc= 30440


Arditi, Luigi (1822-1903), conductor and composer, was born on 16 July 1822 in Crescentino, Piedmont, the son of Maurizio Arditi and his wife, Caterina Colombo. He studied the violin with Carossini and Capitani in his home town, with Caldera in Turin, and with Alessandro Rolla at the Milan conservatory, where he also took composition lessons with Nicola Vaccai. His first opera, the one-act 'I briganti', was produced there in 1841. He left the conservatory in 1842 and first conducted opera in Vercelli in 1843, then moved to the Teatro Re in Milan (1844-6). In 1846 he went to Havana and conducted at the Teatro Imperiale and the Teatro Tacon, where he produced his one-act opera 'Il corsaro' (1847); he also conducted in Canada in 1853 and the USA in 1854-6, producing his 'La spia' in New York in 1856. After working in Constantinople and touring Europe, he settled in London in 1858 as conductor at Her Majesty's Theatre. He remained there through the managements of Benjamin Lumley, E. T. Smith, and James Mapleson until the theatre burnt down in 1867, conducting a wide repertory, and took the company touring, especially to Dublin. He succeeded Michael Costa at Covent Garden in 1869, and also conducted seasons with the Italian Opera at St Petersburg (1871, 1873) and annual seasons in Vienna (1870-78). He conducted the Covent Garden Promenade Concerts from 1874 to 1877, and in 1878 conducted in Madrid. His many other activities included regular tours of the USA with Mapleson's company (with Adelina Patti), and engagements at Her Majesty's (1880), Covent Garden (1885, 1889), and the Shaftesbury Theatre (1891). In 1891 he conducted Patti, who greatly admired him, at the opening of the theatre in her house at Craig-y-Nos on 12 August, and, with Lago's company, before Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle on 27 November, the first operatic performance there since the death of the prince consort. His last tour was with the Carl Rosa Company in 1894. 
Arditi conducted twenty-three important British premieres of operas by composers including Verdi ('Un ballo in maschera', 1861, 'La forza del destino', 1867), Gounod ('Faust', 1863), Wagner ('Der fliegende Hollander', 1870), Mascagni ('Cavalleria rusticana', 1891), and Humperdinck ('Hansel und Gretel', 1894), earning their friendship; he also conducted historical revivals, including Cherubini's 'Medee' (1865) and Gluck's 'Iphigenie en Tauride' (1866). He married Virginia, daughter of William S. Warwick, of Richmond, Virginia, on 20 June 1856; the couple had a daughter, Giulietta ('b'. 1859), and a son, Luigi ('b'. 1866). 
Arditi's compositions include vocal waltzes, a genre he virtually invented; among these is the once immensely popular 'Il bacio' (1860), which Patti used to sing in the Lesson Scene in Rossini's 'Il barbiere di Siviglia'. He sold this outright to the publisher Cramer for $50. None of his other music, which includes orchestral works, has remained in the repertory. He was admired by musicians and audiences as a highly professional and versatile opera conductor. Bald, moustachioed, and with a small goatee, he was affectionately mocked for his piping voice and insecure command of English. His autobiography (1896) gives a vivid account of his career and of the many musicians with whom he came in contact. He died of lobar pneumonia at 14 Gwydyr Mansions, Hove, on 1 May 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 30441


Arkell, William Joscelyn (1904-1958), geologist, was born in Highworth, Wiltshire, on 9 June 1904, the youngest of a family of seven of James Arkell, brewer, and his wife, a talented artist, Laura Jane, daughter of Augustus William Rixon, a London solicitor. From an early age Arkell displayed a keen interest in natural history, explored the countryside, and collected insects, plants, and fossils. At Wellington College, Berkshire, he was an enthusiastic member of the school's natural history society. At New College, Oxford, he made geology and palaeontology his special subjects, receiving much encouragement from W. J. Sollas, then professor of geology. In 1925 he gained the only first-class honours of his year in geology and was soon awarded the Burdett-Coutts scholarship, which opened the way for research in his chosen field. In 1929-33 he was lecturer in geology at New College, an appointment which enabled him to devote most of his time to research, and thereafter he held senior research fellowships at New College (1933-40) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1947-58). He received the DSc degree of the University of Oxford in 1934. In 1929 he married Ruby Lilian (1908-1984), daughter of S. R. S. Percival, of Boscombe, Hampshire. The couple later had three sons. 
Arkell's name will long be associated with the study of the rocks of the Jurassic system and their fossils. His earliest work was on the Corallian beds of Oxfordshire and neighbouring counties and his first paper, which dealt with certain fossil bivalve molluscs from these strata, appeared in 1926. It was the forerunner of his voluminous 'Monograph of British Corallian Lamellibranchia', published by the Palaeontographical Society between 1929 and 1937. His first stratigraphical paper, dealing with the same area of Corallian rocks, was published in 1927 in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. It was soon followed by contributions on the Cornbrash (with J. A. Douglas) and on the Great Oolite. At the same time he was working industriously at the literature and his 'Jurassic System in Great Britain' appeared in 1933. A work of major importance and an amazing achievement for a man still in his twenties, it presented a masterly review of the principles of stratigraphy followed by a critical and exhaustive survey of information scattered in hundreds of memoirs and papers. It immediately gained for its author an international reputation, and more than sixty years later was still considered an indispensable starting point for students of the British Jurassic. 
While continuing with stratigraphical researches in a number of areas in southern England, Arkell also took up the study of ammonites as being most usefully applicable to problems of Jurassic correlation. His 'Monograph on the Ammonites of the English Corallian Beds' was published by the Palaeontographical Society between 1935 and 1948, while publication by the same society of his 'Monograph of the English Bathonian Ammonites', begun in 1951, was completed posthumously at the beginning of 1959. Shorter papers dealt with ammonites from the Oxford and Kimmeridge Clays of England and with several collections from overseas. Arkell's 'Geology of Oxford' was published in 1947, as was his classic geological survey memoir 'The Geology of the Country around Weymouth, Swanage, Corfe, and Lulworth' (in Dorset), written during summer holidays at the family's cottage in Ringstead. He was also responsible for the sections on Jurassic ammonites in part L (1957) of the 'Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology' (edited by R. C. Moore), written in conjunction with his 'Jurassic Geology of the World' in 1956. The last, his second major stratigraphical work, was not only an able and critical digest of a very extensive literature, but also embodied much original information. It too became a standard work of reference throughout the world and a Russian translation was published in 1961 -- with many additions relevant to the Soviet Union. 
Arkell's interests were by no means confined to his Jurassic studies. For four winter seasons (1926-30) he accompanied Dr K. S. Sandford on a survey of traces of Palaeolithic man in Egypt, organized by the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. Four notable monographs under their joint authorship (1929-39) were the outcome of this work and occasional papers on palaeoliths and Pleistocene chronology appeared from Arkell's pen even later in life. Tectonic problems also attracted him, and among his papers on this subject was one on Mesozoic and Cainozoic folding in England, read at the International Geological Congress in Washington when he visited America in 1933. Topographical names and local dialects interested him considerably. Place names in Wiltshire, Dorset, and Gloucestershire formed the subject of papers in 1940-42 and in 1953 he published (with S. I. Tomkeieff) a work entitled 'English Rock Terms, Chiefly as Used by Miners and Quarrymen'. He was an authority on building stones and his 'Oxford Stone' appeared in 1947. His writings reflect in their fluency and felicity of style a rare literary gift and, in their contents, great powers of mental concentration. An artist of no mean ability, he not only drew many of the illustrations for his various works, but painted in watercolours as a hobby. 
Elected FRS in 1947, Arkell was awarded the Mary Clark Thompson gold medal of the National Academy of Sciences of America in 1944, the Lyell medal of the Geological Society of London in 1949, and the von Buch medal of the German Geological Society in 1953. He was also an honorary member or correspondent of several foreign learned societies. 
Tall, robust in appearance, and fair-haired, Arkell was somewhat reserved and aloof, but was nevertheless very approachable and always ready to help younger workers. He had a strong inclination to participate in controversies (particularly in print), but bore no malice towards those with whom he disagreed. Less strong physically than he appeared, he did not recover completely from a wartime illness after work in London as a temporary civil servant (1941-3), and at the Sedgwick Museum in Cambridge he was allotted a downstairs room to save fatigue. A stroke in 1956 left him partially paralysed and he died at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge on 18 April 1958. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30442


Arkwright, Sir Joseph Arthur (1864-1944), bacteriologist, was born at Thurlaston, Leicestershire, on 22 March 1864, the youngest of the five children of Arthur William Arkwright, gentleman farmer, of Broughton Hall, Astley, and his wife and second cousin, Emma (died 1866), daughter of John Wolley, of Beeston, Nottinghamshire. His great-great-grandfather, Sir Richard Arkwright, inventor of machinery for textile manufacture, was one of several forebears who had won scientific distinction. Arkwright was educated at Wellington College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took the natural sciences tripos in 1884-6 with zoology as his major subject. He completed his medical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital and qualified in 1889. He held residential posts there and afterwards at the West London Hospital and the Victoria Hospital for Children. In 1893, he married Ruth (died 1950), daughter of Joseph William Wilson, a civil engineer. They had three daughters, two of whom became doctors. 
Arkwright settled in general practice at Halesowen, Worcestershire but was forced to give up owing to severe dermatitis. In 1906 he joined the staff of the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, first as a voluntary worker, then from 1908 onwards as assistant bacteriologist. He retired in 1927 but continued to work at the institute as an honorary member of staff. From 1932 to 1944 he represented the Royal Society on the governing body of the institute. 
Arkwright's early investigations were concerned with the spread of diphtheria in schools and the differentiation of meningococcus strains. Much of this work was summarized in a book entitled 'The Carrier Problem in Infectious Diseases' (1912), which he wrote in collaboration with J. C. G. Ledingham. In 1915 he studied an epidemic of cerebrospinal meningitis among troops encamped on Salisbury Plain. Later that year he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps and was posted to Malta as pathologist in charge of the laboratory at St George's Hospital; there he made interesting observations on convalescent carriers in bacillary dysentery, and on blackwater fever. In 1918 he was appointed a member of the War Office committee on trench fever, and with Arthur William Bacot and F. Martin Duncan he demonstrated the constant association of the virus of trench fever with 'Rickettsia quintana' in lice. 
The subject with which Arkwright's name will always be associated is, however, that of bacterial variation. Arkwright's researches on the variants denoted by him as R and S (rough and smooth) in bacilli of the dysentery and enteric group were reported in the 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology' in 1921 and in his Bradshaw lecture to the Royal College of Physicians in 1929. In 1922 at the request of the Egyptian government he accompanied Bacot to Cairo to investigate the aetiology of typhus fever. After two months' work they both contracted the disease. Bacot died, and Arkwright recovered after a long illness. On returning to the Lister Institute Arkwright concentrated on animal diseases. His investigations into foot-and-mouth disease extended over more than twenty years. From 1925 onwards he was a member of the Ministry of Agriculture's committee on the subject and he became its chairman in 1931. He was a member of the Medical Research Council (1930-34) and the Agricultural Research Council (1931-40), and was chairman of the committee on 'Brucella abortus' infection and on Johne's disease; he also chaired their joint committee on tuberculosis. 
Arkwright was the author of more than fifty papers on bacteriology and immunology. He became FRCP in 1916 and FRS in 1926, and was knighted in 1937. Apart from his special studies, he was a man of wide culture and he possessed an exceptional knowledge of field botany and of horticulture. He died in King's College Hospital, London, on 22 November 1944, after a brief illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 30443


Arlen, Michael (1895-1956), novelist, was born on 16 November 1895 at Rustchuk, Bulgaria, the son of Sarkis Kouyoumdjian, an Armenian merchant. He was educated at Malvern College (along with an elder brother), and briefly studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh. In 1922 he was naturalized in the UK, and changed his name by deed poll to Michael Arlen, the name under which he had begun to publish novels and short stories. His writing was soon to achieve considerable, if temporary, fame. His first novel, 'The London Venture', was published in 1920 on the recommendation of Edmund Gosse. Three more books in the next three years established him on the literary scene, and in 1924 came 'The Green Hat', which was acclaimed, attacked, parodied, and read, to the most fabulous degree of best-sellerdom; and made him a comfortable small fortune. It was a romance suited to its decade -- cynical, sophisticated, yet sentimental, highly coloured, and glittering. If the colours later faded, and the glitter became mostly tarnished tinsel, the book certainly cast a spell in its day and influenced many young writers. The character of the heroine, Iris Storm, set a new fashion in fatal charmers; and Arlen's pictures of London cafe society were as exact as glossy photographs. 'The Loyalty' -- recognizable as the Embassy Club, at which the smartest people, including young princes, then danced to the blues -- was depicted almost table by table, with a mixture of mockery and romanticism which delighted those who read of themselves. 
Perhaps because he was a foreigner, who while mingling among them viewed them from outside, Michael Arlen had free licence to satirize these people. Rather as English society had petted the young Disraeli, it forgave Arlen his cleverness and his exuberant elegance. Even when poor and struggling, this young man had contrived to be elegant; and in prosperity, it was said that his white waistcoat always seemed to be whiter than anybody else's; but Arlen himself was forestallingly ready to disarm criticism -- describing himself as 'Every other inch a gentleman', 'The one the Turks forgot', or 'A case of pernicious Armenia'. His wit not being above the heads of his fashionable hearers, they found him the best of company; moreover, he was a man of whom his friends spoke with lasting regard. 
Arlen took a hand in several plays, published collections of his short stories and, among further novels, 'Lily Christine' (1929), 'Men Dislike Women' (1931), 'Hell! Said the Duchess' (1934), and finally 'Flying Dutchman' (1939). All had the professional touch of the born story-teller, but he never believed himself an important writer, and in later years steadily declined to have his 'rubbishy' best-sellers reprinted. His gains were well invested; and when he was happily married in 1928 to Atalanta, daughter of Count Mercati, they presently settled in the south of France. They had one daughter, and a son, Michael J. Arlen, who became a writer (his essays, 'Living-Room War', appeared in 1969) and his parents' biographer with 'Exiles' (1971). At the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Arlen returned to England to offer his services and was injured in the bombing of the city which had formed a background to his most successful fictions. Eventually he settled in New York at 23 East 74th Street, where he died on 23 June 1956 after a long illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 30444


Arliss, George (1868-1946), actor, was born in London on 10 April 1868, the third son of William Joseph Arliss Andrews, printer and publisher, and his wife, Rebekah Tomkins. He was educated in London and an early friendship with the two sons of the actress Nellie Farren turned his ambitions towards the stage. He made his first appearance in 1886 at the Elephant and Castle Theatre, where he obtained a variety of experience under Joseph A. Cave, an actor and manager of the old school. He married on 14 September 1899 Florence Kate Montgomery (1872/3-1950), daughter of Douglas Gordon Montgomery Smith. It was a singularly happy marriage. She was herself an actress who frequently played the part of his wife on stage and screen. They had no children. He then toured throughout the provinces for some years, eventually returning to London where his first appearance of note was his performance as Cayley Drummle in Pinero's 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' with Mrs Patrick Campbell, whom he accompanied to America in November 1901. He was next engaged by David Belasco to support Blanche Bates at the Belasco Theatre, New York, and in 1902 he made an immense success as Zakkuri in 'The Darling of the Gods' by Belasco and J. Luther Long. Later he passed under the management of Harrison Grey Fiske and he appeared with Mrs Fiske in 'Becky Sharp' by Robert Hitchens and Cosmo Gordon-Lennox, C. M. S. McLellan's 'Leah Kleschna', Ibsen's 'Hedda Gabler', and various other plays. In 1911 he played the title role in 'Disraeli', a play written for him by Louis Napoleon Parker, which, on stage and screen, served him well and faithfully for many years. 
Most of Arliss's best work on the stage was done in America, but in 1923 he returned to London after an absence of twenty-two years, and for over a year at the St James's Theatre he gave a memorable performance of the raja of Rukh in 'The Green Goddess'. This play by William Archer was an excellent vehicle for Arliss, who in 1928 used it for the first of the remarkable series of biographical (if often historically questionable) films that brought him fame. It was followed by 'Disraeli' (1929), for which he won an Academy award, and 'Old English' (1930), from the play by John Galsworthy. Other notable successes were 'Voltaire' (1933); 'The House of Rothschild' (1934); 'The Iron Duke' (1934), his first British film; 'Cardinal Richelieu' (1935), from the play by Lord Lytton; and 'Dr Syn' (1937), from the novel by Russell Thorndike, set in Arliss's beloved county of Kent. 
Had Arliss been a painter he would probably have been a Pre-Raphaelite or a miniature painter. Louis Parker used to say of him that he could 'express more with one finger than most actors can express with their entire bodies'. His work was not cast in a heroic mould. His performance of Shylock was intensely interesting, with a mass of detail, but it lacked the magnificent sweeping breadth of character that Shakespeare gave him: 'I have never been able to rise to those great heights', he said, apropos of Richelieu. But if he could not attain the full stature of some of his characters, his miniature performances were always dignified and thoughtful studies -- they could not, however, altogether conceal his very distinctive features and the charm of his voice and personality, which was not assumed. It was this, perhaps, rather than his undoubted talents as a character actor that endeared him to the family audiences for whom his films were made. He received a gold medal for diction from the American Academy of Arts and Letters, the honorary degree of MA from Columbia University in 1919, and he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1934. 
As a man Arliss was of a rather shy, retiring, and cautious disposition. He was not to be hurried, and although for long he thought of himself as a stage actor and intended to return to the theatre, he found less nervous strain in making films. Arliss was a vegetarian on principle. He was a first-rate player of contract bridge, but his chief recreation was walking, which he loved, especially by the sea. For many years he owned first a cottage and then a house at St Margaret's Bay, Kent, to which he and his wife came regularly every year from America. The house was fortunately untenanted when it was completely destroyed in 1942 by a 15-inch shell fired from the 'Gneisenau' when, with the 'Scharnhorst', she slipped through the English Channel. Arliss died in London on 5 February 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 30445


Armes, Philip (1836-1908), organist, born at Norwich on 15 August 1836, was the eldest son of Philip Armes, a schoolmaster and bass singer and his wife, Mary. He was a chorister in Norwich Cathedral from 1846 to 1848, then joined the choir of Rochester Cathedral on the appointment of his father as bass lay clerk there. Possessed of a beautiful voice, he achieved great success as solo boy, and on retiring from the choir in 1850 received a public testimonial. He was determined to be a professional musician, and in 1850 was articled to John Larkin Hopkins, organist of Rochester Cathedral; up to 1856 he acted as Hopkins's assistant, at the same time serving as organist of Milton church, Gravesend. In 1857 he passed to St Andrews, Wells Street, London, then in 1861 moved to Chichester Cathedral, and finally in 1862 settled as organist of Durham Cathedral, where he remained until his death. He had graduated BMus at Oxford in 1858, and was admitted to the same degree 'ad eundem' at Durham in 1863. He proceeded DMus at Oxford in 1864 and at Durham 'ad eundem' in 1874. Also in 1864, on 14 January Armes married Emily Jane, the daughter of Sir Henry Davison, chief justice of the supreme court of Madras, India; they had two sons and two daughters. 
From 1873 to 1883 Armes was the honorary conductor of the Durham Musical Society, and later he played first viola for the Durham Orchestral Society. When Durham University instituted its external degrees in music, Armes drew up the scheme for the first examinations, conducted in 1890. He received ample recognition for his contributions in the field: in 1891 Durham University conferred on him the honorary degree of MA and in 1897, when the chair of music was formally instituted at the university, he was appointed the first professor of music. He was also made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Organists. Armes died at his home, 17 North Bailey, Durham, on 10 February 1908, and was buried in the cemetery of St Mary-le-Bow, Durham. A memorial to him was placed in the west cloister of Durham Cathedral. 
Armes's compositions comprise an oratorio, 'Hezekiah', produced at Newcastle upon Tyne (1877), two cantatas, 'St John the Evangelist', produced at York Minster (1881), and 'St Barnabas', produced at Durham (1891), numerous services, anthems, and hymn tunes, and much organ music. He received the Molineux prize and gold medal offered by the Madrigal Society in 1897 for his madrigal 'Victoria'. 


@@@@@


doc= 30446


Armour, John Douglas (1830-1903), judge in Canada, was born on 4 May 1830, at Cavan, near Peterborough, Ontario, the youngest son of Samuel Armour, Anglican rector of Cavan, and his wife, Margaret Douglas. His father, of Irish origin, graduated MA from Glasgow University in 1806, and emigrated to Upper Canada about 1821; there he taught in a school in York (later Toronto) before ordination in the Church of England. John, after early education at local schools and at Upper Canada College, where he was head boy, entered the University of Toronto as a King's College exhibitioner, and graduated BA in 1850, winning the gold medal in classics. 
Armour studied law under his brother Robert Armour and in the office of Chancellor Philip Vankoughnet. Called to the bar in 1853, he practised in Cobourg in partnership with Sidney Smith, afterwards postmaster-general of Canada. On 28 April 1855 he married Eliza, the daughter of Francis Schimerhorn Clench of Cobourg and his wife, Eliza Cory. They had eleven children. Armour was appointed county crown attorney for Northumberland and Durham on 26 March 1858, and clerk of the peace on 2 May 1861; he served on the Cobourg town council for several years. He was elected warden of the counties in 1859-60, the same time he was appointed a senator of the University of Toronto. In 1867 he was named queen's counsel, and in 1871 he became a bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada. In 1874 he declined the Liberal nomination for West Northumberland in the House of Commons. He was appointed a puisne judge of the Ontario court of queen's bench in 1877, and was promoted chief justice of the court in 1887. Armour was made commissioner to revise the Ontario statutes in 1896. In July 1900 he became chief justice of Ontario and president of the court of appeal. While he declined a knighthood more than once, in June 1902 he received an honorary LLD from his university. On 21 November 1902 he joined the supreme court of Canada. In May 1902, as one of the 'distinguished jurists of repute', he was chosen by the Canadian government to represent Canada on the international tribunal constituted to decide the Alaska boundary dispute. He died in London on 11 July 1903, while attending the sittings of the tribunal, having participated in only two supreme court terms. He was buried in St Peter's cemetery, Cobourg, Ontario. 
Armour's appointment to the supreme court of Canada represented an attempt by the government of Sir Wilfrid Laurier to improve the quality of its members. Armour enjoyed an unimpeachable reputation as a jurist and was unencumbered by partisan ties. A tall broad-shouldered man with a commanding presence, he was known on the Ontario bench as a hard-working judge, who in his judgments combined common sense with a knowledge of local society and a recognition of the spirit of the law. He tended to be unimpressed by arguments based on strict technical views of the law, and employed an incisive mind and a sharp wit to cut to the heart of the issues before him. Though his influence on the supreme court was negligible, his appointment to that court strengthened his position on the international tribunal. 


@@@@@


doc= 30447


Armstead, Henry Hugh (1828-1905), sculptor and illustrator, was born in Bloomsbury, London, on 18 June 1828, the fourth and youngest son of John Armstead, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Hugh Dyer of Belfast. John Armstead was a heraldic chaser and Henry Hugh Armstead began his education in his father's workshop. At the age of thirteen he was sent to the Government School of Design at Somerset House. A contemporary reported that while sketching at the British Museum he began a lifelong friendship with a fellow student, William Holman-Hunt. He subsequently studied at two well-known private art schools in London, run by Francis Stephen Cary (1808-1880) and James Matthews Leigh (1808-1860). Armstead married Sarah, daughter of Henry Tanworth Wells, a harness maker, and sister of Henry Tanworth Wells, RA, at St Pancras Church, Marylebone, on 9 September 1857. They had three daughters and one son. 
Later Armstead was employed at the factory of silversmiths Hunt and Roskell. There he worked with and became a close friend of J. R. Clayton, an important designer of stained glass. At this time he also studied in the studio of the sculptor Edward Hodges Baily (1788-1867) and at the Royal Academy Schools. Until about 1863 Armstead concentrated mainly upon metalwork, designing, modelling, and chasing sculptural trophy and exhibition pieces for Hunt and Roskell and C. F. Hancock & Co. His style was influenced by that of Antoine Vechte (1798-1868), the great French silver-chaser, who was in England at that time, also working for Hunt and Roskell. Among Armstead's works in metal the most important are the 'Tennyson Vase', the 'Packington Shield', and the 'Outram Shield' (exh. RA, 1862; V&A). However, Armstead increasingly turned to sculpture because, Gosse suggests, he was disappointed when his work in silver did not bring him the recognition it deserved (Gosse, 172). The Art Union awarded prizes to Armstead in 1849 and 1851 for a relief of 'The Death of Boadicea' and a statuette entitled 'Satan Dismayed' and published them as an edition of reduced scale bronzes. About 1860 Armstead provided sculptural decoration for the architectural partnership of John Pritchard and John Pollard Seddon at Llandaff Cathedral and Ettington Park, Warwickshire. For Ettington, Armstead designed a series of twenty reliefs illustrating the history of the Shirley family, who lived there. It is said that it was this series of reliefs, together with the 'Outram Shield', which initially brought Armstead to the attention of George Gilbert Scott. During the second half of the 1860s Armstead was at work on a series of wooden relief panels of Arthurian subjects for the royal robing room at the Palace of Westminster. For Scott, Armstead executed the sculptural parts of the model for the Albert Memorial, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Of this Scott wrote in his memoirs, 'I doubt whether either the central figure or a single group, as executed, is superior to the miniature models furnished by Mr Armstead' (Scott, 266). For the actual memorial, in Kensington Gardens, Armstead worked on the podium frieze, with John Birnie Philip, and provided four bronze statues of Rhetoric, Astronomy, Chemistry, and Medicine. Another major work for Armstead was the exterior sculptural decoration of the Colonial Office, Whitehall. The range of Armstead's work encompassed funerary monuments, including the effigies of Bishop Wilberforce in Winchester Cathedral and of Bishop Ollivant in Llandaff Cathedral, public statues, such as 'Lieutenant Waghorn' at Chatham, busts, and a few imaginative works such as 'My Dainty Ariel' (ex Christies, South Kensington, 21 January 1998), 'Hero and Leander', 'The Ever-Reigning Queen', and 'Remorse' (exh. RA, 1903; Tate collection). Armstead also illustrated a number of books: Eliza Cook's 'Poems' (1856), 'Good Works' (1861), and 'Sacred Poetry' (1862); 'The Churchman's Family Magazine' (1863); 'Touches of Nature by Eminent Artists and Authors' (1867); 'Dalziel's Bible Gallery' (1880); and 'Art Pictures from the Old Testament' (1894). Simon Houfe noted that 'his illustrations, especially his religious subjects, were rather hard... his modern genre subjects could be delightful with a good sense of composition' (Houfe, 222). 
Armstead has been recognized as a forerunner to the New Sculpture movement due to the naturalism evident in many of his works. Susan Beattie has argued that his early training as a craftsman also distinguishes him from his contemporaries and links him to a younger generation of sculptors (Beattie, 33). Armstead was familiar with Pre-Raphaelite circles although he was never really part of that movement. 
Armstead was elected an associate of the Royal Academy on 16 January 1875, and Royal Academician on 18 December 1879. He was said to be an active member of the academy and extremely popular as a man. He taught in the Academy Schools from 1875 until near his death. He had a reputation for fine taste as an arranger of works of art when it was his turn to place the sculpture in the annual exhibitions. He died at his house, 52 Circus Road, St John's Wood, on 4 December 1905, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30448


Armstrong, Edward (1846-1928), historian and college administrator, was born at Tidenham vicarage, Gloucestershire, on 3 March 1846, the second son of John Armstrong DD (1813-1856) and his wife, Frances Whitmore (died 1908). In 1853 his father was made the first bishop of Grahamstown, and the family moved with him to Cape Colony. The young Armstrong sometimes accompanied his father on his diocesan visitations among the indigenous population, and the novel sights of southern Africa left a deep impression all his life. His first school was St Andrew's College, Grahamstown. On his father's death in 1856, he returned to England and won a scholarship at Bradfield College, where he was an outstanding athlete. In 1865 he went to Exeter College, Oxford, as a scholar, and obtained first classes in classical honour moderations (1866) and in 'literae humaniores' (1869). That same year he was awarded his degree and elected to a fellowship at Queen's College. 
Except for two years as a classics master at Rugby School (1871-3), Queen's College and Oxford were the centre of Armstrong's teaching and work for the rest of his life. A severe case of typhoid in 1872 brought an interval of enforced convalescence and the opportunity for extensive travel on the continent. Throughout his life travelling was his chief recreation. European travel enabled Armstrong to acquire a proficiency in modern languages that was rare among Oxford dons of his day. His own jocular claim, 'I can speak five fluently and mangle two' ('DNB') seems an accurate account of his attainments. His historical scholarship and numerous book reviews confirm his fine knowledge of French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Dutch, in addition to Latin and classical Greek. Over the years, his wanderings took him to distant parts of Europe where, in addition to visiting towns and libraries, he studied the countryside and its flowers and the ways of rural life. His vivid descriptions of historic sites and their associations often enlivened his lectures and informed his tutorials, to the delight of his listeners and pupils. 
In 1878 Armstrong became senior bursar of Queen's College. The next year he married, on 2 October 1879, Mabel (died 1920), the beautiful daughter of Joseph John William Watson, a scientific inventor and sometime vice-consul for Spain at Brighton. The couple, who had no children, settled in the Red House on Iffley Road, near the Queen's College, and a mile from the home in Iffley of his mother and artistic sister, Fanny. The appointment of his colleague G. W. Kitchin as dean of Winchester allowed Armstrong in 1883 to add to his work as bursar the teaching of modern history for his college. This proved to be the turning-point in his career. He became active in the newly formed history faculty board. The 'Oxford Magazine' wrote in 1928 of him and his friend Arthur Johnson 'probably no two men did more to build up our Modern History school'. He introduced 'Italy, 1492-1513' as a special subject in May 1884. Among the set texts were Guicciardini's 'Storia fiorentina', Machiavelli's 'Il principe', and Luigi da Porto's 'Lettere storiche', all of which were to figure prominently in Armstrong's teaching and scholarship. The special subject in Italian history proved immensely popular, especially with women students, until its suspension in 1913. At the same time Armstrong continued to lecture on fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Europe, succeeding C. E. Boase as university reader in European history in 1894. Armstrong was an early supporter of the education of women at Oxford, serving for several years as chairman of the council of St Hilda's College, and as tutor to many who took Italian Renaissance history as their special subject. But he was in many ways a conservative college don, wedded to the weekly essay and gruelling written examinations, who protested against the alternative of a short dissertation proposed in 1906 by T. F. Tout of Manchester University. 
Armstrong's teaching, in university extension as well as college, often resulted in publication. His university extension lectures in summer 1892 were expanded into his first book, the survey 'The French Wars of Religion'. His biographical study 'Elizabeth Farnese: the Termagant of Spain' (1892) was based on original research in the archives of Naples as well as Spain. From his teaching in Italian history derived his popular life of 'Lorenzo de' Medici', published in Putnam's 'Heroes of the Nations' series in 1896. Based on mastery of the published scholarship but no archival research, the biography is strong on political manoeuvrings, but weak on art and culture. Completely at home in the violent world of Medicean Florence, in his account of the Pazzi conspiracy he drops such chilling aphorisms as 'nothing is easier than to murder one man, few things more difficult than to murder two' (Hutton, 398). His lectures on the great days of the Spanish empire, Germany during the Reformation, and the Netherlands in the sixteenth century culminated in his 'magnum opus', 'The Emperor Charles V' (2 vols., 1902). This work, based on standard collections of documents and specialized monographs, displayed Armstrong's concern for factual accuracy and detail at the expense of much lightness of touch. 
More consistent with Armstrong's reputation as a great talker and entertaining after-dinner speaker are the papers on Renaissance themes which he presented to the Oxford Dante Society, the British Academy, and many learned periodicals. A selection of these was edited after his death by his pupil, C. M. Ady, as 'Italian Studies' (1934). For four decades he frequently reviewed books for the 'English Historical Review', bringing important works of continental scholarship to the attention of British scholars. He wrote lively and informative chapters on Savonarola for volume 1 and on Tuscany and Savoy for volume 3 of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1902, 1905). His most ambitious scheme of historical popularization was as editor of a series, 'The States of Italy', undertaken for Methuen in 1906. Armstrong recruited some of the top talent in Oxford for studies on the cities of north Italy and Naples, but in the event only two volumes were published: 'Milan under the Sforza', by Cecilia M. Ady (1907), and 'A History of Verona', by Alice Maud Allen (1910). He was among the several Oxford dons who signed a letter of post-war reconciliation to German and Austrian professors ('The Times', 18 Oct 1920, 8). 
Administrative work, more than scholarship, occupied Armstrong's later years. From 1911 to 1927 he served as pro-provost of Queen's College. Effectively the head of the college for these years, Armstrong dealt with all sorts of people -- from college servants, undergraduates, and tenants, to soldiers, scholars, and diplomats. A loyal churchman, Armstrong set an example by his daily attendance at morning chapel at Queen's College. A member of the council of Bradfield College (1882-1902), he served as its warden from 1910 to 1925. In Oxford he served as a curator of the Taylor Institution and the botanic garden. In 1905 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy, and in 1926 was awarded its Serena medal for distinguished work in Italian history. His election to the Athenaeum in 1905 was an honour appropriate to his social gifts. The death of his first wife was followed by a second marriage, when he was seventy-five, on 24 September 1921 to Geraldine Prynne, daughter of James Adolphus Harriss, vicar of St Andrew's, Oxford. The loving attention of his young bride, aged twenty-three, brought Armstrong great happiness in his declining years. Failing eyesight curtailed his research and writing, but only weeks before his death he was at work on two chapters for the 'Cambridge Mediaeval History', which were published posthumously. He died on 14 April 1928 at the Red House, Oxford, and was buried in Holywell cemetery. 
Since his school-days, Armstrong had been in the habit of expressing his most intimate thoughts in verse. In his 'Poems', his widow gathered a selection written between 1861 and 1924, which were privately printed by Oxford University Press in 1929. Her touching introduction and the poems themselves convey the range of feeling and depth of character of this remarkable Oxford figure. Armstrong was not a great historian, but more than any don of his generation, he opened the history syllabus at Oxford to new fields, especially to Italy during the Renaissance, and acquainted British readers with contemporary European scholarship. A quiet rebel against the dominance of British history at his university, he introduced new areas of European history to generations of Oxford undergraduates who responded to his enthusiasm and interest with genuine admiration and affection. 


@@@@@


doc= 30449


Armstrong, Sir George Carlyon Hughes, first baronet (1836-1907), newspaper proprietor, younger son of Colonel George Craven Armstrong, of the East India Company's army, and of Georgianna, daughter of Captain Philip Hughes, was born at Lucknow, India, on 20 July 1836. He was privately educated and was nominated to a military cadetship in the company's service in 1855. During the Indian mutiny he was attached to the 59th Bengal native infantry, and afterwards to Stokes's Pathan horse, a newly raised regiment of Indian irregulars. As second in command of the latter he was seriously wounded in the course of operations around Delhi. On the suppression of the mutiny he was appointed orderly officer at Addiscombe Military College, a post he occupied until the college closed in 1861, when he retired from the army with the rank of captain. On 2 February 1865 he married Alice Fitzroy, daughter of the Revd Charles Joseph Furlong; they had three sons and two daughters. 
In 1866 Armstrong took on the duties of secretary and registration agent to the Westminster Conservative Association, and his powers of work and organization were largely responsible for the defeat of J. S. Mill by W. H. Smith in November 1868. After acting for a short time as financial manager of Watney's brewery, he was offered, in 1871, the editorship and management of 'The Globe' newspaper, then in the hands of a small Conservative syndicate, of which George Cubitt (afterwards Lord Ashcombe) was the leading member. The paper had been run for some years at a heavy financial loss, but Captain Armstrong, though without any previous experience of journalism, was an excellent man of business with a keen political instinct. He rapidly raised the paper from the position of a mere derelict to that of a valuable property, and he made it one of the most thoroughgoing and influential supporters of Disraeli in the metropolitan press; down to his death it remained the typical organ of the militant Conservative school. As an acknowledgement of his labours and success the sole property of 'The Globe' was made over to him by the owners in 1875, and in 1882 he acquired a large interest in 'The People', a Sunday Conservative paper with a large circulation among the working classes, and obtained by Armstrong as an antidote to the radical 'Lloyd's Weekly News'. Thanks to these joint ventures, Armstrong made and (unlike many of his contemporary proprietors) retained a large fortune; but he took no part in public or political affairs outside the columns of his papers. Perhaps the best-remembered incident in connection with his editorship of 'The Globe' was the leaked disclosure in its pages, on 30 May 1878, of the terms of the Salisbury-Shuvalov treaty, made available to the paper by Charles Marvin, an occasional contributor temporarily working in the Foreign Office. In 1892 Armstrong was rewarded with a baronetcy for his services to the Unionist Party; he had relinquished the editorship of 'The Globe' in 1889, and in 1899 the control of the paper passed to George Elliot, his second surviving son, who succeeded to the baronetcy. His eldest son, Arthur Reginald, lieutenant 19th hussars, died at Secunderabad on 1 November 1898. Armstrong died of heart disease at his home, 39 Cadogan Square, London, on 20 April 1907. He was buried at Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 30450


Armstrong, Henry Edward (1848-1937), chemist and educational reformer, was born on 6 May 1848 at Caroline Place, Avenue Road, Lewisham, Kent, the eldest son of Richard Armstrong (1827-1884), a commission agent and importer, and his wife, Mary Ann Biddle. He was educated at Colfe Grammar School, Dartmouth Hill, and began to study chemistry in the spring of 1865 at the Royal College of Chemistry in London, first under A. W. Hofmann, and then with Edward Frankland. Within a very short time he was assisting the latter in devising methods for water analysis, particularly for detecting and estimating sewage contamination in public supplies. The methods which they devised were subsequently used by Frankland in a survey of the whole British drinking water supply, which put Britain ahead of all others in its safe provision. 
In 1867 Armstrong went to Leipzig to study chemistry under Frankland's friend, Hermann Kolbe (1818-1884), returning in 1870 with the degree of PhD and a passion for research which never left him; it was undoubtedly Kolbe's 'try it and see' approach to a research problem that was to inspire his later educational ideas. After holding teaching appointments at St Bartholomew's Hospital (1870-82), where he assisted A. Matthiessen in research on alkaloids, and at the London Institution as professor of chemistry (1871-84), he became associated in 1879 with the City and Guilds of London Institute, first at Finsbury College in Cowper Street where he organized classes in technical chemistry, and then, in 1884, as professor of chemistry at the new Central Institution at South Kensington (after 1893 the Central Technical College). At Finsbury, alongside his engineering colleagues, W. E. Ayrton and J. Perry, and equipped with good laboratory facilities, Armstrong pioneered the heuristic, or 'discovery', method of teaching science. Later, at the Central College, he, Ayrton, and W. C. Unwin were pioneers in designing courses in higher technical education for engineers and chemists. The chemistry school was small, but it produced an impressive amount of research in organic chemistry and was among the first in the country to train chemists for work in factories, and the first to produce what were later called chemical engineers. 
Following the formation of Imperial College in 1907 it was inevitable that the Central College would be forced to amalgamate, and when this happened in 1912, Armstrong was forcibly retired, though he was allowed laboratory space until 1913. In his long retirement he became Britain's elder statesman of science, and its Thersites. His interests as a scientist ranged over a wide field of chemistry, which he brought to concise order in his 'Introduction to Organic Chemistry' (1874) and in a series of entries in successive editions of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. His researches in the chemistry of naphthalene were of fundamental importance when this substance was becoming increasingly used as a starting material for the manufacture of intermediates for dyestuffs. The value of this work was especially appreciated in Germany. Concurrently he carried out research into the puzzling rules of substitution in benzene derivatives, suggesting a 'centric' formula for benzene to explain its chemical behaviour. His double-bond or 'quinone' theory of the colour of organic compounds proved a guiding principle for students of dyestuffs until superseded by quantum mechanical ideas. 
The theory of aqueous solution was another subject to which Armstrong devoted much attention, and upon which he carried out a great deal of experimental work. He contested hotly the dissociation theory of Svante August Arrhenius and Wilhelm Ostwald on the justifiable ground that the ionic theory took insufficient account of the part played by the solvent and of the complex character of water. Armstrong's mathematical abilities were inadequate to give his alternative ideas a quantitative basis, but in its modern form the dissociation theory has been modified so far as to justify his ferocious criticism. His broad interest in the causes and conditions of chemical change, which he explained in terms of association, or 'reversed electrolysis', meaning that no reactions ever took place without the presence of an electrolyte, were influential on Arthur Lapworth and the development of ideas on the mechanism of chemical reactions. Other subjects of research in his laboratory were the constitution of camphor and its derivatives, the study of plant enzymes, and the crystallography of organic compounds, of which he realized the fundamental importance, for as early as 1886 he invited H. A. Miers to give instruction in the subject. In all this research work Armstrong was assisted by a succession of students, many of whom, such as W. J. Pope, subsequently made their mark in academic and industrial spheres, carrying his influence with them. He was also an accomplished geologist, walking and photographing almost the entire coastline of southern England with a Margate friend, Dr Arthur Rowe. His long association with the Rothamsted Research Station, where he was a member of the Lawes Agricultural Trust committee from 1889 and eventually chairman in 1937, testified to his keen interest in agriculture. 
On 30 August 1877 Armstrong married Frances Louisa (1843-1935), daughter of a Lewisham druggist, Thomas Howard Lavers. They had three daughters and four sons, one of whom, Edward Frankland Armstrong (1878-1945), became a distinguished industrial chemist. 
Armstrong was elected FRS in 1876 and received the Davy medal in 1911. He did much to raise the profile of the Chemical Society, of which he was a fellow for nearly seventy years, and served as secretary for eighteen years, as president from 1893 to 1895, and as councillor for over sixty years. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of St Andrews and that of DSc from the universities of Melbourne and Madrid. He was awarded the Messel medal of the Society of Chemical Industry (1922), the Albert medal of the Royal Society of Arts (1930), and the Horace Brown medal of the Institute of Brewing (1926). He spoke and wrote much upon matters of public interest in which the application of science was involved, and was a frequent contributor to 'The Times'. In retirement he continued as a critic, writer, and lecturer and came to be regarded as the doyen of British chemistry. He believed it his duty to point out the errors of governments, universities, and individuals and to indicate the path they ought to take. 
Armstrong was a man of forceful personality who held ideas tenaciously and advocated them vigorously. Immensely sociable and a connoisseur of food and beer, he loved travel and visited America three times, as well as India, Australia, and north Africa. He rendered great service to English education by the reforms which he caused to be brought about in the teaching of science, not least by advocating that all secondary schools should be equipped with laboratories. Between 1884 and 1891 the elementary teaching of science was studied by the British Association, inspired by Armstrong. He believed that young children could find out things for themselves if properly guided, and he strongly advocated the heuristic method, notably in a Board of Education report in 1898. He rendered valuable service to Christ's Hospital school as the Royal Society representative on the council of almoners, guiding its move from Newgate Street to West Horsham in 1902; under his guidance it became one of the best-equipped schools in the country for the teaching of science. His reports and essays on science teaching were collected in his 'The Teaching of Scientific Method' (1903, 2nd edn, reprinted 1925). Other essays were published in 'The Art and Principles of Chemistry' (1927). 
Armstrong's personality was elegantly summarized by his son-in-law, Stephen Miall, who described him as 'a vigorous man physically and mentally, a keen critic, a great worker, a good friend, and a good companion', and compared him to Dr Johnson, ascribing to his father-in-law 'many of the good qualities, and some of the faults characteristic of the great lexicographer' ('Chemistry and Industry', 1935, 669). Armstrong died at his home, 55 Granville Park, Lewisham, on 13 July 1937. 


@@@@@


doc= 30451


Armstrong, Thomas (1832-1911), artist and applied arts administrator, was born at Fallowfield, Manchester, on 19 October 1832, the eldest son of Thomas Armstrong and his wife, Sarah. Educated at a private school at Tarvin, near Chester, he initially began work in his family's cotton business in Manchester. However, after taking up drawing classes at the Manchester Fine Art Academy, he decided to train as a painter, and travelled in 1853 to Paris. There he entered the atelier of Gabriel Navier, under the teaching of Ary Scheffer, who greatly influenced his early style and techniques; in the evenings he also attended the famous Academie Suisse. In the late summer and autumn of 1854 he spent time in the artists' colony at Barbizon, where he made the acquaintance of Millet. In 1855 he briefly studied in the Academie Royale at Antwerp under Van Lerius before returning to the family home in Manchester. In 1856 he was back in Paris, where he struck up friendships with George Du Maurier, Edward John Poynter, Thomas Reynolds Lamont, and James Whistler, later immortalized as the 'Paris gang' in Du Maurier's popular novel of 1894, 'Trilby'. Armstrong spent most of 1858 painting in Algiers and in the winter of 1859-60 moved briefly to Dusseldorf, where he was joined by Du Maurier. There Professor Eduard Bendemann had recently succeeded the Nazarene painter F. W. Schadow as director of the art academy. 
On his return to Manchester in 1860, Armstrong devoted himself to painting. From this time he also secured a number of commissions for decorative schemes in houses in the north of England. He finally settled in London in 1864, and with the 'Paris gang' regrouped there, Armstrong and his friends began to make their mark on the art community. He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy from 1865 to 1877, and subsequently at the Grosvenor Gallery up to 1881. His work, mostly as a landscape and figure painter, can be divided into two main phases. His early work was influenced by the academic and naturalist methods he had met with in France, and on his numerous returns to Manchester at this time he painted the streets and slums of the city, although little of this work survives. His work in Algiers, exhibited at the British Institution on his return, also attempted to portray everyday life. However, this early concern with certain forms of realism contrasts sharply with his later idealized and classical concerns. A painting such as 'The Hayfield', exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1869 and now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, is representative of his later work, although Armstrong attempted to convey a greater degree of poetic feeling than would be found in the vigorous classicism of Leighton, Poynter, and Albert Moore. Whistler remained a strong influence, especially in his paintings of decorative interiors depicting women. 
On 22 April 1881 Armstrong married Alice Mary Brine of Shaldon, Devon, and in the same year he was appointed director of the art division of the Department of Science and Art (DSA) at South Kensington, London, in succession to Poynter. His position gave him ultimate direction over the South Kensington Museum and the National Art Training School in their dual concern to provide the highest decorative values in the design of industrially produced objects. His official duties also entailed much travelling, inspecting and awarding prizes at regional art schools. Subsequently, the demands of the post prevented him from continuing his artistic career until after his retirement, despite initially being given studio space at South Kensington. The period of his directorship was marked by a continuous expansion of the DSA's system of art education and museum provision in the regions but, paradoxically, also by the increasing independence of many of the larger schools in major cities such as Birmingham, Glasgow, and his home town of Manchester. Nevertheless, Armstrong was noted for the personal interest which he took in the pupils' work throughout the country, and for his concern to make himself acquainted with the requirements of each district. His own knowledge of the decorative or applied arts had been practically gained on his earlier commissions. Most notably, in 1873 he had employed his friend Randolph Caldecott to help him with a commission for decorative panels of figures and birds for Bank Hall, Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire. Before his appointment at South Kensington he had also supported Gertrude Jekyll in her efforts to establish at Chelsea a school for art needlework. At the DSA he warmly supported the efforts of Walter Copland Perry to supply art students with an adequate representation of antique sculpture, and developed and carried out the plans of his predecessors Sir Henry Cole and Edward Poynter, for a museum of casts. To his initiative also was due the revival of the art of English enamelling, established at the National School under Professor Dalpeyrat in 1886. He was, too, a warm supporter of the school of art wood-carving, which, although not officially countenanced or aided by the department, received the active support of its chief, Sir John Donnelly. 
It was owing to Armstrong's insistence that the Victoria and Albert Museum acquired the scale models of the Camerino of Isabella d'Este, the Appartamento Borgia in the Vatican, the dome of the chapel of St Peter Martyr at Milan, the chief room of the Palazzo Madama at Rome, and other works -- copies of important Italian Renaissance decorative schemes which proved to be invaluable to students. He also applied himself to the acquisition of works of art for the museum and brought in Poynter, Morris, and Walter Crane to develop the department's educative role. He successfully continued the DSA's policy of establishing professional and friendly relations with the directors and officials of similar schools and museums on the continent, and to attract them to Britain to compare and explain their methods. Armstrong retired from the DSA in 1898, when he was made CB. He took up painting again, and devoted himself especially to the execution of a mural tablet of two panels of low-relief copper coloured by oils, showing a 'Riposo' and 'Christ in the Temple'; this was placed in the church at Abbots Langley, Hertfordshire, to the memory of his only child, Ambrose, who had died aged ten years in 1894. Armstrong died after a long illness at his home, Abbots House, Abbots Langley, on 22 April 1911, and was buried at Abbots Langley on 26 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 30452


Armstrong, William (1882-1952), actor and theatre producer, was born at Edinburgh on 30 November 1882, the eldest son of John Armstrong, a grocer, and his wife, Annie Tait. Descended from schoolmasters and ministers, young William was brought up to be a devout Baptist and a teetotaller, and as raconteur and humorist would recall singing at Band of Hope concerts: 'When the wine around you is passing, Have courage, my boy, to say No' ('DNB'). Leaving Heriot's School at fourteen, he studied music at Edinburgh University with help from the Carnegie Trust. He wanted to be a schoolmaster. He passed his first professional examination for the degree of MusB, but musical theory chilled him. He turned to the theatre. With J. M. Barrie as president he founded the university dramatic club and he also joined an amateur dramatic society. From the sixpenny gallery of the Lyceum Theatre he saw the best players on tour -- Sir Henry Irving, Herbert Beerbohm Tree, and Ellen Terry. After years as a schoolmaster Armstrong turned at twenty-six to professional acting. He joined Frank Benson's Shakespearian company at Stratford upon Avon as Jamy in 'Henry V'. 
Tall, willowy, with reddish fair hair and a Scottish accent, young Armstrong cut an impressive figure. His charm and humour were to win him many friends. He made his London debut with Tree's company at His Majesty's in 1909 as Cinna in 'Julius Caesar', and after touring Germany with an English troupe he went back to Scotland for two seasons with Alfred Wareing's newly formed Glasgow repertory company, inspired by Annie Horniman's pioneering venture at Manchester. Back in London after a tour of the United States in Arnold Bennett's play 'Milestones', Armstrong partnered Madge McIntosh in a short one-acter, 'The Music Cure' (Little Theatre, 1914), written for them by G. B. Shaw. The work was subtitled 'a piece of utter nonsense', but it was also seen in a London variety bill. That year Armstrong found sterner Shavian stuff as leading man at Liverpool repertory theatre. This was the start of a long and distinguished career, first as leading man and later as artistic director, at what became, with Armstrong at the helm, the country's most successful repertory theatre. He joined the theatre at a low point in its fortunes, as a member of a so-called 'commonwealth of actors' formed to keep it going during the First World War. It provided him with more substantial Shavian parts than the absurd Lord Reginald Fitzambey. He played Marchbanks in 'Candida', Dubedat in 'The Doctor's Dilemma', and Hjalmar in Ibsen's 'The Wild Duck'. He was also in two Galsworthy plays, one of which took him back to London with the company at the Kingsway for a season in 1915. 
Armstrong was a busy actor at this time, not only at Liverpool and in the West End but also touring army camp theatres. In J. B. Fagan's company he played Aguecheek in 'Twelfth Night' and Crabtree in 'The School for Scandal', and at the prestigious Everyman in Hampstead he played Octavius in 'Man and Superman'. It was, however, his partnering of Mrs Pat Campbell in a tour of 'Hedda Gabler' that in 1922 brought his acting career to a climax -- he beguiled listeners for years afterwards with memories of acting opposite the 'monstre sacre' -- and which launched him as an incomparable, influential, and much-loved director at what became the best repertory theatre in the country, the Liverpool Playhouse. 
Unlike other repertory theatres, which depended on wealthy men such as Barry Jackson at Birmingham to run them or settled for the scramble of a weekly change of bill, Liverpool repertory theatre was owned by 1500 shareholders and it had 900 seats to fill nightly. Armstrong's regime ran from 1922 until 1941. With Maud Carpenter, his business manager, Armstrong was delighted to be able to pursue his own policy without having to consider what he called 'the jungle' (the West End), beyond choosing whatever he fancied from London successes, or even failures if he thought that Liverpool would enjoy them, and restaging them for at least three weeks, and sometimes longer. Impulsive, sentimental, and generous, yet also shrewd, cautious, and businesslike, Armstrong was never tempted to impose his view of the play on the company as an intellectual might have done. It was his personality, his sense of humour, and above all his ability to create an affable atmosphere that brought him such success. 
'Steering firmly between the merely popular and the rashly adventurous', as Grace Wyndham Goldie, historian of the Playhouse, put it, Armstrong had what she called an 'almost overtender regard for the feelings of his company and of his staff' (Rowell and Jackson, 59). His zest and thoughtfulness kept rehearsals lively and entertaining. Actors had a loose rein as long as they remained in tune with the author's ideas and the other performers. 'When things are critical', wrote Wyndham Goldie in her history, 'he is at his best... soothing anybody who is ruffled; insinuating criticisms so that they do not sting; reassuring the nervous with praise; treating every crisis with humour' (Goldie, 202). Every season showed a profit. Playhouse audiences could count on a much better performance than a touring company could give. If the theatre did not achieve a new school of dramatic writing as was originally hoped -- and as Miss Horniman had achieved at Manchester -- many actors of the day owed their later eminence to Armstrong and the Liverpool Playhouse: Michael Redgrave, Rex Harrison, Diana Wynyard, Robert Donat, Cecil Parker, Harry Andrews, Herbert Lomas, Hugh Williams, Robert Flemyng, and Judy Campbell. 
Before the 1941 season began German air raids forced the Playhouse to close. It later housed the exiled Old Vic Company. Armstrong became chief inspector of the Entertainments National Service Association at Drury Lane Theatre (1941-2), and he was much in demand for the West End, where he directed Edith Evans in 'The Rivals' and 'Old Acquaintance', John Gielgud in 'The Circle', Flora Robson in 'A Man about the House', Michael Redgrave in 'Uncle Harry', Pamela Brown in 'Claudia', and Dorothy Hyson in 'Pink String and Sealing Wax'. He was back in the jungle. The West End was 'getting me down', he wrote to a colleague, the director Norman Marshall. 'My heart has always been in repertory and the theatre with a definite policy. I have had some unhappy experiences producing plays with stars who shall be nameless... In spite of the arduous work at Liverpool... it was the greatest and happiest experience of my life. I love working with young people, and moulding them into potential stars. There is a lovely spirit of adventure and excitement in repertory which one never gets elsewhere. (Marshall, 200)' Armstrong moved out of the jungle in 1945. He returned to the provinces, which were later to be renamed the regions and officially subsidized, as assistant to Barry Jackson at Birmingham repertory theatre; he later took over as director. He was appointed CBE in 1951. As the editor of volumes of one-acters, Armstrong collaborated on two full-length plays: 'The King of the Castle' with A. P. Herbert and 'The Furnace' with Francis Brett Young. He died, unmarried, on 5 October 1952 at his home near Birmingham, 176 Oak Tree Lane, Bournville. 


@@@@@


doc= 30453


Jones, Sir Robert Armstrong- (1857-1943), psychiatrist, was born at Llwyn-y-mafon-isaf, Ynyscynhaearn, Caernarvonshire, Wales, on 2 December 1857, the second child and eldest son of the ten children of the Reverend Thomas Jones, Independent minister and farmer, of Eisteddfa, Cricieth, and his wife, Jane Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Jones, also of Eisteddfa. His mother claimed to be twenty-first in lineal descent from Collyn ap Tangno, lord of Eifionydd. He assumed the additional surname of Armstrong in 1913. Jones was educated at Porthmadog grammar school, at Grove Park School, Wrexham, and at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. After six months' apprenticeship to a Dr Roberts at Porthmadog, he entered St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in 1876, where he gained the Wix essay and Hitchens prize. He qualified as LSA (1880), MB (London, 1880), and MD (1883). He was admitted MRCP in 1900 and FRCP in 1907. Leaving St Bartholomew's in 1880 he was junior medical officer at the Royal Earlswood Institution for Idiots for two years, and then at the Colney Hatch Asylum for six years. He had an early inclination towards surgery and in 1885 took the FRCS, but soon decided that psychiatry was to be his life's work. In 1888 he returned to Earlswood as medical superintendent, and then in 1893 became the first medical superintendent of the London County Council's new asylum at Claybury, in Essex. In that year he also married Margaret Elizabeth (died May 1943), daughter of Sir Owen Roberts who was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for the counties of London and Caernarfon. They had one son and two daughters. 
Armstrong-Jones remained at Claybury for twenty-three years, resigning in 1916. His medical and administrative ability, and the research work of his colleague Frederick Mott spread the renown of Claybury far and wide. It was the first asylum under municipal control to receive paying patients and the first to institute a systematic course of training for psychiatric nurses. His work to promote psychiatric nursing was recognized by the order of St John of Jerusalem, who awarded him a knighthood of grace. As Claybury's directing genius, Armstrong-Jones played a crucial role in ushering in more scientific methods of treating mental illness. He was also noted for his support of occupational therapy and for his teaching of students. He was for many years consulting physician in psychological medicine to St Bartholomew's Hospital, and during the First World War he acted in a similar role to the London and Aldershot commands, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
From 1921 until 1931 Armstrong-Jones was one of the three lord chancellor's visitors in lunacy. He was a justice of the peace for Essex and justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for the counties of London and Caernarfon and in 1929 high sheriff of Caernarvonshire. Armstrong-Jones had firmly held religious beliefs and in 1910 he gave evidence on behalf of the British Medical Association to the royal commission on divorce and matrimonial causes, and in 1920 he served on the archbishop of Canterbury's special committee on spiritual healing. Armstrong-Jones was Gresham professor of physic (1917-27), general secretary of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association (1897-1906), and its president (1906-7), president of the section of psychological medicine of the British Medical Association (1903), and of the section of psychiatry of the Royal Society of Medicine (1929). He was knighted in 1917 and made CBE in 1919 in recognition of his war services. He received the honorary degree of DSc from the University of Wales in 1920. He travelled as far afield as Russia, Poland, and Tunisia to visit psychiatric hospitals, and was keenly interested in social questions, on which he wrote vigorous letters to 'The Times'. He published a 'Text-Book of Mental and Sick Nursing' (1907) and contributed many articles to encyclopaedias, treatises, and journals. Armstrong-Jones was well known and admired for his tact, enthusiasm, and energy. His grandson, Antony Charles Robert Armstrong-Jones, earl of Snowdon, married Princess Margaret (Rose), younger sister of Elizabeth II. Armstrong-Jones died on 30 January 1943 at his home at Plas Dinas, Caernarfon. 


@@@@@


doc= 30454


Arnold, Sir (Robert) Arthur (1833-1902), radical and writer, born on 28 May 1833 at Gravesend, Kent, was the third son of the three sons and three daughters of Robert Coles Arnold JP ('b'. 1797), of Whartons, Framfield, Sussex, and Sarah, daughter of Daniel Pizzey (or Pizzi) of Clement's Hall, Rochford, Essex. Sir Edwin Arnold was an elder brother. Owing to delicate health, Arnold was educated at home, and subsequently adopted the profession of surveyor and land agent. He was professionally engaged on proposals connected with the construction of the Thames Embankment; and in 1861 he issued a pamphlet, entitled 'The Thames Embankment and the Wharf Holders', in which he described the three schemes under consideration, including that of Joseph William Bazalgette. Cherishing literary ambitions, he produced in his leisure two sensational novels, 'Ralph, or, St Sepulchre's and St Stephen's' (1861) and 'Hever Court' (1867); the latter appeared as a serial in 'Once a Week'. 
In 1863, under the 'Public Works (Manufacturing Districts) Act', Arnold was appointed by Charles Pelham Villiers, then president of the poor-law board, assistant commissioner, and subsequently government inspector of public works. For three years he was engaged on the difficult task of supervising the employment of the destitute cotton operatives of Lancashire on the making of roads and other public works, and he contributed some striking articles on the subject to the 'Daily Telegraph', then under the editorship of his brother Edwin. In 1864 he issued his popular 'History of the Cotton Famine from the Fall of Sumter to the Passing of the Public Works Act', which reappeared in a cheap edition the following year. On 17 June 1867 he married Amelia Elizabeth (1822-1915), only daughter of Henry Barry Hyde (1785-1831), captain of the 96th regiment, judge, and acting governor of Sierra Leone, of Castle Hyde, co. Cork, and Amelia, daughter of Major Robert Cole of Newport, Isle of Wight. They had no children. In 1867 they made a tour of the south and east of Europe, which first aroused Arnold's Hellenic sympathies. These, to which he remained constant throughout his life, were conspicuous in his descriptive letters, published as 'From the Levant' in 1868. In 1873 the king of Greece conferred the golden cross of the order of the Saviour on Arnold, with special reference to this work. 
In 1868 Arnold also became the first editor of 'The Echo', a new evening paper, and one of the earliest to be sold for 1/2died Under his control this achieved great success and established itself as a paper of independent Liberal principles, with a reputation for cultural content. Arnold's reputation was that of a journalistic trainer, who brought forward some key young talents of the day: William Black, later of the 'Daily News', Frances Power Cobbe, George Byrom Curtis (later editor of 'The Standard'), and Sir John Macdonell, subsequently a leader writer for 'The Times'. Arnold resigned the editorship in 1875, soon after the purchase of the paper by Albert Grant, known as Baron Grant, and immediately started on a journey through the East with his wife. They rode the whole length of Persia, a distance of more than 1000 miles, and his 'Through Persia by Caravan' (1877), dedicated to Earl and Countess Granville, gave a lively account of his adventures. 
Arnold's interests were divided between politics and journalism. A staunch radical, he studied with attention current social and agrarian problems, and contributed frequently to the leading reviews. Articles and pamphlets by him were collected into a volume, entitled 'Social Politics' (1878), in which he advocated a radical programme of church disestablishment, land law reform, reform of metropolitan government, state ownership of the railways, public works during periods of distress, temperance reform, women's political enfranchisement, and reform of the married women's property laws. 
Arnold's ambition to enter parliament was eventually gratified. After he had unsuccessfully contested the borough of Huntingdon in the Liberal interest in 1873 he declined the invitation of the Liberal committee in Northampton to stand in 1874. But in 1878 he accepted the invitation to stand for Salford, where he was elected on a radical platform in the Liberal landslide of 1880. He was an early supporter of home rule, one of only fifteen radical/Liberal MPs who came out in favour of an inquiry at the election; he thereby received strong support from Irish voters. 
While acting with the radical wing of his party on questions of home politics, Arnold frequently criticized with vigour and independence the government's conduct of foreign affairs. In 1880 he became chairman of the Greek committee, in succession to Sir Charles Dilke, and he was active in urging the claims of the Hellenic kingdom to an extension of territory in accordance with the suggestion of the treaty of Berlin. He was also closely involved in the successful campaign to reform the married women's property laws. After joining the executive of the committee in the mid-1870s, he issued several pamphlets on the question and was one of the deputation to the lord chancellor, Lord Selborne, in January 1881, which secured government support for a full measure of reform. In the House of Commons, Arnold also made his mark as an effective speaker in debates on the franchise. On 21 March 1882 his proposal of a uniform franchise and a redistribution of seats was approved by the house ('Hansard 3', 267, 1443, 1532). In 1883 he moved for an elaborate return of electoral statistics, which influenced the 'Reform Bill' of 1884. 
During the 1880s Arnold also took up the question of land reform. In 'Free Land', published in 1880, he advocated the Cobdenite programme of removal of restrictions on the sale and transfer of land -- abolition of the laws of settlement and primogeniture coupled with compulsory registration of titles. This would, he argued, lead to wider land ownership and greater capital investment in agriculture. Arnold's views were also influenced by J. S. Mill and the Land Tenure Reform Association -- he argued in favour of heavier taxation of land and of the 'unearned increment'. Denying the existence of a right of absolute private property in land on the grounds that it was an essential natural resource, he asserted the dormant 'joint interest' of the state to intervene and regulate where necessary. But such views did not lead him to support land nationalization, which he regarded as too costly and impractical. Arnold was the driving force behind the creation of the Free Land League and was elected its president in 1885. His moderate policy of land reform came into competition with Joseph Chamberlain's 'radical programme' which proposed land purchase by elected county councils to provide allotments and smallholdings for rural labourers. Arnold denied Chamberlain's argument that 'free land' on its own would merely make land agglomeration by rich capitalists easier, and asserted that an open land market would allow every farm worker to save up and purchase 'three acres and a cow'. In the 1890s he modified his views on the creation of a peasant proprietorship, and called for the extension of Irish land purchase schemes to the rest of the United Kingdom. 
At the general election of 1885 Arnold was defeated in the newly formed division of North Salford. The small margin of the loss (176 votes) suggests that he may have been a victim of the Parnellite strategy of directing Irish voters to support tory candidates; although a long-standing supporter of home rule, Arnold had not been exempted from this directive. But he clouded his position with the publication in 1885 of 'Home Rule', in which he appeared to back away from the idea of granting Ireland the legislative powers of a self-governing colony, on the grounds that this would lead to separation. Instead he gave support to Imperial Federation and the creation of a true imperial parliament with several devolved parliaments for the constituent parts of the union. Arnold stood again for North Salford as a home-ruler in 1886 but was defeated, and again for North Dorset in 1892 with the same result. He did not re-enter the House of Commons. 
Arnold now turned his energies to the problems of local government in the metropolis, the arena where his public career had begun. In the mid-1880s he was a supporter of the London Municipal Reform League. In 1889, on the formation of the London county council, he was elected an alderman for six years; he was re-elected in 1895 for three and again in 1898 for six years. On 12 March 1895 he was chosen chairman, and was re-elected on 10 March 1896; he thus enjoyed the unique distinction of holding the office for more than one year. As a leading council progressive, he was in full sympathy with the municipal programme carried through during the first ten years, a programme limited to improvements in streets, sewers, rivers, and open spaces. However, in 1898 he emerged as a leading opponent of the council's new policy of municipal housing, arguing that a costly policy of wholesale slum clearance and house building by the council would merely displace the poorest slum dwellers to other parts of the metropolis. Arnold argued that private developers should continue to provide dwellings for the lowest wage-earners, and that the council should limit itself to sanitary regulation and the promotion of transport between the centre and the suburbs. 
On 18 July 1895 Arnold was knighted, and in 1897 Cambridge University bestowed on him the honorary degree of LLD. He was also a magistrate for London and Dartmouth and a harbour commissioner for Dartmouth, where he had a residence. During his final years he retained a keen interest in party politics. His views on Irish home rule had led him towards the Liberal-imperialist camp and this was confirmed by his opposition to official Liberal policy on the South African War. Although he supported the 'patriotic' aims of the Imperial Liberal Council he did not join it, and remained uncomfortable with the term 'imperialist' which, 'to me is always suggestive of a waxed moustache and December 1852' ('The Times', 22 Oct 1900, 5d). Arnold argued that the Cobdenite policy of peace and non-intervention, framed in a different time and context, could not be maintained in the present era of great power rivalry. He remained a vocal opponent of Campbell-Bannerman's leadership and a supporter of Lord Rosebery until the last, writing as late as March 1902 to damn the Liberal leadership for its vague declaration of policy on Irish home rule ('The Times', 12 March 1902, 6). His last public appearance was as chairman of the London Anti-Vaccination Society, at a meeting a few weeks before his death. He died of heart disease at his home, 45 Kensington Park Gardens, London, on 20 May 1902, and was buried at Gravesend. He was survived by his wife, Amelia, who founded a scholarship in his memory at Girton College, Cambridge. She held advanced views on the women's franchise question, and was an active campaigner in her own right. She served on the executive of the Married Women's Property Committee and the Anti-Narcotic League, for whom she wrote a pamphlet, 'A Woman on Tobacco', in 1885. In addition to her travels in the Mediterranean and Near East with her husband, Lady Arnold was an author and novelist. She produced translations of two works by Emilio Castelar (1832-1899), president of the first Spanish republic, published as 'Old Rome and New Italy' (1873) and 'The Life of Byron and other Sketches' (1875), which illustrated her shared interest in Greek independence and wider European nationalist movements. She also wrote several novels, including 'His by Right', 'John Hesketh's Charge', 'Under Foot', and 'Better than Gold'. The last and best-known, published in 1873, took the form of sensational social melodrama, dealing with sexual politics within a propertied Victorian family. Lady Arnold died on 25 March 1915, aged ninety-three. 


@@@@@


doc= 30455


Arnold, Sir Edwin (1832-1904), poet and journalist, was born at Gravesend on 10 June 1832, the second son of Robert Coles Arnold ('b'. 1797), of Whartons, Framfield, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Pizzey (or Pizzi). He was the elder brother of Sir (Robert) Arthur Arnold (1833-1902). His childhood was spent at the family farm of Southchurch Wick, in Essex. Educated at Rochester grammar school, where in 1849 he won 'every available prize for English or Latin prose or verse' (Peiris, 37), and at King's College, London, Edwin Arnold obtained a scholarship at University College, Oxford, in 1851 and graduated BA in 1854 and MA in 1856. Although he won only a third class in the final classical school, he read Greek poetry with enthusiasm, and in 1852 obtained the Newdigate prize with his first poem, 'The Feast of Belshazzar'. This was published separately in 1852, and reissued the following year as part of his 'Poems Narrative and Lyrical' (1853), a collection which obtained the distinction of a joint review with Matthew Arnold's poems in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (March 1854). It is said that in America, many years later, Matthew Arnold found himself credited to an embarrassing extent with the poetical baggage of his namesake. 
Arnold took up a position as second English master at King Edward VI School, Birmingham, in 1854, and on 4 January 1855 he married Catherine Elizabeth Biddulph at Taunton in Somerset. He retired from his duties as a schoolmaster in 1856 in order to take his MA degree at Oxford, and obtained the position of principal of the Deccan Sanskrit College at Poona, India, in November 1857, largely through the good offices of his brother-in-law General John Lester. On settling there he was elected a fellow of Bombay University. He soon studied Eastern languages, and mastered not only those of India but also Turkish and Persian. His time in India produced a pamphlet on education in that country (1860), a successful translation, 'The Book of Good Counsels, from the Sanskrit of the Hitopadesa', with illustrations by Harrison Weir (1861), and a 'History of the Marquis of Dalhousie's Administration' (2 vols., 1862-5). According to his son, he 'twice had the honour of receiving the thanks of the Governor in Council' during his period in India (Arnold, 7). 
Arnold resigned his post in 1861, primarily because of fears for his wife's health. On returning to England he responded to an advertisement for the post of leader writer on the 'Daily Telegraph', which Joseph Moses Levy was just setting to work to regenerate. This appointment finally determined his career. He wrote six leading articles in his first week, and went on to produce well over six thousand more over the next twenty years. On Thornton Hunt's death in 1873 Arnold became a chief editor of the 'Daily Telegraph', and with the proprietors was responsible for the dispatch of some of the most enterprising and important journalistic missions of the time, including those of George Smith to Assyria in 1874, H. M. Stanley (jointly with the 'New York Herald') to Africa in the same year, and Sir H. H. Johnston to Kilimanjaro in 1884. Arnold's strong interest in eastern affairs was reflected in his support for the 'forward policy' of Lord Lytton in India, and especially in his advocacy of the Turkish cause during the Russo-Turkish War of 1878, a stance which helped to shift the 'Daily Telegraph''s political allegiances from radicalism to 'modified conservatism'. He was made companion in the Order of the Star of India when Queen Victoria was proclaimed empress of India on 1 January 1877, and was also decorated by the sultan of Turkey and the shah of Persia. 
In 1879 Arnold published 'The Light of Asia', a versified account of the life and teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, the founder of Buddhism. According to his son, the poem 'was mostly written at Hamlet House, near Southend in Essex' (Peiris, 33). It proved to be tremendously popular; there were sixty editions in England and eighty in America, and translations were numerous. Its apparent promotion of Buddhist values and beliefs aroused the hostility of some Christian commentators, but it was warmly received in the Buddhist world; the king of Siam conferred the order of the White Elephant on Arnold for services to Buddhism in 1879. In an attempt to placate his critics, Arnold published a sequel in 1891 on the life of Christ called 'The Light of the World', but it proved a signal failure. 
Arnold's first wife died in 1864, and on 3 August 1868 he married Francis (Fannie) Maria Adelaide, the daughter of the Revd W. H. Channing of Boston. He was made knight commander in the Order of the Indian Empire on 1 January 1888. On the death of his second wife in March 1889, he left the editorial room of 'The Telegraph' to become a 'travelling commissioner' of the paper. In August 1889 he was invited to deliver two lectures at Harvard University by its president, Charles William Eliot, and in 1891 he returned to the United States to undertake a lecture tour. He also visited Japan twice during these years, returning to England the second time with his third wife, the twenty-year-old Tama Kurokawa, whom he married in 1893. These experiences resulted in a number of travel books, including 'East and West' (1891), an optimistic account of Japanese progress and culture. 
Arnold was a serious candidate for the poet laureateship on the death of Tennyson in 1892, and, indeed, 'expected the appointment' (Peiris, 67), but he encountered the formidable opposition of Gladstone, and eventually lost out to Alfred Austin. During the last nine or ten years of his life his sight gradually failed, but in spite of infirmities he maintained a keen interest in contemporary affairs and continued to publish both poetry and prose. He was well enough to attend the coronation of the tsar of Russia in 1896, and to undertake a cruise around the Mediterranean in the following year. In 1899, however, his eyesight and his general health both deteriorated rapidly, and he retired from active work. 
Arnold died at his house at 31 Bolton Gardens, London, on 24 March 1904; he was cremated at Woking and his ashes were placed in the chapel of his old college at Oxford. He was survived by his third wife and by three sons and two daughters, including his eldest son, Edwin Lester Arnold (1857-1935), a journalist and novelist. 
The vast majority of Arnold's copious literary output is likely to remain undisturbed by future generations of readers. Such modern interest as there is in his poetry stems almost exclusively from the role played by 'The Light of Asia' in popularizing Buddhist thought in the West. It has been claimed that Arnold in fact became a Buddhist despite officially remaining a member of the Church of England until his death. Evidence for this view is sought in his adoption of many Buddhist practices; he was, for instance, 'vice-president of a vegetarian society in Bayswater of which a young Indian student then M. K. Gandhi, later Mahatma Gandhi, was secretary' (Peiris, 76). 


@@@@@


doc= 30456


Arnold, George Benjamin (1832-1902), organist and composer, born on 22 December 1832 at Petworth, Sussex, was the son of George Frederick Handel Arnold, organist of the parish church of Petworth, and his wife, Mary. He was articled to George William Chard, the organist of Winchester Cathedral, in 1849, and on Chard's death that year the articles were transferred to his successor, Samuel Sebastian Wesley. Arnold was organist successively at St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, near Dublin (1852), St Mary's Church, Torquay (1856), and New College, Oxford (1860), following Stephen Elvey. He graduated BMus at Oxford in 1855 and DMus in 1861. In 1865 he succeeded Wesley at Winchester Cathedral, a post he retained for the rest of his life. On 6 June 1867 he married, at Winchester, Mary Lucy Roberts, the daughter of the Revd Thomas Roberts; they had three sons and a daughter. 
By 1867 Arnold had already begun publishing his compositions, including the national song 'Old England' (1854), and the oratorio 'Ahab', performed by the National Choral Society at Exeter Hall (1864). His sacred cantata, 'Sennacherib', was produced at the Gloucester festival of 1883, 'The Song of the Redeemed' was written for and performed at St James's Church, New York (1891), and 'An Orchestral Introduction and Chorus in Praise of King Alfred' was given at the inauguration of the Alfred Memorial at Winchester in 1901. In addition Arnold composed motets, psalms, anthems, partsongs, sonatas, and glees, one of which, 'Harmony', won the Lancashire Choral Union prize. He was also a fellow of the Royal College of Organists and acted as examiner for that body for many years. He died at 5 The Close, Winchester, on 31 January 1902, and was buried at Winchester Cathedral in February. He was succeeded by his pupil and assistant organist, William Prendergast. In 1904 an alabaster tablet with a quotation from one of his works was placed in Arnold's memory in the north transept of the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 30457


Arnold, Sir Thomas Walker (1864-1930), orientalist, was born at 1 Fore Street, Devonport, Devon, on 19 April 1864, the third son of Frederick Arnold, an ironmonger, and his wife, Matilda Christiana Sweet. He was educated first at Plymouth high school, then from 1880 at the City of London School, and in 1883 he won a scholarship to Magdalene College, Cambridge. Although he gained only a third class in the classical tripos he had developed a strong interest in oriental studies under the influence of Edward Byles Cowell and William Robertson Smith, and spent a fourth year at Cambridge studying Arabic and Sanskrit. 
In 1888 Arnold was appointed teacher in philosophy at the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh, in the United Provinces, India, where he remained until 1898. These ten years had a lasting influence on Arnold's character and outlook. He was among a small band of Englishmen, led by the principal of the college, Theodore Beck, and Theodore Morison, who devoted themselves to the ideal laid down by its liberal-minded founder, Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan, to reform Islam by a harmonious synthesis of reform culture with western scientific thought and method. Arnold set out with genuine religious fervour to make this ideal a reality. He dressed like a Muslim and founded for students in the college the Anjuman al-Farz, or 'Duty Society', the members of which undertook to work individually for the regeneration of their nation. He acquired a deep understanding of Indian Muslim society and the affection and respect of his colleagues and pupils. 
On 20 September 1892 Arnold married Theodore Beck's niece Cecilia Mary Hickson, daughter of George Hickson, wholesale boot and shoe maker; they had one daughter. In 1898 he joined the Indian educational service as professor of philosophy at the Government College (later University) of Lahore. Among those profoundly influenced by his teaching there was Muhammad Iqbal, later one of the leaders of the Indian Muslim community. 
Arnold resigned from the Indian service in 1904 and returned to London as assistant librarian at the India Office, holding simultaneously the part-time professorship of Arabic at University College. From 1909 to 1911 he was the first holder of the post of educational adviser for Indian students in England. His services to Indian education were duly recognized by the CIE in 1912 and a knighthood in 1921. On the establishment of the School of Oriental Studies in the University of London in 1917, Arnold was invited to teach part-time. After retiring from the India Office in 1920 he was appointed first holder of the school's chair of Arabic and Islamic studies. His remaining years were devoted to building up the new department, to teaching, and to writing. 
Arnold's first major work, 'The Preaching of Islam' (1896), written during his time at Aligarh, placed him at once in the front rank of Islamic scholars and historians and was influential in disseminating the more informed and sympathetic view of Islam which began to prevail towards the close of the nineteenth century. An Urdu translation was published in 1898, and a second, much revised and enlarged, English edition in 1913. It was subsequently translated into Turkish (1925), Persian ('c'.1936) and Arabic (1947). An edition of a small but important theological text on the 'Mu'tazilah' (1902) was Arnold's only other orientalist publication from India. 
Arnold's most productive period of publication came after he had retired from the India Office and from the administrative pressures which had curtailed his research output. His interests fell into two main categories: first, the religion and history of the Arab Islamic world, and second Islamic pictorial art. In 'The Caliphate' (1924; repr., 1965), he surveyed the history of the caliphate from its origins to its final abolition, producing a classic work which became a standard text for several generations of English-speaking undergraduates. In 'The Islamic Faith' (1928) he compressed the work of many years into a sixpenny booklet for a wider public. Articles contributed to James Hastings's 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics', 'Persecution' and 'Toleration', suggested the idea of a book on toleration in Islam but this did not materialize. Since 1910 Arnold had acted also as English editor of the premier international reference work, the 'Encyclopaedia of Islam', himself contributing several articles relating mainly to India. 
In his later years Arnold's main interest was Islamic art, a subject in which there had previously been relatively little academic interest and which he helped to build up as a major subject of study. 'Court Painters of the Grand Moguls' (with Laurence Binyon, 1921) and some minor essays preceded the publication of his elaborate study 'Painting in Islam' (1928; repr., 1965), a work which laid the foundations for the scholarly study of the history and technique of Islamic art. His conclusions were summarized in 'The Islamic Book' (in collaboration with Adolf Grohmann, 1929; also in German, 'Denkmaler Islamischer Buchkunst'). More specific subjects were covered in 'Bihzad and his Paintings in the Zafarnamah MS' (1930) and the 1928 British Academy Schweich lectures entitled 'The Old and New Testaments in Muslim Religious Art' (posthumously published in 1932). 
Arnold delighted in teaching, and his humanity and enthusiasm made him an ideal teacher. A careful and precise scholar, he maintained a high intellectual standard and always countered dogmatic judgements with humorous but devastating criticism. Something of a scholastic, keenly interested in medieval thought and religious institutions, and a lover of colour and ritual, he produced a much admired translation entitled 'The Little Flowers of St Francis' (1898, and many subsequent editions), an early demonstration of his feel for literary style. Among his many honours was that of honorary fellow of Magdalene College in 1917, an honorary doctorate of the University of Prague, and election as a fellow of the British Academy in 1926. Arnold died of heart failure at his home, 19 Gloucester Walk, Kensington, London, on 9 June 1930, shortly after returning from a few months in Cairo as visiting professor at the Egyptian University. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30458


Arnold, William Thomas (1852-1904), journalist and author, was born at Hobart, Tasmania, on 18 September 1852, the eldest son and second child of Thomas Arnold (1823-1900), sometime administrator, schoolmaster, and university professor, and Julia Sorell (1826-1888). 'Willie' was a gentle, sensitive, academically gifted child. He was born into one of England's most distinguished, middle-class, Liberal families. His grandfather Thomas Arnold, was the famed headmaster of Rugby School; an uncle, Matthew Arnold, was the poet; and another uncle, W. E. Forster, a minister in two of Gladstone's cabinets. His elder sister, Mary, later Mrs Humphry Ward, became a best-selling, highly respected novelist and his younger sister Ethel Margaret Arnold became a journalist and lecturer on female suffrage. Yet all his life he was happiest when not having to be an Arnold, with all the relentless striving and ambition that implied. His early years and education were in some part influenced and shaped by his mother's mental instability and, more fundamentally, by his father's sudden conversions from and to Roman Catholicism. Arnold was baptized an Anglican at birth, was rebaptized as a Roman Catholic at five, only to be confirmed in the Church of England at twelve. From 1862 to 1865 he was a pupil at the Oratory School, Birmingham; from 1865 to 1871, he attended Rugby School. Apparently unruffled by this eclectic religious denominationalism, and the sudden changes in domestic arrangements forced upon the family by his father's quixotic behaviour, Arnold earned golden opinions at school, and proceeded to University College, Oxford, as a scholar. There, in 1876, to everyone's surprise but his own, he graduated, not with a first but a good second-class honours degree. Nevertheless, he revealed his true scholarly potential subsequently with an outstanding study of Roman provincial administration, which won the Arnold prize in 1879. 
In 1873 Arnold had fallen in love with Henrietta Wale, daughter of Charles Wale JP, of Little Shelford, near Cambridge. His family were opposed to the match, but they were married on 26 June 1877, at Lee, Kent. Arnold loved his wife dearly, but Henrietta was always highly-strung and nervous; they had no children. In 1879, on the advice of Humphry Ward, C. P. Scott recruited Arnold for the 'Manchester Guardian'. Arnold liked Manchester and enjoyed the companionship afforded by his newspaper colleagues. He worked six afternoons and evenings a week at the 'Guardian' office, writing leaders, reviews, and theatre notices. His leisure hours he devoted to research in Roman history, English literature, particularly the poetry of Keats, publishing a scholarly edition of the poet's works in 1884, and to long country walks with his wife and their dogs. 
To journalism Arnold brought real academic distinction and pronounced Liberal sympathies. His searching, powerful intellect coupled with impressive imaginative powers made him an accomplished and persuasive writer. Almost immediately it was his writing on Ireland that set the tone and made possible the future 'leap of faith' by the 'Guardian' when, in the mid 1880s, whiggism was abandoned for Liberal radicalism. Between 1879 and 1896 it was Arnold, not Scott, who was the true architect of the 'Guardian''s style, and his the personality more strongly expressed both in the leader and the critical columns. To the acute vexation of his family, but to his own deep and entire satisfaction, few people were aware of Arnold's crucial contribution. It has been said that he gave himself to the 'Guardian' 'as a Jesuit to the order'. He would quote: 'There is no limit to what a man can do when he does not care who gains the credit for it' (Nichols, 113-14). He refused a number of tempting offers to become a member of parliament and a don; he was content with his life as a journalist. 
For someone who was such a talented political writer Arnold attached no overwhelming importance to politics, insisting it was criticism that gave to any newspaper its true cachet. He wrote particularly well on the theatre and painting; he always encouraged local artists and played an active part in establishing the Manchester School of Art. It was Arnold's interest in individuality and his respect for intellectual authority that shaped his political journalism. This was most directly relevant concerning Ireland. He was responsible for the 'Guardian''s Irish policy, committing it to the support of home rule in a debate that for so long excited extremes of public opinion. Sympathetic to the unionization of unskilled labour, he presented and defended the claims of the dockers in their 1889 strike. Much as he admired German culture and scholarship, towards the end of his life he became increasingly concerned about Prussian chauvinism. A series of articles originally written for the 'Spectator' was republished as 'German Ambitions as they Affect Britain and the United States' (1903). 
From 1896 Arnold was increasingly incapacitated by what at first he supposed was rheumatism. His physical and nervous deterioration proved altogether too much for his wife, who collapsed under the strain and thereafter was hopelessly disabled by hysterics. Arnold's elder sister, Mary, nursed him and took charge of his affairs during the last dreadful years. His suffering, caused by locomotor ataxia (syphilitic in origin), was agonizing, and the partial relief afforded by morphia ended in inevitable addiction. A cerebral thrombosis eventually brought merciful release on 29 May 1904; he was buried at Little Shelford. Arnold was undoubtedly one of the greatest journalists of his day. Although his active working life was short, only seventeen years, his influence upon the 'Manchester Guardian' was as immeasurably great as it was long-lasting. 


@@@@@


doc= 30459


Forster, Hugh Oakeley Arnold- (1855-1909), politician and author, was born at Dawlish, Devon, on 19 August 1855, second son and third child (a second sister, Frances Egerton Arnold-Forster, was born later) of William Delafield Arnold (1828-1859), director of public instruction in the Punjab province of India, and Frances Anne (died 1858), daughter of General J. A. Hodgson (who became surveyor-general of India). His father was a younger son of Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby School, and brother of Matthew Arnold, the poet, critic, and inspector of schools. Oakeley (as he was known to family and friends) Arnold was thus born into the academic purple of the 'intellectual aristocracy' of Victorian imperial Britain. Among his widely ramifying cousinhood were Francis Cranmer Penrose, architect and archaeologist, and his daughter Emily Penrose, the principal of Somerville College; and on his mother's side Mary Augusta Ward, known as Mrs Humphry Ward, the novelist and mother-in-law of G. M. Trevelyan, and Julia Frances Huxley, daughter-in-law of T. H. Huxley, and mother of Julian and Aldous Huxley. All his life Arnold bore the stamp of this elite. He had a justifiably high opinion of his intellectual abilities and a corresponding sense of obligation to employ them worthily in social and public service. His high-mindedness was of an uncompromising integrity, redolent somewhat of his famous grandfather's schoolmasterly manner. He worked intensely as a scholar, writer, and controversialist, and then as a politician, to instruct and improve the world about him. 
When Arnold was four months old his parents returned with him to India, where his early years passed with the family at Dharmsala and the hill station at Kangra. It was at this latter place that his mother died in 1858. His father decided to send the children back to England, but, while following them, died at Gibraltar on 9 April 1859. The orphaned children were taken in to the home of their aunt Jane Martha, their father's elder sister, who had married in 1850 the Quaker-bred Bradford woollen master and liberal politician William Edward Forster. The Forsters were childless, and the match between them and the Arnold orphans proved to be entirely happy and affectionate. 
Arnold's early schooling was in his maternal family country at Exmouth, under John Penrose, a relation of his late mother. In 1869 he entered Rugby School, scene of his grandfather's renown, but was later withdrawn by Forster on the ground that the standard of discipline had declined. After preparation under a private tutor Arnold matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 24 January 1874. At Oxford he proved receptive to the influence of Ruskin's social, national, and imperial ideals, much as was the case with his near contemporary Cecil Rhodes. He graduated in 1877 with a first-class degree in modern history. On leaving Oxford Arnold, along with his siblings, adopted the name of Arnold-Forster. 
On 5 November 1879 Arnold-Forster was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, after having read at the chambers of R. A. McCall. 'In all that he did', McCall later recalled, 'he was ever 'thorough'' (Arnold-Forster, 29). A promising career as a barrister seemed in prospect, but Forster's appointment by Gladstone in April 1880 to the chief secretaryship at the Irish Office opened up a much more spacious opportunity. Arnold-Forster took on the position of private secretary to his foster father at one of the most critical times in Britain's relationship with Ireland. As Forster grappled with the Irish revolution inspired by Parnell and the Land League his adopted son was initiated into the great world of high politics. Arnold-Forster commenced his voluminous career as a controversialist with the anonymous publication in 1881 of 'The Truth about the Land League'. Forster's break with Gladstone, and his resignation over the so-called Kilmainham treaty and Parnell's release from prison in May 1882, followed by the murder of Lord Frederick Cavendish in Dublin a few days later, left foster father and adopted son united in hostility to Gladstone's Irish policy. Released from official secretarial duties, Arnold-Forster engaged himself assiduously in a variety of public activities. He became involved in social work projects in association with Octavia Hill, Canon Barnett, and other leading philanthropists. He wrote extensively for the reviews, soon establishing himself as an expert in the field of naval, military, and imperial affairs. He joined his foster father among the founders of the Imperial Federation League in 1884, and became its secretary. He became political editor of 'The Statist', which platform he used in the mid-1880s to criticize Gladstone for the want of a definite and constructive Egyptian policy. He travelled extensively, particularly in eastern Europe and Russia, often in Forster's company. Arnold-Forster had an insatiable love of the sea and seafaring: there was many a cruise in his Thames barge as well as, later, an immersion in the higher concerns of naval policy. His most notable exploit in this earlier period was his role in conspiracy with Captain John Arbuthnot Fisher RN, then director of the Portsmouth gunnery school, and the 'sensational' journalist William Thomas Stead to get up very successfully the 'navy scare' of the autumn of 1884. In 'The truth about the navy', published in Stead's 'Pall Mall Gazette', Arnold-Forster accused Gladstone's government of neglecting Britain's imperative duty to assure command of the seas. 
Amid the stir of these activities in 1884 Arnold-Forster married Mary, eldest daughter of Mervyn H. N. Story-Maskelyne, professor of mineralogy at Oxford. In order to put his marriage on a secure financial footing (there were eventually four sons of the union) Arnold-Forster entered the publishing firm of Cassells in 1885, and commenced on an extensive programme of writing books designed to instruct children in (in his foster father's words) 'what ought to be the principles which should actuate them as patriotic citizens' (Arnold-Forster, 62). Of his historical and geographical texts, a piece for 'Murray's Magazine', 'In a conning tower' (1888), was admired by Rudyard Kipling for the authenticity of its depiction of naval warfare. Arnold-Forster was a critic of Edward Cardwell's army reforms of the 1870s, and in 1892 and 1898 made two books out of his indefatigable letters to 'The Times' on the subject. In all, the list of Arnold-Forster's books and 'principal articles' in reviews extends to forty-four items. Sir Michael Grant-Duff remarked that 'Arnolds seem to write as naturally as they learn to breathe or walk' (ibid., 40). 
Like his uncle Matthew, Arnold-Forster found Gladstone's summoning of the 'masses' increasingly indigestible. He disliked also what he saw as the pointless brawling of party politics. At the time of debate about the third 'Reform Bill' in 1884 he collaborated with Sir John Lubbock on 'Proportional Representation'. His reservations about Liberalism led to his declining an offer of nomination to contest Oxford City in the Liberal interest in 1881. In 1883 he was nominated to contest Devonport, but withdrew in 1885, following Forster's repudiation of Gladstone's appeal to the country in the general election of that year. It was after the Liberal split over Irish home rule in 1886 that Arnold-Forster found a more congenial role as a Liberal Unionist. He stood unsuccessfully at Darlington in 1886 and at Dewsbury in 1888. In these years he continued to write copiously on questions of imperial defence and inter-service collaboration, as raised particularly by the Hartington commission's work between 1888 and 1890. It was George Robert Parkin, the educationist and imperialist, who commented on Arnold-Forster's intolerance of dissent and his 'brusque manner which sometimes exposed him to criticism' (Arnold-Forster, 41). 
At the general election of 1892 Arnold-Forster was successful as a Liberal Unionist in the West Belfast division, which he continued to represent until 1906. He entered the House of Commons as one of Joseph Chamberlain's followers, though characteristically he was at pains to insist upon his independent standing. One of his first acts as an MP in 1893 was to be instrumental in having the union flag flown over the Palace of Westminster while parliament was in session, when existing protocol dictated that the royal standard alone be raised over a royal palace. Official employment could not be found for Arnold-Forster in the construction of the Conservative and Liberal Unionist coalition government in 1895. He was never a popular House of Commons man, nor was he at ease in the clubs. In his advocacy of Chamberlainite policies such as imperial federation and tariff reform Arnold-Forster was ever the stiff and austere intellectual. Chamberlain, now colonial secretary, asked him in August 1900 to go to South Africa as chairman of a land settlement commission to report on the prospects of settling discharged British soldiers in that country after the South African War. Arnold-Forster fulfilled his task in highly difficult circumstances with characteristic dispatch and efficiency. On his return later in 1900 Lord Salisbury invited him to take on the parliamentary secretaryship of the Admiralty in the reconstructed Unionist government, and to answer for that department (Lord Selborne being the new first lord) in the House of Commons. 
This was a post well suited to so enthusiastic a navalist as Arnold-Forster. With accustomed energy and single-mindedness he launched himself into a programme of reforms 'modern and scientific'. A characteristic concern was to optimize the efficiencies to be got by standardization of dimensions of equipment and materials. He worked to this end with Sir Joseph Whitworth, having already (in 1899) published 'The Coming of the Kilogram'. He worked also once more with the new second sea lord, Sir John Arbuthnot Fisher, in revolutionizing the system of entry and training of naval officers to meet the exigent demands of a new era of technology. He worked too with the 'back-room' eminence and royal confidant Lord Esher and with Sir George Sydenham Clarke at the War Office on the beginnings of what became the committee of imperial defence. As the journalist James Louis Garvin remarked of Arnold-Forster, 'no man knew more about public affairs as a whole' (Arnold-Forster, vii). If such knowledge, combined with unsparing application and athletic dynamism (he was a keen cyclist), were the essential prerequisites of political success, Arnold-Forster's public career seemed by 1903 to be poised on the brink of expansive good fortune. 
In 1903 A. J. Balfour, who succeeded his uncle Lord Salisbury as prime minister in 1902, was in great difficulties following Chamberlain's resignation of the Colonial Office in order to further his campaign for tariff reform in an imperial 'Zollverein', and the consequent counter-resignation of the chief of the free traders, the duke of Devonshire. In his reconstruction Balfour moved St John Brodrick from the War Office to the India Office. Brodrick had not been a convincing reformer of the army, which the South African War had exposed as the most imperative requirement among the great institutions of the British state. On paper Arnold-Forster was his obvious replacement at the War Office. Balfour's difficulty was that he knew Arnold-Forster's great weakness: that he was an over-rigid theoretician and an intellectual perfectionist, unwilling to accept that (in Clarke's words) 'curiously... illogical institutions' could answer for Britain's needs more effectively than ones founded on dialectic impeccability (Tucker, 100). In a subordinate office, as at the Admiralty, these considerations were not disabling for Arnold-Forster. But the War Office notoriously required a tactful handling of personalities and a sureness of parliamentary touch. It was thus that Balfour's offer of the War Office and cabinet rank came to Arnold-Forster only after the refusal of five more favoured candidates (the king first wanted Esher, Balfour first wanted Aretas Akers-Douglas). 
Hence Arnold-Forster was reluctantly appointed to an office widely regarded as a graveyard of political reputations, at a time when Balfour's ministry was beginning to crumble under the pressures of the division in the Unionist Party over the fiscal question. It was unfortunate also that shortly before taking over at the War Office Arnold-Forster strained his heart severely in a riding accident, from which he never fully recovered. He none the less set about confidently scrapping the Cardwell and Brodrick reforms. Linked battalions and regimental depots were set to be abolished, with 'large depots' established for recruitment and supply. Brodrick's army corps system was abandoned. Arnold-Forster wanted a perfectly logical dual-system army: a short-service (two-year) home army to build up a reserve for expansion in time of war, and a long-service (nine-year) army to garrison the empire. His primary aim was to create a real striking force of all arms able to take the field without cumbersome delays of mobilization. In order to fit into this system the militia would be scrapped and integrated into the short-service home army, liable for foreign service in time of war. The commandership-in-chief was abolished and an army council established on the model of the Board of Admiralty. Arnold-Forster set in train plans for a general staff and an inter-service defence committee composed of the intellectual elite. He 'lectured the generals of the army council as if they were schoolboys and treated the House of Commons with scarcely more respect' (Hamer, 230). 
This ruthless frontal assault on well-entrenched professional interests created for Arnold-Forster many enemies. Eminent and influential people with whom he had collaborated when at the Admiralty, and who were initially sympathetic to root and branch military reforms, found his personality and his methods at the War Office counter-productive. The militia colonels in parliament were especially active in stirring up hostility to his plans. Balfour defended Arnold-Forster to Esher as the 'best of good fellows, [but] he is at once unconsciously inconsiderate of other people's feelings, and unduly sensitive in his own, -- a rather unfortunate combination' (Hamer, 231). Esher thought Arnold-Forster 'not quite a gentleman' (Lees-Milne, 147), and likened his policies to his lack of prowess at shooting: 'He knows all about guns, but he can't hit a haystack' (ibid., 231). It was he who played the decisive part in undermining Arnold-Forster's reforming plans at the War Office. Avoiding responsible office, and adept and feline in intrigue, Esher used his connections with the court and his place on the War Office reconstruction committee to work to subordinate the War Office to the policy decisions of the newly formed committee of imperial defence. Esher challenged Arnold-Forster directly on such issues as disposition of militia battalions in what his biographer has described as 'a bold stance for an independent peer to take up against an accredited Secretary of State for War' (Lees-Milne, 152). Arnold-Forster 'never forgave Esher for his interference in military affairs'. He felt he had cause also to condemn Brodrick as a 'false friend' (Hamer, 227). Fisher also in his own way became a 'false friend' by his resistance to Arnold-Forster's plan to make the Admiralty subject to inter-service co-operation. Esher clandestinely arranged for the formation in January 1905 of a secret subcommittee of the committee of imperial defence, chaired by Balfour and backed by Joseph Chamberlain, to settle matters behind Arnold-Forster's back. 
The impasse into which Arnold-Forster got himself in any case hardly mattered in the context of the general disintegration of the position of Balfour's government in 1905. Balfour's resignation in December of that year ended any chance of Arnold-Forster's achieving substantial results for his 'dual army' scheme. At the general election called by the new prime minister, Campbell-Bannerman, in January 1906 Arnold-Forster retired from his Belfast constituency and was adopted at more convenient Croydon. This division he successfully held amid the collapse of the unionist parties under the Liberal landslide. In the new parliament he conducted a futile campaign against his successor at the War Office, Richard Burdon Haldane. 
During 1907 Arnold-Forster suffered severely from his heart condition. A visit to Jamaica, accompanied by his wife and a son, on the invitation of Sir Alfred Jones to attend the conference of the Imperial Cotton Growing Association was intended as a relaxing diversion, but unfortunately coincided with a devastating earthquake which wrecked Kingston and destroyed Port Royal. He and his family were lucky to survive. He returned to Britain in shock, his health in unrelieved decline, and died at 27 Hereford Square in South Kensington on 12 March 1909. He was buried at Wroughton, Wiltshire, the parish of his wife's family home. 
Arnold-Forster's career illustrated vividly the strengths and limitations of pure intellect as applied to the impure world of parliamentary politics and ministerial intrigue. He was constitutionally inhibited from making concessions or compromises in policy or from cultivating popularity. He was an easy target for enemies such as Campbell-Bannerman, who could take advantage of Arnold-Forster's superb unwillingness to ingratiate himself and mock his allegedly 'metallic voice, sour visage, and dogmatic egotism' (Hamer, 256). 'His patriotism', as J. L. Garvin judged, 'was a religion which possessed him from head to foot. He was a pioneer of all the imperial causes through their darkest days' (Arnold-Forster, vii). Balfour paid accurate tribute to Arnold-Forster: no man was 'more absolutely absorbed in a great and unselfish desire to carry out his own public duty' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 30460


Arrol, Sir William (1839-1913), civil engineer, was born at Houston, Renfrewshire, on 13 February 1839, the son of Thomas Arrol, cotton spinner, and his wife, Agnes Hodgart, sister of Matthew Hodgart, a mechanical engineer in Paisley and partner in the firm of Fullerton Hodgart and Barclay. Shortly afterwards the family moved to the nearby textile town of Johnstone where at the age of nine William was sent to work as a piecer in a local cotton mill. In 1850 Thomas Arrol became manager of one of the thread mills of J. and P. Coats in Paisley where William was employed as a wooden bobbin maker until he was apprenticed at the age of fourteen to Thomas Reid, a local blacksmith. After completing his time he worked as journeyman in different parts of England, returning to Scotland in the early 1860s to work for the Paisley engineering firm of Blackmore and Gordon. He was appointed foreman of the boilershop of R. Laidlaw, gas engineers in Glasgow, in 1863, and the following year married Elizabeth, daughter of David Pattison, a Paisley mill mechanic. 
During 1868 Arrol started his own boiler-making business with premises in Peel Street, Glasgow, trading as William Arrol & Co. In 1871 he built the Dalmarnock iron works and shortly afterwards diversified into bridge building and public works contracting, winning a number of contracts from the Edinburgh suburban railway. His first major contract, in 1875/6, was for the Bothwell Viaduct (727 feet long) to carry the Hamilton and Bothwell branch of the North British Railway over the Clyde. In carrying out this contract Arrol devised a novel method of projecting the continuous girders across the river from pier to pier on rollers driven by ratchet bars. This success made him the natural choice later in 1876 for the Caledonian Railway contract to build the viaduct across the Clyde into Glasgow's new Central Station. For the construction of this massive bridge Arrol invented special drilling machines and hydraulic riveting equipment. 
Before the viaduct was completed in October 1878 Arrol had won the prestigious commission to build a railway bridge across the Firth of Forth designed by Sir Thomas Bouch. When Bouch's Tay Bridge collapsed in December 1879 the contract was cancelled while new designs using a cantilever and straw stick system of construction were prepared by John Fowler and Benjamin Baker. In 1882 Arrol was awarded the contracts for both the Forth Bridge and the replacement Tay Bridge, designed by William Henry Barlow. The contract for the Forth Bridge, worth more than $3 million, was for a steel rather than a wrought-iron bridge. In order to make up the huge tubular supports, Arrol designed with the help of his cousin Matthew Hodgart complex drilling and riveting machines. He overcame the problem of building in a fast-flowing river by using a system of pontoons for sinking caissons. Model sections of the bridge were tested by Arrol on Fowler's highland estate near Ullapool. His industry during these contracts was formidable, getting up at four nearly every morning, supervising the production of the sections at the Dalmarnock works, visiting both sites every week, and meeting the consulting engineers in London every Thursday. The contracting work at Queensferry on the Forth was entrusted to a new company, Tancred Arrol & Co. The new Tay Bridge was opened in 1887 and the Forth Bridge in 1890. At the inauguration ceremony performed by the prince of Wales, it was announced that Arrol had been knighted. The bridge was soon acknowledged as one of the modern wonders of the world, attracting crowds of visitors. 
By the mid-1880s Arrol had won major contracts outside Scotland, for Tower Bridge in London (1886-94) and for the viaduct over the Hawkesbury River in New South Wales. Over the next twenty years the firm, which was converted into a limited liability company in 1895 as Sir William Arrol & Co. Ltd, was recognized as the leading bridge builders in Britain. Contracts included the second section of the bridge over the Clyde at Central Station (1901-6), the Nile Bridge at Cairo (1904-8), the Redheugh high level bridge at Newcastle, twelve of the largest bridges on the Manchester Ship Canal, and the Wear Bridge at Sunderland (1905-9). 
Arrol's structural engineering skills also won him contracts for light steel roofs and whole workshops. In 1887 he built his first roof, for the smithy at Dubs locomotive works in Glasgow. Other business quickly followed until his company became one of the most important builders of engineering workshops in the country. Contracts included the Parsons marine steam turbine works at Wallsend-on-Tyne (1895-7), massive engine and boiler shops for William Beardmore's Dalmuir naval construction works (1902-5) and the gigantic Coventry Ordnance in Glasgow (1910). By the First World War, there was hardly a shipyard or engineering works in Scotland, the north of England, and Ireland that Arrol had not done work for. 
Arrol's knowledge of hydraulic engineering led him to manufacture hydraulic riveting machines, together with their associated engines and accumulators. He combined his hydraulic and structural skills to build massive gantries over shipbuilding berths at Beardmore's Dalmuir yard and Harland and Wolff's Queen's Island yard in Belfast. These complex structures were equipped with lifts and jib cranes to carry hydraulic riveting machines. Benefiting from his early experience in gas engineering he invented in collaboration with William Foulis, the Glasgow corporation gas engineer, machines for charging, discharging, and cleaning retorts. These were supplied to gas companies throughout the United Kingdom. Arrol's skill as a businessman and his likeable character earned him a seat on the board of J. and P. Coats when it became a public company in 1890 and on that of Union Castle Steamship Company when the merged company was formed in 1900. He was also a special director of the Glasgow-based Union Bank of Scotland and a director of the steelmakers Stewarts and Lloyd. 
Arrol was a Liberal Unionist in his early life, but left the party in 1886 with other Unionists over the Irish home rule question. He became a passionate opponent of home rule, standing as Unionist candidate in South Ayrshire in 1892 and winning the seat in 1895. He stood down as an MP in 1906. He was not an active parliamentarian, attending the Commons only infrequently and only speaking four times in his whole career on minor issues. He made his home at Seafield House in Ayr from 1885, where he became an enthusiastic gardener and picture collector. His first wife died in 1904 and in 1905 he married his first cousin Janet Hodgart. She died on 2 January 1910 and on 16 November of that year he married Elsie, daughter of James Robertson of London. He died on 20 February 1913, at Seafield. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 30461


Arthur, Prince (1883-1938), governor-general of South Africa and grandson of Queen Victoria, was born Arthur Frederick Patrick Albert at Windsor Castle on 13 January 1883. He was the only son and second child of Prince Arthur William Patrick Albert, first duke of Connaught (1850-1942), third son of Queen Victoria, and his wife, Princess Louise Margaret Alexandra Victoria Agnes (1860-1917), daughter of Prince Frederick Charles of Prussia. He and his sisters, Margaret (later crown princess of Sweden) and Patricia (later Lady Patricia Ramsay), were largely raised at Queen Victoria's court, though in 1887 they joined their parents in India. 
As a small boy, his father found Arthur 'very intelligent and even thoughtful' (Longford, 234), while his aunt, Princess Beatrice, dismissed him as 'slow and wanting' (ibid.). He was educated at Farnborough School, Hampshire, and Eton College before attending the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In 1899 the death of his cousin Prince Alfred of Coburg raised the question of the succession to the dukedom of Coburg. The duke of Connaught was now heir apparent to this title, with Prince Arthur next in line. Connaught saw some merit in his son taking on the German title since as a prince of the United Kingdom he would receive no civil list income and yet be debarred from earning a living. Queen Victoria did not want him to leave his family, while the Kaiser objected to Connaught, his uncle. Young Prince Arthur refused to leave Eton. He threatened his cousin Charles Edward, duke of Albany, with a thrashing if he did not offer himself as a candidate. Under pressure, Albany surrendered his English nationality and duly succeeded as duke of Coburg, with lamentable consequences for himself when war broke out between England and Germany. 
Prince Arthur was commissioned into the 7th hussars in 1901 and served in South Africa on an exposed plain outside Krugersdorp. He later became captain in the Royal Scots Greys in 1907, rising to brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1919, honorary major-general in 1920, and colonel-in-chief of the regiment in 1921. 
As one of only two grandsons of Queen Victoria available for royal duties (the other being the prince of Wales, later King George V), Prince Arthur was deployed by King Edward VII for those he found irksome, an early example being the entertainment of the shah of Persia (with whom conversation was impossible) during his state visit in August 1902. He was sent to Japan to invest Emperor Mutsuhito with the Order of the Garter in 1906, returning via Canada. In 1912 he represented George V at the same emperor's funeral and invested Emperor Yoshihito with the Garter. In 1918 he was again sent to Japan to hand the emperor a field marshal's baton. There were missions to Portugal (1908) and to Russia, Bavaria, and Italy (1911). Prince Arthur was a councillor of state during George V's visit to India for the Delhi durbar from 1911 to 1912. 
During the First World War Prince Arthur went out with the Old Contemptibles, serving as aide-de-camp to Sir John French, commander-in-chief of the British empire forces, from 1914 and in similar appointments under General Haig and Sir Charles Carmichael Monro until September 1916, when he was transferred to his regiment until March 1917. He then served on the general staff on the western front until 1919, being twice mentioned in dispatches. 
Having earlier wished to marry one of the daughters of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, Prince Arthur was married on 15 October 1913 to his first cousin once removed, Alexandra, duchess of Fife (1891-1959) ['see 'Alexandra, Princess], daughter of the princess royal and a granddaughter of Edward VII. His bride gave her husband a cigarette case inscribed 'From Fife to Drum'. They had one son, Alastair, who eventually succeeded his grandfather as second duke of Connaught and died in Canada on 26 April 1943, making the dukedom of Connaught extinct. 
In 1920 there were rumours that Prince Arthur might become king of Greece, which were denied by the Foreign Office. Instead he served as governor-general of South Africa from 1920 to 1923. Being a member of the British royal family, and thus above political suspicion, he received a warm welcome from the South Africans, and made a point of undertaking special duties for the indigenous peoples. General Smuts, the prime minister, was pleased with the reception of his royal governor-general, and on his departure praised him for having done everything possible to 'advance the interests of South Africa' ('The Times', December 1923). 
During Prince Arthur's South African years, depression in trade and industry led to unemployment, economies in public and railway services, and the Rand strike of 1922, which was suppressed by martial law; he had handed over South African military command to the union authorities in the previous year. In 1922 he inaugurated the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, becoming its first chancellor. He opened Cape Technical College in 1923, and the barrage on Vaal River at Vereeniging in the same year. He travelled widely, sometimes to remote areas by car and by horseback, and was generally successful in prompting feelings of good-neighbourliness in many communities. Yet his official secretary, Bede Clifford, found him peevish, rebuking officials for minor infringements of etiquette. Once, in the Eastern Province, Prince Arthur doggedly proceeded with a speech to adults which had been written for schoolchildren, and a talk in Portuguese west Africa, in which he touched on the well-meaningness of government stock inspectors, was received with groans. 
At his own request Prince Arthur resigned as governor-general in 1923 and returned to England. Thereafter he was based in London, where he led a more leisurely life. His principal occupation was as chairman of Middlesex Hospital from March 1924. $2 million were raised, much of the total being due to his efforts on the special appeal committee, and the Middlesex became one of the greatest teaching hospitals with first-rate laboratories, a new outpatients' building, and a new nurses' home. He was also closely involved with the work of University College and Moorfields hospitals. 
Prince Arthur was a tall, stooping figure, known for his shyness and reticence. He once arrived to open a church fete in Buckinghamshire via a side route. But when he took an interest in the lack of playing fields for poor boys, he played skittles happily in an East End mission hall. He was appointed KG (1902), KT (1913), privy councillor (1910), GCMG (1918), GCVO (1899), and CB (1915), and held the Royal Victorian Chain (1906). His father being actively involved in freemasonry, Prince Arthur was initiated in the Royal Alpha Lodge, no. 16, London, in 1911. 
In May 1937 Prince Arthur took his place with the royal dukes in Westminster Abbey at the coronation of King George VI, representing his aged father at the ceremony. Within the year, he developed cancer of the throat. He travelled to Switzerland for treatment, returning in March 1938 looking painfully thin. He died at his home, 41 Belgrave Square, London, on 12 September 1938 and was buried on 22 September in the burial-ground at Frogmore. The king attended the funeral, and the archbishop of Canterbury paid tribute at the memorial service to 'the quiet courage and patience with which he met the duties and some of the disappointments of his life' ('The Times', 22 Sept 1938). 


@@@@@


doc= 30462


Arthur, Prince, first duke of Connaught and Strathearn (1850-1942), governor-general of Canada, army officer, and son of Queen Victoria, was born at Buckingham Palace, London, the third son and seventh of the nine children of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, on 1 May 1850, the birthday of his godfather, the duke of Wellington, after whom he was named Arthur William Patrick Albert. His mother's favourite son, from his earliest years, Prince Arthur was destined for a career in the army. In 1858 his father mapped out a scheme for his education and appointed Captain Howard Elphinstone as his governor. The young prince lived in an independent establishment with his governor at Ranger's House, Greenwich, and, on the death of the prince consort in 1861, Elphinstone took an increasingly paternal role in his charge's life. He was influential in leading the prince to acquire an interest in and appreciation of the arts and sciences, with the result that Arthur was more cultivated than either of his elder brothers, the prince of Wales and the duke of Edinburgh. 
Prince Arthur's formal military training began on 11 February 1867 when he entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. In 1868 he was commissioned in the Royal Engineers and was subsequently posted to the various arms of the service to give him the broad qualification which might later be useful if, as was expected, he were to succeed the duke of Cambridge as commander-in-chief. His first service abroad was from 1869 to 1870, in Canada with the rifle brigade. On 24 May 1874, he was created duke of Connaught and of Strathearn, and earl of Sussex, and was subsequently known by his first title. In 1876 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and placed in command of the 1st battalion of the rifle brigade. From 1880 to 1883, as a major-general, he commanded the infantry brigade at Aldershot. His promotion had been accelerated, but he was to show that it had not outstripped his competence. In 1882 he commanded the brigade of guards during the Egyptian campaign, which culminated in Wolseley's brilliant victory at Tell al-Kebir against Arabi Pasha's much larger, well-entrenched, and powerfully gunned army. Connaught's brigade was in the second line, but it, and he personally, came under fire during the engagement. He had succeeded in bringing his men to the right place at the right time after an adventurous night march in which much might have gone wrong. Wolseley declared that he had 'taken more care of his men and is more active in the discharge of his duties than any of the generals now with me'. Thus the duke acquitted himself well in battle and became the last British prince to command a significant formation in action. 
During the pacification of Egypt, Connaught was governor of Cairo, but he had little taste for that work and was glad in 1883 to embark on service in India, first as a divisional commander and then, from 1886 until 1890, as commander-in-chief of the Bombay army. His area of responsibility extended from Bombay to Aden, but his wish to modernize the Indian armies and to reduce the social gap between the British and the Indian officers and troops was not encouraged by the duke of Cambridge nor, indeed, by almost anyone other than the queen. While in India, he travelled extensively and strenuously throughout the subcontinent carrying out military inspections, and on diplomatic and imperial missions. His interests ranged from improving the efficiency of his forces to concern for the status of women in what he considered a primitive form of society. 
In these roles, Connaught excelled and, both before and after he was in India, he discharged them in most quarters of the globe, including the United States, China, Japan, many of the British dominions and colonies, and most of the European countries. He was an excellent public speaker, a welcoming host, and an attentive guest, who found himself more or less at ease with the bey of Tunis, President Taft of the United States, the emperor of Japan, the emperor of Austria, and even Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, his nephew. 
On 13 March 1879 Connaught had married Princess Louise Margaret Alexandra Victoria Agnes of Prussia (1860-1917), the third daughter of Prince Frederick Charles of Prussia and the great-niece of William I of Germany. They had three children; the eldest, Margaret (1882-1920), married the crown prince of Sweden, and had four sons and a daughter; the only son, Arthur (1883-1938), was governor-general of South Africa; and the younger daughter abdicated her royal style in 1919 to become Lady Patricia Ramsay (1886-1974). The Connaughts' marriage was happy and enduring, notwithstanding the duke's affection for Leonie Leslie, the sister of Lady Randolph Churchill, which was shared by his wife. 
In 1902 Connaught was promoted field marshal and in 1904 was selected to fill the new post of inspector-general of the forces. The declared purpose of this innovation (which arose from the so-called Esher army reforms), was to provide the newly created army council with eyes and ears; they would sit in their offices and committee rooms and the inspector-general would go out and report what was happening on the ground. Connaught travelled widely among the troops in the United Kingdom and those in the overseas garrisons and he reported as he found, mostly to the effect that the reforms were eyewash. This did not appeal to the army council, nor to the secretary of state for war, and it was decided that the duke, who was too prestigious to be sacked, should be exported. He was, much against his own wish and only on the insistence of his brother, Edward VII, sent to Malta as commander-in-chief and high commissioner in the Mediterranean. Here he found himself, as he had predicted (and quoting his own description), no more than a fifth wheel on the coach; an impediment to, rather than an enhancement of, its efficiency. Much to the annoyance of the king and R. B. Haldane, the secretary of state for war, he resigned in 1909 and so ended his active military service. 
Ironically, however, this change brought Connaught towards the summit of his useful career. Edward VII decided that the duke should be governor-general of Canada and to this proposal there was an enthusiastic response from both sides of the Atlantic. Connaught was sworn in as governor-general in Quebec on 13 October 1911. During the next five years, he travelled to every part of the dominion. There was some reserve in French Canada, but in most places he was well-received and he became much better known than any of his predecessors. He established an informal system for seeing the prime minister, Robert Borden, and the ministers of his Conservative government, which had just won a general election. At first, he thought highly of them all, but he soon came to believe that his original impression of healthy enthusiasm and vigour in the minister for militia and defence, Sam Hughes, was more correctly interpreted as self-conceit inflated by an unbalanced mind. This raised very serious issues after the outbreak of war in 1914: with his own army experience, the duke inevitably had strong opinions on military matters, and, despite his constitutional position, he came into conflict with Hughes. The latter insisted on the Canadian troops being equipped with the Canadian-made Ross rifle, and continued to do so after conclusive evidence had been assembled showing that the rifle often jammed after a few rounds when exposed to the conditions of the battlefield. He talked of raising vast Canadian armies of a million men, which Connaught believed would bleed the dominion white, and he turned a blind eye to the recruitment of Americans while the United States was still neutral, contrary to assurances given to the American president by the governor-general. Hughes was also in close accord with Colonel Wesley Allison, long suspected and eventually unmasked as one of the most disagreeable of a number of fraudulent arms profiteers. Thinking that Hughes was a danger to Canada, Connaught pressed Borden to drop him. Borden was probably of the same opinion, but it was not until after the duke had left Canada that he acted on it. 
Connaught's attitude has been portrayed as an unconstitutional vendetta, but had he left Sam Hughes to himself, the governor-general would have been failing in his duty to advise, warn, and encourage. When he left Canada in October 1916, there were widespread expressions of regret, not the least from Borden himself. 
After Canada, Connaught did not hold any public appointment, but he continued to fulfil public engagements, the most important of which took him in 1921 to India, where he opened the new chamber of princes, the central legislative assembly, and the council of state. 
Connaught lived on until 1942, dividing his time between Clarence House in London and Bagshot Park, Surrey, which had been built for him between 1876 and 1879. From 1921 to 1934 he also maintained a villa, Les Bruyeres, at St Jean Cap Ferrat, in France, where his garden was regularly opened to members of the navy visiting Villefranche. The duke had received every order which it had been in the power of his mother to bestow, and had received further decorations from Edward VII and George V, and from many foreign powers. He presided over many organizations, including the Royal Society of Arts, the Boy Scouts' Association, and the united lodge of freemasons, and was colonel of three, and colonel-in-chief of nineteen, army regiments. His later years were saddened by the loss of his wife in 1917 and by the death of his elder daughter in 1920 and of his only son in 1938. He died at the age of ninety-one on 16 January 1942 at Bagshot Park and was buried at Frogmore. 


@@@@@


doc= 30463


Arthur, William (1819-1901), missionary, was born on 3 February 1819 at Glendun, Antrim, the son of James Arthur, whose ancestors came from counties Limerick and Clare, and his wife, Margaret Kennedy, who was of Scottish and Ulster descent. He grew up in Kells, Antrim, and moved with his parents to Newport, co. Mayo, at the age of twelve. Brought up as an Episcopalian, he became a Wesleyan Methodist and began to preach before his sixteenth birthday. In 1837 he entered Hoxton Academy to train as a Wesleyan minister. He became committed to the cause of overseas mission and sailed for India on 15 April 1839 under the auspices of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society. In India he was based at Gubbi, about 80 miles north-west of Bangalore, but his health gave way and he returned to England in 1841. Although his sojourn in India lasted for less than two years, it was, on his own admission, probably the most important period of his life. In 1843 he was stationed at Wesley's chapel in City Road, London. From 1846 to 1849 he was a Wesleyan missionary in France, first at Boulogne and then in Paris. In 1849 and 1850 his ministry was in London, at Hinde Street and Great Queen Street. From 1851 to 1868 he was one of the secretaries of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, and he was an honorary secretary from 1871 to 1888. From 1868 to 1871 he was principal of the Methodist college, Belfast. 
Arthur was elected a member of the effective leaders of the Wesleyan Methodists, the legal hundred, in 1856, and was president of the Wesleyan conference in 1866. In 1888 he settled at Cannes, where he preached occasionally in the Presbyterian church. On 18 June 1850 he married Elizabeth Ellis Ogle (died 1888), from Leeds. They had five daughters. He died at Cannes on 9 March 1901. 
Portraits of Arthur in his later years show him as a slender, balding figure with deep-set blue eyes and a kindly expression. Within the Wesleyan pastorate he had a reputation for generosity, holiness, and integrity. As a theologian he was praised more for his intuition than for his powers of reasoned argument. Although he was committed to a punishing schedule of preaching, administration, and writing, ill health plagued him all his life and frequently determined the type and geographical location of his ministry. He suffered from poor eyesight, serious throat problems, and an unspecified chest illness. Unsurprisingly, over time his writings came to have more influence than his actions. 
Arthur's chief interests, reflected in his published works, lay in domestic and foreign missions, education, and Christian apologetics. Besides prolific contributions to reviews and magazines he published some thirty pamphlets on theological and political subjects; his eleven books included 'A Mission to the Mysore' (1847), 'The Tongue of Fire' (1856), 'The Life of Gideon Ouseley' (1876), 'The Pope, the Kings and the People' (1877), and 'Women's Work in India' (1882). He was an honorary secretary of the Evangelical Alliance and played an important part in organizing the first international ecumenical Methodist conference at Wesley's chapel in London in 1881. He was a vigorous opponent of slavery, Anglo-Catholicism, and Roman Catholicism, and an equally vigorous supporter of temperance (he was a vice-president of the United Kingdom Alliance), sabbatarianism, and religious education. He maintained a lifelong interest in his native Ireland from a stoutly protestant perspective and unsurprisingly he sided with those nonconformists who rejected Gladstone's proposals for home rule in 1886. He was, in short, narrowly protestant in his religious sympathies, but engagingly internationalist in his vision for a Christian world order. 


@@@@@


doc= 30464


Asche, (Thomas Stange Heiss) Oscar (1871-1936), actor and theatre producer, was born in Geelong, Victoria, Australia, on 24 January 1871, the son of Thomas Asche (1826-1898), a Norwegian by birth. Asche referred to his mother as being 'a Kentish woman of farming stock' ('Oscar Asche', 17); elsewhere, she is stated to have been Thomas Asche's second wife, Harriet Emma, daughter of William Trear, licensed victualler, of Sunderland ('DNB'; Blake). Thomas Asche, who was renowned for his physical strength, had studied law in Norway and emigrated to Melbourne in 1854, but, failing to master the English language, earned his living as a hotelier and land speculator, successively in Geelong, Melbourne, and Sydney. The opportunity to meet a succession of English actors (including Dion Boucicault, G. V. Brooke, George Rignold, and Kyrle Bellew) who stayed at the Royal Hotel, Sydney, owned by his father, encouraged Oscar's youthful enthusiasm for the theatre. His other enthusiasm was cricket. 
Adventurous by nature the young Asche left Melbourne Church of England grammar school in 1887 and travelled to China, into the Australian bush, to Fiji, and to Norway where he met Ibsen, who was 'pleasantly drunk' at the time. Asche had a letter of introduction to Bjorn Bjornson (son of the author) with whom he intended to train for the theatre, but instead he followed Ibsen's advice: 'Go to your own tongue language' ('Oscar Asche', 68-9) and went to England. On Henry Irving's recommendation, he took elocution lessons with Walter Lacy and made his London debut at the Opera Comique on 25 March 1893, playing a small role in 'Man and Woman', but he spent the next eight -- formative -- years touring with Frank Benson, having been engaged as much for his (supposed) skills behind the stumps as for those on the stage. Team-player and good sport, Asche was the quintessential 'Bensonian'; he married Elizabeth (Lily) Brayton (daughter of Lancashire physician and surgeon John Grindall Brayton), who had joined the company in 1896, on 22 June 1898. By then Asche, having played more than 100 Shakespearian roles, had graduated to second leads -- Brutus, Claudius, and so on. When Benson brought his itinerant troupe to the Lyceum Theatre in the spring of 1900 Asche appeared in six of the eight productions, most notably as Pistol, Claudius, and Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, raising that smallish part to one of sinister grandeur. 
Although Asche remained with Benson after the London season, the following year he rose to the challenge of a contemporary play in the West End, creating the role of Maldonado in Pinero's 'Iris' (Garrick Theatre, 21 September 1901). Next Asche enlisted with Herbert Beerbohm Tree at His Majesty's Theatre as both an actor and a producer, combining leading roles with production so that for 'Richard II' (10 September 1903) he prepared (cut and rearranged!) the text, rehearsed the company, and appeared as Bolingbroke, whose coronation tableau brought the production to a scenically spectacular conclusion. Asche interrupted his seasons with Tree to play Benedick to Ellen Terry's Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing' (Imperial Theatre, 23 May 1903). 
The actor having turned producer, the next step was for the producer to turn manager, or rather joint-manager with Lily Brayton and their old Bensonian colleague Otto Stuart at the Adelphi Theatre, where their greatest success was 'The Taming of the Shrew' (29 November 1904), with Brayton as Katherine and Asche as Christopher Sly and Petruchio. Played initially as a farce by a largely old Bensonian company, 'The Taming of the Shrew' became Asche's greatest success, which he and Lily Brayton played 'something like fifteen hundred times, in many parts of the world' ('Oscar Asche', 112). Asche naturally included 'The Shrew' in his solo-management at His Majesty's Theatre in 1907, where the repertoire included Laurence Binyon's 'Attila' and 'Othello', with Asche scoring a notable success with a depiction of the title role which drew on stereotypical characteristics of the black male. When Asche staged 'Othello' during his first professional visit to Australia in 1909 it drew forceful interjections from members of the audience unfamiliar with the story -- such as 'You're a bloody liar!' to Iago in act III ('Oscar Asche', 126). 
At the Garrick Theatre on 19 April 1911 Asche appeared as the philosophic beggar Hajj in Edward Knoblock's 'Kismet', scoring a success as actor, producer (the first of his studiedly oriental offerings), and manager. The king and queen attended 'Kismet' during its record-breaking run which concluded on the very eve (20 January 1912) of Asche's second Australian tour; this was followed by tours of New Zealand and South Africa, with performances of 'Antony and Cleopatra' (with Asche and Brayton in the title roles) in all three countries. 
A revival of 'Kismet' was affected by the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, but, undeterred, Asche successfully staged 'Mameena', an adaptation of Rider Haggard's 'Child of the Storm', at the Globe Theatre (30 September 1914). His great wartime success, 'Chu Chin Chow', was written to fill in time during a wet week in Manchester. Enhanced by George Frederic Norton's tuneful score and sumptuous costumes and sets, 'Chu Chin Chow' provided the escapism for which combatants and civilians alike clearly craved as they filled His Majesty's Theatre from August 1916 to July 1921 for a record-breaking 2238 performances. While 'Chu Chin Chow' enjoyed its long run, its greatest rival as a musical hit, 'The Maid of the Mountains', was produced by Asche at Daly's Theatre in 1917. 
Asche earned $200,000 from 'Chu Chin Chow', but the money did not last long. A stranger to any form of financial management (he never filled in cheque stubs) and an incorrigible gambler, Asche also lost heavily on his farm in Gloucestershire. Through necessity and inclination he continued to work, revisiting Australia (1923-4) and trying his hand at modern-dress Shakespeare with 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (Haymarket Theatre, 26 July 1929). He wrote his autobiography, 'Oscar Asche: his life by himself' (1929), and two works of fiction, 'The Joss-Sticks of Chung' and 'The Saga of Hans Hansen' (1930). He appeared to have recovered from the pleurisy which had afflicted him towards the end of 1935, but on 23 March 1936 he died suddenly of coronary thrombosis at his cottage, Endways, Bisham, Berkshire, near his wife's riverside home. He left $20; he had no children. Lily Brayton survived him, and married a Scottish physician, Douglas Chalmers Watson, in 1938. 
With his Norse paternity, his antipodean upbringing, his outstanding Shakespearian repertoire, and his fascination with the Orient, Oscar Asche was a true cosmopolitan. Beneath his expansive figure and carefree, or rather careless, ways were the talents of an actor, an author, a producer, and a manager. He encompassed and succeeded in the classical tradition of Benson and Tree as well as creating what for decades remained the longest-running show in theatrical history. To Asche alone belongs the distinction of appearing (as Casca) in the Shakespeare tercentenary revival of 'Julius Caesar' before the king and queen at Drury Lane on 2 May 1916 and a few months later making his first entrance at Her Majesty's Theatre, singing: 'I am Chu Chin Chow of China'. 


@@@@@


doc= 30465


Ashbee, Charles Robert (1863-1942), architect, designer, and social reformer, was born on 17 May 1863 at Spring Grove, Heston, Isleworth, Middlesex, the first of the four children of Henry Spencer Ashbee (1834-1900), merchant and book collector, and his wife, Elizabeth Josephine Jenny (1841-1919), daughter of Edward Otto Charles Lavy of Hamburg and his wife, Marian Benjamin. 
In 1865 Ashbee's parents moved to 46 Upper Bedford Place, Bloomsbury, and it was here, in the comfortable household of an increasingly wealthy London merchant, that he and his three sisters grew up. H. S. Ashbee is now famous for his outstanding collection of erotic books, assembled in the 1870s and 1880s, and for published catalogues of erotic literature. But these interests do not seem to have disturbed the even tenor of family life at Upper Bedford Place, which was presided over by H. S. Ashbee's small, strict, German-Jewish wife. Elizabeth Ashbee loved her only son almost too much; and his love for her was, perhaps, the most enduring attachment of his life. 
Ashbee was educated at Wellington College, and then at King's College, Cambridge (1883-6). What he learned at Cambridge came not from the academic history which he studied, but from the shared intellectual life of his circle of high-minded friends at King's College. Socialists in a loose, non-political sense, they were anxious to temper the late Victorian inequalities of wealth and class. Friendships within the circle were intense, and at Cambridge Ashbee came to accept his own homosexuality, helped by the guidance of Edward Carpenter, the socialist and simple life enthusiast, who urged that love between men might work to break down the barriers of class. He had already developed an interest in art, perhaps at first just because he was good at drawing. Now he found in the writings of John Ruskin a critique of industrial society in the name of art which strengthened his aesthetic responses, linking them to his social concerns. He learned, too, to think of himself as part of an intellectual elite, abreast of the latest ideas, interpreting the world. The values, interests, and identity which Ashbee acquired in these years remained with him for the rest of his life. He left the university -- having decided to train as an architect -- full of a powerful but rather unfocused urge to do good in the world. 
In the autumn of 1886 Ashbee began work as an articled pupil of Bodley and Garner, the leading church architects of the day. He took up residence at Toynbee Hall in Whitechapel, east London, which had been set up in 1884 in response to the public outcry the previous year when reports of poverty, disease, overcrowding, and crime in east London, and particularly in Whitechapel, had shocked middle-class London. It was a university settlement where graduates from Oxford and Cambridge could live among the poor while carrying on their own professional work. Residents were expected to do some educational or social work in the area: Ashbee ran a Ruskin reading class. Out of this experience grew the idea of a workshop which would double as a craft school in the evening, and on 23 June 1888 the Guild and School of Handicraft was opened on the top floor of a warehouse at 34 Commercial Street, next to Toynbee Hall. There were four workmen at first, under the direction of the twenty-five-year-old Ashbee, making furniture, metalwork, and painted decorations. With its idealized sense of craft, derived from Ruskin, William Morris, and the burgeoning arts and crafts movement, and its social mission derived from the settlement movement, the guild was quite unlike the surrounding poverty-driven workshops of Whitechapel. 
In 1891 Ashbee moved the workshops of the guild from 34 Commercial Street to Essex House, at 401 Mile End Road, an early eighteenth-century mansion on the borders of Mile End and Bow; he believed that the guild would be more at home among a less deprived, more solidly artisan population. The guild prospered at Essex House and by 1900 was employing about forty men, although the School of Handicraft had to close in 1895. At this stage, and for many years to come, the guild was the centre of Ashbee's life, and very much his creation. But it was also an attempt to give power to the men who worked there. It was a co-operative workshop, with important decisions made by the guild in committee and profits (when there were any) shared among the members. Although Ashbee designed most of the guild products, he worked hard to nurture the craftsmen's own creativity. In a sense it was not this table or that decanter that was the object of his creativity, but the human story of the guild. And just as his workshops stood far to the east of other arts and crafts workshops in London, so Ashbee stood apart in the arts and crafts movement because he was mainly interested not in design or technique or the reform of public taste, but in the workshop experience of the men -- and at this stage they were all men -- whom he employed. 
Ashbee was, in general, a solitary figure who did not work easily with other men as equals. In the guild he had created for himself a little kingdom, and a role that cut across professional boundaries. He put 'Architect' on his letterhead, but he was also a designer, businessman, journalist, and teacher. Some people thought him a fop, which seems a strange term for a man who worked so hard and so imaginatively in the East End of London. But he could be stagey in public as a way of protecting himself, and was known to carefully time his entrances at parties. Lanky and intense, with big, searching eyes, a full moustache, and a wispy beard, he resembled J. A. M. Whistler, especially in the years when he used an eye-glass. With friends and family he could be more easy, though he was not easily detained by creature comforts. In the guild, where he was known as C. R. A., it was part of the openness he had created that to some he was just the boss, while to others, usually the younger men, he could be as much friend or mentor as employer. In photographs of the guild he usually appears in crumpled clothes, sprawled on the grass on a guild picnic or camping holiday. These were, perhaps, his happiest times. 
In the early 1890s Ashbee lived at Essex House, but in 1893 he designed a house at 37 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea (dem.), for his mother, himself and his two unmarried sisters. In the same year his mother obtained a legal separation from her husband, in circumstances which remain unclear. Between 1896 and 1913 Ashbee designed six more houses on Cheyne Walk which used the language of jumbled, riverside streetscape to evoke a romantic sense of Chelsea's past. They were his best architectural works, but only two (nos. 38 and 39) survive. The guild in Mile End remained his chief concern, but he now moved more in Chelsea's artistic circles and became a Londoner of two worlds, bicycling between the two. 
Ashbee was single, energetic, and idealistic, and his time in the 1890s was full. He lectured for the Oxford University extension, harnessing the history of English architecture or decorative art to his own social philosophy of craft. In 1894, shocked by the demolition of a fine early seventeenth-century manor house in Bromley by Bow, he set up the committee for the survey of the memorials of Greater London, to guard against the loss of historic buildings in London. From the late 1890s the committee collaborated with the London county council, and its work continued throughout the twentieth century in the scholarly volumes of the 'Survey of London'. Also in 1894 he published 'A Few Chapters in Workshop Re-Construction and Citizenship', the first of a handful of books which form a kind of commentary on the fortunes of the guild; they stand out among the rather cloistered writings of the arts and crafts movement for their practical engagement with current ideas and social policy. In 1896 he spent six weeks in the United States, lecturing for the American Society for the Extension of University Teaching. This was the prelude to seven more lecture tours, and a generally untroubled love affair with the United States. 
Meanwhile, in Mile End, the guild was prospering. The workshops now included jewellers, silversmiths, enamellers, and blacksmiths, and in March 1898 they took over the staff and presses of William Morris's Kelmscott Press to form the Essex House Press. The guild as a whole was profitable. In July 1898 it was registered as a limited company, bringing security and some investment, and in the spring of 1899 a shop was opened in the West End, at 16A Brook Street. (Ashbee relished success, but worried that it took the guild out of his control and made it impersonal.) His designs for decorative art were now original and assured. For jewellery and domestic silverware he made simple designs which left room for the craftsman's intervention, using pieces of silver wire and hammered metal, coloured stones, and enamel. These were arguably the first distinctly arts and crafts work in these media, and their style was taken up by other arts and crafts designers. In the years around the turn of the twentieth century guild work was exhibited and published, not just in Britain but also in the United States and in the parts of Europe where the self-conscious simplicity of British arts and crafts work was admired. Ashbee, as a distinct figure in the movement, had his share of exhibition invitations and enthusiastic articles. 
On 8 September 1898 Ashbee married Janet Elizabeth (1877-1961), daughter of Francis Augustine Forbes, a stockbroker from Kent who had been an early supporter of the guild. She was a solitary, robustly intelligent, and rather beautiful young woman fourteen years his junior. Neither partner was moved by very powerful feelings of attachment, and the marriage is not easy to understand, except that both were anxious to get away from their respective families. On their engagement he wrote her a long letter about comradeship and his men and boy friends, saying that there might be many comrade-friends but there could be only one comrade-wife. She knew so little about sex that she probably did not understand his high-flown words. It was an unpromising start, and the marriage was childless for many years. But it was not a bad marriage for all that. At first she was something of an acolyte to him, wondering at the sophistication of their life in Chelsea; but she soon learned the value of her freedom. Her tomboyish character appealed to him, and, almost without knowing it, Ashbee needed her natural intelligence to offset his own too intellectual life. 
In the spring and early summer of 1902 Ashbee moved the guild workshops again, this time to the little town of Chipping Campden in the Cotswolds, three hours from London by train. He was influenced, as so often, by large ideas, the arts and crafts movement's romanticized version of the countryside, and current concern over health in working-class areas of big cities, aroused by the statistics of South African War recruiting campaigns. The beauty and quiet of the town moved him too. About 150 men, women, and children were involved in the move, adding 10 per cent to the population of the town. After some early tensions, the guild's new home began to seem at least a bit like the workshop paradise that visiting journalists described. In addition, Ashbee found welcome architectural work, repairing and adding to the buildings of the town, including a ruined Norman chapel which he recast, very movingly, as a dwelling for the Anglo-Sinhalese scholar Ananda Coomaraswamy. 
Then, from 1905 onwards, the guild's balance sheets began to show losses. A business manager was appointed; the Essex House Press was closed down, and the guild craftsmen attempted to make more of what the public wanted, but the losses continued, and in the autumn of 1907 it was decided that the Guild of Handicraft Limited should go into liquidation. Characteristically, Ashbee's response was to write a brave, detailed, and wide-ranging commentary on the guild's recent experiences, entitled 'Craftsmanship in Competitive Industry' (1908). It seems obvious, in broad terms, that the move to Chipping Campden lay behind the failure of the limited company, and Ashbee acknowledged this among other causes. But he did not want to go back to London and start again -- though most of the guildsmen were obliged to do so -- since that would be to throw away what they had learned in the country. 
The next few years were a time of adjustment for Ashbee. Nine of the guildsmen went on working in Chipping Campden under their own names, and the skeletal organization of the guild survived until it met for the last time in 1919, since it was only the limited company that had ceased to exist. But the truth was that the failure of the limited company made a large gap in his life, and he was thrown back, in his late forties, on other skills. He wrote and lectured more, pushed his architectural practice, although he was out of touch with the architectural world, and played an active part in the new town planning movement. 
In March 1911 Janet Ashbee gave birth to a child, Mary. Three more children, all girls, were born in the next six years, all of them in the romantic but draughty Norman Chapel in Broad Campden which the Ashbees rented from Coomaraswamy. Ashbee's wife found the centre of her life just when Ashbee himself had lost the focus of his, a situation which cannot have been easy for him. Moreover, any hopes that Ashbee might have had of shaping a new and profitable career for himself were destroyed by the First World War. Unable to find work connected with the war, he spent a good deal of time lecturing in the United States, and then, early in 1917, took a post as lecturer in English at the Sultania training college in Cairo, freeing younger staff there to go and fight. 
In the early summer of 1918 Ashbee was called from Cairo to Jerusalem by the military governor, Ronald Storrs, who asked him to write a report on the planning and repair of the city, which had just been captured by British forces from the Turks, and on the possibility of reviving traditional crafts and industries. It was an extraordinary opportunity, exactly suited to Ashbee's skills. He wrote a long and impressive report, and at the beginning of 1919 took up the non-governmental post of civic adviser in Jerusalem. His family moved to Palestine, and he set to work. It was as if he had been invited to repeat his life's work over again, but in the shadow of a longer and more troubled history, and under a stronger sun. Religious interests narrowed what could be done, but he cleared out and repaired the finest of the old market halls, the al-Qattanin souk, and started a weaving school there, brought in glass-blowers from Hebron and tile makers from Turkey and Armenia, drew up a development plan for the city as a whole, laid out gardens round the citadel, and began to repair the sixteenth-century walls of the old city, so that tourists could walk along the ramparts where Turkish guards had gone before. Much more might have been done, but Ashbee, uneasy working in any organization not his own and, though half Jewish, suspicious of the Zionists, resigned in March 1922. 
After a lecture tour in the United States -- by now a habitual way of marking a turning point in his life -- Ashbee settled with his family at Godden Green, near Sevenoaks, Kent, in the house in which his wife had grown up. His life, which had always been various and energetic, now slowed down, and he spent almost the next twenty years in retirement, writing, working in the garden, and sorting the thousands of letters and entries which make up the more than fifty volumes of the Ashbee journals (now in the library at King's College, Cambridge). He had not moved in London circles for many years and was now a rather forgotten figure, but history was catching up with him. In 1935 Nikolaus Pevsner sent him a draft of an article, 'William Morris, C. R. Ashbee und das zwanzigste Jahrhundert', and Ashbee was pleased and surprised to find 'how famous I appear to be' (C. R. Ashbee to J. Ashbee, 13 Feb 1935, Ashbee journals, King's Cam.). In his influential 'Pioneers of the Modern Movement', published in the same year, Pevsner presented Ashbee as a transitional figure, partly attached to old ways, but also readier than most arts and crafts figures to look favourably on 'the machine', that shibboleth of modernism. This did not pretend to be anything other than a selective account, part of a modernist genealogy, but it set the pattern for later accounts of Ashbee, and for fifty years he was seen as one of Pevsner's pioneers. More recent studies have, by way of compensation, stressed the full and various narrative of his career, the importance of his social ideals, the range of historical and symbolic allusion in his designs, and the anti-modern elements in his thinking. 
Ashbee died of cancer on 23 May 1942, at Godden Green, Kent, and was buried nearby in the churchyard at Seal. All his life he had chosen to work across conventional professional boundaries, sacrificing thereby the possibility of eminence in any one field. But it is precisely the variety of his career, together with the generous project of the Guild of Handicraft and the elegant simplicity of some of his designs, that now makes him seem interesting and admirable. 


@@@@@


doc= 30466


Ashby, Arthur Wilfred (1886-1953), agricultural economist, was born in the Warwickshire village of Tysoe on 19 August 1886, the eldest of eight children of Joseph Ashby (1859-1919), farmer and surveyor, and his wife and cousin, Hannah Ashby ('b'. 1861/2). His father was a remarkable man whose life, as told by his daughter, is the classic story of the articulate village leader of the second half of the nineteenth century for whom religion, farming, and politics were the stuff of life. Having left the village school a little before his twelfth birthday, young Ashby spent the next eleven years helping his father in the multifarious duties of small farmer, self-taught surveyor, Methodist lay preacher, poor-law guardian, organizer of village clubs, and local agent for the Liberal Party. This apprenticeship to a robust heritage laid the foundation for his lifelong study of rural society. 
Ashby's orderly studies started in 1909 when he went to Ruskin College, Oxford, with a Charles Buxton scholarship. There he took the diploma (with distinction) in economics and political science (1911) and wrote his contribution on the administration of the poor law (1912) for 'Oxford Studies in Social and Legal History' edited by Paul Vinogradoff. In 1912 the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries awarded him the first of its scholarships in agricultural economics. This took him in turn to the newly founded Institute for Research in Agricultural Economics at Oxford and to the University of Wisconsin, where he was honorary fellow in political science. 
In 1915 Ashby returned to the Oxford institute to study the history of allotments and smallholdings; his book (1917) on this topic has not been superseded. From 1917 to 1919 he was seconded to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries, where he had a big share in shaping the first Agricultural Wages Board and in the work of the food production department. Back at the institute he was senior research assistant, and in 1922 he married Rhoda, daughter of John Dean Bland. They had one son, who also became an agricultural economist. 
In 1924 Ashby went to Aberystwyth as head of the new department of agricultural economics in the University College of Wales. His work there was recognized by his elevation in 1929 to the first professorship in agricultural economics in the UK. In 1946 it was entirely fitting that he should return to the institute at Oxford to succeed C. S. Orwin as director; he held the post until his retirement in 1952. 
Ashby was a prominent member of the small group who were pioneers in the study of agricultural economics as a subject in its own right. It was his efforts which led, in the face of considerable opposition, to the formation in 1926 of the Agricultural Economics Society, of which he was twice president. He was also a founder member and, from 1949 to 1952, a vice-president of the International Conference of Agricultural Economists. Through his contributions to teaching, to research, and to policy over a period of forty years he made a decisive and enduring impact on the development of his chosen subject. 
Ashby's undoubted greatness as a teacher was given full scope with his translation to Aberystwyth. His deliberate manner of speaking coupled with his tall and dignified presence was always calculated to command full attention, but it needed the encouragement of sympathetic Welsh farmer audiences to mould the halting lecturer of earlier years into the familiar platform figure who spoke with such confidence and authority. On returning to Oxford in 1946 he used his twenty years' experience in Wales to give a new emphasis to the teaching side of the work of the institute. Both at Aberystwyth and at Oxford he attracted students from all over the world. Having himself been denied the educational advantages that usually lead to an academic career, he was particularly sympathetic to overseas students; when he visited India in 1949 to advise on the development of agricultural economics it gave him great pleasure to be greeted by old pupils. 
Ashby was equally gifted as a director of research, for he was indefatigable both as instigator of original work and as supervisor of advanced studies. He was himself a prolific contributor to the literature of his subject. His writings are scattered in many journals: a selected list representative of their wide range is given in the 'Journal of Agricultural Economics' (vol. 12, 1956). Many of his most stimulating contributions were made, however, in extempore discussions at conferences and meetings. Some of the best of these contributions will be found fully indexed in the 'Journal of Proceedings' of the Agricultural Economics Society and in the 'Proceedings' of the International Conference of Agricultural Economists, which also contain some of his more important papers. 
Ashby's background meant that to him agricultural economics could never be an arid exercise. Hence his untiring work on the many official and voluntary bodies on which he served from 1919 onwards. Three of these are worth special mention because they concerned causes in which he had a special interest. First, his membership of several important marketing committees in the inter-war years gave him the chance to propagate his profound belief in the efficacy of co-operation. His knowledge of milk marketing was probably unequalled, and, in the background, he played a big part in designing the Milk Marketing Board for England and Wales. Second, as an appointed member of the Agricultural Wages Board from 1924 onwards he was able to use his influence in the furtherance of good relations between master and man on the farm. Finally, he welcomed the opportunity, which service on the awarding committee for scholarships to the sons and daughters of rural workers gave him, to express his lifelong interest in the education of country children. 
Throughout his life Ashby remained true to his radical-reformist upbringing. In politics he was a supporter of the Labour Party, yet successive Labour governments failed to utilize effectively his unrivalled knowledge of the problems facing British agriculture. 
Ashby was a shy, reserved person with a touch of the suspicious caution of the typical countryman. In academic circles he was never entirely at ease and he never rid himself completely of a certain nervous tension in public, characteristics which led him, on occasion, to do less than justice to himself. But he was essentially a kind and friendly man, always generous with his help to those, especially young people, who sought it. His sense of humour was of the quiet kind; he loved to hear a good story and to chuckle loudly at one of his own. 
In 1923 Ashby received the honorary degree of MA from the University of Oxford (and MA by decree in 1946), and he was elected a fellow of Lincoln College in 1947. He was appointed CBE in 1946. A justice of the peace, he sat on the bench both in Cardiganshire (1940-46) and in Oxfordshire (1946-53). He became a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Agriculture (1951) and a member of the Scientific Agricultural Society of Finland (1953). Ashby died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 9 September 1953. 
Edgar Thomas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30467


Ashby, Henry (1846-1908), paediatrician, was born on 8 March 1846 at Carshalton, Surrey, the son of John Ashby, miller, and his wife, Charlotte Gibbard, both members of the Religious Society of Friends. Educated first at Ackworth School, near Pontefract, and from 1864 at the Flounder's Institute, Ackworth (which also belonged to the Society of Friends), Ashby worked for a short period as a private tutor before entering Guy's Hospital, London. Winning the gold medal for clinical medicine, he was assistant in the physiological laboratory for two years and also resident obstetric and house physician. He was admitted MRCS in 1873 and graduated MB in 1874 and MD in 1878 with a gold medal from the University of London. 
In 1875 Ashby was appointed demonstrator of anatomy and physiology in the Liverpool school of medicine and assistant physician to the Liverpool Infirmary for Children. While in Liverpool he published the notes that he had originally compiled for his students as 'Notes on Physiology' (1878), which went through several editions before his death. 
In 1879 Ashby moved to Manchester to become honorary physician to the Manchester Hospital for Sick Children (known as Pendlebury Hospital). On 15 July that year he married Helen ('b'. 1859/60), daughter of the Revd Francis Edward Tuke of Borden, Kent. They had two sons and one daughter. One of their sons, Hugh, also entered the medical profession, following his father as physician to Pendlebury Hospital and editing Ashby's books on physiology and the diseases of children after his father's death. 
From 1880 to 1882 Ashby was evening lecturer on animal physiology at Owens College, and from 1880 until his death he was lecturer on diseases of children, first at Owens College and then at the Victoria University. He became a member in 1883 and a fellow in 1890 of the Royal College of Physicians. An active member of the medical societies of Manchester, he promoted the transformation of the microscopical section of the Medical Society into the Pathological Society (1885), of which he was the first president (1885-6). He was also president of the Medical Society and the Medico-Ethical Association. In 1902, when the British Medical Association visited Manchester, he was president of the section on children's diseases. 
Ashby enjoyed a worldwide reputation as an expert on diseases of children. He rapidly acquired a large practice as a consultant and attracted visiting physicians from the continent and the United States to his wards at Pendlebury. He also published extensively. His major work, 'The Diseases of Children, Medical and Surgical', was written with George Wright, a surgeon at both Pendlebury and the Manchester Royal Infirmary. First published in 1889, and going through five editions before Ashby's death, 'The Diseases of Children' became a leading textbook of paediatrics. Committed to preventing childhood diseases by improving the education of parents, Ashby also presented numerous public lectures and wrote a popular textbook, 'Health in the Nursery' (1898). Besides these books Ashby published a large number of articles on various aspects of paediatrics in a variety of medical journals such as the 'Medical Chronicle', the 'British Medical Journal', and 'The Practitioner'. In later life he became particularly interested in the psychology of the child and began a book on the subject, which he did not live to complete. In 1905 he delivered the Wightman lecture on 'Some neuroses of early life'. 
Ashby's commitment to the welfare of children was not confined to his hospital work. He also became closely involved in many local philanthropic and educational enterprises. In particular, in 1896 he assisted Mary Dendy in assessing the mental and physical health of nearly 40,000 Manchester school children. Their subsequent report convinced members of the Manchester school board to establish special classes and schools for mentally handicapped children in Manchester. His association with Dendy's movement to provide special institutions for mentally handicapped children and adults was extensive. He was honorary physician to the Sandlebridge boarding-schools and colony (run by the Lancashire and Cheshire Society for the Permanent Care of the Feeble-Minded, founded by Dendy in 1898), and he gave evidence before both the committee on physical deterioration (1904) and the royal commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded (1904-8). In addition, he served as medical adviser to the Manchester education committee from 1904, and as consulting physician to Manchester schools for mentally handicapped, disabled, profoundly deaf, and epileptic children. In 1905 he was instrumental in encouraging the education committee to inaugurate a residential school for disabled children at Swinton, the only one of its kind then under municipal administration. 
According to his contemporaries, Ashby's blunt and direct manner sometimes obscured his geniality and sincerity. His firm but kindly character was, however, particularly evident in his skilful examination and management of children. Although he retained his connections with the Religious Society of Friends for some years, his Quaker origins appear to have had little continuing impact on his life and work. 
Ashby died on 6 July 1908 at his residence, New Home, 3 Lancaster Road, Didsbury, Manchester. He was cremated on 8 July at the Manchester crematorium and his ashes were interred in St James's Church, Rusholme. He was survived by his wife. Ashby's substantial contributions to paediatrics were recognized in a number of ways. A memorial scholarship was founded by Ashby's friends at the Victoria University of Manchester, to promote the study of diseases of children. A tablet was placed by his family at Pendlebury to commemorate his services to the hospital and when a hospital was built at Sandlebridge colony in 1913 it was named the Ashby Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 30468


Ashby, Thomas (1874-1931), archaeologist, was born at Ashford Road, Staines, Middlesex, on 14 October 1874, the only child of Thomas Ashby (1851-1906), a member of the well-known Quaker family which owned Ashby's brewery at Staines, and his wife, Rose Emma, daughter of Apsley Smith. Young Ashby was an exhibitioner at Winchester College (1887-93), where he was almost immediately dubbed with the lasting nickname Titus. In 1886 the Staines brewery became a private company, and in 1890, when Ashby was sixteen, his father settled in Rome, there to become an enthusiastic explorer of the Campagna and an associate of Rodolfo Lanciani. Learning and enthusiasm won Ashby a scholarship at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a pupil of Francis John Haverfield and John Linton Myres; he was awarded a first-class degree in classical moderations (1895) and in 'literae humaniores' (1897). 
In 1897 Ashby was awarded a Craven fellowship, thereafter devoting himself to studies of Roman antiquities, on which he obtained the Oxford degree of DLitt (1905) and the Conington prize for classical learning (1906). His first article, 'The true site of Lake Regillus', was published in 1898. At this time the city of Rome was being transformed by a series of excavations: renewed work on the Roman forum had commenced in 1898 under Giacomo Boni. Ashby wrote a regular series of reports on these developments, which appeared in the 'Classical Review' (1899-1906), and subsequently in 'The Times', the 'Times Literary Supplement', and the 'Antiquaries Journal' (1921-5, 1930). 
Ashby was the first student of the British School at Rome, enrolling in January 1902, under Gordon McNeil Rushforth, its first director. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and appointed honorary librarian of the school. Following Rushforth's early retirement due to ill health Ashby was appointed assistant director (1903) under Henry Stuart Jones. When Stuart Jones had to retire due to ill health (1905) Ashby continued as assistant director until 1906 when he was appointed director, a position he held until 1925. His first assistant director was Augustus Moore Daniel, who subsequently became director of the National Gallery in London. Ashby's position at the school was not always secure but it was strengthened in 1909 by the appointment of Eugenie Strong as assistant director, who in effect served as hostess for the school, extending its influence in Roman society. 
At this period foreign archaeologists were not permitted to excavate in Italy. This led to an emphasis on topographical and museum studies. Ashby himself produced a series of detailed topographical studies of the Roman roads of Italy, which were brought together in the valuable work 'The Roman Campagna in classical times' (1927); this was republished in 1970 with an Italian edition in 1982. A second strand of Ashby's research was on the aqueducts of the city of Rome: his first study was published in the 'Classical Review' (1900). 
Ashby became a master of Rome's urban topography, and derived from early literature and prints a unique knowledge of the vicissitudes of the city's monuments and artistic treasures. While the former mastery was evinced by articles eventually running into hundreds, the latter was demonstrated by his treatment of such varied themes as Eufrosino della Volpaia's map of the Campagna (1547), the sixteenth-century architectural drawings of Antonio Labacco, the topographical studies of Etienne du Perac (1581), Giovanni Battista de'Cavalieri's 'Antiquae statuae urbis Romae', and the Windsor Castle, Soane Library, and Eton College collections of drawings and paintings. 
Ashby gained experience of excavation at the Roman town of Caer-went in south Wales through the encouragement and support of Haverfield. This project, initiated by the Clifton Antiquarian Club, was organized under the title of the Caerwent Exploration Fund (1899-1910, 1913), with Lord Tredegar as its president. Ashby worked with Alfred E. Hudd and A. Trice Martin, an assistant master at Clifton College, and he contributed to the annual reports which were published in 'Archaeologia' (1901-7, 1909-11). 
Ashby sought to make the British School at Rome a focus for archaeological research in the western Mediterranean. Duncan Mackenzie, who had been working with Arthur Evans at Knossos, was appointed an associate student of the British School. Ashby and Mackenzie visited Sardinia together in June 1906, and later that summer presented a joint paper on the ethnology of the island to the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in York. This area of research was brought to a close in 1909 when Mackenzie returned to the eastern Mediterranean to work for the Palestine Exploration Fund. Ashby returned to Sardinia in 1912. Attention then turned to the British islands of Malta and Gozo which offered possibilities for research on the prehistory of the Mediterranean. He was joined for the 1905-6 session by Thomas Eric Peet. Ashby made a series of visits to Malta in 1908 and 1909. In 1910 and 1911 he returned with Peet to excavate the sites of Hagiar-Kim and Mnaidra. 
In 1912, with the support of the British ambassador, Sir Rennell Rodd, it was decided to expand and relocate the British School at Rome to a new, permanent building in the Valle Giulia, designed by Lutyens. This expansion allowed the school to embrace not only archaeology but also art and architecture when it moved to the new premises in 1915. During the First World War Ashby, with his Quaker leanings, volunteered for service in the first British Red Cross ambulance unit (1915). Though criticized for not fighting in the trenches, and asked to return to Rome where Mrs Strong was trying to run the school, he continued to serve initially as translator in the unit which was based at the Villa Trento near Udine, and was mentioned in dispatches for his intrepidity on the Asiago plateau while working with the Red Cross. Following the Italian defeat at Caporetto, Ashby served at the British Red Cross headquarters in Genoa from late 1917 to spring 1918. He then moved to Rome and undertook a role as an education officer, lecturing on ancient Rome to the troops. 
Ashby resumed his role as director of the school in spring 1919. One of the immediate tasks was to resume, with Eugenie Strong, the school's work on the sculpture catalogue initiated by Stuart Jones. Ashby returned to Malta in March 1921 to work with Themistocles Zammit at Hal-Tarxien; the work was published in the 'Antiquaries Journal' (1924). Ashby continued his interest in prehistory by collaborating with Peet and H. Thurlow Leeds on an essay on the western Mediterranean for the 'Cambridge Ancient History' (1924). On his return from Malta, in spring 1921, Ashby met Caroline May, eldest daughter of Richard Price-Williams, civil engineer, who had been working in the school library; she was a cousin of Walter Ashburner, an old friend of Ashby's who had links with the British Institute at Florence. They married on 20 July 1921; there were no children. 
Ashby feared that Eugenie Strong would resent losing her role as hostess at the school, and indeed relations between them became strained. In 1924 the school's executive committee decided to renew both appointments for just one more year (when Mrs Strong would be sixty-five, and could be retired). The news was met with shock: Rennell Rodd reported in late November 1924: 'almost everyone I meet deplores the decision... In spite of Ashby's eccentricities he had the regard of all the Italian archaeologists and they are all very much upset at his going. In his own particular line he is considered one of the greatest authorities and his collections and maps which have been at the disposal of students are almost unique in their way. (Hodges, 79)' In 1925 Ashby, who settled in Rome, set himself to complete three standard works: a valuable revision of the second part of W. J. Anderson and R. P. Spiers, 'The architecture of Greece and Rome' (1927), first published in 1902; a thoroughly revised edition of Samuel B. Platner's 'Topographical dictionary of ancient Rome' (1929); and Ashby's own 'The aqueducts of ancient Rome', a work of lasting value, published posthumously under the guidance of Ian Richmond in 1935. Ashby lectured in Australia (following up a first visit made in 1914), and in 1926 he embarked on a lecture tour of North America in conjunction with the Archaeological Institute of America. He also completed 'Some Italian scenes and festivals' (1929), a work dedicated to his wife; it appeared in a revised edition as 'Sagre e feste d'Abruzzo' (1995). 
Ashby was a member of the German Archaeological Institute (1913), of the Pontificia Accademia Romana d'Archeologia (1914); a foreign member of the Reale Accademia dei Lincei (1918); an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects (1922); an honorary member of the Reale Accademia di San Luca (1925); and a fellow of the Reale Societa Romana di Storia Patria (1923), and of the British Academy (1927). His figure was stocky, his head tall and forceful, with a neat beard first red and later white. He spoke equally brusque English and Italian; John Ward-Perkins recalled a 'flow of impeccably idiomatic Italian spoken in an accent which to his dying day remained obstinately British' (Hodges, 6). He was shy with strangers, blunt with acquaintances, and devoted to his friends. 
Ashby's health seems to have been in decline -- one symptom was a deterioration in his eyesight. In 1930 he was elected to a senior research studentship at Christ Church, Oxford. He returned to England to fulfil the residence requirements and on his way to Oxford, on the morning of 15 May 1931, he fell from the Southampton to Waterloo train between New Malden and Raynes Park, Surrey. The post-mortem revealed that he had an enlarged brain tumour, and although there was a suspicion of suicide an open verdict was recorded. He was cremated and the ashes were interred at St Margaret's Bay in Kent, a place of which R. R. Campbell recalled that Ashby 'was almost as fond as of his own beloved Rome' (Smith, 521). 


@@@@@


doc= 30469


Asher, Alexander (1834-1905), lawyer and politician, was born at Inveravon, Banffshire, on 27 January 1834, the third son and fifth child in the family of five sons and four daughters of William Asher DD (1791-1874), parish minister of Inveravon, and his wife, Katherine Forbes (died 1880), daughter of John Gordon, minister of Duffus. After education at Elgin Academy and at King's College, Aberdeen, he entered Edinburgh University, where he was a member of the Speculative Society (president 1863-5), but did not graduate. After passing to the Scottish bar on 10 December 1861, he gradually acquired a large practice and became one of the most distinguished counsels of his day, his only rival being John Blair Balfour, first Baron Kinross. He took a leading part in numerous cases which attracted public attention, and he represented the United Free Church in litigation which ended in 1904 with the defeat of that body. A strong Liberal in politics, he was appointed advocate-depute in 1870, during the Gladstone ministry of 1868-74. He married in the same year Caroline Julia, daughter of the Revd Charles Henry Gregan Craufurd, rector of Old Swinford, Stourbridge, Worcestershire; they had no children. 
At the general election of 1880 Asher was unsuccessful as Liberal candidate for the universities of Glasgow and Aberdeen; but in 1881 he was elected for the Elgin burghs (in succession to Sir M. E. Grant Duff) and retained this seat for the rest of his life. He made no great mark in the House of Commons, where he followed Gladstone in his support of home rule. Meanwhile in 1881 he became QC; he was an inconspicuous solicitor-general for Scotland during Gladstone's later ministries in the years 1881-5, 1886, and 1892-4, and was deputy lieutenant of Edinburgh. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Aberdeen (1883) and Edinburgh (1891). In 1894 he resigned office, 'largely', it was said, 'owing to the very inadequate remuneration then paid to the Scottish solicitor-general' ('The Times'), and in the following year was elected dean of the Faculty of Advocates. Suddenly taken ill in London on 4 July 1905, he died on 5 August at his house, Beechwood, Murrayfield, Edinburgh, and was buried in the churchyard of Corstorphine. 


@@@@@


doc= 30470


Ashley, (Anthony) Evelyn Melbourne (1836-1907), politician and biographer, born in London on 24 July 1836, was the fourth son of Anthony Ashley Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury (1801-1885), politician and social reformer, and his wife, Emily (1810-1872), daughter of Peter Leopold Cowper, fifth Earl Cowper; his maternal grandmother, sister of Lord Melbourne, married in 1839, as her second husband, Lord Palmerston. 
Ashley, who appears never to have used his family's second surname, was educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated MA in 1858. In the same year he became private secretary to Palmerston, then prime minister. The government was on the eve of defeat, and on its fall (1858) Ashley paid a visit to America with Lord Frederick Cavendish and Lord Richard Grosvenor. Palmerston returned to office the following year, and Ashley acted as his private secretary until the prime minister's death in 1865. Meanwhile he made more than one eventful excursion abroad. In 1860 he told Lord Palmerston that he was going to Italy to see what Garibaldi was doing and would take full advantage of his official position. Lord Palmerston replied that what his secretary did during his holiday was no business of his. With this implied permission, Ashley presented himself to Garibaldi in camp and was given ample facilities for watching the progress of the campaign. In 1863 he accompanied Laurence Oliphant on an expedition into the Russian province of Volhynia, where they were arrested on suspicion of being Polish insurgents (Oliphant, 333). In 1865 he was attached to the mission sent to convey the Order of the Garter to Christian IX of Denmark, and was then created a commander of the Danish order of the Dannebrog. 
In 1864 Ashley joined Algernon Borthwick and others in producing 'The Owl', the forerunner of society newspapers. The editors were intimately acquainted with current public and private affairs, and secured contributions of literary value. The publication attracted much attention during the six years of its existence. Ashley had become a student of Lincoln's Inn on 22 November 1856, and was called to the bar in 1863. After Palmerston's death (1865) he joined the Oxford circuit; he held the office of treasurer of county courts from 1863 until 1874. He devoted most of his time to the completion of 'The Life of Lord Palmerston', which had been begun by Lord Dalling but which was interrupted by his death in 1872. Lord Dalling published two volumes in 1870 and had written part of a third. This Ashley finished in 1874, and he added two concluding volumes which he published in 1876. 
Ashley was well acquainted with the Liberals. It was his account that recorded Gladstone's dramatic declaration on receiving the queen's summons in December 1868, 'My mission is to pacify Ireland' (Ashley, obituary of Gladstone, 'National Review', June 1898). After defeat at the 1874 general election he was elected as a Liberal for Poole, Dorset, at a by-election on 26 May 1874. As a private member he persistently but unsuccessfully endeavoured to pass a bill to enable accused persons to give evidence. The principle was eventually sanctioned by Lord Halsbury's act of 1898. In 1879 he distinguished himself by his defence of Sir Bartle Frere from an attack by members of his own party. At the general election of 1880 he was returned for the Isle of Wight and was appointed parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade in Gladstone's second administration. The president, Joseph Chamberlain, was also in the Commons, so that Ashley's parliamentary duties were light, but he presided over the railway rates committee (1881-2). In 1882 he was transferred to the Colonial Office; the secretary of state was Lord Derby, and Ashley represented his department in the House of Commons. To him fell the important task of explaining the conditions of service in which the Australian contingents were to proceed to the Sudan in 1885. From 1880 to 1885 he was one of the ecclesiastical commissioners. 
At the general election of 1885 Ashley was beaten in the Isle of Wight by Sir Richard Webster (Lord Alverstone). When Gladstone announced his adoption of the principle of home rule, Ashley joined the Liberal Unionists. At the general election of 1886 he stood as a Liberal Unionist for North Dorset, and was beaten. There followed a series of defeats -- at Glasgow, Bridgeton division, in 1887, at the Ayr burghs in 1888, and at Portsmouth in 1892 and 1895 -- and although his active interest in politics never declined, he made no further attempt to renew his parliamentary career. 
On the death in 1888 of his uncle, William Cowper-Temple, Baron Mount-Temple, Ashley succeeded to the properties bequeathed to Mount-Temple by Lord Palmerston, his stepfather -- Broadlands and Romsey in Hampshire, and Classiebawn, co. Sligo. He was sworn of the privy council in 1891. He was deputy lieutenant for Hampshire and a JP for Hampshire, Dorset, and Sligo, an alderman of the Hampshire county council, official verderer of the New Forest, and five times mayor of Romsey (1898-1902). He was also chairman of the Railway Passengers' Assurance Company. 
Ashley married twice: first, in 1866, Sybella Charlotte (died 1886), daughter of Sir Walter and Lady Mary Farquhar (a tory family), with whom he had one son (Wilfrid William Ashley, MP for the Blackpool division of Lancashire) and two daughters; second, in 1891, Alice Elizabeth, daughter of William Willoughby Cole, third earl of Enniskillen, with whom he also had one son. Ashley died at Broadlands on 15 November 1907, and was buried at Romsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30471


Ashley, Wilfrid William, Baron Mount Temple (1867-1939), politician, was born in London on 13 September 1867, the only son of (Anthony) Evelyn Melbourne Ashley (1836-1907), a Liberal Unionist politician, and his first wife, Sybella Charlotte (died 1886), second daughter of Sir Walter Rockliffe Farquhar, third baronet. He was a grandson of the famous seventh earl of Shaftesbury. From his great-grandmother Emily Cowper, sister of Melbourne and later married to Palmerston ['see 'Temple, Emily], he inherited Broadlands at Romsey in Hampshire, and Classiebawn, the Palmerston estate in co. Sligo on the west coast of Ireland. He was educated at Harrow School and at Magdalen College, Oxford, which he left without taking a degree, and then travelled widely, including in Africa and the Americas. He served in the Ayrshire militia (1886-9), the Grenadier Guards (1889-98), and the third (militia) battalion of the Hampshire regiment (1899-1903). 
Following his family's Liberal tradition in politics, Ashley acted in 1899 as private secretary to Sir Henry Campbell-Bannermann when he was leader of the opposition. Ashley served in the South African War and, after being invalided home, congratulated Campbell-Bannermann on his 'methods of barbarism' speech in June 1901. He married on 4 January 1901 Amalia Mary Maud (1879-1911), known as Maudie, the only child of Sir Ernest Joseph Cassel, the financier and philanthropist, and his wife, Annette, daughter of Robert Thompson Maxwell, of Croft House, near Darlington. Ashley was, however, soon looking for a Conservative seat in parliament and was elected for Blackpool in 1906 with a good majority, in spite of the Liberal landslide. He held that seat until the general election of 1918, when he became member for the Fylde division of Lancashire. In 1922 he was returned unopposed for the New Forest division of Hampshire, in an earlier form a family seat, which he represented until 1932. He served as a Conservative whip from 1911 to 1913 and was in favour of allowing the 'Parliament Bill' to pass rather than risk a creation of peers. 
Following the death of his first wife, and before setting out for military service in the First World War, Ashley married (on 29 August 1914) Muriel Emily 
(Molly; 'c'.1881-1954)
, elder daughter of the Revd Walter Spencer, of Fownhope Court, Hereford, and formerly wife of Arthur Lionel Ochoncar Forbes-Sempill, fifth son of the seventeenth Baron Sempill. After commanding the 20th battalion of the King's Liverpool regiment in 1914 in the rank of lieutenant-colonel, Ashley returned from France in 1915 to become parliamentary private secretary to the financial secretary to the War Office. He reached office in 1922 under Bonar Law as parliamentary secretary to the office of works and Ministry of Transport. The following year, when Baldwin became prime minister, he was transferred to the War Office as under-secretary of state. 
In 1924 Ashley was made minister of transport and sworn of the privy council. He held the post until the Baldwin government relinquished office in 1929. He was responsible for the reorganization of that ministry at a time of greatly increasing traffic and growing competition between road and rail. He introduced one-way traffic schemes and roundabouts in London and then in other large cities. He designated 'arterial' roads, the precursors of motorways. He consolidated the lighting regulations for motor vehicles, previously subject to local variations. He worked, through legislation and administratively, for the expansion of the electricity supply, particularly in rural areas. His attempts to provide for the building of a further bridge across the Thames near Charing Cross did not come to fruition during his tenure of office. The work of his ministry brought him into touch with the unemployment problem. He did not hold office again after 1929, but remained politically active. In January 1932 he was elevated to the peerage as Baron Mount Temple of Lee. 
Among Ashley's many interests were those arising from his ownership of his Hampshire and Irish estates. He was high steward of Romsey, and a justice of the peace, deputy lieutenant, and alderman of the county of Hampshire. He was for several years chairman of the Anti-Socialist and Anti-Communist Union and president of the Navy League, and was one of the founders of the Comrades of the Great War, precursor of the British Legion. 
Ashley developed pronounced right-wing, pro-imperialist, anti-socialist and anti-Bolshevik views. He was a strong supporter of the unionist position in Ireland, a political friend of Carson, and was active in promoting opposition to the creation of an Irish free state. He saw Irish republicanism as part of a worldwide conspiracy against the British empire. In 1921, when he felt the British government's writ had ceased to run in much of Ireland, he called for support for the loyalists in southern Ireland. He wrote to the prime minister asking for protection for his property in Ireland. 
During the 1920s Ashley advocated Anglo-German understanding and organized Anglo-German conferences of industrialists. Regarding the Hitler regime as a bulwark against Bolshevism, he became in 1935 one of the founders of the Anglo-German Fellowship and was its president. He was a strong supporter of the policy of appeasement, and argued in parliamentary speeches and letters to 'The Times' that national socialism was the most effective instrument of German national awakening and represented the culmination of the German rise to nationhood. It would make changes in eastern Europe inevitable, such as the federation, though not incorporation, of Austria with Germany and the autonomy of the Germans in the Sudeten areas. He paid several visits to Germany. During one of them, to mark the beginning of Sir Nevile Henderson's tenure of the British embassy in Berlin in June 1937, he had a long interview with Hitler, at which only an interpreter was present. He regarded Hitler's anti-Jewish policy as a major stumbling-block to a better understanding and had as early as March 1933 presided over a meeting at the Whitechapel Art Gallery protesting against the treatment of Jews in Germany. In October 1938, after the Munich agreement, he was among twenty-six signatories of a letter to 'The Times', calling the agreement 'the rectification of one of the most flagrant injustices in the peace treaties'. A few weeks later, after the anti-Jewish pogrom in Germany in November 1938, he resigned as president of the Anglo-German Fellowship, but he remained a member of the organization. In his letter of resignation he also protested against the treatment of Catholics and Lutherans by the Nazi regime. 
Ashley was a strikingly good-looking man, of military bearing, courteous and tactful, with strongly held, rather conventional views, sometimes regarded as reactionary. He had a wide social circle, including royalty, beginning with Edward VII when he was prince of Wales. He died of Parkinson's disease at Broadlands on 3 July 1939. His funeral took place on 6 July in Romsey Abbey and he was buried there. 
Ashley had two daughters from his first marriage. The first, Edwina ['see 'Mountbatten, Edwina Cynthia Annette], married in 1922 Lord Louis Mountbatten, later first Earl Mountbatten of Burma. The younger daughter, Ruth Mary Clarisse, married in 1927 her father's parliamentary private secretary, Alec Stratford Cunningham-Reid MP (marriage dissolved, 1940), in 1940 Major Ernest Laurie Gardner, son of Sir Ernest Gardner MP (marriage dissolved, 1941), and in 1943 Thomas Pitt Hamilton Cholmondeley, the fourth Baron Delamere (marriage dissolved, 1955). 


@@@@@


doc= 30472


Ashley, Sir William James (1860-1927), economic historian, was born at 11 Sun Street, Bermondsey, London, on 25 February 1860. He was the eldest son of James Ashley, a journeyman hatter from Wrexham, Denbighshire, and his wife, Jane ('nee' Short). He was educated at St Olave's Grammar School, Southwark, London, and in 1878 went up to Balliol College, Oxford, as Brackenbury scholar in modern history, graduating in 1881 with first-class honours. In 1882 he won the university's Lothian essay prize. Ashley remained in Oxford until 1888, continuing with his studies, acting initially as a private tutor and, after 1885, as a fellow of Lincoln College and lecturer at Corpus Christi College. He had developed an interest in economic history as an undergraduate: this interest was strengthened by his attending the lectures of Arnold Toynbee on the industrial revolution in the winter of 1881-2, and by three visits to Germany, in particular to the University of Gottingen, where he was influenced by the work of the German historical school of economists, notably Gustav Schmoller (whom he was to meet in 1902), Karl Knies, Bruno Hildebrand, Wilhelm Roscher, and Adolf Wagner. On 2 July 1888 he married Annie Margaret Hill (1859/60-1922), the daughter of George Birkbeck Hill, the Johnsonian scholar. They had three children, one son and two daughters. 
Shortly after his marriage Ashley took up the post of professor of political economy and constitutional history at the University of Toronto, Canada. His main reason for leaving Oxford was to be 'free from the irksome necessity of tutorial work' (W. J. Ashley to Richard T. Ely, 2 Feb 1888, Ely MSS) which, he stated, 'prevented my doing good work on my own' (W. J. Ashley to E. R. A. Seligman, n.d. 1888, Seligman MSS). He had attempted to gain more freedom in Oxford by applying for the chair of political economy in early 1888, but he had been unsuccessful. At the time of this application Ashley had felt that his chances of success were slim because historical economic studies were looked down upon by the increasingly powerful mathematical school of economists led by Alfred Marshall of Cambridge. One of Marshall's acolytes, F. Y. Edgeworth, did indeed get the Oxford chair, thereby confirming Ashley's view that he was unlikely to prosper in the world of academic economics in Britain. 
The basis for Ashley's differences with the Marshallians was crisply outlined in the preface to his 'Introduction to Economic History and Theory', published in 1888 soon after his arrival at Toronto. Ashley stated that 'Political Economy is not a body of absolutely true doctrines'. Like other British historical economists, notably W. Cunningham, H. S. Foxwell, W. A. S. Hewins, and L. L. Price, Ashley argued that deductive, abstract reasoning could not provide the basis for meaningful or effective economic theory or practice, and that statements of economic principle were true only in relation to given historical conditions. This historical relativism was anathema to Marshallian, neo-classical economists who were keen to establish economics as a science, and in both academic debate and in the distribution of senior academic appointments the Marshallians sought to marginalize the historical school. 
The North American academic world was, however, more open to historical economics, and Ashley flourished at Toronto and then, in 1892, was appointed to a chair specifically created for him in economic history at Harvard University. At Harvard he completed the second volume of his 'Introduction' (1893) and produced a series of lectures and essays arguing for the centrality of the historical method to economics which were published in 1900 as 'Surveys, Historic and Economic'. In the latter half of the 1890s he turned his mind to the problems of eighteenth-century commercial history, and his works 'The Tory Origin of Free Trade Policy' (1897) and 'The Commercial Legislation of England and the American Colonies' were not only important historical studies of the theory and practice of eighteenth-century mercantilism, but also indicated an implicit scepticism about the wisdom of free trade. 
In 1901 Ashley and his wife returned to Britain. Mason College, Birmingham, had been converted into the University of Birmingham and Ashley was appointed as its first professor of commerce. Here Ashley had the chance to design his own curriculum, and sought to structure a course that was both academically strong and of practical use to businessmen. The degree course he designed was based on economics and economic history with particular emphasis on the structure, organization, and administration of industry, which reflected his own interests and also the influence of the American institutional economists (such as Richard T. Ely and E. R. A. Seligman) with whom he had worked in the United States. Ashley held this post until his retirement in 1925. 
Birmingham University owed its existence to the interest and wealth of the great local businessman and politician Joseph Chamberlain. When Chamberlain launched the campaign for tariff reform in May 1903 Ashley became one of its strongest academic supporters. After Alfred Marshall and his neo-classical acolytes sent a letter to 'The Times' in September 1903 criticizing tariff reform and defending free trade, Ashley, along with most of his fellow historical economists, signed a countering letter the next month. Late in 1903 Ashley produced a powerful case for tariffs in 'The Tariff Problem', which Chamberlain himself described as 'the best manual we have' (J. Chamberlain to W. J. Ashley, 26 April 1904, Chamberlain MSS), and he further pressed the tariff case in a series of articles in the 'Economic Journal' and 'Economic Review' throughout the first decade of the century. Ashley's historical approach to economic problems had led him to the conclusion that, as circumstances had changed since the introduction of free trade, so policy had to be adapted to new conditions. But Ashley was not simply interested in tariffs for their own sake. He had long been interested in social questions, and his book 'The Progress of the German Working Class in the Last Quarter of a Century', published in 1904, argued that the protection afforded to German domestic employment by tariffs and the German government's social insurance and old age pensions provision, partly paid for by tariff revenues, showed how to achieve improved social conditions in Britain. His correspondence with leading Conservative politicians during the Edwardian period thus stressed the need for a social reform programme, and he became an adviser to the unionist Social Reform Committee after 1911. 
Ashley was awarded a PhD by the University of Berlin in 1910 and in 1912 delivered a series of lectures at Hamburg, published as 'The Economic Organisation of England' (1914). With the outbreak of the First World War he was drawn into government service, largely as an expert adviser on, for example, the departmental committee on food prices in 1916, and the Sumner committee on the cost of living in 1918, where his statistical knowledge was at a premium. It was largely for these services that he was knighted in 1917. He was appointed a member of the royal commission on agriculture in 1919 and also to the agricultural tribunal of investigation which sat from December 1922 to May 1924. While working for the tribunal he undertook a tour of Denmark to study that country's agricultural system, and he became a great admirer of Danish farming. In December 1924 Ashley was appointed a member of the departmental committee on industry and trade, and, following his retirement from his chair in 1925, devoted a great deal of time to the committee's work -- so much so that he turned down an offer to sit on the Coal Commission in 1925 on the grounds that, though retired, he was too busy. 
Ashley spent his last years working in his various public capacities and on his own studies. He had retained his links with Oxford. In 1920 he was made an honorary fellow of Lincoln College, and in 1925 he was one of the main organizers of the celebrations to mark the bicentennial of John Wesley's election to a fellowship at the college. In 1923 he had been invited by Oxford University to be Ford's lecturer, and intended to take as his subject the historical place of rye in the diet of the English people, but his work for the agricultural tribunal had made it impossible to deliver the lectures. However, he continued to work on the subject and completed the manuscript of his book 'The Bread of our Forefathers: an Enquiry in Economic History', which was to be published posthumously in 1928. Ashley's last important public, academic role was when he acted as chairman of the economic history section of the Anglo-American Conference of Professors and Teachers of History in July 1926. That summer he was taken ill with cancer. In November he underwent a major operation, but the progress of the illness was not halted and he died at his home, 3 St Stephen's Road, Canterbury, Kent, on 23 July 1927. His funeral service was held in Canterbury Cathedral on 27 July and he was buried there the same day. That his funeral was held in such a location was a tribute not only to his academic and public distinction, but also to his active membership of the Church of England which had culminated with a leading role in the Modern Churchman's Conference. 
Ashley's career as an academic was, both institutionally and intellectually, of great significance. At Harvard he held the first chair in economic history in the English-speaking world, and, as professor of commerce at Birmingham, he has reasonable claims to being the founder of business studies in Britain. As a leading member of the British school of historical economics he played an important role in the 'Methodenstreit' with the Marshallians, and made a significant contribution to the development of economic history as a discipline in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 30473


Ashton, Thomas Gair, first Baron Ashton of Hyde (1855-1933), industrialist and politician, was born at Ashfield, Fallowfield, Lancashire, on 5 February 1855, the eldest son of Thomas Ashton (1818-1898), cotton manufacturer, of Hyde, Cheshire, and his wife, Elizabeth (1831-1914), daughter of Samuel Stillman Gair, of Rhode Island, USA, and Penketh Hall, Liverpool. Thomas Ashton's second daughter became the wife of James (later Viscount) Bryce. The Ashtons had for generations been known for their singularly humane treatment of the workers in their cotton mills, and, after his education at Rugby School, 1868-74, and University College, Oxford, 1874-7 (of which he was elected an honorary fellow in 1923), Thomas Gair Ashton was connected with the family business in Manchester and Hyde for forty years, carrying on this tradition, which coloured his whole life. He married on 2 December 1886 Eva Margaret (died 1938), second daughter of John Henry James, of Watford, who belonged to a Cumberland family. They had two sons, the elder of whom died as a child, and two daughters. 
He was Liberal member of parliament for the Hyde division from 1885 to 1886, when he lost the seat (failing to regain it in 1892), and for the Luton division from 1895 to 1911. During that period he sat on various royal commissions, was chairman of the House of Commons railway and canal traffic committee in 1909, and of the standing orders committee in 1910, and became notable in the house for his wide knowledge of finance. 
Ashton's care for education was also displayed by his guarantee to make good any losses sustained in its first three years by the county secondary school at Hyde, and by his support of the Hyde Technical School and the free library, both for a time dependent on his generosity. He was a governor of Manchester University, the first honorary secretary of the Manchester Technical School, and a member of the governing body of the Whitworth Institute. He also took a keen interest in the history and antiquities of Sussex, where he lived after 1902. 
Ashton was raised to the peerage in 1911 as Baron Ashton of Hyde, and, during the First World War he was chairman of the cotton exports committee, which controlled the amount of cotton allowed to pass through the blockade to neutral nations bordering Germany. The importance of this work lay in the fact that cotton was then a raw material for munitions. 
Ashton was sagacious, far-sighted, widely read, and widely travelled, with excellent judgement of men and affairs, and an immense capacity for work, but his extreme reserve and modesty hid his real capabilities from those not closely acquainted with him. He had a most exacting sense of duty in all public affairs, and was entirely incapable of self-advertisement, never pushing his own claims and interests. Nor for one moment did he support any views merely because of their popularity. For instance, he advocated home rule for Ireland before W. E. Gladstone pronounced in its favour. But, owing to his profound shyness, he struck even those who knew him well as curiously impersonal, a fact which perhaps militated against due recognition of his deep feeling for the causes which he served so faithfully. He died at his home, Vinehall, Mountfield, Robertsbridge, in Sussex, on 1 May 1933 and was buried three days later at Hyde Chapel in Cheshire. He was succeeded as second baron by his younger son, Thomas Henry Raymond (1901-1983). 
Marion Wood', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30474


Ashton, Thomas Southcliffe (1889-1968), economic historian, was born at Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, on 11 January 1889, the second son and third child of Thomas Ashton, manager of the local Trustee Savings Bank, and his wife, Susan Sutcliffe. From Ashton under Lyne secondary school he won a scholarship to Manchester University, where he read history and political economy and obtained his MA in 1910. After a brief and inappropriate spell as a schoolteacher in Dublin, he returned to England to lecture to trade unionists on economic topics, continuing to do so until 1912, when he was appointed to lecture in economics at Sheffield University. In 1915 Ashton married Marion Hague, daughter of Joseph Slater, of Ashton under Lyne; they had one son. 
Unfit for military service, Ashton remained at Sheffield throughout the war but moved to Birmingham University in 1919 where, however, he found the dominating figure of Sir William Ashley wholly uncongenial. In 1921 at the instigation of a man to whom Ashton was devoted and whose influence on him was powerful -- George Unwin, professor of economic history at Manchester and still, then, the sole professor of that subject in Britain -- Ashton became senior lecturer in economics at Manchester. There he stayed for twenty-three years, lecturing mainly on public finance (he became reader in public finance and currency in 1927), but researching and writing on economic history. 
Ashton's most important early works were written during this period. They included two major studies in industrial history: 'Iron and Steel in the Industrial Revolution' (1924) and 'The Coal Industry of the Eighteenth Century' (with Joseph Sykes, 1929); an entertainingly written centenary history of the Manchester Statistical Society: 'Economic and Social Investigations in Manchester, 1833-1933' (1934); and a small but illuminating piece of business history, 'An Eighteenth-Century Industrialist: Peter Stubs of Warrington' (1939). In 1944 he was persuaded by R. H. Tawney to move to the chair of economic history at the London School of Economics, which he occupied until his retirement in 1954. During that time he published two books of a notably more general nature than those of his Manchester period: 'The Industrial Revolution' (1948) and 'An Economic History of England: the Eighteenth Century' (1955). In 1953 he was Ford's lecturer at Oxford and from those lectures emerged his last major work, 'Economic Fluctuations in England, 1700-1800' (1959). 
In his own upbringing and in his intellectual approach, Ashton seemed to reflect some of the qualities of the men who had been associated with the very industrial revolution on which he became the most notable authority of his day. He was something of a Manchester radical; his faith was in economic liberalism. Reared in a thrifty nonconformist household, he was practical and pragmatic, not overtly brilliant nor given to flights of intellectual fancy. His range was limited but he brought to his subject what it then badly needed: an insistence on asking economic questions of historical sources. His concern was always to find the typical and representative characteristics of the phenomena he investigated, using quantitative data wherever possible. Such a path could easily have led to history of a very arid sort. That it did not do so in Ashton's books was a consequence of his warmth of character, his concern for the role of the individual in history, and his great lucidity in writing. These qualities were probably best exhibited in the brief compass of 'The Industrial Revolution', which was a superb compression of his learning, experience, and technique; it deservedly enjoyed substantial sales and was translated into French, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. 
Short in stature and wiry in build, Ashton was one of the kindest of men, utterly devoid of self-importance and pretentiousness, friendly, and immensely helpful to many students and colleagues. He was at his best in seminars, and those who attended them soon became familiar with the penetrating and pertinent questions gently delivered in a Lancashire accent and through a fog of cigarette smoke. His long labours, in a field of enquiry which orthodox British historians had too easily regarded with a suspicion and contempt born of ignorance, were eventually rewarded with due honours: elected FBA in 1951 and an honorary vice-president of the Royal Historical Society in 1961, he received the honorary degrees of DLitt from Nottingham in 1963, LittD from Manchester in 1964, and DPhil from Stockholm in the same year. He declined honours other than those of the academic variety. He was the recipient of a Festschrift, entitled 'Studies in the Industrial Revolution' (ed. L. S. Pressnell), on the occasion of his seventieth birthday. Shortly after his retirement Ashton and his wife went to live at Tredwells, Blockley, in the Cotswolds. He died in hospital in Oxford on 22 September 1968. Among his bequests were $500 to a local school, Campden grammar school, and $500 to the Economic History Society, which was used in helping to endow a T. S. Ashton prize in his memory. 
D. C. Coleman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30475


Ashton, Winifred (1888-1965), playwright and novelist, was born on 21 February 1888 at Westcombe, Westcombe Park Road, Greenwich, London, the daughter of Arthur Charles Ashton, commission agent, and his wife, Florence Bentley, who provided a home of late Victorian respectability against which Winifred soon strongly reacted. Educated in England, Germany, and Switzerland, she rebelled and, intending to be a painter, became an art student (at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, 1904-6, and in Germany at Dresden, 1906-7), a teacher far from home (in Geneva in 1903, in Ireland 1907-13), then an actress on the London stage (as Diana Portis, 1913-15). Her debut was in H. V. Esmond's 'Eliza Comes to Stay'. Her experience was reflected in her very first novel, 'Regiment of Women' (1917), a caustic look at a girls' school and lesbianism in that hothouse atmosphere. It was dedicated to a female companion, E. A. Its leading character is even less sympathetic than Muriel Spark's Miss Jean Brodie. Her second novel, 'First the Blade' (1918), was a comedy, but then came a sort of expose of the backbiting of bohemian writers she knew personally: in 'Legend' (1919) a group of supposed mourners cattily dissect a literary 'legend' who has just died. 'The Way Things Happen' was the stage adaptation (produced 1923, published 1924). 
Clemence Dane's stage work began with 'A Bill of Divorcement' (starring Katherine Cornell, 1921); it asks whether a marriage should be annulled on grounds of insanity. In 1921 she also contributed 'The Terror', a minor pot-boiler, and the well-received verse play 'Will Shakespeare' (the 'Shakespeare in Love' of its day). Then the London theatre was auntie's way of capping a day of shopping in London, theatres and productions were plentiful and inexpensive, and tea was served at the interval. 
To the commercial stage Clemence Dane brought 'plays for boys' ('Shivering Shocks', 1923; 'Mr Fox', 1927), bankable West End dramas ('Naboth's Vineyard', 1925; 'Granite', 1926; 'Mariners', 1927; 'A Traveller Returns', 1928, and so on), musicals with Richard Addinsell ('Adam's Opera', 1928; 'Come of Age', 1934; 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland' and 'Through the Looking-Glass' from Lewis Carroll, 1943 and 1948), adaptations ('L'aiglon' from Rostand, 1934; 'The Happy Hypocrite' from Sir Max Beerbohm, 1936; 'Herod and Mariamne' from Hebbel, 1936), and a string of middle-class matinee plays ('Gooseberry Fool', 1929; 'Wild Decembers', 1933; 'Moonlight is Silver', 1934; 'England's Darling', 1940; 'Cousin Muriel', 1940; 'The Golden Reign of Queen Elizabeth', 1941; 'The Lion and the Unicorn', 1943; 'Call Home the Heart', 1947). She became a fixture, whether with costume drama or contemporary drama. After a hiatus she returned with 'Eighty in the Shade' (1958) and 'The Godson' (1964), proving that changing tides of taste had still not done away with the old-fashioned well-constructed dramatic entertainment for the middle class. She had given them King Arthur and the Virgin Queen, Thomas Chatterton and the Brontes (played by Diana Wynyard, Beatrix Lehmann, and Emlyn Williams), the Bard in pursuit of Anne Hathaway, the young son of Napoleon, and titillating modern problems. The original stars of 'Granite' (long considered her most serious play, the darling of amateur theatre groups in its day), Dame Sybil Thorndike and Sir Lewis Casson, returned thirty-two years later to star in 'Eighty in the Shade'. David Storey's 'Home' used the same sort of setting for a much more powerful play. However, these favourite stars and Clemence Dane's firm grasp of theatrical tricks impressed a loyal public. 
Clemence Dane made less of a name (but more money) writing screenplays, beginning with 'The Tunnel' (or 'Transatlantic Tunnel', 1935, with additional dialogue by Kurt Siodmak and L. D. Peach). That same year she adapted Tolstoy's 'Anna Karenina' (also released as 'Love') for Greta Garbo. With Edward Knoblock she wrote 'The Amateur Gentleman' (based on Jeffrey Farnol's Regency farrago, 1936), with Patrick Kirwin 'Farewell Again' (or 'Troopship', 1937), with Sergei Nolbandov a classic star vehicle, 'Fire over England' (for Flora Robson, 1937), on her own 'St Martin's Lane' (or 'Sidewalks of London', 1938), with Elizabeth Baron 'Salute John Citizen' (1942), with Anthony Pelissier 'Perfect Strangers' (or 'Vacation from Marriage', 1945), with Cyril Hume and Michael Hogan 'Bride of Vengeance' (1949), and with Karl Hartl and Franz Tassie 'Angel with a Trumpet' (1950). She also wrote 'Bonnie Prince Charlie' (1948). Clemence Dane competently collaborated in the film mills. The alternative titles above prove her work entertained both British and American filmgoers. 
For radio Clemence Dane wrote 'The Saviours: Seven Plays on one Theme' (1940-41), 'Henry VIII' (adapted from Shakespeare, 1954), 'Don Carlos' (adapted from Schiller, 1955), and 'Scandal at Coventry', her last radio drama, the story of Lady Godiva (1958). In that same year of 1958 her script for 'Till Time Shall End' was broadcast on BBC television. In a golden age of BBC radio drama she could not equal Dylan Thomas's 'Under Milk Wood' and other triumphs, but her work was consistently admired, her services often sought. She began early with a BBC radio serial, 'The Scoop' (1931). Had she started later, she might have been still more successful as a writer for television, for she had an even better eye for a striking image than an ear for convincing dialogue. 
Clemence Dane had many talents. She wrote some fiction in collaboration with Helen Simpson; she was a good artist (her bronze bust of Ivor Novello is in the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London); she was the author of anthologies, one a book about the blitz ('The Shelter Book', 1940). She wrote 'London has a Garden' about Covent Garden (where she lived for more than thirty years). She turned out novels right up to 'Bonfire' (published posthumously, 1981). She wrote feminist essays ('The Women's Side', 1926), literary criticism (including 'Tradition and Hugh Walpole', 1929), and finely crafted short stories in 'Fate Cries Out' (1935). Her best novels all deal with the stage: 'Broome Stages' (1931, seven generations of an acting dynasty), 'Enter Sir John' (a detective story involving an actor-manager, 1931 with a 1932 sequel), and 'The Flower Girls' (1954, children of a first family of the theatre). 
Winifred Ashton was made a CBE (1953) but Clemence Dane has yet to be appreciated fully. The feminists may win her a place: 'Regiment of Women' was republished (1995) in Virago's 'Lesbian Landmarks series'. She died at her home, 1 Draycott Place, Chelsea, London on 28 March 1965. One of her executors was Olwen Bowen-Davies. 


@@@@@


doc= 30476


Ashwell, Lena (1872-1957), actress and theatre manager, was born on 28 September 1872 aboard a training ship moored in the Tyne, the 'Wellesley', the daughter of Captain Charles Ashwell Botelar Pocock and his wife, Sarah Margaret Stevens. She was the third daughter in a large and religious family; one of her brothers, Roger Pocock, later became a traveller and founder of the Legion of Frontiersmen. When she was eight the family moved to Canada at Brockwell on the St Lawrence River. Here her father became a minister and Lena Ashwell was educated at Bishop Strachan's School for Young Ladies in Toronto and the University of Toronto, and later specialized in music at the Swiss State School, the Lausanne conservatoire, and the Royal Academy of Music in London. On the advice of Ellen Terry, who was adjudicating an elocution class in which she was training, Ashwell gave up her career in music in favour of one in acting. She used her father's middle name professionally. 
Lena Ashwell eventually found acting work through the professional support of Malcolm Watson (later theatre correspondent of the 'Daily Mail') and her first engagement as an actress was in a production of 'The Pharisee' by M. Watson and Mrs L. Wallis in March 1891. By 1892 she was touring with George Alexander in Oscar Wilde's 'Lady Windermere's Fan'. Various London and touring roles followed but it was as Elaine in Comyns Carr's 'King Arthur' with Henry Irving that she gained significant critical notice in 1895. Ashwell was now in constant employment and her role as Mrs Dane in Charles Wyndham's production of 'Mrs Dane's Defence' (1900) by H. A. Jones brought her into the ranks of one of the half-dozen leading actresses of the day. From this point on she was often given lead female roles such as Katusha in 'Resurrection' (1903) by M. Morton, Leah in 'Leah Kleschna' by C. M. S. McLellan in 1905, and her much-praised 1909 performance in 'Madame X' by John N. Raphael. Ashwell was known as an actress of great soul, who chose to play what were then considered to be 'modern' parts which demanded emotional force and sincerity. During this first phase of her career she worked with many of the iconic actor-managers of the Victorian period and this was to influence the way in which her own career developed. 
During the Edwardian period Ashwell took on the management of the Savoy Theatre in 1906 and then refurbished and reopened Penley's Theatre in Great Queen Street as the Kingsway in 1907. Her dedication to suffrage politics coincided with her years of actor management and it was the Kingsway which saw the first production of Cicely Hamilton's feminist play 'Diana of Dobson's' (1908) with Ashwell in the lead. Ashwell later worked with Hamilton again as part of her work organizing entertainments for the troops during the First World War. At the Kingsway she encouraged among other things matinee performances of new plays by new playwrights, and her wish to produce theatre which appealed to the mind meant that productions were not always commercially successful. Financial constraints eventually forced her into subletting the theatre to other managements. According to 'Votes for Women' (13 February 1914): 'when the woman theatrical manager was practically unheard of she made a brilliant success of an enterprise that gave the public a series of plays in which the woman's point of view was never left out; and so she won another outpost for the advancing woman's army.' Ashwell's political and ideological beliefs infiltrated her work to a significant degree during these years. Aware that her star status had come from playing either villainous or submissive women, she campaigned to improve women's lot in a theatre world largely controlled by men. Along with a number of other leading actresses she joined and became an active campaigner in the Actresses Franchise League in 1908. The league organized performances of suffrage plays and training in public speaking and generally acted as a pressure group which brought the struggle for female franchise more into the public eye, as well as aiming to improve generally the position of women within the theatre industry. For someone with such a high public profile Ashwell was unusually outspoken in her political beliefs, and was one of a deputation sent by the Women's Tax Resistance League to confront Lloyd George about the inequities of the income tax law for married women; she even refused at one point to condemn militant suffragette action, pointing out that such anarchy is often the 'result of some deep seated sore within the community' ('Daily Telegraph', 16 June 1914). Ashwell was also a founder of the Three Arts Club on the Marylebone Road in London: here affordable and safe accommodation was provided for women working in the arts. 
A champion of theatrical causes as well as social ones, Ashwell spent a great deal of her career arguing for the benefits of some kind of national theatre, pointing out the continual discrepancies between attitudes to culture in other European countries and those in Britain. It was this agenda which underpinned her work from the First World War onwards; she believed in the educational and emotional value of theatre, that theatre should be available to all no matter where they lived or from what social class they originated. During the First World War she organized an enormous number of concerts for the troops, mainly in France, but some of the tours went as far afield as Egypt. These concerts might include short plays as well as songs and recitations or extracts from Shakespeare's works and were often oversubscribed by the troops eager to find respite from the terrors of the war. Ashwell worked with large teams of performers who were paid expenses only, and raised $100,000 towards the enterprise. For this work she was appointed OBE in 1917. 
After the First World War Ashwell returned to London and devoted her energies to trying to continue on home ground the kind of arts work she had been carrying out abroad. She set up touring companies which performed all over London, with the support of London county council mayors who gave permission for performances to take place in local halls and baths; they appeared as far afield as Camberwell, Enfield, Bethnal Green, and Watford. The Lena Ashwell Players became a training ground for many young performers who went on to later fame, and the repertory was full of both classic and modern works. In 1924 she established a permanent base at the Bijou, a small Notting Hill theatre which she renamed the Century. This was, until financial collapse in 1929, the headquarters of two companies, one in residence and one on tour, and such plays as St John Ervine's 'Jane Clegg', Henrik Ibsen's 'The Master Builder' and 'An Enemy of the People', and G. B. Shaw's 'Fanny's First Play' and 'Misalliance' -- works unlikely to be staged in the commercialized West End theatres -- were produced to great critical acclaim. 
With the collapse of the Century Theatre venture Ashwell retired from active service in the theatre. In one of her four books, 'The Stage' (1929), she split her career into three phases, the first being her years as a star actress from which she made a great deal of money, the second her war work, which was honorary, and the third her work with the 'great London Boroughs' in which she lost most of her money. To some extent she saw this work as having failed, but in retrospect it is not possible to see Ashwell as anything other than a pioneer of work toward a national theatre and as someone who truly dedicated herself to the opening up of opportunities for the whole community to enjoy theatre in one form or another. 
Lena Ashwell's first husband was the actor Arthur Wyndham Playfair (1869-1918). Unusually for her day, in 1908 she obtained a divorce from him on the grounds of drunken and violent behaviour towards her. In that year she married the surgeon Henry Simson, later knighted, and lived happily with him until his death in 1932. Her other works were 'Modern Troubadours' (1922), 'Reflections from Shakespeare' (1927), and 'Myself a Player' (1936). She had no children and died on 13 March 1957 in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30477


Askwith, George Ranken, Baron Askwith (1861-1942), industrial arbitrator and civil servant, was born at Waltham Abbey, Essex, on 17 February 1861, the second but eldest surviving son of William Harrison Askwith (1811-1897), colonel (later general) in the Royal Artillery, and formerly superintendent of the royal gunpowder factories at Waltham Abbey, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1914), daughter of George Ranken. He was educated at Marlborough College and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship, rowed in the college eight, and took first-class honours in modern history in 1884. He read law, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple and the Middle Temple in 1886. He worked first in the chambers of Sir Henry James, through whom he became counsel for both HM commissioners of works and the crown in peerage claims. He was junior counsel for Great Britain in the British Guiana-Venezuela boundary arbitration in 1899. He took silk in 1908 and in the same year, on 20 February, married Ellen (1863-1962), daughter of Archibald Peel, of no profession, and widow of Major Henry Graham. They had one daughter but no son and so the peerage, to which he was controversially raised (on 24 March 1919), became extinct. 
Askwith's peerage was bestowed in recognition of his exceptional career as the government's leading arbitrator, conciliator, and adviser on industrial relations, which commenced with his appointment to the Board of Trade by Lloyd George in 1907. He had been introduced to arbitration work by Sir Henry James as early as 1896 and by 1907 was taking more than half of the board's cases. He rapidly rose to be comptroller of the labour department in 1909 and then chief industrial commissioner in 1911. The period was one of exceptional industrial unrest. The transport strike of 1911 was particularly violent; and in 1912 over 40 million working days were lost due to strike action, the third highest total in the century. Askwith, who had become a public figure through his staged intervention in the music-hall strike of 1907, did much to defuse the tension and won the particular gratitude of the king, who summoned him to Balmoral at the end of 1911 to be knighted. 
The secrets of Askwith's success as a mediator were his immense patience and inscrutability, his willingness to wait until the warring parties had exhausted themselves, his ability to identify the smallest element of common ground on which to build a broader agreement, and his readiness to allow the others the credit for that agreement. All his adjudications contained recommendations concerning the means by which the two sides of industry could themselves resolve future disputes. In consequence he has been described as one of the 'secret dictators' in Edwardian Whitehall who wielded more real influence than many politicians (Halevy, 261). His wider and vehemently held principles were that the state should rise above vested interest and ensure that the public interest was both considered and defended in all disputes. Consequently he championed trade boards, which brought together the two sides of poorly organized industry to establish minimum wages, but not the more bureaucratic labour exchanges. He was chairman between 1911 and 1919 of the fair wages advisory committee, by which government sought to improve industrial best practice through its contractors. He was also appointed in 1911 chairman of the Industrial Council, a body of leading industrialists and trade unionists designed to become the central authority for arbitration and conciliation, with the power to make legally binding agreements. It was unsuccessful, as was its recommendation in 1913 that the government introduce a strike-free 'cooling-off period' before any major dispute. 
Askwith was particularly hostile to the political opportunism which usually attended ministerial intervention in industrial disputes. After some particularly unfortunate instances in 1912, the prime minister concurred as did his minister Sydney Buxton. As a result he was given an exceptional degree of freedom and, so he later claimed, the status of a permanent secretary. This could not survive the outbreak of war. The Ministry of Munitions (initially under Lloyd George), the Admiralty, and War Office each became heavily involved in industrial disputes, and their ministers and frequently inexperienced staff made conflicting awards. On his appointment as prime minister in 1916, moreover, Lloyd George created a Ministry of Labour with former trade unionists as minister and permanent secretary. Askwith, to his disgust, was transferred to this ministry and required to report regularly to them. With labour administration descending into increasing chaos, Askwith's advice to cabinet was typically trenchant and egocentric. All disputes on government contracts should be referred solely to him as chief industrial commissioner; if unresolved they should be passed to the government's main arbitration tribunal, the committee on production, of which he happened to have been chairman since 1915. To forestall unrest, the committee would also regularly review wages in the light of inflation. These suggestions were rejected as he had neither the staff nor the economic muscle to force quick solutions. Initial responsibility remained with the contracting departments and the ministry, with the committee on production responsible only for settlements affecting grades of workers employed by more than one department. Not even this was enforced. 
Askwith's growing acerbity led in November 1917 to a cabinet minute ordering him to comply with government policy on pain of dismissal. He was also increasingly sidelined within the ministry and was clearly unsuited after the war to head its new industrial relations department, to which the conciliation officers of the other departments were transferred. This post went to his secretary at the committee on production, Horace Wilson. The new minister requested his dismissal and although Bonar Law thought Askwith's demand for a peerage unjustified he advised Lloyd George that he was too well known to be refused. 
Askwith immediately published an outspoken defence of his record, 'Industrial Problems and Disputes' (1920), and rather more surprisingly was president from 1921 to 1930 of the National Citizens' Union, which grew out of the Middle Class Union, which was which was an intended counterweight to the more extreme demands of labour and of which his wife was an active promoter. He later became a vice president of the Federation of British Industry and a director of Monotype, among other business interests. This all gives rise to some doubts about the precise nature of his neutrality as an arbitrator. He served on various government bodies such as the 1931 royal commission on Malta, was chairman of the parliamentary delegation to Bermuda (1932), and was active in the world of education, being associated with Royal Holloway College, Cheltenham Ladies' College, and St Hilda's College, Oxford. In 1913 he was mayor of St Ives, Huntingdonshire, where he had his country residence. He died at his London home, 5 Cadogan Gardens, Chelsea, on 2 June 1942 and was cremated. 
His widow, Ellen, Lady Askwith, published two novels, 'The Tower of Siloam' (1905) and 'The Disinherited of the Earth' (1908), as Ellen Graham. She was appointed CBE in 1918 for her work during the First World War, when she was a lady president of the YMCA, ran canteens for dockworkers, and started national kitchens. She later served on several government committees on issues including women's unemployment, war savings, and war memorials. Their daughter was Betty Askwith, the novelist and biographer. 


@@@@@


doc= 30478


Aslin, Charles Herbert (1893-1959), architect, was born at 34 Burnell Road, Owlerton, Ecclesfield, Yorkshire, on 15 December 1893, the younger of two sons of Arthur William Aslin and his wife, Louisa Annie Outram. His parents were originally from Lincolnshire and Derbyshire, but by the time of Aslin's birth his father was foreman in a Sheffield steelworks. After leaving Sheffield central school he was articled in 1910 to a local architect, and also studied part-time in the department of architecture at Sheffield University. At the outbreak of war in 1914, Aslin volunteered for the infantry but was rejected because of defective vision. Following a period in the Army Pay Corps and the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry, he was commissioned in the Royal Artillery in 1916. He served as a captain with a field regiment on the western front until 1919. 
On returning to Sheffield, Aslin worked on the staff of the city architect. In 1922 he was appointed architect to the borough engineer of Rotherham, where he designed new municipal offices. Architectural careers in local government were opening up at this time; moving up the ladder, Aslin became deputy county architect for Hampshire in 1926 and borough architect for Derby in 1929, where he demonstrated the drive that was to carry him to the top of his profession. His 'central improvement scheme' for Derby, comprising council offices, police courts, bus station, open market, riverside gardens, and a bridge, provided for the replanning of a key area of the city along the Derwent. The stringencies of the 1930s prevented much of this from being carried through, nor was the style of Aslin's proposed and executed buildings noteworthy. But the authority and ambition of the scheme enhanced his reputation. 
In 1945 Aslin was appointed as Hertfordshire's first county architect. His new department's chief responsibility was for school-building, following the 'Education Act' of 1944. It was then becoming clear that the post-war demand for schools would be beyond the capacity of the building industry, which had been depleted by wartime labour shortages, was committed to essential tasks of repairing war damage, and needed to provide new housing to cater for the shift in population. In no part of the country were these problems more acute than Hertfordshire, which had grown fast between the wars and was now to be the location of fresh communities created under the 'New Towns Act' of 1946 and the London county council's overspill policies. On the advice of the Ministry of Education and with a shrewdly appointed deputy, Stirrat Johnson-Marshall, Aslin encouraged his staff in promoting and developing an in-house system of construction for primary schools which would make full but flexible use of prefabricated components and so relieve the strain on traditional builders. His leadership and loyalty were crucial in securing the backing of the county council and fellow officials, notably the county education officer, John Newsom, for this bold innovation. 
The system proved outstandingly successful and soon attracted notice. The Hertfordshire primary schools became places of pilgrimage for architects from all over the world. Existing educational values were challenged; new technical, costing, and administrative procedures were adopted; and a new aesthetic evolved using space, light, colour, and furniture to create a fresh kind of school environment. By 1955 Hertfordshire had built over a hundred schools and, following Johnson-Marshall's early promotion to the Ministry of Education, the county's methods had been adopted by leading authorities throughout the country. Aslin's role as team leader and 'umbrella man' was to appoint and welcome some of the brightest young architects of the day on his staff, support them, and generously acknowledge their contribution. In 1951 he received the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) bronze medal in recognition of the pioneering architecture of the Hertfordshire schools. 
Aslin was also important in the counsels of the RIBA. He was elected associate in 1920 and fellow in 1932, first served on the council of the RIBA in 1941-3, and was regularly a council member thereafter. As chairman of the official architects committee, he helped to heal a breach that had developed between architects in private practice and the growing number in salaried posts, notably in local government, who were dissatisfied with their conditions of service. In 1948-50 and 1952-4 he acted as a vice-president and in 1954-6 as president of the RIBA. His presidency coincided with the end of building licensing and inaugurated a more confident and optimistic mood among architects, buoyed up by his personality. Appointed CBE in 1951, he was also an associate of the Institution of Structural Engineers, a member of the Royal Society of Arts, and an honorary fellow of the American Institute of Architects. 
Respected for his kindness and wisdom, Aslin made friends easily and was at ease with people of differing age, background, race, and temperament. Coupled with his charm he retained a Yorkshire shrewdness and strength, enabling him to adopt a firm stand when he thought it necessary. At Hertfordshire he was committed to the collective vision and methodology of his department, but reacted sharply when left-wing architects sought equality of pay and abolition of hierarchies. He detested pomposity and pretension. Throughout his career he was encouraged and supported by his wife, Ethel Fawcett ('b'. 1895/6), a domestic science teacher, also from Sheffield, the daughter of Joseph Armitage, a butcher, whom he married on 30 October 1920; the Aslins were consistently helpful and hospitable to others. Outside architecture, Aslin played a good game of tennis, was interested in cricket, enjoyed the theatre, photographed well, read widely, and supported numerous societies. During the Second World War he did much to foster Anglo-Polish relations. Brought up as a strict nonconformist, he later embraced the Church of England. 
Aslin had a narrow escape from death during a visit to Staffordshire in 1955 on RIBA business, when his bedroom filled with gas owing to a fractured main. He was seriously ill and it is doubtful whether he ever completely recovered his previous robust health. He retired from Hertfordshire in 1958, died at home at New Place, Queens Road, Hertford, on 18 April 1959, and was buried at St Mary's Church, North Mymms. 
The Aslins' only child, 


@@@@@


doc= 30479


Asquith, Anthony (1902-1968), film director and aesthete, was born on 9 November 1902 in London, the youngest son of Herbert Henry Asquith, first earl of Oxford and Asquith (1852-1928), the Liberal statesman and future prime minister, and his second wife, Margaret Emma Alice (Margot) Asquith (1864-1945), daughter of Sir Charles Tennant, merchant and art patron. There were five children of this marriage, two of whom survived. Of these two, Elizabeth (died 1945) was six years older than Anthony (who was universally known by his childhood name of Puffin). There were also five children of H. H. Asquith's first marriage. 
Anthony Asquith was educated at Summer Fields, Oxford, Winchester College, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained second classes in both classical moderations (1923) and 'literae humaniores' (1925). He had a passionate love of music from an early age but, deciding that he was not talented enough for a professional career, concentrated on his other great interest, the cinema. After leaving Oxford in 1925, Asquith, a founder member of the Film Society in London, was invited to study the American industry in Hollywood, as a guest of Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford. 
On returning home after six months Asquith joined H. Bruce Woolfe's British Instructional Film Company in 1926. Thereafter, unlike Alfred J. Hitchcock and many other leading figures in British cinema, Asquith never left London to work in Hollywood. He was essentially English in his tastes and his style, a characteristic that was his greatest strength but also, owing to the restricted nature of the native industry, one that imposed technical and financial limitations on his work. Most of his best films were screen adaptations of West End plays, opened out for the cinema, but with a limited conventional use of the flexibility that technical developments brought to film-makers in his lifetime. His artistic and personal integrity, coupled with a sensitive literary and visual imagination, won the respect of all his studio associates from the leading international film stars to the humblest technicians, and enabled him to create a wholehearted devotion for any feature he made. In an industry whose outstanding directors were often flamboyant hectoring egotists, Asquith was modest and undemonstrative, and got his way by persuasion and attention to his craft. It was not surprising that when the Association of Cinematographic Technicians was created in 1937, Asquith was invited to become the first president and retained this position until his death in 1968, a fitting tribute to the 'technicians' director'. 

'Shooting Stars' (1927), for which he was scriptwriter and assistant director, began a decade in which Asquith was a film 'auteur', who directed from his own scripts. His first independent success was 'A Cottage on Dartmoor' (1929) -- one of the last, and best, British silent films. A growing reputation was enhanced by 'Tell England' (1930-31), based on the 1915 Gallipoli campaign, but this was unfortunately followed by six years of making less distinguished films for uncongenial company producers. Asquith's service in Alexander Korda's studio at Denham ended after one film, 'Moscow Nights' (1935), remarkable only for an early screen appearance by Laurence Olivier. Few men could have been more unalike than the gentle Asquith and the overbearing Korda. 
This frustrating period ended with 'Pygmalion' (1938), probably Asquith's greatest achievement. He wrote the script, in consultation with George Bernard Shaw, author of the successful play of that name, and encouraged the experienced Leslie Howard and the comparatively unknown Wendy Hiller to give outstanding performances as Professor Higgins and Eliza Doolittle. Asquith had discovered his metier, the transformation of plays written for middle-class London theatre audiences into films that would appeal to the much wider cinema-going public. He managed to popularize the material without debasing its quality. 

'Pygmalion' was followed by 'French without Tears' (1939) with Terence Rattigan, the author of many of his films over the next twenty years. One of the few breaks in this partnership linked Asquith with a very different playwright, Samuel Beckett, in the creation of a short film, 'Zero' (1960). During the war Asquith directed two documentaries, one an introduction to Britain for American servicemen entitled 'Welcome to Britain' (1943), successful feature films such as 'Quiet Wedding' (1940) and 'Fanny by Gaslight' (1944), and films with a political or war interest -- 'The Demi-Paradise' (1943) and 'The Way to the Stars' (1945). After 1945 Asquith formed a company with Terence Rattigan to film the latter's stage successes 'While the Sun Shines' (1947), 'The Winslow Boy' (1948), 'The Browning Version' (1950), and a tribute to English cricket, 'The Final Test' (1952). He also supervised brilliant screen versions of Oscar Wilde's 'The Importance of being Earnest' (1951) and Shaw's 'The Doctor's Dilemma' (1958). 
Surprisingly, and sadly, Asquith's one professional excursion into the musical world which he loved so much, as producer of 'Carmen' for Covent Garden in 1953, was not very successful. He was more at ease with films that combined a fictional story with shots of stage performances of ballet, as in 'The Young Lovers' (1945) and the earlier 'Dance Pretty Lady' (1931), and of opera, with 'On such a Night' (1955) -- devoted to an evening of Mozart at Glyndebourne. In the mid-1950s he directed several successful television films of ballets danced by Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev. The greater appreciation of ballet and opera by British television audiences in the 1960s and 1970s came unfortunately too late for Asquith, who would have been exceptionally well suited to make such productions. 
In the last years of his career Asquith was employed by the big international companies who dominated the industry to direct expensive films for the world market, such as 'The VIPs' (1963) and 'The Yellow Rolls-Royce' (1964), very different from the restrained, essentially English works with which he had made his name. In December 1963 he had a serious automobile accident. Although he recovered, and within four months was directing the last film he was able to complete, he was never again fully fit. While working in Italy on a film of 'The Shoes of the Fisherman', he was taken ill and died in London of cancer on 21 February 1968. He never married. He was buried in All Saints' churchyard, Sutton Courtenay, Berkshire. 
Asquith is best remembered for his early contributions to British cinema when it was seeking to evolve a distinctive style to compete with the American domination of the market. Although he helped to achieve this in the 1930s and 1940s, the British industry, like Asquith himself, was too delicate to flourish long in the face of the superior resources of the United States. He will be remembered also for his modesty, charm, and sincere concern for all who worked with him and for him. His dress was casual, wayward at times, and endeared him to his many friends, who ranged from distinguished figures in public affairs, banking, and the arts, to working men and women. Having been brought up in 10 Downing Street, he was at home and happy in stately homes or in lorry drivers' cafes. Asquith's outstanding physical features were the long, delicate fingers of a pianist, always gesticulating, as though they were trying to keep up with the quickness of his thought and speech. His strong, finely cut features seemed sometimes at odds with his careless dress, and suggested that he was in too much of a hurry to meet and help people to waste much time on external appearances. Lord David Cecil wrote 'There are people in this confused and distracted age who question the possibility of human goodness. No one could do so who knew Anthony Asquith' (Minney, 229). 
D. J. Wenden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30480


Asquith, Lady Cynthia Mary Evelyn (1887-1960), writer, was born on 27 September 1887 at her family's estate, Clouds, near East Knoyle, Wiltshire. She was the third of seven children of Hugo Charteris (1857-1937), styled Lord Elcho until his succession as ninth earl of Wemyss, and his wife, Mary Constance Wyndham (1862-1937) ['see 'Charteris, Mary Constance]. Most of her childhood was spent at another family estate, Stanway House, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, where she was educated privately; one of her governesses, Charlotte Jourdain, inspired in her a deep respect for learning, and she sought mastery in subjects such as Greek, not normally part of the education of a girl of her class. Her parents were leading lights in the aristocratic circle called the Souls, a group notable both for its members' political power and for their romantic entanglements; she later suspected that Arthur Balfour, one of the Souls, was her father. 
Cynthia Charteris's parents sent her, in 1903-4, for 'finishing' to Dresden, where she met Herbert Asquith (1881-1947), son of Herbert Henry Asquith, the liberal politician. The two became secretly engaged in 1907, and married on 28 July 1910. Her family did not favour the match: Asquith, a barrister, had far more limited means than those to which his young wife had been accustomed. They leased a home near Regent's Park in London until the First World War broke out in 1914 and her husband entered the Royal Field Artillery. In that year her grandfather died, and she inherited the title Lady Cynthia, a title that, however, was accompanied by neither money nor property. She began a long period of moving from one temporary home to another, which she called 'cuckooing'. By this time she had two sons, John ('b'. 1911) and Michael ('b'. 1914); a third son, Simon, was born in 1919. 
Lady Cynthia Asquith's wartime diaries (published in 1968) are the best of all the writing she eventually produced. They detail her cuckooing existence as well as her growing difficulties with her son John, who was slipping into the condition later described as autism. More importantly, the diaries provide a dynamic portrait of aristocratic life during the war: side by side with trivia about hair-styles and dinner parties are simple and moving entries about the deaths of many of the young men with whom she had grown up, including two of her brothers. The diaries are vivid, insightful, and often clever as well, expressive of her complex personality and sensibility. 
A friend and confidant during these years was D. H. Lawrence, who depicted Asquith in a number of his works (most notably in the short story 'The Blind Man'); some feel she is the basis also for his Lady Chatterley. Her husband returned from the front suffering from shell-shock, which impaired his ability to earn a living, and in 1918 she took a job as secretary to the playwright J. M. Barrie, who became a dominant presence in her life until his death in 1937; for Barrie, she played alternately the roles of friend, nurse, mother, and lover, and at his death he left her some $30,000, which at last gave her financial security. 
During the 1920s Lady Cynthia Asquith had begun producing a series of anthologies for children and adults, persuading her friends to contribute to them (Lawrence's 'The Rocking-Horse Winner' was written for one of her collections); they enjoyed some popularity, ten different titles being produced between 1923 and 1929. She also wrote novels -- 'The Spring House' (1936) and 'One Sparkling Wave' (1943) -- which are chiefly of interest for their autobiographical content. 
After Barrie's death Lady Cynthia and her husband moved to Sullington, Sussex, close to the home of her friend the novelist Viola Meynell; and in 1946 they moved to Bath. After her husband's death in August 1947 she moved to London. She invested money in the publishing company being started by Barrie's nephew, James Barrie, and he persuaded her to write her memoirs for the firm. The first, 'Haply I May Remember', was published in 1950, and 'Remember and Be Glad' in 1952; both are valuable portraits of the era in which she grew up. During this time she also wrote a memoir, 'Portrait of Barrie' (1954). She also wrote a play, 'No Heaven for Me' (1943; produced in 1946), about Tolstoy's wife, and later wrote a full-scale biography of her, 'Married to Tolstoy' (1961). But before that book was in print, she contracted meningitis and died in the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 31 March 1960. 
Those who knew her admired Lady Cynthia for her stunning beauty, her qualities of discretion and loyalty, and her unique blend of intelligence and playfulness; her lofty social background made her fascinating to many as well, and portraits of her figure in the works not only of Lawrence but of Enid Bagnold, Angela Thirkell, and L. P. Hartley. Of the many titles that came out under her name most are relatively slight, as most were produced out of the need to help support her family, but her 'Diaries' and her memoirs are remarkable works which provide insight into both her and the class into which she was born. 


@@@@@


doc= 30481


Asquith, Cyril, Baron Asquith of Bishopstone (1890-1954), judge, was born at Eton House in what used to be John Street, Hampstead, on 5 February 1890. He was the fourth son and the youngest of the five children of the future prime minister, Herbert Henry Asquith, later first earl of Oxford and Asquith (1852-1928), and his first wife, Helen Melland ('c'.1855-1891), daughter of a distinguished Manchester physician. The daughter became (Lady) Violet Bonham Carter in 1915 and was created a life peer in 1964 ['see 'Carter, (Helen) Violet Bonham]. Their mother's death in 1891 may have contributed to the shyness which affected Cys, as he was always known to his friends, throughout his life. 
From Summer Fields, Oxford, Asquith went as a scholar to Winchester College, where he was a noted football player. Like his father and his brother Raymond Asquith he became a foundation scholar at Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in both classical moderations (1911) and 'literae humaniores' (1913). He also won the Hertford, Craven, and Ireland scholarships. He then became an Eldon scholar and was elected a fellow of Magdalen College in 1913. His reserve kept him from taking the same active part in college and university affairs as had his brothers Raymond and Herbert, who had both been presidents of the Oxford Union. 
When the First World War began Asquith volunteered in the Queen's Westminster rifles, later being promoted captain. From 1916 to 1918 he was employed in the Ministry of Munitions. On 12 February 1918 he married Anne Stephanie (died 1964), daughter of Sir Adrian Donald Wilde Pollock, chamberlain of the City of London; they had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1920 Asquith was called to the bar by the Inner Temple and became a pupil in the chambers of W. A. Jowitt, a choice of considerable significance later in Asquith's career. His practice was in the common law courts, but it was not a particularly successful one. From 1925 to 1938 Asquith had time to be assistant reader in common law to the Council of Legal Education. Nevertheless in 1936 he took silk and in 1937 he was made recorder of Salisbury. 
In 1938 Asquith was appointed a judge of the King's Bench Division (with the customary knighthood) by the lord chancellor, Lord Maugham. The appointment caused some considerable surprise at the bar, for his practice had been a small one. The lord chief justice, Lord Hewart, in particular, felt that he had not been appropriately consulted regarding the appointment, and he had little regard for Asquith's talents. It is said that for this reason Hewart assigned Asquith to try a number of serious criminal cases at the Old Bailey, where an error would have had an unfortunate effect on Asquith's reputation. It was, however, in the trial of criminal cases that Asquith proved particularly successful, because his skill in explaining the law when charging a jury was of special value. There was some complaint that he was too generous in sentencing the guilty, but this did not bother him. 
Fortune smiled again when Asquith's former head of chambers became lord chancellor in the Labour government of 1945-51. In February 1946 Asquith was appointed a lord justice of appeal by Clement Attlee on Jowitt's recommendation, and was made a privy councillor. Jowitt was not unaware of the dangers of the appointment. Writing to Attlee, the prime minister, Jowitt said he regarded Asquith as having 'the finest mind... on the other hand, he has shown a complete neglect of any sense of public duty. His conduct with regard to sittings is so bad that I am deeply concerned about it'. He was using the equal pay committee as an excuse for not working: 'If he were to be appointed a member of the Court of Appeal, he would be one of a team, and under the tutelage of the Master of the Rolls he might be made to do some work... I recognise that his promotion would be regarded by the Bench and Bar as a reward for singularly unmeritorious services. On the other hand, I still believe he has the best brain of any of the King's Bench judges... I should be thankful to get rid of him from the King's Bench Division, as would many, many of the senior judges. (26 Jan 1946, Stevens, 'Independence', 83)' What is now called the Peter Principle was very much in evidence.At the same time, once in the Court of Appeal Asquith's knowledge of the law, coupled with his literary interests, gave a certain distinction to his judgments which were otherwise conventional, if not conservative. Perhaps the most frequently quoted judgments are 'Victoria Laundry (Windsor) Ltd v. Newman Industries Ltd' (1949), in which he restated the law concerning the measure of damages on breach of contract; 'Thurogood v. Van Den Berghs & Jurgens' (1951), on the measure of damages in tort; and 'Candler v. Crane, Christmas & Co.' (1951), in which he responded to Lord Denning's remark that 'there were the timorous souls who were fearful of allowing a new cause of action' by saying 'If this relegates me to the company of timorous souls, I must face that consequence with such fortitude as I can command'. 
Certainly Asquith's contributions were of a conservative bent; and he showed little gratitude to Jowitt for his scarcely justified promotion. In April 1946 Asquith wrote to Jowitt from the straitened environment of Brooks's to complain about his salary. 'The only way in which Queen's Bench Division judges have been able to balance their budgets during the War has been by going circuit'. (The judges received a tax-free allowance of $7 10's'. daily on circuit.) Asquith complained: 'I've lived from hand to mouth during the War' (3 April 1946, Stevens, 'Independence', 120). He had sold his King's Bench robes but could not afford to buy Court of Appeal ones. He suggested that instead of $5000 p.a. the appropriate salary for a judge should be $70,000. Jowitt was unmoved. 
In April 1951 Asquith became a lord of appeal in ordinary, with a life peerage, again on Jowitt's recommendation. It was remarked that 'the higher he went the better he became' ('DNB'); but equally the sentiment might be used for suggesting that success at the bar is not a 'sine qua non' for success in the appeal courts, particularly if one has the right contacts. As a law lord he served for only three years before he died, but during that time he gave a number of judgments. In 'Bank of New South Wales v. Laing' (1954) he delivered the decision of the judicial committee of the privy council on a difficult procedural point concerning the onus of proof in an 'indebitatus assumpsit' count. His two dissenting judgments in the House of Lords, 'King v. King' (1953) and 'Stapley v. Gypsum Mines Ltd' (1953), illustrate the clarity of his style. 
Certainly Asquith understood the workings of the judicial process. He put it elegantly in 'Chapman v. Chapman' (1954): 'Nor, speaking more generally, does English jurisprudence start from a broad principle and decide cases in accordance with its logical implications. It starts with a clean slate, scored over, in course of time, with ad hoc decisions. General rules are arrived at inductively, from the collation and comparison of these decisions: the rules do not pre-exist them.' At the same time, perhaps because of his nature and his natural conservatism, he had virtually no impact in the Lords. His decisions suggested that he had little sympathy with injured workmen (such as 'Parvin v. Merton Mach. Co.', 1952) and legislatively he advocated capital and corporal punishment. It was an undistinguished period in the House of Lords as a final court of appeal; Asquith did nothing to ameliorate it. 
The most remarkable moment in Asquith's life came in October 1951 when Winston Churchill offered him the lord chancellorship. He refused it and Asquith himself never referred to it again. The offer was unexpected, since Asquith had no political experience which would have aided him in presiding in the House of Lords as a legislative body. Perhaps Churchill's choice was influenced in part by the fact that Asquith was the son of the prime minister under whom he had first served in the cabinet; it may also have been due in part to the fact that they were fellow members of The Other Club, where they often met at dinner, and where Churchill had been attracted by Asquith. Asquith's critics assumed that his reluctance sprang, at least in part, from the opprobrium he might encounter in the light of his undistinguished -- although extraordinarily lucky -- career at the bar and on the bench. His friends insisted he was far too high-minded to accept a post which he felt he was not strong enough physically to perform adequately. In a letter to his son-in-law John Stephenson, Asquith insisted that Churchill 'mustn't be saddled with a lame duck on the Woolsack' ('DNB'). Churchill then turned to another law lord, whom he had never met, Gavin Simonds, and made him lord chancellor. 
Apart from his judicial career Asquith held a number of appointments. He was a member of the lord chancellor's Law Revision Committee, he was the High Court judge attached to the General Claims Tribunal (1939), and he was chairman for six months in 1940 of the advisory committee on aliens. He was chairman of the commission on higher education in the colonies, 1943-4, and chairman of the royal commission on equal pay for equal work, 1944-6. 
Asquith must have been one of the major contributors to 'The Times' in the number of letters he wrote to it and in the unsigned leaders. They varied from extreme seriousness to the humorous. Most of the leaders concerned possible reforms in the law and dealt with such subjects as the cost of litigation, the legal machine, and the law relating to married women. 
Asquith's publications included 'Trade Union Law for Laymen' (1927), which achieved a popular success; 'Versions from 'A Shropshire Lad'' (1930), a translation into Latin of poems by A. E. Housman which was less popular but received the approval of his former Balliol tutor, Cyril Bailey; and in 1932 with J. A. Spender the life of his father. About half the first volume, which deals with his father's early and family life, was written by Asquith, and a smaller part of the second volume; they would probably have been more successful if he had written the whole of them. 
Asquith's conversation and his writings have been described as showing 'the same deliberation, dry humour and careful choice of words that marked his father's style' ('DNB'). Cyril Asquith was himself an illustration of his father's famous remark concerning 'the effortless superiority of Balliol men'. Like his father he was elected an honorary fellow of the college. He died in London on 24 August 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 30482


Asquith, Margaret Emma Alice, countess of Oxford and Asquith (1864-1945), political hostess and diarist, was born on 2 February 1864, the sixth daughter and eleventh child of Sir Charles Tennant, first baronet (1823-1906), wealthy Scottish industrialist and Liberal MP, and his first wife, Emma (1821-1895), daughter of Richard Winsloe of Mount Nebo, Taunton, Somerset. Her younger brother, Harold John (Jack) Tennant, was also a Liberal MP and briefly secretary of state for Scotland in 1916. At birth her names were registered in the order Alice Emma Margaret; in later life they were sometimes given as Emma Alice Margaret. 
Margot was born at The Glen, the house her father had built at Innerleithen, Peeblesshire. She was proud of being 'Scotch' (her invariable term). Agile and energetic, she revelled in the freedom of her country childhood. She loved riding, and when introduced to hunting in 1880 she found an activity in which she could excel; she rode with the Cottesmore, the Quorn, and the Belvoir hunts. In one of her many accidents, however, her nose was broken, and her upper lip became misshapen. Before that, she had been 'rather a pretty girl' (M. Asquith, 'More Memories', 1933, 232). She was educated mostly at home, and read widely in her father's library; she also attended a seminary in London run by Mlle de Mennecy, and spent five months in Dresden studying music and German. 
Being nervous and irascible, Margot was often unfavourably compared to her gentler, more spiritual sister Laura ['see 'Lyttelton, Octavia Laura, 'under' Lyttelton, Alfred], but they were deeply devoted to each other, and under Laura's influence Margot developed the strong Christian faith to which she adhered all her life. With the marriage of the eldest sister, Charlotte, 'the only beauty of the family' (M. Asquith, diary, 1910-11, 143), to Thomas Lister, fourth Baron Ribblesdale, in 1877, the Tennants made a significant social advance. After 'coming out' Laura and Margot enjoyed a resounding success in society. Both girls were charming, vivacious, and highly unconventional. They were portrayed in novels such as Mrs Humphry Ward's 'Robert Elsmere' (1888), and in E. F. Benson's 'Dodo' (1893), where the 'clever and stimulating' heroine, with her inconsequential chatter, was widely recognized as being based on Margot. The sayings of Margot -- for example her comment on ghosts, 'Appearances are in favour of them' -- were much repeated throughout her lifetime: she herself had to suffer hearing epigrams attributed to her which were not authentic. Lord David Cecil described her remarks as being like those of a clever child who is surprised when grown-ups laugh. 
When Laura, who had married Alfred Lyttelton in 1885, died in childbirth the following year at the age of twenty-four, the shock was felt not only by Margot but by the whole circle of Laura's friends and relatives, who drew together in mourning her. Margot became a prominent member of this group, which included Arthur Balfour and George Curzon among politicians, and Mary Elcho and Ettie Grenfell among the great hostesses whose country houses were its meeting places. Their intellectual and cultural interests gained them the nickname the Souls; Balfour thought the name 'meaningless and slightly ludicrous' ('Chapters of Autobiography', ed. B. Dugdale, 1930, 232). In later life Margot was emphatic about the influence and success of the Souls, particularly in crossing party boundaries. She scornfully contrasted their 'brilliant conversation' and 'excellent company' with the later 'Anti-Cant' group, 'sexless, soulless and so disloyal' (M. Asquith, diary, July 1916 - August 1917, 35). 
Margot first met Herbert Henry Asquith (1852-1928), earl of Oxford and Asquith from 1925, in 1890. Asquith's wife, Helen, died suddenly in the following year from typhoid, leaving five children ranging in age from thirteen to one. When, to the surprise of his friends, Asquith asked Margot to marry him, she hesitated for months before finally accepting in 1894. The wedding took place on 10 May 1894; the register was signed by four prime ministers -- Gladstone, Rosebery, Balfour, and Asquith. She later wrote that every one of the letters congratulating her had included 'a note of warning' (M. Asquith, 'Autobiography', 1.282); and she soon found that the strains of being a stepmother were severe. She was to have five children of her own, but only Elizabeth (1897-1945) and Anthony 'Puffin' Asquith (1902-1968) survived, three dying at birth. Much as she often longed to be alone with her husband and two children, she rarely achieved this. She brooded frequently over the difference in temperament between the Tennants and the Asquiths. She once wrote of her own father's lack of self-control, and of his tendency to hurt other people's feelings by saying everything that came into his head 'like a spoilt child' (M. Asquith, diary, 1904-6, 241). These traits she had undoubtedly inherited: they made difficulties for her throughout her life, especially with her reserved stepfamily. Her relations with Raymond Asquith, the eldest, were cool; with Violet Bonham Carter, the only daughter, stormy. 
By the end of 1903 there were good prospects that the Liberals would soon form a government, of which Asquith would be a prominent member. Margot, who had kept a diary since childhood, embarked in 1904 on a new scheme of arrangement whereby political events would be recorded separately from family matters. She wrote in the new volume that it was to record 'with absolute fidelity and indiscretion the private and political events of the coming years' (M. Asquith, diary, 1904-6, 1). She continued to write two diaries more or less in tandem until 1913, and combined diary volumes from 1914 until 1918. After beginning work on her 'Autobiography' she wrote no diary until 1922-3; if there were further volumes, they have not survived. 
Margot's diary is of great importance as the record of someone close to the centre of power at a time of significant political change and, with the outbreak of the First World War, of crisis for the country. Often rapidly written in her strong angular hand, the diary has great freshness and vigour: Margot had a gift for the expressive phrase -- writing for instance of Balfour's 'cool grace' (M. Asquith, diary, 1904-6, 45). Her promise of 'absolute fidelity', however, has to be taken with caution. It is known that she made notes of conversations, for example, as soon as possible after the event: but she also writes of her despair at the piles of notes waiting to be written up, and in busy times letters, rough notes, pressed flowers, locks of hair, and even a baby tooth were thrown into the volumes. Where notes exist that can be compared with the diary version, the latter is reasonably accurate; but on one occasion when she presented inscribed cigarette cases to several friends, she gives two different versions of the inscription, at a few pages' distance from each other. More seriously misleading is the marginal entry 'From my diary' in the 'Autobiography'. In many cases Margot considerably altered her diary narrative, usually to inject more drama into the scene. 
Asquith became chancellor of the exchequer in December 1905. Margot and he looked over no. 11 Downing Street, but she could see no possibility of fitting into it with '16 servants and 9 of the family' (M. Asquith, diary, 1904-6, 179-80). Sir Charles Tennant provided money whereby they were able to remain at their home, 20 Cavendish Square, and when Asquith succeeded Campbell-Bannerman as prime minister in April 1908 his 'cabinet-making' took place there. He telegraphed Margot from Biarritz that he had kissed hands, adding: 'Back Friday ask Grey dinner and one or two nice women'. Margot commented in the diary 'I never thought of obeying Henry's wire... it would have ruined our dinner. I know very few really clever discreet women' (M. Asquith, diary, 1907-9, 56). The Asquiths moved into no. 10 Downing Street, which Margot thought 'an inconvenient house with three poor staircases' (M. Asquith, 'Autobiography', 2.107). 
It is difficult to assess what influence, if any, was exerted by Margot, especially during the premiership. On the personal side she was highly demanding and critical, and poor health frequently made her difficult. She was capable of making terrible scenes (as she herself recounted). All this meant a far from restful home life for Asquith. On the other hand she was fiercely loyal to him, and seldom complained of her husband's close friendships with other women even in 1914-15, when one of these, with Venetia Stanley, had made her miserable. The lavish lifestyle of the Asquiths in society was much criticized: here Margot was thought to have had a corrupting influence on her husband. These criticisms were not confined to political opponents: they were voiced by Liberals also, and by at least one detached observer, Beatrice Webb. 
Margot was wholly committed to the task of keeping the Liberal Party in power, even if there was an element of self-interest there. The extent of her interference, as revealed by countless examples in the diary, is startling. She lectured George V on home rule: 'You see sir you only see fashionable Tories and not very clever ones' (M. Asquith, diary, February 1912 - September 1914, 175); she begged the chief whip in November 1910 to have a general election immediately; she summoned Kitchener in June 1915 in an effort to get a parliamentary question withdrawn; she suggested in October 1915 the suspension of 'The Times' and the 'Daily Mail'; she claimed to have 'made' at least one viceroy; she advised Winston Churchill in 1910 to turn over a new leaf. She once attempted to advise Lloyd George on what not to say in his speeches: but at that point she met her match, and on receiving an icy reply and the threat of a complaint to Asquith, she made peace. She admitted that 'Henry' hated her 'missionary tendencies' (M. Asquith, diary, January 1910 - end of 1911, 93). 
Margot's impetuous and high-handed ways were of course bound to attract criticism. In 1905 she was unable to resist dining out on an incident at court; a stiff royal rebuke, with the threat of withdrawing future invitations to Windsor, was administered. A more dangerous fault was her extravagance, which caused much adverse comment. Sir Charles Tennant had made generous provision for her on her marriage, and he increased this in 1900 and again when Asquith came into office. Some at least of these arrangements continued after Sir Charles's death in 1906. Margot was certainly generous, especially to her stepchildren, but being 'passionately fond of clothes' (M. Asquith, diary, 1922-3, 26), she spent so much that even while Asquith was still prime minister she told Rosebery that she was forced to make money by journalism. The tory chief whip in 1910 considered that Asquith's inability to earn much in private life, coupled with his wife's extravagance, would make him cling to office as long as possible. It is certainly true that on one occasion the mere possibility of Asquith's being forced to resign from ill health reduced Margot to panic. 
When the First World War broke out Margot insisted, typically enough, on visiting the front, though told by the foreign secretary that this was 'pure self-indulgence' (M. Asquith, diary, October 1914 - May 1915, 211). Mounting criticism of her husband's leadership of the coalition which he had formed in May 1915 infuriated her, and when in June 1916, as the result of Kitchener's death, Asquith made Lloyd George war secretary, she saw this as a tragic mistake. She wrote sadly of the rift it had made between her and her husband: for the first time they were unable to discuss politics. The subsequent moves whereby Asquith was forced out of the premiership by Lloyd George in December 1916 roused Margot to intense rage and bitterness. 
Margot had always enjoyed writing, regarding it as a kind of safety valve. When it became urgent for her to earn money she decided to write her 'Autobiography', based on the diary. The publication of the first volume in 1920 was preceded by extracts in English and American newspapers. Immediate offence was given to some of her friends by her unvarnished descriptions of them -- Curzon was never reconciled to her. The excessive candour and the egotism of the author were severely commented on by critics, and surprise was expressed at her account, in the newspaper version, of a conversation with Lord Salisbury which was held apparently after his death. However, the advances for both volumes were large (volume 2 was published in 1922), and the book sold well. Margot had a simple and direct style. With the aid of the diary she had been able to recall political manoeuvres and her encounters with many famous figures from politics, literature, and society. To the modern reader, there is much that is trivial and tedious in her material; however, the 'Autobiography' brought fame, and Margot made a successful lecture tour of the United States in 1922, described in 'Places and Persons' (1925). She continued to produce books at intervals during the next twenty years ('Lay Sermons', 1927; 'More Memories', 1933; 'Myself when Young', 1938; 'Off the Record', 1943). These tend to share the faults of the 'Autobiography', without having its zest and novelty. 'Olivia', Margot's only novel, was published in 1928; it draws largely on her own experiences, particularly in the hunting field, and one of the central characters is based on her early admirer Peter Flower. 
When obliged to sell their Cavendish Square house in 1919 the Asquiths moved to 44 Bedford Square. Margot arranged her homes with what Violet called her 'impeccable eye' (Pottle, 358); in 'Lay Sermons' she writes that she would have liked to decorate houses for friends as an occupation. The Wharf, Sutton Courtenay, Berkshire, which Margot had bought in 1911 with money given to her by Pierpont Morgan, continued to be a favourite resort until sold in 1932, when Margot was forced to economize further. 
After Asquith's death in 1928 Margot continued to occupy herself with her books and journalism. Her son, Puffin, was making a distinguished career as a film director. Her daughter, Elizabeth, who had married Prince Antoine Bibesco in 1919, lived much of her life abroad, and throughout the Second World War was in Romania. The news that she was about to return to Britain in 1945 was immediately followed by that of her death. This was a crushing blow. Margot died on 28 July 1945 at 14 Kensington Square, and was buried at Sutton Courtenay churchyard on 31 July. 
Margot had charmed Benjamin Jowett, had been given a private recital of 'Maud' by Tennyson, had watched the beautiful young duchess of Leinster making eleven perfect curtsies to royalties at an assembly, had launched a dreadnought, had knelt in prayer in a railway carriage with General Booth of the Salvation Army, had waltzed in a cabinet ante-room with Admiral Lord Fisher, had wept with the German ambassador on 4 August 1914 while he told her that Germany had 'never counted' that old Belgian treaty, and had lived to see Winston Churchill, for whom in 1915 she could foresee 'no political future', become the twelfth of the thirteen prime ministers she had known. 


@@@@@


doc= 30483


Asquith, Herbert Henry, first earl of Oxford and Asquith (1852-1928), prime minister, was born on 12 September 1852 at Croft House, Morley, Yorkshire. He was registered at birth as Herbert Asquith, and was known by that name until he was about forty, being called Bertie in the family; the name Henry seems to have been added at an early stage. He was the second son of the two sons and three daughters of Joseph Dixon Asquith (1825?-1860), a minor employer in the woollen trade, and his wife, Emily (died 1888), daughter of William Willans JP, a wool-stapler of Huddersfield. Two of his sisters died early, and his brother suffered a sports injury which stunted his growth; his father died when he was eight, from an intestine twisted while playing cricket. His mother was an invalid, with a heart condition and frequent bronchitis. The young Herbert Asquith soon of necessity developed the imperturbable, slightly withdrawn, self-sufficiency and good health which was his life's standby. 
The Asquith family was thoroughgoingly Liberal in politics and strictly Congregationalist, attending the Rehoboth Chapel in Morley. Herbert was chiefly educated in his early years by his well-read mother. The family moved in 1858 to Mirfield, Yorkshire; on Joseph Asquith's death in 1860, William Willans, the grandfather, took responsibility for the family, sending the boys to Huddersfield College, their first school, and then in 1861 to the Moravian school in Fulneck, by Leeds. On William Willans's death in 1863, Emily Asquith moved to St Leonards, Sussex, but Herbert and his brother, William Willans Asquith, were billeted in various middle-class London households while they attended the City of London School as day boys. This made Asquith, he recalled, from that time 'to all intents and purposes a Londoner' (Asquith, 'Memories', 1.6). Even so, his chapel background remained more important to him than he perhaps later admitted to himself. It gave him a point of sturdy anti-establishmentarian reference, important to a man whose life in other respects was a long absorption into metropolitanism. Moreover, just after his eighteenth birthday, Asquith had fallen in love with Helen Kelsall Melland ('c'.1855-1891), daughter of Frederick Melland, a physician in Manchester. She was the cousin of the Kelsalls, friends of the Asquiths who lived at St Leonards. His first love (and first marriage) was to emphasize his pre-London ties. 
Under G. F. W. Mortimer and, from 1865, Edwin Abbott, the City of London School gained a reputation for good classical teaching and a strong Oxbridge entrance. Asquith flourished in this environment, also studying modern politics in the Guildhall Library. His personal circumstances and his mixture of classical and modern reading gave him a maturity and a 'gravitas' of manner unusual for his years. In November 1869, in the proudest moment of his life, he won a classical scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, going into residence there in October 1870, just after Benjamin Jowett became master, and just as the college entered its most distinguished epoch. Asquith was to be a chief and very characteristic adornment of that period. Asquith recalled Plato and Kant as the two greatest 'thinkers and teachers' (Asquith, 'Memories', 1.19) -- he did not write 'influences', which is perhaps surprising, for in most respects he was a natural Aristotelian. T. H. Green was, with Jowett, the chief influence in Asquith's Balliol: 'the greatest personal force in the real life of Oxford'. But, Asquith recalled, 'though I owe more than I can say to Green's gymnastics, both intellectual and moral, I never 'worshipped at the Temple's inner shrine'' (ibid.). Even so, Asquith came to be, in practical politics, a chief exemplar of the semi-secular ethical progressivism which Green taught. Asquith blossomed at Balliol. He gained a first class in honours moderations in 1872 and was 'proxime accessit' in the Hertford scholarship that year, being also 'proxime' for the Ireland scholarship in 1873. In 1874 he was president of the Oxford Union (after several attempts), as a Liberal, and gained a first class in 'literae humaniores'. He was, with A. C. Bradley, elected a probationary fellow of Balliol in 1874 (full from 1875), a post which he held until 1882 and which maintained his Oxford associations. Asquith's most famous phrase, the 'effortless superiority' of Balliol men, was coined in a speech at a dinner given in his honour by Balliol men when he became prime minister in 1908 (J. Jones, 'Balliol College: a History', 2nd edn, 1997, 226). He left Balliol with a distinguished reputation and a coterie of friends which included many who would make a mark: Alfred Milner, A. C. Bradley, Herbert Warren, Charles Gore, Thomas Raleigh, W. P. Ker, and W. H. Mallock. He had many prospects, but no money. 
Equipped by a fine education, Asquith had to make his way in the world. His early career showed less of an effortless rise to the top than his Balliol career had suggested. For a few months he tutored the earl of Portsmouth's children -- which gave him an enduring taste for great houses and country house parties -- and examined for the Oxford and Cambridge board. Asquith had begun eating the required dinners in Lincoln's Inn while an undergraduate, and in October 1875 he began to work in the chambers of Charles Bowen. He was called to the bar in June 1876, with chambers at 6 Fig Tree Court, but briefs did not abundantly follow. 
Asquith's steadfast romance with Helen Melland, to whom he had become secretly engaged about the time of his final year at Oxford, and whose father rather reluctantly released her, resulted in marriage at Manchester on 23 August 1877. Helen brought with her a small annual income which supplemented the money from Asquith's Balliol fellowship. By the time of her early death, she had borne five children: Raymond Asquith (1878-1916), Herbert (1881-1947), Arthur Melland (1883-1939), (Helen) Violet (1887-1969) ['see 'Carter, (Helen) Violet Bonham], and Cyril Asquith, Baron Asquith of Bishopstone (1890-1954). 
Asquith's married life was happy but limited, almost at times suffocating. In a rare letter surviving from this period of his life, he wrote in 1892 (a year after Helen's death) to his confidante, Mrs Horner of Mells, whose daughter his son Raymond later married: 'I belonged to the very middle classes then... I was young and callow, and self-confident, and ambitious if possibly rather repellent. Women played very little part in my life. I was content with my early love, and never looked outside. So we settled down in a little suburban villa, and our children were born, and every day I went by train to the Temple, and sat and worked and dreamed in my chambers, and listened with feverish expectation for a knock on the door, hoping it might be a client with a brief. But years passed and he hardly ever came.... of all times the most hateful is to feel that you have the capacity for power and yet that you have no field to exercise it. That was for years my case, and no one who has not been through it can know the chilling, paralysing, deadening, depression of hope deferred and energy wasted and vitality run to seed. (letter of 17 Oct 1892, Matthew, 'Asquith's political journalism', 147)' As Asquith waited for briefs, he found a further source of income from writing for 'The Spectator': between 1876 and 1884 he wrote at least thirty-nine articles, usually in the summer when the editors, R. H. Hutton and Meredith Townsend, were on holiday. These articles -- the only source for his political opinions until he became an MP -- show his lifelong Liberalism early and clearly defined. They reflect a staunch radicalism tempered by realism (on condition that it worked from within the Liberal Party), a hostility to radical factionalists, and an admiration for 'party spirit... the product of a very complex sentiment, which is slow to grow and hard to sustain, and which thrives best where it can be nourished by historic memories' -- a view stated in his first and very characteristic article, 'The English extreme left', an unusual use of the term 'left' at that time ('The Spectator', 12 Aug 1876). Asquith deplored the fair-trade movement of the early 1880s, but argued that the Liberals must seem 'responsible' in their criticism of foreign policy and must not allow the tories to secure the patriotic vote. Asquith recorded later that it was because of home rule that he stopped writing for 'The Spectator', Hutton and Townsend being strongly unionist; but his articles on the Irish in the early 1880s reflected a strict legalism, a considerable caution as to alliance with the Parnellites. He argued that 'the severance of Ulster from the rest of Ireland is a geographical, and therefore, a political impossibility.... The Union is safe as long as Ulster is loyal' ('The invasion of Ulster', 'The Spectator', 29 Sept 1883). Though Asquith played no other significant part in national or local politics between 1875 and 1884, his 'Spectator' articles show him with already a clear political identity, tough-minded in its caution towards those on the 'left', but also staunchly anti-tory. Asquith's political journalism is easily recognizable -- in both style and content -- in terms of what later came to be described as 'Asquithian'. In the same period (until 1885) he regularly wrote one of the two leading articles in 'The Economist'. 
Probably through the Eighty Club (founded to mark the Liberal victory in 1880), Asquith became acquainted with R. B. Haldane, the club's first secretary, who quickly became a close political and family friend. In 1883 Asquith moved to the chambers of R. S. Wright at 1 Roper Buildings, London. Through Wright, Asquith got work from Sir Henry James, Gladstone's attorney-general, and his legal career quickly picked up. His memorandum on the Bradlaugh case reached the prime minister. In 1884 the Liberal Central Association published his 'Election Guide', which especially dealt with the new 'Corrupt Practices Act' and which led to much legal business after the 1885 general election. By the mid-1880s, therefore, Asquith was well known in London Liberal legal circles, and by 1886 he had sufficient briefs to be earning a fair income. 
In the political confusion following the defeat of the first 'Government of Ireland Bill' and a snap dissolution in June 1886, Asquith, through the good offices of Haldane, became the Liberal candidate for East Fife. He defeated (by 2863 to 2489 votes) the previous Liberal MP, J. Boyd-Kinnear, who stood as a Liberal Unionist, having been disavowed by the East Fife Liberal Association. Irish home rule and the local Liberals' allegiance to Gladstonian principles were thus the causes of Asquith's acquisition of a seat which, while always needing nurturing, invariably until the First World War returned a Liberal. It remained his constituency until 1918. There was an element of risk for Asquith involved in becoming an MP, for his income from the bar was by no means assured. But the hiatus in the Liberal Party caused by the events of 1886 offered exceptional opportunities to young politicians who, in the usual course of Liberal politics, would normally have had to serve a generation as back-benchers before expecting office. Asquith grasped this opportunity with characteristic lack of fuss. 
Speaking sparingly but always authoritatively in the Commons, Asquith quickly assumed a role as a custodian and formidable apologist for Liberalism. His maiden speech on 24 March 1887 led to a dinner invitation from Gladstone. Gladstone evidently anticipated Asquith's rise to the top, for Asquith recalled that he advised him (at an unspecified date): 'If ever you have to form a Government, you must steel your nerves and act the butcher' (Asquith, 'Studies and Sketches', 206). At the National Liberal Association meeting in Nottingham in October 1887, Asquith moved the resolution pledging the party to home rule. Round Asquith and Haldane a small group formed for political discussion dinners, which in 1889 became the Articles Club (there were thirty-nine well-connected members). Asquith's prominence was also aided by his role as junior counsel to Sir Charles Russell before the commission of 1888 on 'The Times' and the supposed support of Parnell for the Phoenix Park murders. Asquith's cross-examination demolished the evidence of D. J. Macdonald, 'The Times''s manager. Asquith became QC in February 1890. 
His career now well under way, Asquith's domestic life was disrupted by the unexpected death of Helen Asquith on 11 September 1891 while on the family's holiday on the Isle of Arran. She was thought to have caught her son's influenza, but in fact died of typhoid. Asquith began a peripatetic life, his children moving almost as often as he had himself been required to do in his youth. Before his wife's death he had met Margot Tennant ['see 'Asquith, Margaret Emma Alice (1864-1945)], daughter of Sir Charles Tennant (1823-1906) and his first wife, Emma (1821-1895). In October 1892 he told Mrs Horner that 'about two years ago, Margot, whom I had met, but not often, took possession of me... there have been moments when we were almost more than lovers' (Asquith to Mrs Horner, 17 Oct 1892, Earl of Oxford MSS, Mells, Somerset). Even so, Margot, an energetic member of the Souls and thus a 'modern woman', was cautious about marriage. 
When Gladstone formed his fourth and last administration in August 1892, he made Asquith, from 18 August (when he was also sworn of the privy council), his home secretary. In Gladstonian terms, this was a quite exceptional accolade, for he normally required years of executive experience before a promotion to secretary of state. It followed from Gladstone's selection of Asquith to move on 8 August the amendment to the address which caused the resignation of Salisbury's government, confirming in the Commons its defeat in the country at the general election. With Gladstone and John Morley absorbed in the second 'Irish Home Rule Bill', this left Asquith and his under-secretary, Herbert Gladstone, the prime minister's son, in charge of important aspects of the Liberals' programme of domestic reform. Asquith's position was difficult, for the Liberals in the Commons had only 272 MPs to the combined Unionist vote of 314, and thus relied on the Irish home-rulers for their majority. It soon became clear that the Unionists intended to use their own majority in the Lords not merely to stop home rule but to spoil whatever items of the Liberals' legislative programme they disliked: 'ploughing the sands' was Asquith's famous phrase (borrowed from Juvenal) for the government's fate. 
Asquith dealt firmly with the vexed question of public meetings in Trafalgar Square, laying down a code of procedure which lasted more than a century. He declined to distinguish between 'political' and 'non-political' offenders in cases involving Irish dynamiters. During the lock-out in the coalmining industry in 1893, he sent 400 members of the Metropolitan Police to Featherstone, in Yorkshire, to assist the local authorities with outbreaks of disorder; the local authorities also requested military help, and after the reading of the 'Riot Act' the troops opened fire and killed two men. Asquith's close friend R. B. Haldane was a member of the commission of inquiry which vindicated the troops; 'Remember Featherstone' was a cry at Asquith's political meetings for the next thirty years. With Haldane, he persuaded Gladstone to appoint Rosebery as (successful) arbitrator between the coal owners and the Miners' Federation, an important step towards governmental involvement in industrial disputes. 
By origin a nonconformist, Asquith was faced with some difficulty in his ecclesiastical patronage responsibilities; he tried to avoid appointment as an ecclesiastical commissioner, but eventually agreed to serve. Welsh rather than Scottish disestablishment gained a high place in the Liberal programme and was Asquith's responsibility. He introduced a 'Welsh Church Suspensory Bill' on 23 February 1893 as a preliminary, but after a promising vote on its first reading it was abandoned on 18 September. In the autumn of 1893 Asquith prepared a 'Welsh Disestablishment and Disendowment Bill', which made little progress in the last months of Gladstone's premiership. On 26 April 1894 -- after Rosebery had succeeded Gladstone -- Asquith introduced the bill, the first government attempt at disestablishment on the British mainland; it foundered in 1894 but was reintroduced, slightly amended, by Asquith on 25 February 1895. His speech on its second reading 'must rank as among the finest of his career' (Morgan, 'Wales', 150); the bill passed its second reading but was scuppered in committee, partly by the intrigues of Lloyd George and other Welsh members intent on making it more of a home-rule measure, and the bill was lost when the government resigned. 
Asquith was also responsible for the 'Employers' Liability Bill' of 1893, which dealt with the question of factory accidents by removing the doctrine of common employment rather than by insuring the workforce. The Lords' amendments wrecked the bill and it was dropped. Asquith improved factory conditions by strengthening the factory inspection service (and introducing women inspectors) and through his 'Factory Bill', whose final stages he persuaded the incoming Unionist government to allow through in July 1895. 
Asquith's legislative achievement as home secretary was thus thin, but his reputation as a balanced, sturdy, and reliable Liberal was confirmed. 'He will rise' was Gladstone's encomium (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 28 Oct 1893). When Gladstone resigned in March 1894, Asquith supported Lord Rosebery, who was appointed prime minister. 
On 10 May 1894 Asquith married Margot Tennant in a Church of England society wedding in St George's, Hanover Square, London, three prime ministers -- Gladstone, Rosebery, Balfour -- witnessing the signatures in the register. There were five children of the marriage, only two of whom survived infancy: Anthony Asquith (1902-1968) and Elizabeth Charlotte Lucy, later Princess Bibesco (died 1945). Charmed by Margot's eccentric enthusiasm, Asquith had made what was to prove a politically dangerous marriage, and an expensive one, for his wife's style was generously extravagant (though she brought with her about $5000 per annum). In the early years of their marriage, she was often ill and was a chronic insomniac. With Margot, Asquith became Henry, rather than Herbert, and her usage soon became general. His love for Margot confirms the risky, raffish element in Asquith's outwardly staid personality. The Asquiths set up in 20 Cavendish Square, London, their family home until 1919. Breaking precedent, Asquith returned to the bar when the Liberal government went out of office, and began a decade of legal work, bringing in between $5000 and $10,000 per annum. 
Asquith trod political water in the late 1890s. Neither of Gladstone's successors as leaders of the Liberal Party -- Rosebery and Harcourt -- lasted long; Asquith saw the performance of Rosebery as 'selfish' and Harcourt was in Asquith's view 'undignified by even the slightest tincture of a sense of public duty' (Matthew, 'Liberal Imperialists', 22, 31). In terms of policy, Asquith was associated with R. B. Haldane and Sir Edward Grey, but lacked their enthusiasm for Lord Rosebery's leadership. Always irritated by radicals, he found himself differing from his party's leadership on questions such as the conquest of the Sudan, but never to the point of seriously endangering party unity: unlike his friends, he did not look to a Liberal split or purge on imperial questions. When Harcourt resigned as Liberal leader in December 1898, Asquith, despite encouragement from his friends, declined to be considered for the leadership and, with the rest of the party, supported Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. If he had become leader he would have had to cease practising at the bar, and he could not afford this. However, he seemed well placed in due course to succeed Campbell-Bannerman -- his senior by sixteen years. 
On the outbreak of war in South Africa in September 1899, Asquith called for support for the government and 'an unbroken front'. Initially associated publicly and privately with the strong line taken by Alfred Milner, the high commissioner in South Africa, Asquith was always cautious about association with the various Liberal Imperialist organizations within the Liberal Party during the war, though he was inferentially associated with several of them. He declined to preside over the Imperial Liberal Council and he worked to maintain contact between the Liberal Imperialists and Campbell-Bannerman, an approach which broke down with the latter's 'methods of barbarism' speech in June 1901. Subsequently, Asquith led the Liberal Imperialists in order to contain them: he joined the Liberal Imperial League, he drafted the Liberal League's manifesto in 1902, and was one of the vice-presidents. Asquith found these manoeuvrings distasteful. Unlike his friends Grey and Haldane, he had no real interest in imperial questions and saw them chiefly as unwelcome disrupters of party unity. He consequently at once saw the advantage that Joseph Chamberlain's campaign for tariff reform gave to the Liberal Party and he took it energetically. Asquith's series of speeches answering Chamberlain in 1903 helped dignify tariff reform as the critical question in British politics, and Asquith's forensic skills quickly exposed deficiencies and self-contradictions in Chamberlain's arguments. They also ended the tentative movement away from strict free trade which some Liberal Imperialists sought. 'Wonderful speeches... How can these fellows ever have gone wrong', reflected Campbell-Bannerman (Spender, 'Campbell-Bannerman', 2.120). 
By 1904 a Liberal victory at the next election was likely, by 1905 all but certain. Complex manoeuvring for cabinet posts began. Asquith, Haldane, and Grey proposed in March 1905 that Campbell-Bannerman be prime minister, but in the Lords, with Asquith as chancellor of the exchequer (and heir apparent in the Commons) and Haldane as lord chancellor. Haldane tried to bind his friends into what became known as the Relugas compact of September 1905, by which Edward VII and the court would see to Campbell-Bannerman, and the trio of friends would stand firm together in their demands. In fact, when Balfour and the Unionist government resigned in December 1905, Asquith advised Campbell-Bannerman not to take office but to force the Unionists to dissolve parliament. Campbell-Bannerman ignored this advice, refused to go to the Lords, and offered the exchequer to Asquith, who immediately accepted it without discussion with his friends. The Liberal Imperialists were well placed in the new government, and better placed for influence on foreign and military affairs than they themselves had intended. But this was more due to Campbell-Bannerman than to plotting by Asquith or the 'Limps'. 
Asquith's chancellorship was short but important. He approached the office with characteristic self-confidence, later telling Philip Snowden that the post 'was the easiest one in the Government' (B. E. V. Sabine, 'A History of Income Tax', 1966, 144). His appointment seemed to imply a rather conservative tenure, with the safeguarding of free trade his chief objective. It was certainly the case that reduction of debt and a curbing of defence expenditure were expected by most of the Liberal Party. However, Asquith also used his chancellorship creatively, and prepared the way for Lloyd George's development of the Treasury as a positive rather than negative force in British government. Asquith hoped in 1906 to increase land taxes and to end a Gladstonian shibboleth by graduating the income tax and differentiating its payment between those on earned and unearned incomes, but Treasury officials persuaded him against this; he consequently appointed a select committee under Sir Charles Dilke to inquire into differentiation and graduation, thus indicating the direction of his thinking on revenue raising. 
Asquith's first budget was on 30 April 1906. The confidence he had always shown in public speaking certainly did not elude him as he moved towards the very centre of power: he spoke, his permanent secretary noted, 'with such lucidity and fluency as if he had been making Budget speeches all his life' (Hamilton, 462-3). With the government only four months in office, this first budget was bound, as Asquith said, to be 'provisional'. It abolished the coal tax, reduced the tea tax, and announced a reduction of $1.5 million in naval expenditure, with 'a return to more thrifty and economical administration the first and paramount duty of the Government' ('Hansard 4', 156, 1906, col. 287). It was Asquith's intention both to reduce income tax and to avoid further tariffs. 
Asquith's second budget, presented on 18 April 1907, differentiated the income tax (by abating the charge on earned incomes under $2000), the chancellor feeling that the introduction of graduation in the same year would be beyond the tax administration. When prime minister he strongly supported Lloyd George's introduction of graduation and a super tax. In 1907 death duties were increased. Asquith's pronouncement that the chancellor should 'not drift along the stream and treat each year as if it were self-contained' and should 'budget not for one year, but for several years' ('Hansard 4', 172, 1907, col. 1186) implied the possibility of financial planning of an innovatory kind. 
Behind the 1907 budget -- less radical than many Liberals would have liked -- lay the question of social welfare. The large Liberal majority in the Commons did not mean easy passing of Liberal bills, for it soon became clear that the Unionists would use the Lords as a wrecking chamber as energetically as they had done in the 1890s. With Campbell-Bannerman often attending to his sick wife, Asquith, who was deputy leader of the house as well as chancellor, took a leading role in the Commons: 'send for the sledge-hammer' was Campbell-Bannerman's solution to a difficulty (Spender and Asquith, 1.181). Failure to pass bills such as the 'Education Bill' of 1907 led to disappointment in the party and the country, and from the start of the government Campbell-Bannerman -- in no sense a 'new Liberal' -- looked to Asquith to provide 'balance' (Gilbert, 203). 
In December 1906 the Treasury produced an important cabinet paper on old-age pensions. In 1907 Asquith was reluctant to make a commitment to old-age pensions, but hoped in his budget speech of 18 April 1907 'to lay the firm foundations of this reform' ('Hansard 4', 172, 1907, col. 1191). He told the house that he was 'not what is called a Socialist', but also that 'there is nothing that calls so loudly or so imperiously as the possibilities of social reform' (ibid., 172, 1907, col. 1189). On 1 April 1908 Asquith's cabinet paper set out the details of a plan for non-contributory pensions financed from national taxation. He made it public in his budget on 7 May 1908, in fact delivered after he had become prime minister, those over seventy receiving a weekly pension collected at the Post Office (Lloyd George subsequently somewhat amended the scheme and saw through the legislation, much to the advantage of his reputation). The justification for the state pension, Asquith declared, stood 'on precisely the same footing as the free education of children' (ibid., 188, 1908, col. 475). The principle of financing welfare centrally and nationally (like the navy), rather than indirectly or via local taxation, was novel and dramatic, and cut across centuries of habit. Asquith's role in manoeuvring the Treasury and the cabinet to accept this solution -- for the need for some form of public support for aged persons other than the poor law was generally recognized -- remains uncertain, but given the character of the Treasury must have been significant. Asquith underestimated the cost of old-age pensions, believing they could be paid for without significant extra taxation and through a reserve he had built up for the purpose: 'I have realised from the first that if it could not be proved that social reform (not Socialism) can be financed on a Free Trade line, a return to Protection is a moral certainty' (letter of 9 May 1908, Matthew, 'Liberal Imperialists', 257). It was left to Lloyd George to introduce the new taxes -- albeit taxes for which Asquith had prepared the way -- needed to finance welfare without recourse to tariffs. No British politician has brought more benefit more simply to ordinary people than Asquith did with old-age pensions. 
During his chancellorship, Asquith and his growing family continued to live at 20 Cavendish Square (11 Downing Street being too small). In 1907 the Asquiths took over from Margot's brother, Frank, Archerfield House, situated between Gullane and North Berwick on the Firth of Forth, and adjacent to Muirfield and other golf courses. Sometimes playing with Arthur Balfour, who lived nearby, Asquith was an enthusiastic but no more than modestly competent golfer (and probably never had a handicap). He was an economical worker and always allowed himself time for relaxation. He enjoyed cards after dinner and conversation with women. He also enjoyed drink, and during this period his drinking habits began to be the subject of comment among his colleagues. This did not, however, affect his status as heir apparent to Campbell-Bannerman. Though in as broadly based a party as the Edwardian Liberals there was naturally talk of alternatives, Asquith's succession to the premiership was more certain than that of any Liberal politician in the history of the party. Such a status might be constraining, or liberating: in Asquith's case it was much more the latter than the former. In November 1907 Campbell-Bannerman suffered a heart attack, and another on 12 February 1908. Even so, he was reluctant to resign, eventually doing so on 1 April 1908. Edward VII summoned Asquith to Biarritz, where he was holidaying, an absence which led to some criticism. Asquith travelled across France incognito and alone, and on 8 April 1908 kissed hands as prime minister in the king's hotel room, having first resigned as chancellor (his original intention had been, like Gladstone in 1873-4 and 1880-82, to hold both offices). On his return, his leadership of the party was confirmed by a party meeting on 29 April; he was the first prime minister whose appointment was thus ratified. Asquith completed his duties as chancellor by introducing his third budget (with its provision for old-age pensions, discussed above) on 7 May. 
Asquith began his premiership in good shape. By promoting Lloyd George to the chancellorship and Winston Churchill to the Board of Trade and the cabinet, he reinforced the radical and activist side of Liberalism. Asquith and Lloyd George were to form one of the most effective combinations in British progressive politics, similar to that of Attlee and Bevan. Asquith's steady support saw Lloyd George through many a difficulty, including, and especially, the Marconi scandal of 1912-13; in return Lloyd George gave the government a much sharper progressive profile. Asquith also stiffened the cabinet by making Lord Crewe colonial secretary and Liberal leader in the Lords and bringing forward Reginald McKenna to head the Admiralty. Through Crewe, he secured his small but important whiggish flank. 
Asquith's government had a majority over the Unionists of over 350 in the Commons, but the Unionists had a majority over the Liberals of about 400 (or more) in the Lords. This was the context which was to dictate the agenda of much of his peacetime premiership. Asquith's intention and inclination as prime minister was to act as co-ordinator of a lively cabinet whose members would bring forward Liberal legislation. The effect of the intransigence of the Lords was, however, to bring forward the prime minister to the front rank of action and intervention. In 1908 the 'Licensing Bill' (introduced by Asquith in February 1908 while still chancellor) was rejected by the Lords, and other important government measures were either rejected or mutilated: the 'Education Bill', the 'Housing and Town Planning Bill', the 'Small Holders (Scotland) Bill', and the 'Land Values (Scotland) Bill'. It was, however, difficult to dissolve on any or all of these: they were important to sections of the community but were insufficient questions on which to risk or to carry a general election. On 11 December 1908 Asquith, speaking at the National Liberal Club, declared the question of the Lords the critical issue of the time, and associated it with the coming 'Budget and Finance Bill': 'The Budget of next year will stand at the very centre of our work' (Rowland, 1.169). 
Lloyd George's budget of 1909 had Asquith's support. It developed the changes in direct taxation anticipated during Asquith's chancellorship, and it financed significant increases in defence and social welfare costs (including Asquith's underestimate of the cost of old-age pensions) without infringing free-trade principles. Its emphasis on various innovations in direct taxation (though indirect taxes were also increased) ensured that it would meet opposition from sections of the propertied classes and from tariff reformers who believed protective duties should meet the revenue gap. The unusual discussion in cabinet of the budget's proposals -- particularly super tax and the land taxes -- marked its exceptional political importance, for the budget was normally revealed to the cabinet only a few days before its statement in the Commons. Asquith supported his chancellor through fourteen cabinet meetings, with the result that the cabinet was clearly associated with the budget's proposals. Asquith saw them as a means of broadening the appeal of his government, which in 1908 had become over-associated with nonconformist causes. 
The budget posed the Unionists a problem: their tariff reform wing was bitterly opposed to the budget, their anti-socialists saw it as a test case, their peers had become accustomed to using their hereditary power. Any government in 1909 would have needed to raise considerable extra revenue: the moment coincided with a clear division between the parties on the means of doing so, and gave Asquith a central question on which to rally the forces of free-trade progress. 
As the 'Finance Bill' made its slow progress through the Commons, Asquith supported it in the country, emphasizing both its financial and its constitutional importance. From July 1909 there were indications that the Unionist peers might vote against the 'Finance Bill'. Lord Rosebery attacked the budget in September 1909, Asquith resigning in consequence as vice-president of the Liberal League. Also in September the cabinet considered the consequences of the Lords voting down the bill. With Asquith's encouragement, the king warned the Unionist leaders of the grave consequences of rejection. Asquith's cabinet in November considered a bill to provide finance should the main 'Finance Bill' fail, but, on the advice of Courtenay Ilbert, supported by Lloyd George, he reversed this policy on the grounds that it would seem to concede that the Lords had the right to decide which financial measures the Commons could propose: the country would now rely on voluntary payment of taxes (as it turned out, a successful device). It was agreed that, should the Lords reject the bill, parliament would be dissolved and a general election held (barely four years into the seven-year parliament), the huge Liberal majority of 1906 being certain to be substantially reduced. On 28 November the king's secretary made it clear to Asquith that to be asked to create a large number of peers would practically be almost an impossibility, and if asked for would place the king in an awkward position (Jenkins, 'Asquith', 202). On 30 November the Lords rejected the second reading of the 'Finance Bill' by 370 votes to 75, and on 2 December Asquith carried by 349 votes to 134 a motion in the Commons declaring the Lords' action 'a breach of the constitution and a usurpation of the rights of the Commons'. 
Asquith opened the Liberals' election campaign at the Albert Hall on 10 December 1909, announcing that he and his colleagues would not resume office 'unless we can secure the safeguards which experience shows to be necessary for the legislative utility and honour of the party of progress' (Rowland, 1.243), a remark widely assumed to mean that Asquith had already secured the king's agreement to the creation of peers. On 15 December, by an exchange between their respective secretaries, the king warned Asquith explicitly that 'he [Edward VII] would not be justified in creating new peers (say 300) until after a second election' (Jenkins, 'Asquith', 202-3). Following Liberal precedent, Asquith protected the king by not divulging his position on this central question, which would, in any case, have been damaging to the Liberal Party's case; Asquith's speeches during the election were thus necessarily circumspect. 
The general election of January 1910, fought on a fresh register and producing an all-time record turnout of 92 per cent, resulted in the Liberals and the Unionists having 275 and 273 MPs respectively, the Liberals being conditionally sustained in office by most of the 82 Irish home-rulers and the 40 Labour MPs. It was in some respects a disappointing if not unanticipated result for Asquith, but it was the first time since 1885 (only the second time since 1865) that a government had been re-elected in peacetime, and the government's overall majority (of Liberals, Labour, and home-rulers) was second only to that of 1906 for Liberal governments since the first 'Reform Act'. 
Even so, both Asquith and his party were dispirited. In the early months of 1910, Asquith was tired and even lackadaisical. The endgame with the crown and the Lords was bound to be protracted and thankless; the government was formally without revenue; the question of Irish home rule, side-stepped during the majority years of 1906-9, was again at the forefront of politics and promised to absorb years of government time; the relationship of the Liberals to their partners in the majority required detailed attention. Asquith retreated, as Gladstone had often done, to stay with Lord Rendel on the French riviera. On 21 February, when the new parliament met, Asquith dismayed his followers by telling them that on the question of the creation of peers by the king, 'I tell the house quite frankly that I have received no such guarantee, and that I have asked for no such guarantee' (Spender and Asquith, 1.273). It was in this dispiriting context that Asquith, in reply initially to Lord Helmsley on 3 March but later to three other questioners, used the phrase 'wait and see', a phrase which fairly described his position but which he may have come to regret (instances quoted in Spender and Asquith, 1.275). After prolonged cabinet discussions, Asquith on 29 March 1910 moved three resolutions in the Commons or the Lords (on money bills, on other than money bills, and on the duration of parliament); these were carried. On 14 April he introduced the 'Parliament Bill' with a rather opaque reference to the terms the government would request from the crown should a further general election on the Lords be necessary. On 20 April the 'Finance Bill' was reintroduced and passed, and on 28 April the Lords passed without a division what they had splenetically rejected five months earlier. This seemed a good precedent for the 'Parliament Bill', though there was little expectation that it would prove a precedent which the Lords would follow. 
The death of Edward VII on 6 May 1910, news of which was received by Asquith while holidaying off Portugal aboard the Admiralty yacht 'Enchantress', was thought to change this situation. Asquith was as reluctant to be seen harrying the new king, George V, as he had been cautious about forcing the pace with his father. With Edward VII, he could have taken some satisfaction in the extent to which he had avoided provoking the sort of crown-aristocratic alliance which many Unionists felt natural. His tactic with Edward VII had been to allow him to conclude that Unionist behaviour was unacceptable, a tactic which took time. George V, though as associated with affairs of state as his father, when Prince of Wales, had been excluded, was, even so, a cautious man necessarily feeling his way. There was no self-assertion by the new king -- as there had been by Edward VII in 1901 -- that he intended rapidly to change the course of royal behaviour. Asquith, with his cabinet's agreement, decided to promote a constitutional conference with the Unionist leaders, with the aim of achieving a solution to the question of the Lords by agreement (with the consequence that a second general election would be avoided). Twelve meetings were held between 17 June and the end of July, with further spasmodic meetings until 10 November, when the conference broke up, partly over Unionist insistence that Irish home rule be excluded from the proposed limitations on powers of the Lords. The conference was the nearest to a constitutional convention held in Britain in the twentieth century; but the minor parties were not included, and its purpose was to achieve a political arrangement satisfactory to the Liberals and the Unionists. Its immediate political import was further emphasized by Lloyd George's memorandum of 17 August, calling for a coalition government and circulated round the inner ring of front-bench politicians of both parties without Asquith's imprimatur. 
On the breakup of the talks, Asquith on 10 November requested an immediate dissolution, and secured from a most reluctant George V on 16 November a secret agreement that if the government won the election he would, if necessary, use his prerogative to appoint peers. From a quick election campaign, with Asquith leading his party more rigorously and confidently than the previous January, the election confirmed the Asquith government position, the numbers of seats won being almost a replica of the January election. It was a very striking victory, despite the familiarity of issues under discussion: the only occasion since 1832 on which a party had won three consecutive general elections. That it was a party rather than a personal crusade of the Gladstonian sort was wholly in keeping with Asquith's view of his political role. In a long endgame he had checkmated the Unionists; it remained to be seen whether they acknowledged the rules of the game. 
The 'Parliament Bill' took until 15 May to pass the Commons and entered the Lords. On 14 July Asquith presented a formal minute of the cabinet to the king preparing for the creation of peers, its content soon becoming known to the Unionist leaders. A list of 249 proposed ennoblements was drawn up -- it included Thomas Hardy, the novelist -- which would have been hereditary not life peerages. On 24 July Asquith stood his ground for half an hour at the dispatch box of the Commons only spasmodically audible against Unionist braying: his party might criticize him for his unwillingness to force the pace against the Lords, but this notorious occasion confirmed Asquith's approach, that the Unionists must be given time either to change or to display publicly their anti-democratic intentions. 
On 10 August the 'Parliament Bill' passed the Lords and there was enacted a modest but, in terms of the politics of the day, critical change in the British constitution. The episode was the zenith of Asquith's prime ministerial career. In the British Liberal tradition, he patched rather than reformulated the constitution. His objectives were throughout conservative, in the sense of making the existing constitution work, and the 'Parliament Act' left the Lords with significant powers of obstruction, as was quickly to be seen. The question of the Lords ironically both encouraged the formulation of a wider programme of constitutional change and prevented its development and implementation. 
The Lords absorbed much of Asquith's time, but this by no means prevented his government action on a wide range of other fronts, for he saw his premiership as co-ordinating rather than initiating in the Gladstone style. Strong ministers -- Lloyd George at the exchequer, Winston Churchill at the Home Office from 1910, Sir Edward Grey at the Foreign Office, R. B. Haldane as secretary of state for war and then lord chancellor -- were left to advance policy in their departments. Asquith did not force the pace upon them; but no peacetime premier has been a more effective enabler. Labour exchanges, the introduction of unemployment and health insurance, the reform of the army, and the establishment of an Imperial General Staff reflected the reforms the government was able to achieve despite the problem of the Lords. Asquith was not himself a 'new Liberal', but he saw the need for a change in assumptions about the individual's relationship to the state, and he was fully aware of the political risk to the Liberals of a Labour Party on its left flank. Like many of his ministers, he was rather insulated from the party and from the Liberal intelligentsia, and he was never a man to spend time in the Commons' tea-room and bars. 
On the question of votes for women, Asquith was, however, not merely unwilling to enable but was actively opposed, as he had been since at least the 1880s, and especially from 1892, when he spoke and campaigned against A. K. Rollit's bill, which R. B. Haldane sponsored. In this, he differed from his closest political friends, Sir Edward Grey and Haldane. Asquith dismissed arguments about political rights, brushing 'aside all these abstractions and metaphysical points' (speech of 6 May 1913, Asquith, 'Speeches', 176), and focused on two points: proponents of change must establish a clear demand that most women wanted the vote -- he believed from an early stage that women looked on the vote 'with languid and imperturbable indifference' (Fulford, 81), and they must establish that the absence of enfranchised women meant that parliament neglected 'the special interest and needs of the excluded class' (speech of 13 May 1913, Asquith, 'Speeches', 181). Asquith's intransigent attitude, if somewhat muted by cabinet office, made him the focus of attention. From 1906 Asquith was an especial target of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), which sometimes linked his opposition to the female franchise with his enduring unpopularity over the Featherstone incident. He was frequently hectored and sometimes hustled, notably on the golf course at Lympne and Lossiemouth; the windows of 10 Downing Street were broken on several occasions; and informal conventions of British political life, by which cabinet ministers behaved much like other male citizens walking unguarded in streets, hotels, and shops, were interrupted and often suspended. The method of the campaigns of the WSPU did not convince Asquith that most women wanted the vote. As Roger Fulford observed, 'The more the women marched, the less his reason marched with them. Therefore the work of the militants strengthened his opposition to the vote' (Jenkins, 'Asquith', 247). Asquith traded on cabinet differences, so that no government measure was proposed despite a majority in the Liberal Party that it should be. In March 1909 he voted in the minority in the Commons against Geoffrey Howard's bill, while recognizing that such a measure, to be enacted, would need government support. The ''Conciliation Bill'' of 1910, by a parliamentary committee during a suspension of militancy, was intended to gain such support, but its bias towards property as a suffrage qualification again lost it cabinet backing, Asquith speaking grudgingly on it. In 1911 Asquith told the king that a majority of the cabinet favoured assisting the passing of a bill; it was agreed that in 1912 some government time be allocated, but in that year the bill failed its second reading. 
Asquith's difficulty was political as well as personal: a bill extending existing franchises to women was likely to advantage the tories. More general franchise reform -- there had been none since 1884 -- was on the Liberal agenda, and Asquith announced in July 1912 that the fourth 'Reform Bill' would be open to a female franchise amendment. The cabinet agreed to treat it as an open question. However, the tactic misfired: in January 1913 the speaker, James Lowther, declared that such an amendment would so alter the bill as to require its withdrawal and reintroduction. The government abandoned the whole of its 'Reform Bill', and no franchise reform was passed by the outbreak of war, the government's 'Plural Voting Bill' of 1913 passing the Commons but being rejected in the Lords. It is unlikely that Asquith anticipated Lowther's pronouncement, or that the process of 1911-12 was an elaborate and deliberate red herring. Even so, the result was welcome enough: 'The Speaker's 'coup d'etat' has bowled over the Women for this Session -- a great relief' Asquith wrote (letter of 27 Jan 1913, 'Letters to Venetia Stanley', 27). By conflating the 'Reform Bill' with the enfranchisement of women, Asquith risked what Gladstone had deliberately avoided in 1884: bringing down franchise reform for the sake of sexual equality. The difficulty of achieving substantial franchise reform for males only was of course far greater in 1913 than in 1884: none the less, the tactic of a private amendment to a government bill proved a self-defeating device. Faced with hunger strikes by increasingly frustrated militant members of the WSPU, the government passed the ''Cat and Mouse Act'' in 1913 permitting forcible feeding. 
As leader of a government in part sustained by Labour MPs, Asquith's handling of industrial matters had to be especially astute. He did not find this easy. His legalistic language disconcerted trade unionists already very uneasy as a result of the Osborne judgment of 1909. Asquith's government took its time in reversing the consequences of the judgment. Asquith's attempts to prevent a rail strike in August 1911 failed, and Lloyd George's blandishments were required to encourage the men back to work. In 1912, as the government embarked in the king's speech of 14 February on a major legislative programme to take advantage of the 'Parliament Act', a national coal strike was threatened. Despite Asquith's leading a group of the cabinet in negotiation with the owners and the Miners' Federation, the strike began on 29 February. Asquith countered by passing in a week the 'Coal Mines (Minimum Wage) Bill', an important measure in which Asquith went to considerable lengths to end the strike, but without establishing a national minimum wage. His approach was successful in that the strike ended, although the Labour amendments to the bill had been defeated. This industrial crisis exhausted Asquith, far more than the protracted constitutional negotiations of the previous year or the Irish struggles of the next two. Austen Chamberlain noted that Asquith spoke 'under great emotion, his voice breaking and tears in his eyes if not actually running down his cheeks' (Rowland, 2.152). 
Asquith stood by his colleagues Lloyd George, Rufus Isaacs, and the master of Elibank during the Marconi scandal and inquiry by select committee in 1912-13, when political convenience might have led to their dismissal. It was characteristic of Asquith that he never made capital of this loyalty, though his support for Lloyd George cost him dear with the Unionists and their press, and the question remained surprisingly prominent even after the end of the war (Searle, chaps. 8 and 14). 
The king's speech of February 1912 included three major measures, unfinished business of the Gladstonian days: a 'Government of Ireland Bill', Welsh disestablishment, and a fourth 'Reform Bill'. None of these measures was in operation when war was declared on 4 August 1914. The 'Parliament Act' had cleared the road in an absolute sense, but traffic down it was still very slow. As is shown above, franchise reform failed when conflated with the question of female suffrage. Though an authority on Welsh disestablishment since the 1894 bill, Asquith was not involved in detail with the measure, which passed the Commons and was rejected by the Lords, the process repeated in 1913; in 1914 it passed the Commons, was subject to prevarication, but eventually passed (on 17 September 1914) in the Lords, its provisions being suspended until the end of the war. 
Welsh disestablishment sprang from the heart of the Liberal Party. Irish home rule was a more ambivalent question for the Liberal Party. It would be wrong to see it simply as a price to be paid to the Irish home-rulers. The maintenance of Ireland within the Union -- the declared aim of all British political parties -- required that the home-rulers should have their turn once the political arithmetic permitted it. The 'Parliament Bill' was the essential prologue to what was certain to be an epic struggle: that the Unionist opposition was to threaten an epic battle was insufficiently anticipated (though pardonably) by Asquith. 
Heavily involved in the 'Parliament Bill', Asquith (unlike Gladstone in 1886 and 1893) was not a member of the cabinet committee which in 1911 planned the third 'Home Rule Bill'. Lord Loreburn, the lord chancellor, and Augustine Birrell, the Irish secretary, strongly opposed any special treatment for Ulster. Asquith later wrote: 'I always thought (and said) that, in the end, we should probably have to make some sort of bargain about Ulster as the price of Home Rule' (Asquith to Churchill, September 1913, Jalland, 67). Whether he should therefore from the start have tried for a 'home rule within home rule' solution for Ulster has been much debated. Bonar Law, who succeeded Balfour as Unionist leader in 1911, warned Asquith at the start of the session of 1912, the latter recalled, that he would have to show himself 'very vicious' (Asquith, 'Memories', 1.202). Asquith probably underrated the extent to which Bonar Law would live down to his word, or to which the Unionists, having now lost their permanent Lords veto as well as three consecutive general elections, would 'play the Orange card'. 
Central to the Liberal case -- and here Asquith, whatever his earlier reluctance about the primacy of home rule in the Liberal programme, was in the mainstream of Liberal opinion -- was the idea of a constitutional settlement by constitutional means. Representative government presupposes that political questions can be solved within its terms. The prime minister could not proceed on the assumption that the opposition (which called itself the party of the constitution) would advocate armed resistance to correctly enacted legislation. Asquith always took a straightforwardly tough view of such matters, and Liberal oppositions had always been strictly constitutional in their approach to Conservative legislation. If Asquith was naive in his approach to Ulster, it was a naivety publicly required of a prime minister in such a context, whatever his private view. Moreover, the extent to which Ulster was or was not part of Ireland for constitutional purposes was to an extent an issue for debate, and it was very generally held, not only by Liberals and home-rulers, that Ireland without Ulster was not a viable entity. Within Liberalism the Ulster question was seen as at most a minor element in a complex constitutional proposal, for the cabinet had its mind on 'Home Rule all round', with the problem of England at least as large as that of Ulster. The Liberal Party expected Asquith to lead as a Liberal, and not as leader of a quasi-coalition in which the Unionists called the tune. A further complication lay in assessing the objectives of the Unionists. Their stated aim was the defeat of the whole 'Irish Home Rule Bill', using Ulster as the jemmy to prise open the door. If that was really the objective, then there was no point in Liberal concession on Ulster. But if the Unionist objective was, in fact, the more limited one of Ulster exclusion from an Irish home-rule parliament, there was room for negotiation and perhaps settlement. Only time would require the Unionists to define their position. 
Asquith introduced the third 'Government of Ireland Bill' on 11 April 1912; it passed the Commons by majorities usually over ninety, an amendment by Agar-Robartes in June to exclude the four most protestant counties of Ulster being defeated by sixty-nine votes. As in 1886 and 1893, the financial provisions of the bill were among the most contentious of its details; on 11 November 1912 Sir Frederick Banbury, a Unionist MP, carried an amendment (limiting the payment to the Irish exchequer to $2.5 million per annum). This led to an extended dispute, during which the Commons' sitting was suspended. On 1 January 1913 Sir Edward Carson, the leader of the Irish Unionists, moved that Ulster be excluded from the bill; the proposal was defeated by ninety-seven votes, but the initiative for a settlement had begun to pass to the opposition. The bill passed the Commons on 16 January 1913 and was rejected after a few days' debate in the Lords. On 9 June 1913 Asquith again moved the second reading in the Commons, as the bill began to earn its passage under the 'Parliament Act'; it received its third reading on 7 July by 128 votes and was rejected by the Lords on 15 July, Lord Lansdowne, the Unionist leader, having carried a motion that, notwithstanding the procedures of the 'Parliament Act', the Lords would not consider the bill until it had been the subject of a general election. 
The way was now clear for the enactment of the bill under the 'Parliament Act', once it had passed the Commons for the third time. In that sense, Asquith could congratulate himself: with very few exceptions his party and his government had remained united behind this major constitution proposal, which had received substantial majorities in the Commons. Alarmed, the Unionist leadership played the royal card -- their final constitutional fling -- requesting George V to veto the bill and/or to dissolve parliament or hold a referendum. Asquith received memoranda of 11 August and 22 September 1913 from the king putting what was, in effect, the Unionist case for a dissolution; he replied to them with dismissive equanimity, warning George V that he risked making the crown 'the football of contending factions'. Asquith now hoped that the Unionist leaders would recognize the inevitability of the position, at least with respect to home rule for the majority of Ireland. Secret conversations with Bonar Law on 14 October and 6 November discussed this possibility, Bonar Law thinking the agreement more conclusive than Asquith intended. Asquith also discussed the situation with John Redmond, the home-rule leader, a difficult matter, for to press Redmond into accepting an Ireland of twenty-six counties only was to risk breaking Redmond's hold on Irish home-rule opinion. Despite this, the cabinets of November 1913 worked towards a compromise solution of temporary exclusion for Ulster from a home-rule settlement. These various horses proved, however, too complex to keep in harness, and the talks collapsed in January 1914. For Asquith this was serious, because the point was being reached after which an opening to a solution seemed unlikely. 
Asquith started the year of 1914 in good spirits. His emotional state, so low in the early months of 1912, had revived through his epistolary love affair with Venetia Stanley, which began in earnest in the spring of 1912 and was a source of genuine solace to him until May 1915. Asquith had always enjoyed the company of women, and since his first wife's death in 1891 had come to rely on intelligent women as props. His marriage with his second wife, Margot, continued, but in terms of the premiership she had become a burden rather than a solace. Though not much affected by its political views, Asquith enjoyed the company of the youthful Liberal intelligentsia which gathered round his son Raymond, and his correspondence with Venetia Stanley quickly adopted its argot, with constant use of nicknames and playful allusions of an intellectually teasing sort. Asquith has been much criticized for the time he lavished on Venetia, but the daily letters would not have taken his fluent pen more than a few minutes: far less time than if he had been visiting her as his mistress in a physical sense. 
Venetia Stanley's place in history has peculiar significance, for the reticent Asquith unbuttoned his thoughts to her regularly with an openness lacking in his otherwise infrequent series of correspondence. In the fateful year of 1914 these letters have a beguiling if uncertain importance. Venetia Stanley was well informed about the world of affairs, but she was not a colleague, and Asquith was not writing a diary in the form of letters: he was conducting an emotional and intellectual love affair, and the letters are necessarily therefore slanted to Venetia's interests. 
Asquith in 1914 turned sixty-two. He made something of a fetish of untidy dress, curious in one of so tidy a mind. Since 1905 concerned references are to be found in private correspondence about Asquith's drinking. By 1911 the question was a quasi-public one, as during one evening of the committee stage of the 'Parliament Bill' he seemed at least tipsy, slumped on the Treasury bench. His friendship with Venetia Stanley seems for a time to have countered and even reversed what some have seen as a tendency towards alcoholism, and there is no evidence that it affected his general political capacity. After coming under fire on visiting the front in 1916, Asquith had a couple of large brandies when dining with Haig; Haig carefully noted the extent of Asquith's drinking, but later added: 'Mr. Asquith has such a clear and evenly balanced mind. Even in his cups he was never fuddled, but knew exactly what he had seen and said during the day and to whom he had spoken' (R. Blake, ed., 'The Private Papers of Douglas Haig', 1952, 166). When Lytton Strachey met Asquith just before the war, he noted that 'though his appearance on the whole was decidedly donnish -- small and sleek and not too well made in the details -- his hands were different. Small and plump they were too; but there was a masterfulness in them and a mobility which made them remarkable. (note of May 1918, M. Holroyd, 'Lytton Strachey', 2, 1968, 111)' The Asquiths gave up Archerfield in 1911, and in July 1912 moved into The Wharf, Sutton Courtenay, on the Thames near Oxford; it was Asquith's rather modest country house for the rest of his life. He continued to spend part of the summer -- usually August -- in Scotland, playing golf, on duty at Balmoral, and visiting his constituency. When he went abroad for a holiday, it was usually to France, and usually to the French riviera. Asquith kept up quite well with the literature of his day, though he had no inclination -- unlike his Liberal predecessors Rosebery and Gladstone -- to pronounce on it publicly through articles and reviews. He enjoyed playing cards -- usually bridge -- after dinner; Lord Jowitt, ('The Times', 10 January 1956), and Lady Violet Bonham Carter both testified in the 1950s that Asquith never played bridge after lunch or before dinner. His circle comprised Margot's friends and his children's friends, and a few political figures -- Lord and Lady Crewe, the Churchills, the McKennas, and some younger members of his government such as Edwin Montagu and Harold Baker. 
No prime minister can have found his work less burdensome. Asquith was not a worrier. He slept well and, once decided on a course of action, he was imperturbable if not openly urgent in its pursuit. Churchill wrote of Asquith that the latter's mind 'opened and shut smoothly and exactly, like the breech of a gun' (W. S. Churchill, 'H. H. Asquith', 'Great Contemporaries'). Asquith was an optimist. Though he had lost the religious faith of his youth, he had not lost the mid-Victorian optimism of his early days: political processes, he appears to have believed, and his actions certainly suggested, would work for good because human beings were at bottom sensible creatures. There was a curious serenity about H. H. A., as he normally signed himself to friends. 
The political world prepared for the third round of the Commons versus the Lords on the 'Government of Ireland Bill', in which the legal winner, the Commons, was already known. The organization of the Ulster Volunteers and the attitude of the Unionist leaders showed, however, that a legal result would not in itself carry the day. On 22 January 1914 Asquith's cabinet decided to propose an Ulster veto on any legislation of the Dublin parliament affecting that province. The king on 5 February told Asquith the cabinet's proposal was insufficient and warned that the army's loyalty could not be taken for granted, a warning that proved correct. Negotiations began with Redmond to provide for a temporary Ulster opt-out. The army had been used often enough to coerce Catholics in the south and west of Ireland, but it had not previously faced the prospect of coercing the protestants of the north. On 20 March, about sixty cavalry officers stationed at the Curragh, near Dublin, were reported by Brigadier-General Hubert Gough to prefer dismissal to involvement in military operations against Ulster, an episode soon known as the Curragh mutiny. This followed a maladroit series of statements by John Seely, secretary for war, and questions put to the officers by Sir Arthur Paget, commander-in-chief in Ireland ('Paget's tactless blundering and Seely's clumsy phrases', Asquith thought; Jenkins, 'Asquith', 310). Subsequently, two officers and Seely resigned, Asquith taking over as secretary for war on 31 March (at the consequent by-election, he was unopposed in his East Fife constituency). 
On 24 April the Ulster Volunteers, led by Sir William Adair and Major McCalmont MP, illegally shipped in cargoes of guns and ammunition at Larne. The cabinet did not feel strong enough to arrest Adair and McCalmont, despite the urging of the Irish viceroy. On 12 May Asquith announced that the 'Government of Ireland Bill' would be accompanied by an 'Amending Bill' with special provision for Ulster, and on 25 May the 'Government of Ireland Bill' received its third reading in the Commons (for the third time) and under the 'Parliament Act' was ready for the royal assent (not in this instance a foregone conclusion) and enactment. The 'Amending Bill' was reshaped by the Lords in June 1914 to the distress of Liberal and Irish home-rule MPs. At issue were timing and the definition of 'Ulster'. Discussions with the Unionists led to an all-party conference chaired by George V, an unprecedented act by a monarch (at least since George III), which began on 21 July, the king attending only the opening session, and lasted until 24 July. The conference was amicable but inconclusive. On 24 July the cabinet decided to introduce an amended 'Amending Bill', conceding much of what the Unionists at the conference had demanded. Events then pushed even Ireland to the rear. 
Did Asquith bring Ireland to the edge of civil war in July 1914, or had the process of politics worked, as he intended, towards a compromise solution? Asquith had made one large gain: by taking part in the king's conference, the Unionist leadership could no longer claim that the Ulster question was also a means of preventing home rule altogether. If the issue really was one of timing and definitions with respect to the northern protestants, then Asquith had gained the chief objective of the past three years: a 'Government of Ireland Act', albeit with a separate settlement for 'Ulster' without a time limit (the detail agreed at the conference on 24 July). Whether the Unionists would have engaged in civil war over the definition of the boundaries of 'Ulster' cannot, of course, be known. 
After the cabinet's discussion of Ireland on 24 July 1914, Sir Edward Grey, the foreign secretary, drew the cabinet's attention to Austria-Hungary's ultimatum to Serbia. Asquith had on the whole been willing to leave foreign policy to his foreign secretary, one of his oldest political friends. His was the opposite of the approach of Salisbury (who had been his own foreign secretary) and Gladstone (who saw the premier's relationship with his foreign secretary as almost a marriage). While Asquith had a good grasp of the politics of the Foreign and Colonial offices, he did not see himself as pro-actively contributing to their development. In the many battles between those offices and the various radical organizations which flourished within the Liberal Party, Asquith saw himself more as a peacemaker than a protagonist. Remarkably, in view of later allegations that foreign policy was run by a Liberal Imperialist cabal, Asquith was apparently not involved in the decision in 1906 to hold Anglo-French military conversations and, moreover, did not learn of them until the rest of the cabinet was briefed by Grey in 1911. This shows the extent to which he did not discuss policy with Grey, for if he had, the conversations would have been bound to come to the fore. In November 1911 Asquith enunciated that any such conversations must be noncommittal and have cabinet approval, but this was to miss the point of the conversations, whose very existence had implications of commitment, however unexplicit. He wrote later of the conversations 'as one of the most curious examples in his memory of a concurrence of untoward events working to a conclusion which no one intended and no one could defend' (Koss, 143). 
It was a considerable difficulty that the Liberal cabinet, which fairly reflected the party on this question, was so divided on questions of defence expenditure and, to a lesser degree, on foreign policy, that the prime minister's inevitable tactic was to keep such issues away from the cabinet except when necessary, in meeting a crisis or in agreeing the estimates. Details of policy were discussed in bodies such as the committee of imperial defence (CID), of which Asquith was chairman, but there was an absence of general coherence; during the early years of Asquith's premiership of the CID he 'all but abandoned regular meetings of the full Committee' (d'Ombrain, 17). In fact, the Foreign Office's policy of facing both ways was more generally congenial (to both political parties) than is sometimes allowed, for it not only allowed the various factions in the government to coalesce around it but it also wisely avoided a decision between the spectrum of conflicting priorities from the traditional 'blue water' policy (by which the primary objective was naval security against invasion from Europe) to the new 'continental strategy' (which anticipated military involvement in Europe). A definitive commitment to either of these would have had profound foreign policy implications, involving a high-risk strategy of either abstention from or clear commitment to continental war, and Asquith was surely wise to keep Britain's options open. 
Asquith intervened on a number of occasions to enable compromises among cabinet members to be reached, notably in 1909, over the programme for building the dreadnoughts (his compromise was that four ships be laid down at once, with four more to follow by 1910), and in 1910-11. In 1910 he appointed a cabinet committee on foreign affairs, partly to defuse cabinet differences. This was initially useful, but did not continue beyond the summer of 1911. It was defunct by the time of the Agadir crisis of that year, when Lloyd George's speech at the Mansion House, on 21 July 1911, marked a coming together of most of the cabinet behind a determined resistance to Germany's attempt to dictate the course of events. On 23 August 1911 Asquith chaired a meeting of the CID called to determine British military and naval strategy in the event of war. Soon after, however, he provided a compromise when an angry cabinet discussed the recently revealed Anglo-French conversations, by which the possibility of British military or naval intervention was excluded from the conversations; in fact, conversations continued, carefully stopping short of infringing the compromise. In 1911 he also made the important decision to move Winston Churchill to the Admiralty, a move which was a 'sine qua non' of the advocacy of the Dardanelles campaign and of the political crisis of 1915. In 1912 Haldane was sent to Berlin (unsuccessfully) to encourage the Germans to reduce their naval spending. In October-November 1912 the cabinet, under Asquith's guidance, agreed without significant dissent that consultation between British and French defence experts did not commit their governments. The attrition of events and Asquith's habitual patience had produced a greater coherence within the cabinet: 'it is probably true to say that the cabinet was more united on foreign policy in 1913 than it had been for many years past' (Robbins, 20). 
The policy on which Asquith and his cabinet united remained ambivalent. Germany, step by step, appeared the danger to peace, but the British government did not seriously expect soon to be engaged in war. A fractious cabinet had been kept together. Despite disagreement over foreign and defence policy more extreme than in any other modern British cabinet, Asquith lost no one by resignation over foreign or defence policy until August 1914. 
Asquith's decision for war with Germany was the most important taken by a British prime minister in the twentieth century, and was more important than any prime ministerial decision of the nineteenth century. It not only dictated the involvement of the United Kingdom in war but affected much of the pattern of imperial, foreign, and economic history for the rest of the century. It was Asquith's decision in the sense that the mood of the cabinet was such that the ultimatum to Germany of 4 August was by no means a necessary or even a probable development, unless the prime minister supported it. Asquith, of course, did not take the decision alone, nor was there a single moment of decision; even so, the cabinet bore the responsibility for the fact that Britain found herself at war with Germany and Austria. 
It is clear that Asquith believed Britain's stated position: she was not committed by treaty, entente, or policy to the defence of France, but by the treaty of London (1839) and Gladstone's statement of 1870 she had an interest in Belgian neutrality, even if the Belgians were willing to surrender it. The western European elements of the crisis appear to have been those which chiefly affected Asquith. Though he was chairman of the CID and war secretary, as well as prime minister, he did not assert a view or -- as Churchill did at the Admiralty -- try to make the running. The last-minute attempt to revive the idea of the congress and hold a conference of the powers was Grey's, not Asquith's, and it was the foreign secretary not the prime minister who made the vital government statement to the Commons on 3 August, in effect announcing war. This was in character. 
It was also in character that as events unfolded Asquith was led towards involvement in war, for he had never favoured the sort of extreme analysis either of the role of war or of the national interest which would have enabled him to have been resolute enough to have resisted involvement as events unfolded in early August 1914. In particular, for Asquith to have kept the empire out of the war as the public enthusiasm for it grew from 2 August onwards would have required a determination to disregard the Foreign Office which Asquith simply lacked. Initially, and at the time of Austria's ultimatum to Serbia on 23 July, Asquith thought war likely, but thought Britain's involvement in it unlikely. But by 2 August, when he listed six points for the cabinet, the king, the leaders of the opposition, and Venetia Stanley, four of the points pointed to British involvement and the other two were not opposed to it (though, importantly, he then thought the dispatch of the British expeditionary force 'to help France at this moment is out of the question', apparently thinking of naval intervention if necessary; 'Letters to Venetia Stanley', 146). 
At 1.30 a.m. on Saturday 1 August Asquith raised the king from his bed to approve a direct appeal to the tsar. On 2 August he approved the mobilization of the fleet by Churchill, and early on the morning of 3 August he, as war secretary, mobilized the army, a critical action, as any further delay would have made the British expeditionary force too late to prevent the German breakthrough. Later that day he asked Kitchener to be ready to serve. At 2 p.m. on 4 August Sir Edward Grey telegraphed Sir Edward Goschen, ambassador at Berlin, that he should ask for his passports by midnight (11 p.m. Greenwich mean time) if Germany did not give an assurance of Belgian neutrality. Asquith told the Commons of the demand and then drove in his automobile for an hour to collect his thoughts. A decision had been taken, but taken by default. Grey emphasized the need to maintain honour; Asquith responded to the public mood. Wider strategic and economic considerations seem to have played little part with Asquith. 'Speaking for myself personally', he told the Commons just after war began, 'a crucial and almost governing consideration' was 'the position of the small States' (speech of 7 Aug 1914, Asquith, 'Speeches', 194). 
The cabinet that foregathered in 10 Downing Street to await Big Ben's chimes had lost only two members by resignation -- John Morley and John Burns -- a tribute, in part, to Asquith's skill of allowing process to be the agent of unity. He did not anticipate the part which Germany's discounting of Great Britain would play in her dash for victory, but he took full political advantage of it when it occurred, acting with characteristic decisiveness once Germany's intentions were apparent. 
The political enthusiasm which developed from 2 August and continued through, at least, the early years of the war was of great advantage to the reticent Asquith: the war effort did not require encouragement or exhortation from the top. Asquith's measured and dignified speeches, spelling out in rather legalistic terms the case for the war and the case against Germany and Austria, were an appropriate antithesis to the bombast of Britain's opponents and to popular enthusiasm at home and abroad for war. Asquith's swift appointment of Kitchener in his place as war secretary fused the government with the popular mood and outflanked Unionist cautions about the Liberals' ability to wage a war, as did his judicious use of A. J. Balfour as an occasional unofficial member of cabinet. 
Asquith was never one of those who expected the war to be 'over by Christmas'. He spoke in the four capital cities as the United Kingdom's recruiting sergeant and warned from the first that the war would be 'a protracted struggle', similar to the twenty years' struggle waged against the French (speech at the Mansion House, London, 27 Aug 1914, Asquith, 'Speeches', 212). The French wars had involved a balanced approach, comprising direct involvement of the army and the navy, the use of Britain's economic and financial strength through the provision of money and goods to her allies, and the maintenance of a tight blockade. Asquith was, therefore, not one of those who favoured a chief emphasis on the provision of men and munitions. He faced, however, a difficult dilemma which he was not fully successful in resolving. If the British were fighting for civilized standards of behaviour, national leaders should maintain those standards, which included maintaining something of the normal pattern of political and domestic life, an awkward balance to strike as the casualties rose. Asquith was to pay a heavy personal penalty for declining significantly to change his usual routine. On the other hand, a twentieth-century equivalent of the French wars must imply major changes in economic and political processes. Asquith's public warnings of what the nation should expect were only partly reflected in his actions at the strategic and executive level, and it may be that he did not fully accept the implications of his own dictum. 
As chairman of the CID Asquith had not planned a structure to streamline decision making in the event of war. A 'Defence of the Realm Act' was immediately passed, the railways were taken into government control, and other measures were instituted. In November 1914 Asquith set up a war council, originally of eight regular members (Cassar, 54), with Maurice Hankey as secretary. Asquith's choice of Hankey as, in effect, his political chief of staff, was shrewd, but even so the war council did not become an efficient planning body; it existed uneasily alongside informal 'ad hoc' arrangements and the traditional discussions of the cabinet. The latter continued to act as the main decision-making body, claiming authority over the whole range of the war. Remarkably, Asquith did not even match what had been Gladstone's peacetime level of agendas and minutes, and the cabinet's decisions were not minuted until Hankey became its secretary in Lloyd George's premiership. 
Asquith expected military and naval commanders to command, but he overruled Sir John French on 31 August when the latter tried to withdraw the British expeditionary force for the time being. Popular enthusiasm had to be matched by results, and it was clear by November 1914 that these would be hard to achieve on the western front. Asquith's expectation was that the navy -- so painfully and controversially modernized by the Liberal government -- would be of active use, as well as deterring the German fleet from leaving port and thus securing the blockade. By the end of December 1914 several plans had come forward for finding a quicker means to victory than attrition and eventual breakthrough on the western front. At the cabinet of 13 January 1915 Asquith agreed to Churchill's plan for the navy to force the Dardanelles and thus make possible a much more effective allied effort on the eastern front. Asquith himself drafted the highly ambiguous minute of the decision, which subsequently caused many problems: 'the Admiralty should... prepare a naval expedition in February to bombard and take the Gallipoli peninsula with Constantinople as its objective'. The absence of integrated planning now paid its price. The Dardanelles campaign, which began on 19 February 1915, was in effect imposed on the navy and the army by the politicians, Asquith's responsibility thus becoming the greater. When the naval bombardment failed to achieve results, it was at Asquith's insistence that Sir Ian Hamilton was appointed to command the expeditionary force, composed of British, Australian, and New Zealand troops. By late March 1915 it was clear that no rapid victory would be possible in the Dardanelles, but the expeditionary force landed on the Gallipoli peninsula on 25 April. The war at sea took a sharper form with the rejection of President Wilson's proposals for a general neutrality of the seas and Asquith's statement to the Commons on 1 March that 'there is no form of economic pressure to which we do not consider ourselves entitled to resort' (Hankey, 1.368). 
At almost the same time a dispute within the government about the best structure to increase the supply of munitions became generally known in political circles, Asquith finding a temporary, though ineffective, compromise between Kitchener and Lloyd George in the munitions of war committee established on 8 April. Furthermore, problems of domestic supply and labour relations were becoming apparent. On 20 April Asquith spoke in Newcastle upon Tyne to munitions workers and employers. Mistranslating a statement about the next attack for one about recent attacks, he remarked of a statement that military operations were being crippled by a shortage of supply, 'I say there is not a word of truth in that statement' (Asquith, 'Speeches', 228), an unusual slip for a prime minister whose public utterances, almost always made from the briefest of notes, were usually so accurately phrased. It was an observation which seemed to contradict earlier remarks by Kitchener and Lloyd George (in the same speech Asquith pointedly observed that he had appointed a committee in September 1914 'presided over by Lord Kitchener' to oversee such matters). 
By the spring of 1915 it was clear that Asquith's government, competently though in many respects it had met the challenge of war, was unlikely to be able to offer a victory other than that of attrition on the western front (the cost of that attrition was not yet apparent). This was consistent with Asquith's anticipation of a twenty-year conflict, but it was not what a democracy or the political class expected. 
A bizarre dispute between Churchill and Lord Fisher led to the latter's resignation on 15 May 1915 and to Asquith ordering him to return to his post. This episode was the catalyst by which wider concerns linked up with the immediate ambitions of Lloyd George and the Unionist leadership to create the context within which a coalition was planned by Asquith and Bonar Law on 17 May. 
Asquith acted quickly and with apparent brutality in this crisis, which, in general terms, he had probably anticipated for some time. He seemed to ignore his party, and he subordinated his ties to his oldest political associate, Lord Haldane, to the demands of the Northcliffe faction in the Unionist Party by dropping Haldane from his government -- though there is some indication that Asquith suggested relieving Haldane of the chancellorship at an early stage of the coalition discussions ('Letters to Venetia Stanley', 599). In general, however, Asquith's coalition associated the Unionists directly with the government while giving them only a minor role in it. The coalition of 1915 gave far less to the Unionists than did that of 1940 to the Labour Party. If there was to be a coalition, Asquith acted decisively to create it as much on his terms as possible. Those terms were perhaps too much to the advantage of the Liberals for Asquith's own long-term good. He underestimated the restraint the Unionist leadership had exercised -- in marked contrast to its earlier behaviour -- once war had begun. Asquith underestimated Bonar Law's capacity for constructive as well as vicious behaviour, and he underestimated the importance of enabling Bonar Law to maintain his grip on the tory party and press. When reading Bolingbroke's remark about Bishop Warburton -- 'Sir, I never wrestle with a chimney-sweep' -- Asquith observed, 'A good saying, which I sometimes call to mind when I am confronting Bonar Law' (Jenkins, 'Asquith', 367). 
Asquith's actions in May 1915 are the more remarkable, given his discovery on 12 May that Venetia Stanley had decided to marry Edwin Montagu. Asquith's letters to her in 1914 and 1915 had become fuller and more indiscreet, about both persons and policy. They remained primarily love letters, but also became a sort of diary. In Asquith's apologia, 'The Genesis of the War' (1923), dedicated to Edward Grey, he chiefly used official papers, but in 'Memories and Reflections' (1928) he quoted extensively from his letters to Miss Stanley and others, describing them as 'contemporary notes', and explaining that while he had not 'kept what is technically called a 'Diary'', he had 'been in the habit of jotting down irregularly my impressions of noteworthy persons and incidents while they were still fresh in my memory' (Asquith, 'Memories', 2.2). Asquith found other women to write to, notably Sylvia Henley and Kathleen Scott, widow of the explorer, but none attracted quite the 'frisson' of disclosure that constituted the distinctive feature of Asquith's letters to Miss Stanley. 
The establishment of a coalition government was not accompanied by much fresh structural planning. Asquith replaced the war council with the Dardanelles committee, composed of six Liberals, six Unionists, and one non-politician (Kitchener), to consider policy for all theatres of war (Cassar, 111). The committee did not significantly alter planning or policy making. Asquith's stiffness of manner with men and his endemic contempt for most Unionists made him an awkward leader of a coalition. 
Asquith visited France in May-June 1915, making speeches, patching up relations between Kitchener and Sir John French, and meeting French generals and politicians. The visit was a success, and its reporting built Asquith into something of a war leader. At a conference with the French on 5 July -- the first of the war -- Asquith gained sufficient respite for the British army on the western front for a further, and final, effort to be made at the Dardanelles. Apprehensive perhaps at the human cost of the use of Kitchener's 'New Armies', whose formation was nearing completion, Asquith placed high hopes on a breakout from the Anzac beachhead and a landing at Suvla Bay. Disappointed by failure in the Dardanelles, which the collapse of anti-German forces in the Balkans exacerbated, Asquith replaced Hamilton in October, but the gesture gained little. The offensives at the battle of Loos and Vimy Ridge on 25 September achieved little except the death of 65,000 British and 165,000 French troops, but they presaged the losses of 1916. On 19 October Asquith, whose health was normally so reliable as to be taken wholly for granted, became seriously unwell, apparently a physical reaction to mental strain, overwork, and lack of relaxation. 'I never got such a fright in my life', wrote Margot Asquith. 'I thought Henry was 'absolutely done'. I think he thought so too' (Jenkins, 'Asquith', 376). After a fortnight he seemed restored to health, returning to an unimproved political and military situation. Though he suffered for the rest of his premiership from spasmodic bronchial trouble, he gave a general impression of well-being. Meeting him again in 1916, Lytton Strachey noted: 'I studied the Old Man with extreme vigour and really he is a corker. He seemed much larger than he did when I last saw him (just two years ago) -- a fleshy, sanguine, wine-bibbing, medieval Abbot of a personage... Cynical, yes, it's hardly possible to doubt it; or perhaps one should say just 'case-hardened'. (note of May 1918, Holroyd, 'Lytton Strachey', 2.197)' Kitchener's early pragmatic effectiveness lessened as the co-ordination of supply of materials and troops became ever more complex, and Asquith began to pay a political price for his unwillingness to provide a coherent structure for the planning of policy. Colleagues, especially Lloyd George, became restless. Asquith was reluctant to sacrifice Kitchener as his cabinet colleagues had come to desire, the field marshal being sent to the Mediterranean to report (a measure which further delayed the evacuation of Gallipoli). Asquith, as in 1914, was briefly war secretary as well as prime minister and, recovered from his illness, he used this joint office to reassert his authority to considerable effect. He might have done better if he had continued himself in this position (Churchill may have learned something from the episode, for in 1940 he made himself minister of defence). November and December 1915 were the months in which Asquith most directly affected the conduct of the war. On 11 November a war committee was established (its membership leading to the resignation of Winston Churchill). The absence of clarity about its role was not immediately apparent, but, in Hankey's view, it worked well for the first eight months of 1916 (Hankey, 2.543). The successful evacuation of Gallipoli was a behind-the-scenes political success for Asquith, but the public could not but see it as a failure. Asquith replaced Sir John French by Douglas Haig, and appointed Sir William Robertson (French's chief of staff) to be the chief of an enlarged and more powerful Imperial General Staff. These were the two decisive military appointments for the latter years of the war, for Haig and Robertson were wholly committed to the view that victory was achievable only by defeating or exhausting the Germans in the fields of Flanders. Despite Asquith's resolute action during his interim period as war secretary, 1915 ended with the government uneasy at best; the role of Kitchener, and of the army in politics, unresolved; and with the 'big push' on the western front the allies' only serious plan. 
Conscription, an issue within the coalition from the start, and certain to be a difficult question for the Liberal, Labour, and Irish parties, was becoming unavoidable. Asquith, characteristically, allowed its politics to evolve to the point, clarified by Lord Derby, whom Asquith appointed director-general of recruiting in October 1915, that it seemed inevitable. The cabinet approved the 'Military Service Bill' on 31 December 1915 without resignation, save that of Sir John Simon. Asquith's speech to the Labour Party on 11 January 1916 enabled Henderson not to resign. 
Despite these many difficulties and the military stalemate, Asquith's personal position was not directly challenged, though there was in the latter part of 1915 fairly sustained denigration of him in the right-wing press. Moreover, Lloyd George, Asquith's most likely challenger among the Liberals, was considerably discredited by his constant politicking, and his attention to his own department was questioned. Asquith's handling of the military and political changes of late 1915 showed why his leadership was both criticized and felt indispensable: the government seemed to act slowly and to follow rather than to lead. Yet this was just what the coalition government seemed to need if it was to hold together. The fact that the rest of the cabinet relied on Asquith to hold them together as a sort of paternal troubleshooter in itself prevented the development of maturer behaviour among its members; Asquith's chief contribution thus had, in this respect, a negative value. 
By the end of January 1916, Asquith's government had put in place the constituent elements of that year's war: a mobilized work and fighting force dedicated to defeating the Germans on the western front as the defensive war of attrition moved into its active phase. But political exigencies and uncertainty about public reaction to conscription meant that the system was initially partial. In March 1916 Asquith showed little interest in Colonel House's visit to London on behalf of President Wilson to suggest exploratory talks about peace. According to Hankey, Asquith 'affects to regard the whole thing as humbug, and a mere manoeuvre of American politics' (Hankey, 2.480). Even so, House's visit was followed by the establishment of a reconstruction committee by Asquith, which discussed the possibility of a 'peace book' (on the analogy of the war book). 
In late March and early April 1916 Asquith was on the continent, visiting Paris and Rome, where he made a number of successful public appearances and speeches. At the Paris conference (26-8 March) he agreed to leave to the generals the timing of the allied offensive planned for 1916. Asquith reported to the war cabinet on 7 April 1916 that it was clear that French pressure made British involvement in a large offensive unavoidable (French, 184-5). The same day he re-established the cabinet committee on the co-ordination of military and financial effort. He returned to find a further crisis over conscription, engineered by those who wanted its general, rather than its partial, application. Asquith felt close to resignation and he told the Commons that the government was divided to the point of near disintegration. On 27 April Asquith had to hurry to the Commons where Long's bill extending conscription was in difficulties. The prime minister withdrew the bill and himself introduced a new measure for general conscription and saw it through the house. Hankey noted: 'He did not much like the job and was not at his best. The House was astonishingly cold. The fact was that the people who wanted compulsory service did not want Asquith, and those who wanted Asquith did not want compulsory service. Nevertheless Asquith faced the situation with his usual courage. (Hankey, 2.276)' In the midst of the conscription crisis, the Easter rising occurred in Dublin; on hearing the news with Hankey, 'Asquith merely said 'Well, that's something' and went off to bed' (Hankey, 2.475), an example of Asquith's sang-froid, not of a lack of interest in Ireland. Following Birrell's resignation as Irish secretary, Asquith, as he had twice done with the war secretaryship, took on the office himself, went to Dublin, investigated the position following the suppression of the rising, and began a process, continued by Lloyd George in the summer of 1916, of trying to rescue constitutionalism in Ireland from Sinn Fein. Even in the midst of war, some Unionists in the Lords played the Orange card and the plan collapsed. Asquith incurred much criticism for his handling of the consequences of the rising; in retrospect, it can be seen as the last chance for a constitutional solution within the Union. He thus had direct experience of the context in which Roger Casement was convicted of treason. In July 1916 the cabinet discussed Casement's case on four occasions. Asquith, according to Jenkins, 'would have preferred a reprieve based on medical evidence' (Jenkins, 'Asquith', 404), but the cabinet he chaired decided on execution. 
On 5 June 1916 the problem of Kitchener's position was resolved by his death at sea. Asquith again acted as war secretary while he pondered on the succession; he delayed too long to appoint Bonar Law, which would have put the Unionists on the spot as well as tying them more closely to the coalition, for Bonar Law, in a meeting with Lloyd George on 11 June, agreed to decline if asked. With some misgivings on 24 June Asquith appointed Lloyd George -- who had threatened resignation if not appointed -- to the secretaryship and to the vice-presidency of the war committee. He took the seals of office on 7 July (Cassar, 188-9). Asquith had saved Lloyd George's life by sending him to Ireland instead of, as planned, with Kitchener to Russia; it was by no means yet apparent that the same episode and its denouement were the prologue to Asquith's own political doom. 
Unexpectedly, the Brusilov offensive of June 1916 by the Russians against the Austrians gave the allies their best gains of the war and, though the offensive was not fully capitalized upon, gave an optimistic tone to the battle of the Somme which began on 1 July. Such optimism was soon quashed, with 57,470 British casualties on the first day, but the Somme offensive continued. On 6 September Asquith visited the battle zone, coming within range of the howitzers. He and his party sheltered in a dugout during a German bombardment. Hankey observed: 'The Prime Minister was as usual quite composed, but I thought his hand was trembling rather, and no wonder' (Hankey, 2.513). Asquith and Hankey advised Haig not to fritter away the new tanks, which were unlikely to be able to cope with the terrain; their advice was ignored. On this day he met his son Raymond, who had ridden over from his regiment. Asquith thus saw at first hand something of the character of the battle of the Somme, and he experienced its consequences directly, for on 15 September Raymond was killed, the news reaching The Wharf on 17 September. Raymond's death, much more than Venetia Stanley's marriage, did impair the prime minister's effectiveness. He missed several cabinets and sometimes found concentration difficult. But, like Hankey, whose brother was killed at much the same time, Asquith found that a close relative's death stiffened his resolve to see through stated policies, and he was not one of those who felt the Somme offensive hard to defend. Even so, with three other sons still in the field, his enthusiasm for the war can hardly but have been dulled. Asquith's state of mind as he and his cabinet allowed Haig to continue the Somme offensive through the wet summer of 1916 can only be guessed at. By the end of November, there were 415,000 British casualties from the battles on the Somme. 
The huge casualties of the Somme implied a further drain on manpower and further problems for an economy now struggling to meet the demands made of it. They also implied either a stalemate or another expensive offensive. The brief hope of Romanian support was quickly over. Shipping losses from the U-boats had begun to be significant. Press opinion overtly called for change, cartoons referred to 'Squiffy' (the Unionists' nickname for the prime minister), and George Robey added an Asquithian verse into his hit music-hall song 'In other words': '
Just stem this tide of ignorant conjecture, 

Remain inert and dormant just like me, 

And cultivate spontaneous quiescence, 

In other words, Wait and See!!! 
(McCallum, 121)' It was a year since Asquith had asserted himself during his brief spell as war secretary in November-December 1915. Early in November 1916 he called for all departments to write memoranda on how they saw the pattern of 1917, the prologue to a general reconsideration of the allies' position. On a visit to Paris on 4 November with Lloyd George, he seemed to Hankey restored to action and good spirits. Lloyd George, however, came to the view at the Paris conference that the present structure of command and direction of policy could not win the war and might well lose it. He agreed with Hankey that on their return to London he (Lloyd George) should raise with Bonar Law, before speaking to Asquith, the question of 'a small War Committee to handle the day to day conduct of the war, with full powers', independent of the cabinet, 'in close touch with the P.M.', but without his being a member of it. Lloyd George did raise this question and one of the most elaborate political quadrilles of British political history ensued, in which any one of Asquith, Lloyd George, Bonar Law, Balfour, or (even) Carson might have emerged at the head of the dance. On 2 December Asquith agreed to a version of the new structure, as refined by Hankey. On 4 December 'The Times' published the plan, leaked by Carson but taken by Asquith to have been leaked by that inveterate leaker, Lloyd George; 'The Times' combined this with a strong attack on Asquith. Later that day, the sands shifting beneath him, Asquith attempted to reconstruct his government without conceding the loss of power which the new structure implied. He was unsuccessful and on 5 December he resigned. The king called a conference of senior members of the Liberal and Unionist parties but it was fruitless. On 7 December the king summoned Lloyd George, who formed a second coalition government, the party balance of ministerial posts being the reverse of that of May 1915. Almost all the members of Asquith's cabinet had thought him indispensable, and so had he; once he was gone, they quickly learned to do without him. 
Asquith took his fall with what seemed to be his characteristic equanimity; J. M. Keynes, Virginia Woolf reported, dined with the Asquiths 'two nights after their downfall; though Asquith himself was quite unmoved, Margot started to cry into the soup... Maynard has a great admiration for Asquith who had perpetually to stand buffer between [Lloyd] George and McKenna' (N. Nicolson, ed., 'Letters of Virginia Woolf', 2, 1994, 133). Even so, Asquith had not gone readily, and the circumstances of his leaving left him with a permanent sense of affront. He never again held office and was not willing, as Balfour was, to play the elder statesman's role in making the war machine work. He was not a great war leader, and he never attempted to portray himself as such. But he was not a bad one, either. Wartime to him was an aberration, not a fulfilment. In terms of the political style of Britain's conduct of the war, that was an important virtue, but it led Asquith to underestimate the extent to which twentieth-century warfare was an all-embracing experience, and his sometimes almost perverse personal reluctance to appear constantly busy and unceasingly active told against him in the political and press world generally. Bonar Law had advised Asquith in a letter that 'In war it is necessary not only to be active but to seem active' (Blake, 290). Asquith was as a wartime premier much more active than his reputation suggested; it was his determination to maintain something of the pattern of his normal private life which offended men such as Bonar Law (and even in 1955 Robert Blake's comments in his life of Bonar Law occasioned a public wrangle). In the Second World War Churchill drew the lesson, and his private life and necessary relaxation were much more discreetly pursued. 
Asquith was in no sense unusual among his compatriots in seeing the war as something during which normal procedures would to a considerable extent continue. He had to lead a cabinet which expected to govern and a Commons which expected to sit, and debate, and perhaps even be dissolved for a general election. Asquith's rather humdrum, unfussy approach -- as personally unassertive and non-bombastic as was possible in the circumstances -- set a style that was to be a salutary example to Lloyd George and, in the Second World War, to Churchill, both politicians to whom war was something of a fulfilment. Hankey, who saw him more closely between 1914 and 1916 than any other person, gave him a remarkably high encomium, and believed the causes of Asquith's coalition's failure lay in 'an inherent political weakness rather than in the leadership' (Hankey, 2.570). Asquith, Hankey believed, 'never wavered in his unswerving determination to see it [the war] through to final victory'; he built up 'a military machine... on which his successor in office was able to build so successfully as to achieve final victory within less than two years of Asquith's fall.... His powerful and sonorous eloquence enabled him to exercise a leadership which was at the time unsurpassed in any of the nations at war. (ibid., 2.569)' 

Asquith did not take a peerage and he declined the Garter. He remained in the Commons and leader of the Liberal Party, his position confirmed by a vote of the party on 8 December 1916. Welcome though this was to the Liberals, it was bound to place the former prime minister in an awkward position. He knew too much and could say almost nothing. Anything he did say was bound to be seen as the sour criticism of a disappointed man, and was likely to be exploited against him. Lloyd George's coalition, for all the talk of new beginnings, deviated little from the military approach decided upon in 1915-16. Asquith in May 1917 declined the offer of the lord chancellorship. He accepted the recommendations of the speaker's conference for female suffrage and proportional representation and he developed his views, first adumbrated in his speech in Dublin on 25 September 1914, for a League of Nations. In December 1917 his son Arthur was badly wounded, for the second time, just after taking command of his brigade. In 1918 Asquith gave the Romanes lecture in Oxford, 'On the Victorian age' (reprinted in 'Studies and Sketches', 1924). 
Post-war politics began, though this was not apparent at the time, with the publication on 7 May 1918 of Sir Frederick Maurice's letter to 'The Times' stating that Lloyd George's remarks on the number of troops available to Haig for the Passchendaele offensive were incorrect, with the implication that Haig had been intentionally starved of troops. Asquith moved a motion for a select committee of inquiry (rather than the panel of judges suggested by the government). Since there had already been royal commissions on the Dardanelles and Mesopotamia (to the former of which Asquith had given evidence) the suggestion of an inquiry was not unreasonable, and the government did not initially contest the need for one. The Liberals mishandled the debate, taken aback by Lloyd George's impassioned reaction, and Asquith's motion was defeated in 108 votes to 295. The voting list was later used by Lloyd George as a test of loyalty as to which Liberals should be given the 'coupon' of approval (Asquith coined the description) as a coalition candidate at the general election in 1918. At that election, Asquith -- though his tory opponent, Sir Alexander Sprott, was not given the coupon -- was quite heavily defeated in East Fife, having held the seat since 1886. 
Asquith had hoped to serve on the British delegation to the Paris peace conference, but found himself instead chairing a royal commission on Oxford and Cambridge (the first on their structure and purpose since 1850-52). Whereas the 1850-52 commission, in the high noon of academic liberalism, adumbrated a new view of English higher education, Asquith's made the existing structures of Oxford and Cambridge more serviceable, providing some state funding and better provision for the sciences, while confirming the already strong position of the colleges. 
Asquith surprisingly -- stung perhaps by a sense that Lloyd George had thrown the Liberal Party and, to an extent, liberalism to the wall -- held on to political life. His was a curious position, as he was seen as 'whiggish' but was leader of the more radical part of the semi-severed Liberal Party. Staging his own Midlothian campaign, he was elected at a by-election for Paisley in February 1920 after a bold campaign in which his daughter Violet's speeches countered the impression which he still carried of hostility to women in politics. In 1921 he attempted to rally pre-war colleagues such as Grey, Crewe, Runciman, and other younger men to political action in support of a possible alternative government rather more widely based than the remnants of the Liberal Party. Little came of this, and the initiative turned instead to a plan by some Liberals to replace Asquith with Grey, hardly a step towards the future! At the election of 1922, called as a result of the disintegration of Lloyd George's coalition, Asquith held Paisley, but not easily. The election brought home to the Liberals that they had ceased to be a central force in British politics, losing on the right to a resurgent Conservatism, and on the left to a Labour Party liberated by the extended franchise. In the elections of 1923, in which Asquith revived his free-trade rhetoric against Baldwin's protectionism, Asquith's majority in Paisley increased, the opposition vote being split between three opponents. 
Money was a serious problem for the Asquiths; and they did not have enough to support the earldom which Asquith in due course accepted. The home at 20 Cavendish Square, to which they had initially moved back, had to be sold and the cheaper (though still substantial) 44 Bedford Square bought. Both Asquiths wrote for money. Margot's 'Autobiography' (2 vols., 1920-22) was something of a political embarrassment to her husband. In 1923 he published 'The Genesis of the War', which had none of the panache or indiscretion of Churchill's and Lloyd George's later war memoirs. Having in 1918 published 'Occasional Addresses', in 1924 he collected more of his literary addresses and some of his reviews in 'Studies and Sketches'. Asquith's four volumes of recollections -- 'Fifty Years of Parliament' (2 vols., 1926) and 'Memories and Reflections, 1852-1927' (2 vols., 1928, published posthumously) -- were characteristically reticent and unflamboyant, but contain much interesting comment if carefully read. 
Asquith's family provided a relaxing context for their father (known by then in the family as Old Boy). Several of his children moved in the world of Bloomsbury and the creative arts; his youngest son, Anthony (Puffin), began making films in 1926, which his father enjoyed; his daughter-in-law Cynthia Asquith, J. M. Barrie's secretary and heir, was a novelist, and her husband, Herbert (Beb), was a novelist and poet as well as a lawyer; his daughter Elizabeth, who married the Romanian diplomatist and friend of Proust, Prince Antoine Bibesco, in 1919, wrote short stories and poems; even Margot was in due course to write a novel. Much more conventionally political was Violet, who had married Maurice Bonham Carter, Asquith's principal private secretary, in 1915, and saw that her father never forgot the iniquities of Lloyd George. Her unflinching loyalty was to make her a slightly dangerous champion of his posthumous political reputation. Asquith greatly enjoyed the company and the circles his family provided, and in the 1920s he stayed at Garsington Manor and other haunts of the Bloomsburyites. 
In the last decisive act of his long political career, Asquith put the first Labour government into office by persuading the Liberal Party, in a speech to the parliamentary party on 18 December 1923, that this was the correct course of action, a view not altogether accepted within the party, some of whom felt Asquith should have made the case for a Liberal-led minority government. Asquith's successful motion for a select committee over the government's handling of a prosecution for sedition led to the dissolution of October 1924, the Labour government being ejected, and Asquith easily losing his Paisley seat in a straight fight with Labour. The Liberal Party in the Commons fell from 159 in 1923 to 40. Asquith was offered an earldom by the king and, after reflecting on it during a holiday in Egypt, accepted. Asquith asked and received royal approval that he take the name of Oxford as his title, but, after complaints from the Harley family (who had held the title in an earlier century), the title of Oxford and Asquith was gazetted (9 February 1925). In May 1925 he also accepted the Garter. His acceptance in the English establishment seemed confirmed, with the torrid denunciations by the tory press behind him. However, later in 1925 Asquith was nominated for the chancellorship of Oxford University, Curzon's death having caused the vacancy. His success depended on the tories not opposing him, for since 1865 the university had always voted down the Liberal candidate in parliamentary elections. Lord Cave, Baldwin's lord chancellor, also stood, as Asquith suspected he might, and Asquith, though receiving impressive support from university dignitaries across the political spectrum, was heavily defeated by 987 to 441 votes. It was a humiliating conclusion to his distinguished public career, and a graceless, rather vindictive, act by the tories and country clergy of the university (which, embarrassed, elected Edward Grey unopposed two years later). 
Asquith remained leader of the Liberal Party and of the Liberals in the Lords; Lloyd George was leader of the parliamentary party. The arrangement worked uneasily at best, with an undercurrent of acrimony. Neither man was to hold office again; Asquith was clearly 'winding down the coil' (as Gladstone put it with respect to his latter days), but Lloyd George did not appreciate that his extensive career, as well as Asquith's, was finished. The Lloyd George Fund gave its owner a bizarre independence within the party. Asquith tried and failed to balance it by the Million Fund Appeal, launched in January 1925. When Lloyd George failed to participate in the Liberal shadow cabinet's line against the general strike in May 1926, Asquith announced that he could no longer work with him. On 12 June Asquith suffered a slight stroke. On 15 October his resignation was announced. In 1927 he for a time was confined to a wheelchair. He was able to make a final speech at York on 19 October 1927, receiving the freedom of the city. On his return to The Wharf, he was confined to bed. He died there on 15 February 1928. He had let it be known that he did not wish a public funeral. He was buried in Sutton Courtenay churchyard on 20 February, a memorial service being later held in Westminster Abbey. He was succeeded as earl of Oxford and Asquith by his grandson, Julian Edward George Asquith. 
Though Asquith's career ended bathetically with a too long coda of failure, its high noon shed a longer beam of light than is often perceived. Whereas Gladstone led the party of progress from the front, and Lloyd George would have liked to have done the same, Asquith's role was more subtle: he was an enabler, a reticent but firm and very loyal chairman of cabinet, content to choose men of ability and then to let leading ministers lead. His firm determination for constitutional procedure and against vested interests set an important standard and example. The combination of Asquith as prime minister and Lloyd George as dynamic chancellor was a fine formula for progressive cabinet government. Clement Attlee was in this sense Asquith's obvious heir, Harold Wilson a more ambivalent one. Moreover, the constitutional development -- national and regional devolution, reform of the Lords and of the voting system -- which Asquith's government intended but which the war deferred provided a point of reference for the rest of the century, much of its business recurring in the Blair government at the end of it. The view that Asquith was 'the last of the Romans' and his cautious policy views in the 1920s should not obscure the fact that in his heyday Asquith was a formidable, resolute, and resourceful radical politician. 
Asquith's biography was competently written by J. A. Spender and Cyril Asquith in two volumes (1932). The eclipse of the Liberal Party and the excitement surrounding Lloyd George's 'War Memoirs' somewhat sidelined Asquith. R. B. McCallum's short life (1936) maintained interest, which revived strikingly with Roy Jenkins's biography (1964), the latter using the letters to Venetia Stanley, and for the first time naming the recipient and commenting on the relationship. The letters were then splendidly edited with a commentary by Michael and Eleanor Brock (1982). Stephen Koss's short biography (1976) was an astringent radical critique. G. H. Cassar's study, 'Asquith as War Leader' (1994), was an effective rehabilitation. 
Asquith's benign features did not make him an easy subject for caricaturists, and portrait painters such as Orpen (1909) and Fiddes Watt (1912) captured his ordinariness rather than the disguised determination which conditioned his life. Kathleen Scott's bust ('c'.1913; Tate collection) caught Asquith at the height of his powers, its shining bronze reflecting something of his mental and physical toughness. 


@@@@@


doc= 30484


Astbury, Sir John Meir (1860-1939), judge, was born at Grove House, Broughton, near Manchester, on 14 June 1860, the eldest son of Frederick James Astbury JP (died 1901), chartered accountant, of Hilton Park, Prestwich, Lancashire, and his wife, Margaret (died 1894), daughter of John Munn, of Manchester. He was educated at Manchester grammar school and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated with a second class in jurisprudence in 1882: in the following year he was the only candidate placed in the first class in the BCL examination, and in 1884 he won the Vinerian law scholarship. In 1923 he was elected an honorary fellow of Trinity College. 
Astbury was called to the bar in 1884 by the Middle Temple (of which inn he became a bencher in 1903 and treasurer in 1926). He entered practice on the Chancery side as a 'local' at the Manchester bar and soon acquired a practice in the palatine chancery court and at the assizes. In May 1888 he married Evelyn (died 1923), daughter of Paul Susmann, merchant, of Manchester. He took silk in 1895 and migrated to London, attaching himself first to the court of Sir E. W. Byrne and later to that of Sir H. B. Buckley 'going special' in 1905, with a large business in patent litigation, which increased greatly after John Fletcher Moulton became a lord justice of appeal in 1906. In that year he stood as Liberal candidate for the Southport division and defeated E. Marshall Hall, but he was not greatly interested in politics and retired from parliament in January 1910. In 1913 Lord Chancellor Haldane offered him the judgeship in the Chancery Division recently vacated by the promotion of Sir Charles Swinfen Eady; he accepted, and was knighted. For the next sixteen years he discharged the duties of this position with efficiency but without distinction: notwithstanding the assumptions of the English legal tradition, good advocates do not always make good judges. 
Astbury was best-known to the general public and is remembered by historians for the part which, as judge, he played during the general strike of 1926. The litigation in question is reported as 'National Sailors' and Firemen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland v. Reed and others'. The union, composed of loyal merchant seamen, under the wise direction of its secretary J. Havelock Wilson, had little sympathy with the attempt of the strikers to subvert democratic government, and when certain local branches called upon members to cease work the union immediately applied to the High Court of Justice for an injunction prohibiting its subordinate officials from usurping the functions of the union as a whole. The case was in Astbury's list on 11 May, and he gave his decision at once, not confining himself to the technical point as to the relations between the union and its branches, but declaring in forcible language that the whole general strike was illegal and that the court would use its powers, by injunction, to prevent any action which might further the strike's objective. On the previous night Sir Henry Slesser, at that time a leading lawyer among the Labour members of parliament, had declared in the House of Commons that the question of the legality of the strike was one to be decided by the courts of justice, and that 'whatever the decision of this tribunal, we shall all, as law-abiding citizens, obey it'. When the house met on the following evening, Sir John Simon, with a copy of Astbury's judgment, given earlier in the day, in his hand, in a trenchant speech (which complemented one given a week earlier) charged the leaders of the strike as lawbreakers. Although it was on the following morning that Stanley Baldwin made the announcement that the strike had been called off there is no evidence that, as he himself claimed and his 'Times' obituary asserted, Astbury's judgment (or indeed Sir John Simon's statement) played any significant part in bringing this about. While it spawned a host of approving commentary in contemporary legal journals, including a somewhat ambiguous one by Sir Frederick Pollock in the 'Law Quarterly Review', the comprehensive critique by A. L. Goodhart and that of W. S. Holdsworth have never since been challenged. The judgment ignored the jurisprudence of the 'Trade Disputes Act' of 1906 (which supplied immunity for strikers involved in trade disputes) and, if sound, would have made superfluous the 'Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act' of 1927 (which made general strikes unlawful). 
Following the death of his first wife Astbury married secondly, in August 1923, Harriet, daughter of George William Holmes, of Philadelphia, USA, and widow of Captain Morrell Andrew Girdlestone. In 1929 his eyesight began to fail and in October he resigned his judgeship: in December he was sworn of the privy council. His last years were saddened by his blindness and by the death in a motor accident of his only child, a daughter from his first marriage. He died at the Guildford Hotel, Sandwich, on 21 August 1939. By his will, he directed that the ultimate residue of his estate should be devoted to legal education. 


@@@@@


doc= 30485


Astbury, William Thomas (1898-1961), physicist and molecular biologist, was born on 25 February 1898 at Longton, Staffordshire, the fourth of seven children and the eldest son of William Edwin Astbury, potter's turner, of Longton, and his wife, Clara Dean. Astbury was educated at Longton high school and at Jesus College, Cambridge. He went up in 1917 but his education was interrupted for two years by war service in the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) in Cork, Ireland, where he met his future wife. After graduation with first classes in both part one (physics, chemistry, mineralogy, 1920) and part two (physics, 1921) of the natural sciences tripos, he joined Professor Sir William H. Bragg first at University College, London (1921), and then at the Royal Institution (1923). In 1922 he married, in London, Frances Hannah Mary, daughter of Daniel Gould, horticulturalist, of Cork. They had a son and a daughter. 
Astbury first signalled his life's work by accepting an invitation as lecturer at the University of Leeds (1928), where he set up the textile physics laboratory in the department of textile industries, based in the first instance on X-ray diffraction studies of keratin, the wool protein. Subsequently, in 1937, Astbury was appointed reader in textile physics and, in 1945, professor and head of a new department, the department of biomolecular structure. After Astbury's death the university replaced this department by a new one (1962), entitled in his honour the Astbury department of biophysics. 
Throughout his career Astbury was a pioneer, attempting the solution of structural problems, with brilliant intuition, long before the appropriate techniques had been developed. His first papers dealt with small molecules that were, nevertheless, more complicated than any other crystal structures solved at the time. His greatest contribution came, however, after his transfer to Leeds. In three key papers, published between 1931 and 1935, with improved diagrams obtained by X-ray cameras of his own careful design, he showed that the diagram of unstretched wool fibres was interpretable in terms of a folded molecular chain, which by stretching could be converted reversibly into another form with straight chains, substantially as in silk. These structures he named respectively the greekLetteralpha-form and the greekLetterbeta-form. This was the first example of a mechanical polymorph. Astbury favoured an greekLetteralpha-structure in which the long chain of the protein was folded in a sequence of flat hexagons. When, later, accurate atomic models proved that such a fold could not accommodate the bulky side chains of the protein, he developed another, orthogonal fold, consonant with all the properties of the protein known at that time. This folding and unfolding of protein chains, and Astbury's observation that single crystals of globular proteins such as edestin could be turned by denaturation into a set of parallel fibres, led him directly to the profound conclusion that a protein could exhibit different properties and activities simply through differences in the folding pattern. 
In the meantime, Astbury had extended his interests to other proteins: the myosin of muscle which he studied extensively, the epidermin of skin, and the fibrinogen and fibrin of blood. These formed a coherent group, the k-m-e-f group, all of which showed a keratin-like structure. The keratin of bird feathers and reptile scales he found to be slightly different, and so he was able to separate these from mammals on a molecular basis. All these proteins differed sharply from collagen, the inextensible protein of connective tissue, which he regarded as an entirely different protein. In the first Procter memorial lecture (1939), based on a wide selection of collagens, he deduced that the molecular chain of collagen was not quite fully extended; in the ninth (1960) he gave the correct, Ramachandran, structure. Astbury was a man who delighted in the success of others as much as he did in his own and, when Linus Pauling announced the greekLetteralpha-helical structure of proteins, he fully accepted it. 
Perhaps Astbury's greatest contribution to molecular biology was with nucleic acids. He was early convinced of the importance of these acids. Again he reached a structure long before anyone else had done so, but again he missed the real structure of a double helix because the necessary techniques and information were not yet available. 
Astbury's work had a profound effect on the textile industry, on the development of molecular biology, and in the medical field. He received many honours. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society (1940), gave the Croonian lecture (1945), and was a member of the council (1946-7). He was elected honorary life member of the New York Academy of Sciences (1950), corresponding member of the Istituto Lombardo de Scienze (1951), foreign member of the Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences (1956), and honorary founder member of the British Biophysical Society (1961). He was ScD (Cambridge) and doctor 'honoris causa' of the University of Strasbourg (1946). He also achieved many other distinctions. 
Astbury was a man of the Potteries, who retained a bluff, hearty, simple style and a traditional extreme independence. A sturdy figure with a somewhat rolling gait, he was always popular. He was an accomplished pianist and learned to play the violin late in life. Astbury died at the Leeds General Infirmary on 4 June 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 30486


Aston, Francis William (1877-1945), physicist, was born at Church Lane, Harborne, near Birmingham on 1 September 1877, the third of the seven children of William Aston, gun manufacturer, and his wife, Fanny Charlotte, daughter of Isaac Hollis, a gunmaker. From Harborne vicarage school he went to Malvern College and, in 1893, entered Mason College, Birmingham, to study for the London intermediate science examination. For some years he had had a workshop and a makeshift laboratory of his own in his father's house, and by the time he was awarded the Forster scholarship in 1898, to work with P. F. Frankland on the stereochemistry of dipyromucyltartaric acid esters, he was already an accomplished experimenter and a skilled glass-blower. During the tenure of his scholarship he was able also to take a course in fermentation chemistry, and between 1900 and 1903 worked as a chemist in a Wolverhampton brewery. During this period he continued his own work in his private laboratory in his spare time. 
Already having considerable experience in high-vacuum technique, Aston became interested in the construction of X-ray tubes of novel design and in the phenomena of gas discharges at low pressure. This work attracted the attention of J. H. Poynting, professor of physics in the University of Birmingham (as Mason College had become), and in 1903 Aston became a research student in Poynting's department. In 1908 he detected a new 'primary cathode dark space'; a phenomenon which now bears his name. 
In 1909 Aston travelled round the world by way of Ceylon, Malaya, Australia, New Zealand, the Pacific islands, the United States, and Canada. He then held -- for one term -- a lectureship in physics at Birmingham. The brief appointment revealed him to be a reluctant (and rather poor) teacher, and in January 1910 he accepted the position of research assistant to Sir J. J. Thomson at the Cavendish Laboratory. He also became a member of Trinity College, Cambridge -- his home for the rest of his life. Thomson had been working on positive rays since 1906, and by 1910 he had reached the stage of applying the method of crossed electric and magnetic deflections in order to obtain the characteristic 'parabolas' by means of which the first mass-analysis of the rays was achieved. Aston quickly made significant improvements to Thomson's apparatus and developed a camera capable of photographing the observed parabolas. Using the improved instrument, Aston became convinced that the technique provided solid proof that all molecules of a given substance shared an identical mass. However, in 1912, Thomson obtained two parabolas (mass 20 and mass 22) for neon. It seemed likely that this second line (assuming an atomic weight for neon of 20 rather than the commonly accepted 20.2) was either a neon hydride or a discrete element -- meta-neon. Thomson examined the first possibility, while Aston attempted to separate meta-neon by fractional distillation (inventing an extremely accurate quartz microbalance in the process). In 1913, the year he became a Clerk Maxwell scholar, he announced partial separation of a new element, with properties identical to neon. However, the First World War now interrupted work, and Aston went to Farnborough as a technical assistant at the Royal Aircraft Establishment. 
The break gave Aston time to consider the neon problem afresh. In 1913 Frederick Soddy had postulated the existence of isotopes of radioactive elements in 'Nature', and Aston now began to suspect that natural isotopes of other elements might exist. On returning to Cambridge in 1919 to test this hypothesis, he developed the instrument that became known as the mass spectrograph, a huge improvement over Thomson's apparatus. Both electric and magnetic fields now caused deflections of the positive rays (ion beam) to occur in the same plane, with the deflection of the ions proportional to their charge to mass ratio ('e'/'m'). In striking a photographic plate these deflected ions then exposed a series of lines (the mass spectrum), where the position of the line represented an ion's mass and the intensity was proportional to its relative abundance in the original ion beam. Using the instrument, Aston showed that neon produced two spectral lines at mass 20 and 22, the former ten times more intense than the latter. Neon had two stable isotopes. 
Using the mass spectrograph all the elements available in simple gaseous form were analysed within a very short time. The results with neon were confirmed, and the instrument was sufficiently accurate to show that the chemical atomic weight of the element was very likely to represent the average mass of all the atoms in the normal isotopic mixture. Not only elements such as chlorine of which the chemical atomic weight is far from integral on the oxygen scale, but others like bromine with a much more nearly integral atomic weight were shown to be mixtures of two or more species: the phenomenon of isotopy was in fact established as one of the basic phenomena of nature. Significant regularities emerged naturally from these observations -- the whole number rule, stating effectively that the masses of all atoms are integral multiples of the mass of the atom of hydrogen to an accuracy of at least 1 per cent, and the rule of odd and even, recording the fact that the mass numbers of the isotopes of odd-numbered elements are almost always odd and those of even-numbered elements predominantly even. These regularities were developed and given further precision as the result of later work, but from the first they contained the germs of significant truth. 
Widespread acclamation greeted the publication of Aston's astoundingly simple but entirely revolutionary results, and honours came quickly. In 1920 he was elected first holder of one of the newly created research fellowships at Trinity College and received the Mackenzie Davidson medal of the Rontgen Society; in 1921 he was elected FRS; in 1922 he received the Hughes medal of the Royal Society and the Nobel prize for chemistry; and in 1923 he was awarded the John Scott medal (Philadelphia) and the Italian Paterno medal, as well as being elected fellow of the (Royal) Institute of Chemistry and made an honorary LLD of the University of Birmingham. In 1922 he published his seminal 'Isotopes'; it was followed in 1923 by 'Mass-Spectra and Isotopes'. 
Having obtained all the information on isotopes which his instrument could give by way of mass-analysis of the positive rays produced in gas discharges, Aston turned his attention for the next few years to the metallic elements. The technique here was more difficult, but he gradually mastered the art of producing 'accelerated anode rays' and by 1925 analyses of fifty-six elements had been made. By this time a further generalization became obvious: odd-numbered elements are either simple elements or are constituted of two isotopes only. The distinction between even- and odd-numbered elements thus became more clearly discerned, for even-numbered elements frequently have many more isotopes than two. 
In 1927 Aston was Bakerian lecturer of the Royal Society. He had just completed his second mass spectrograph and had obtained the first results with its aid. The resolving power of his original instrument had been insufficient for successful work with the heaviest elements and its precision of measurement was about 1 part in 1000. In the new instrument resolving power was improved by a factor of five, and accuracy had improved to 1 in 10,000; it showed the whole-number rule to be only approximate and the way lay open for a direct check of the Einstein law of equivalence of mass and energy. The application of the method of photometric comparison of intensities of mass-spectrum lines in 1930 made available for the first time a purely physical method of precision for the determination of chemical atomic weights. In the years 1927 to 1935 a complete resurvey of the elements was made with the new spectrograph and Aston's essential contribution to the subject was complete. In the latter year he further improved his spectrograph, increasing its accuracy of measurement by another large factor, but now many younger men were active in similar work and with the outbreak of war in 1939 he soon abandoned regular experimenting. 
Aston's whole life was dominated by hobbies. That his research was a hobby is evident from the fact that he worked alone, never taking on a research student for help or training. (Indeed, only six of his 143 papers were collaborative efforts.) Travel was a lifelong hobby, particularly in order to observe an eclipse. Photography and the care of the Trinity College clock were scientific hobbies, music and the collection of Chinese porcelain cultural hobbies, and at various stages of his life cycling, motoring, tennis, swimming, skiing, and golf took him out of doors with enthusiasm -- and often with reward. He was also, for a time, music critic for the 'Cambridge Review'. 
Aston continued to receive many honours, including foreign membership of the academy of sciences of the USSR (1925) and the Accademia dei Lincei (1926), the honorary degrees of DSc (Dublin, 1929), PhD (Freiburg, 1930; Benares, 1937), and DL (Calcutta, 1938), a Royal medal of the Royal Society (1938), the Joykissen Mookherjee medal (Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, 1938), and the Duddell medal (Physical Society, 1944). He was president of the mathematics and physics section of the British Association in 1935. He died, unmarried, at the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge on 20 November 1945. He left a large estate to Trinity College and several scientific organizations. 


@@@@@


doc= 30487


Aston, Sir George Grey (1861-1938), Royal Marine officer and writer, was born in Cape Colony on 2 December 1861, the youngest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Aston, Indian army (retired), and his wife, Katherine, daughter of the Revd Abraham Faure, of the Cape of Good Hope. Educated at Westminster School and at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, he joined the Royal Marine Artillery in 1879. 
Aston's first posting to the Mediterranean Fleet included active service ashore in the Sudan (1884). He then served in the Admiralty's foreign intelligence committee, which became the naval intelligence department. After passing Staff College, Camberley (1891), Aston returned to the Mediterranean Fleet as intelligence officer to Vice-Admiral Sir George Tryon. He was on leave at the time of the HMS 'Victoria' disaster in 1893, escaping the miscalculation which led to the loss of both admiral and ship; his admiration for the admiral resulted in a close relationship with the Tryon family. During his next appointment as professor of fortification at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich (1896-9), he became friend and mentor to the young Maurice Hankey. In the South African War, Aston served in logistics and later as an intelligence officer (8th division), although ill health prompted an early return to England (1900). 
Staff work at the headquarters of the Royal Marines (1901-2) was followed by service with the Home Fleet (1903). At this time Aston was considered as a potential assistant secretary to the committee of imperial defence, but instead was recruited by Colonel Henry Rawlinson as an instructor at the Staff College (1904-7). Aston helped Rawlinson to forge closer army-navy links through joint exercises with the Naval War College. He advocated inter-service co-operation by writing a book, 'Letters on Amphibious Wars' (1911), during his next posting, as a brigadier-general in South Africa (1908-12). He married on 1 June 1909 Dorothy Ellen, daughter of Vice-Admiral William Wilson, of Clyffe Pypard, near Swindon, Wiltshire. They had three sons and two daughters. Aston enjoyed his time in South Africa, serving as chief of staff to the commander-in-chief, Lord Methuen. Aston's hopes that he might become secretary of the committee of imperial defence were dashed when his protege, Hankey, was appointed (1912). 
Aston then served on the Admiralty war staff (1913-14), during which time he assisted Rear-Admiral Lewis Bayly in assessing potential amphibious operations in the North Sea. A second book, 'Sea, Land and Air Strategy' (1914) was published as war began. At the end of August 1914 an unprepared Aston was dispatched for four days with an improvised brigade of Royal Marines to Ostend, to create a diversion to cover Belgian movements. After withdrawal and three weeks' further improvisation, his force was dispatched to Dunkirk. Aston's health then gave way and he was relieved of command. Until his retirement in 1917 he served as colonel commandant of the Royal Marine Artillery. During this time he was called to give evidence to the Dardanelles commission. This revived his interest in strategic matters, prompting him to pursue a post-war career in military journalism and on the fringes of academia. During this period he encouraged and befriended Captain Basil Liddell Hart, who was to replace him as military correspondent for 'The Times' in 1935. His post-war publications included the autobiographical 'Memories of a Marine' (1919), 'War Lessons, New and Old' (1919), 'The Problem of Defence' (1925), 'The Biography of the Late Marshal Foch' (1929), and 'Secret Service' (1930). He was editor of the seventh edition of 'Hamley's Operations of War' (1922). His passion for fly-fishing produced 'Mostly about Trout' (1921) and 'Letters to Young Flyfishers' (1926). 
Aston was appointed CB (1902) and KCB (1913). He was made aide-de-camp to the king in 1911. He died at his home, Hooklands, Woodford, Salisbury, Wiltshire, on 2 December 1938 and was buried at Woodford church three days later. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30488


Aston, William George (1841-1911), diplomatist and Japanese and Korean scholar, was born on 9 April 1841 near Londonderry, one of the five children of George Robert Aston, minister of the Unitarian Church of Ireland and schoolmaster. He was educated at Saintfield national school in co. Down and in 1859 he matriculated at the Queen's College, Belfast, where he had a distinguished career: he took his BA in 1862, receiving a prize for his results in Latin and Greek, and his MA in modern languages and history in 1863; in 1882 the college awarded him an honorary DLitt. In 1871 he married Janet (died 1908), daughter of R. Smith of Belfast; they had no children. 
Aston joined the consular service in 1864 and was appointed student interpreter at the British legation in Edo, where his task, like that of his colleague Ernest Satow, was to learn Japanese for the conduct of consular business. He soon became acquainted with prominent discontented samurai who were later to play significant roles in the Meiji restoration of 1868: from them he and Satow derived a good understanding of the turbulent politics of the day. He rose in the service to become interpreter and translator to the legation in 1870, and as such he accompanied the Iwakura mission, which included several senior government ministers, during its visit to Britain from August to December 1872. In an anonymous article he contributed to 'Macmillan's Magazine' he explained the purpose of the mission and applauded the commitment to westernization that it betokened. He clearly sympathized with the Meiji government's desire for greater centralization of political and economic power. 
Aston was subsequently appointed assistant Japanese secretary to the legation (1875) and consul at Nagasaki (1882). In 1884 he was appointed consul-general for Korea and was the first British diplomat to reside in Seoul. He had been learning Korean for a number of years, and in 1880 had prepared a set of notes on Korean grammar for Satow, who understood Aston to be fluent in the language. In 1882 he had accompanied Vice-Admiral Willes on his mission to Korea as interpreter, and had made several further trips in 1883 to negotiate the treaty that inaugurated Anglo-Korean relations. In Seoul he assisted Jardine Matheson & Co. in pursuing its commercial interests, but the political situation worried him: he reported in September 1884, 'I have come to the conclusion that the government of Korea is in a thoroughly rotten condition, and I fear that there will be no reform without some violent change' (W. Aston to Parkes, 19 Sept 1884, Parkes MSS, CUL). In December he was present at a dinner party where those opposed to reform were assassinated; the surviving guests departed in confusion, and exposure to the cold night air brought on a pulmonary attack which threatened Aston's life. He recovered to be appointed Japanese secretary to the legation in Tokyo in 1886, but in 1889 he retired on grounds of ill health and was made CMG. The remainder of his life he spent at Beer, Devon, where he devoted himself to his studies of Japan. 
Aston's facility with both the written and spoken forms of the Japanese language is apparent from his numerous official translations of Japanese documents, and it inspired some of his earliest publications. 'A Short Grammar of the Japanese Spoken Language' first appeared in 1869, intended 'for the use of merchants and others'; the fourth edition of 1888, which was completely rewritten, represented the first description of the Japanese language by a Westerner to eschew the grammatical categories of European languages, and the first attempt to capture the internal logic of Japanese. His 'Grammar of the Japanese Written Language' (1872; rev. edns, 1877 and 1904) was similarly successful and highly regarded; much more scholarly in tone, it was based on his extensive study of the works of Japanese grammarians. Following visits to Okinawa and to Hokkaido, he wrote in 1879 an account of the Loochooan (Ryukyuan) and Ainu languages, establishing that the former was merely a dialect of Japanese and the latter quite unrelated to Japanese or Korean. In the same year he was the first to demonstrate that Japanese and Korean were related, and his arguments are still worthy of consideration. 
It was in retirement that Aston made his major contributions to the study of Japan. His translation of the 'Nihon shoki' ('Chronicles of Japan') was first published in 1896: it remained in print throughout the twentieth century as the standard translation of this difficult eighth-century text. His 'A History of Japanese Literature' (1899) was for eighty years the most thorough work of its kind in English; it broke new ground in dealing with contemporary literature and in perceiving literary merit in works considered morally objectionable by Japanese scholars. His last major work was 'Shinto' (1905), a study of indigenous Japanese religion that suffers from his concentration on philological study of the early texts. Aston has tended to be overshadowed by Satow's more glamorous career, and he was more self-effacing by temperament, but his extensive contributions as a scholar, which include numerous articles on the languages, literatures, and history of Japan and Korea, were highly valued in his own time and some long continued to be cited. Aston died at his residence, The Bluff, Beer, Devon, on 22 November 1911. His valuable collection of Japanese books was bought by Cambridge University Library in 1912 for $250. 


@@@@@


doc= 30489


Astor, Nancy Witcher, Viscountess Astor (1879-1964), society hostess and politician, was born at Danville, Virginia, on 19 May 1879, the eighth child in a family of eleven. Her father, Chiswell Dabney Langhorne (1843-1919), a veteran of the American Civil War, had made his fortune in railway construction and bought an estate at Mirador near Charlottesville. Her mother, Nancy Witcher (Nanaire) Keene (1848-1903), a beautiful girl of Irish extraction, married when she was sixteen and worked as a nurse in the last days of the Confederacy. 
Nancy Langhorne received a scanty education at a school in Richmond and later at Miss Brown's Academy for Young Ladies, a finishing school in New York. A small, trim figure with piercing blue eyes, she lacked the good looks of her sister, Irene, an acknowledged southern beauty who was known as Queen Bee in the family. From an early age Nancy used her ready wit, which often deteriorated into mere rudeness, to help her fight for a dominant role in her large and competitive family. She possessed enormous energy, loved sports, and was rather a tomboy. But her outward aggression hid considerable insecurity, and throughout her life she found difficulty in establishing close relationships. The combination of her southern protestant upbringing and her personal insecurity made her appear puritanical and censorious; in particular she had a lifelong aversion for alcoholic drink and a rooted fear of physical relationships. She told her own children they had been 'conceived without pleasure and born without pain' (Fox, 384). Later in life she managed to resolve the problem by engaging in a number of safe, platonic affairs with Julian Grenfell, G. B. Shaw, T. E. Lawrence, and, above all, with Philip Kerr (later the marquess of Lothian). 
In October 1897 Nancy made a disastrous marriage to Robert Gould Shaw (1871-1930), who quickly revolted her by his heavy drinking and his sexual demands. Though they had a son, Bobbie, they were separated in 1901 and divorced in 1903. In the following year Nancy went to England, attracted by the hunting and the social life. She soon felt at home. 'I suppose you have come over here to get one of our husbands', Nancy Cunard reportedly told her. 'If you knew the trouble I've had getting rid of mine, you'd know I don't want yours', Nancy replied (Fox, 76). In 1906, however, she found a much more suitable match in Waldorf Astor, later second Viscount Astor (1879-1952), the son of the eccentric millionaire William Waldorf Astor, and they were married on 3 May. 'I married beneath me,' she liked to say, 'all women do.' They had five children: William Waldorf (Bill), Phyllis (Wissie), (Francis) David Langhorne Astor (1912-2001), Michael, and John Jacob (Jakie), but they all suffered from Nancy's possessiveness and from her inability to give affection. 'I suppose you all think you're misunderstood', she once remarked. 'We've given up hoping for that', replied Bobbie. 'All we want is a bit of civility' (ibid., 384). 
Nancy energetically supported Waldorf's political career by canvassing and organizing the Primrose League in Plymouth, where he became one of the two members in 1910. But her role was essentially conventional; she showed little interest in women's suffrage or in an independent career for herself. She became famous as a hostess at Cliveden, their magnificent country house perched above the Thames at Taplow, and at St James's Square where she liked to pose at the top of the staircase, sparkling with jewels, to welcome her guests. She made a point of inviting men and women with whom she disagreed, such as Sylvia Pankhurst, the socialist and suffragette, and Winston Churchill, who detested the entry of women into the House of Commons. It was at breakfast at Cliveden that the famous, though perhaps apocryphal, exchange occurred when Nancy commented: 'Winston, if I was married to you I'd put poison in your coffee.' He replied: 'Nancy, if I was married to you I'd drink it.' 
Following an illness in February 1914 Nancy suddenly declared her soul ready for enlightenment and became converted to Christian Science. Although she was very voluble and dogmatic on the subject, several of her contemporaries doubted whether she was really a religious person. Her zeal lay in her own awareness of the gulf between her own bad behaviour and her aspirations to be a saint. Religion helped her to deal with the problem. An energetic missionary for Christian Science, she attempted to convert Stalin, who found her visit in 1931 very disagreeable, and the daughters of Hilaire Belloc, who broke off relations; she, however, claimed to have been offended by Belloc's antisemitism. Christian Science enabled her to sustain an intimate and prolonged friendship with Philip Kerr, whom she converted, without feelings of guilt and without the danger of sexual involvement. 
As a Conservative of liberal views, Waldorf became increasingly associated with David Lloyd George during the First World War. But his promising career suffered a setback in October 1919 when he reluctantly succeeded to his father's viscountcy. He made it known that he intended to divest himself of the title and meanwhile promoted Nancy as a stop-gap candidate in the by-election at Plymouth Sutton. At this point no woman had sat in the House of Commons, and prejudice ran high; even the tory party chairman, Sir George Younger, complained about her candidacy: 'the worst of it is, the woman is sure to get in' (John Baird, diary, 27 Oct 1919, National Library of Australia). A defeat for Nancy at Plymouth would have set back the cause of women MPs for many years. In the event she managed to overcome the prejudice by posing as a loyal wife and by denying any intention of seeking a career in politics: 'I am not standing before you as a sex candidate. I do not believe in sexes or classes' ('Western Morning News', 4 Nov 1919). The newspapers, which appreciated her lively exchanges with hecklers, treated her sympathetically, and the working-class voters who dominated the constituency were fascinated to find a wealthy and titled lady who had the common touch. She was also a little lucky in that public opinion -- which had given the Lloyd George coalition a huge majority only a year earlier -- had not yet become disillusioned with the prime minister. In a three-cornered contest she retained 51 per cent of the vote and was elected with a majority of 5000. When she took her seat on 1 December 1919 she was introduced by Lloyd George and Arthur Balfour. Nancy's triumph did not lead to a flood of women MPs, but it encouraged other Conservative wives to step into their husbands' shoes, and it put pressure on the Labour Party to get its leading women into parliament. 
However, many feminists felt dismayed at Nancy's election because they saw her as merely a society hostess with no record of support for women's causes and, in the view of the well-informed feminist Ray Strachey, she was 'lamentably ignorant of everything she ought to know' (B. Strachey, 'Remarkable Relations: the Story of the Pearsall Smith Family', 1980, 287). But when carefully briefed by the women's organizations she soon became an asset to the movement even though her views were rather mixed. As many as 2000 women wrote to her each week -- a sign that they regarded her as their special representative. Nancy's populist instincts put her on the same wavelength as thousands of ordinary women who were alienated by the more intellectual feminists who dominated the women's pressure groups. Nancy also exploited her connections with influential national figures by organizing 'at homes' designed to bring feminists into closer touch with the leading politicians. In parliament she worked closely with Margaret Wintringham, the second woman MP, who was elected as a Liberal in 1920. She campaigned for many women's issues including the provision of nursery schools, widows' pensions, equal employment, women police, and measures to reduce the maternal mortality rates. She strongly supported the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene which campaigned to raise the age of consent to eighteen, and in 1925 she introduced a bill designed to repeal the law on prostitution and soliciting so as to put men and women on an equal footing. On the other hand, she opposed legislation for equal rights in divorce in 1922, and found the movement to extend information on birth control to married women very embarrassing; she regarded birth control in Victorian terms as almost calculated to lower women to men's standards. 
On arriving at the House of Commons for the first time Nancy found her room filled with hats sent in by hopeful milliners. In order to stop the press from trivializing her by engaging in endless discussions of her clothes she adopted a simple costume comprising a white blouse and black skirt, jacket, and tricorn hat, which she invariably wore. A white gardenia in her buttonhole completed the outfit. Nancy adapted well to the adversarial style of the house, becoming notorious for her frequent interruptions of other members. However, she suffered from an inability to deliver a substantial and well-considered speech and her performances degenerated into heckling matches. In time members found her rather tedious, too lightweight and indiscreet, though her liveliness was always appreciated. Her greatest success came in 1923 when she promoted legislation to ban the sale of alcohol to anyone under eighteen. However, in view of the introduction of prohibition in the United States, Nancy's enthusiasm for temperance was a political liability. Although it helped her to attract Liberal votes, it provoked the brewing interests into running an independent candidate against her who split her vote and sharply reduced her majority at the 1922 election. 
By the end of the 1920s Nancy's career had passed its peak, partly because she was being overshadowed by other women members who possessed greater intellect or who were simply more loyal to their party. At the Conservative women's conferences she advocated various social reforms including raising the school-leaving age to sixteen, but she spoke too much, provoked heckling, and was not very effective. On the other hand she rammed home the message that the new female electorate was more interested than the pre-war one in social questions, and in his administration of 1924-9 Stanley Baldwin showed himself alive to this change. However, Nancy was never offered a government post, and in 1924 she was passed over in favour of the duchess of Atholl. Though officially a Conservative, she never hid her ambivalent attitude towards the party, yet at the same time her attacks on the Labour Party made it difficult for her to emerge as an independent politician. That she had some aspirations to lead a women's party was shown after the general election of 1929, when she tried to co-ordinate the efforts of the fourteen women members in parliament; however, the nine Labour women saw nothing to be gained and the initiative failed. Her majority over Labour had been cut to barely 200 votes in 1929 but the popularity enjoyed by the National Government in 1931 and 1935 kept her safely in parliament. 
From 1936 onwards when the left-wing journalist Claud Cockburn launched his attacks on the 'Cliveden set', Nancy's reputation suffered irretrievable damage. Cockburn targetted the Astors as an example of very wealthy people who used their connections and their newspapers to subvert the policy of the government. He linked them to appeasement on the basis that they were keen to use Hitler as a bulwark against Bolshevism. Like many people at that time Waldorf and Nancy were appeasers in the sense that they believed that Germany had been treated harshly by the treaty of Versailles; she also had connections with influential people such as Philip Kerr who was active as an emissary to Hitler. However, the idea of Cliveden as the centre of a conspiracy to impose appeasement is regarded as essentially a fiction. Nancy's guests included a wide range of politicians including leading opponents of appeasement. When she invited von Ribbentrop to lunch, at Kerr's suggestion, they got on badly and her name ended up on a Nazi list of people to be arrested in the event of a German invasion. However, despite her repeated denials, the charges gained wide credibility due to speculation in the press and the cartoons by David Low. By 1939 she was becoming a liability to her party, though her reputation was partly restored by her courage and patriotism during the Second World War. She joined the Conservative rebels in forcing Neville Chamberlain from office in May 1940, and throughout the war she and Waldorf devoted much of their time to raising morale in Plymouth, where he served as mayor for five years. Plymouth became a major target of attack and the Astors' house suffered damage from incendiary bombs. During the blitz Nancy became famous for performing cartwheels to entertain sailors and leading the dancing on the Hoe each evening. The city made her an honorary freeman in 1959 in recognition of her long service; this was one of very few honours she received for her public work apart from her appointment as Companion of Honour in 1937. 
Despite her wartime popularity in Plymouth, Waldorf advised Nancy that she would be defeated if she contested the general election in 1945, and he took it upon himself to inform her local association that she would stand down. Though she agreed, she resented his intervention, and their relations became more distant during the years leading to his death in 1952. She found it difficult to adjust to being out of the limelight after so many years. Nancy fell ill in spring 1964 when staying with her daughter, who was now the countess of Ancaster, at Grimsthorpe Castle, Bourne, Lincolnshire. She died there on 2 May and was buried at Cliveden beside Waldorf. A memorial service was held on 13 May in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30490


Astor, Waldorf, second Viscount Astor (1879-1952), politician and newspaper proprietor, was born in New York city on 19 May 1879, the elder son in the family of two sons and one daughter of William Waldorf Astor (1848-1919) and his wife, Mary (Mamie) Dahlgren Paul (died 1894) of Philadelphia. John Jacob Astor, later first Baron Astor of Hever, was his younger brother. The elder Astor settled in Britain in 1889, and both of his sons were educated at Eton College and at New College, Oxford. Young Waldorf enjoyed a brilliant career at school, where in addition to being captain of the boats, an editor of the 'Eton College Chronicle', and treasurer of Pop he won the prince consort's first French prize. At Oxford he earned no academic acclaim, taking a fourth-class degree in modern history in 1902, but he distinguished himself as a sportsman, by earning blues in both polo and fencing, and once again among the social elites -- he was master of the drag as well as a member of the Bullingdon Club. It was also at this time that he was diagnosed as having a weak heart and, to his great sadness, forbidden ever again to ride. 
On an eastward Atlantic crossing in 1905 Waldorf met and fell in love with the beautiful, brilliant, and outspoken young American divorcee Mrs Nancy Langhorne Shaw of Virginia (1879-1964) ['see 'Astor, Nancy Witcher]. Formerly the wife of Robert Gould Shaw, she was the daughter of Chiswell Dabney Langhorne of Virginia. After a whirlwind courtship they were married on 3 May 1906, and the senior Astor gave as his wedding present his Thames-side country house, Cliveden, Taplow. The young Astors also purchased a London house at 4 St James's Square and, eventually, another on the hoe in Plymouth. With their marriage, the two established a partnership in all things which lasted until the end of their political careers. Both happy with the idea of a large family, they were to have four sons and a daughter. Nancy strengthened Astor's commitment to social reform and encouraged his inherent puritanism (they were teetotallers throughout their marriage) and, among other things, brought him in 1924 to Christian Science, to which she had become an enthusiastic convert ten years earlier. 
With his wife's encouragement Astor pursued a career in politics and, though defeated at Plymouth in the January 1910 election, he was elected in December and held the seat until he succeeded his father as viscount in 1919, when his wife was elected in his place. In 1911 Astor encouraged his father to purchase in his interest from Lord Northcliffe the influential Sunday newspaper 'The Observer'. With effective control of the paper, Astor formed a close working relationship with the editor, J. L. Garvin. The two shared a deep reverence for the empire and for social reform, which brought them both into the orbit of Alfred Milner. Astor became a close associate of the so-called Round Table group of Milner's young admirers, which brought him together with Philip Kerr (later marquess of Lothian), Lionel Curtis, and his wife's brother-in-law Robert Brand. A maverick Conservative with little respect for the English class system, Astor broke with the party line to support the Lloyd George budget of 1909 and the 'National Insurance Act' of 1911. In 1916, perhaps to solidify his place as an aristocrat in his adopted country, Astor's father accepted a peerage (he became viscount the following year) without consultation with his elder son. The inevitability of the inheritance, which would remove Astor from the House of Commons and the centre of British politics, caused a quarrel between father and son which lasted almost until the former's death in 1919. 
In the First World War, Astor's bad heart kept him from the trenches but not from the army. He rose to the rank of major and spent the first two years of wartime first checking waste in army management and later inspecting armament factories. With the advent of the Lloyd George coalition in December 1916, he became the new prime minister's parliamentary private secretary; in 1918 he became parliamentary secretary to the new Ministry of Food; and in the immediate post-war period (1919-21) he was parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Health. More importantly, he was a member of the premier's 'garden suburb', the group of formal and informal advisers whose offices were in temporary huts in the back garden of 10 Downing Street. In this capacity he became an important link between Lloyd George -- a Liberal premier of a largely Conservative-backed government -- and the tory back benches. 
Astor's active political career lost its momentum after the war with the death of his father in 1919. His attempts to avoid his inheritance failed, and he resigned his seat to become the second viscount, remaining active in the government only until shortly before Lloyd George's fall in 1922. He would never again hold political office. In a gesture typical of him, he encouraged his wife, Nancy, to contest the Sutton division of Plymouth, and she became the first woman to sit in the Commons and prolonged the Astor sway over politics in the port city until her retirement in 1945. His remarkable dedication to her political career from this point, however, ensured that his own was at an end. 
Lady Astor's election to the Commons made her the politician of the family, and her powerful personality and love of the spotlight soon made her the more celebrated partner. Astor contented himself with other pursuits. He continued his interest in Plymouth, presenting many generous gifts to the city and serving as lord mayor, 1939-44. He served as a delegate to the League of Nations assembly in 1931 and, because of another favourite interest, chaired the league's advisory committee on agriculture and published with Keith Murray 'Land and Life' (1932) and 'The Planning of Agriculture' (1933), and with B. Seebohm Rowntree 'Mixed Farming and Muddled Thinking' (1946). His interest in world affairs grew no less keen: he travelled widely and in the 1930s met both Stalin and Hitler in their capitals. He gave much energy to the establishment of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House) and was its chairman from 1935 to 1949. His translation from the Commons left him time to pursue another lifelong love: the development of his extremely successful racing stud. His horses would eventually win the Oaks five times, the One Thousand Guineas twice, and the St Leger once, though he had to content himself with no fewer than five second-place finishes at the Derby. 
Since the Astors' earliest days there, Cliveden had been a popular meeting-place for many politicians and other notables of all sorts. Its guest books (and those at St James's Square) contained the signatures of Lloyd George, Milner, and Asquith, Churchill, Eden, and Neville Chamberlain, but also of Bernard Shaw, Charlie Chaplin, and even Gandhi. It was a monstrously unfair myth created by a brilliant left-wing journalist, Claud Cockburn, that Cliveden was the home of a sort of alternative government dedicated in the 1930s to bending British policy to the will of Hitler ['see 'Cliveden set]. The Astors loathed the fascist dictatorships, as they did the Bolshevik tyranny, but they believed also that if another great war was to be prevented, appeasement of a Germany ill-treated at Versailles made supreme political sense. This opinion was shared by Lothian, by Geoffrey Dawson, the editor of 'The Times', by Lord Halifax, the foreign secretary, and, of course, by Neville Chamberlain -- all of whom from time to time were regular guests at Cliveden. The prime minister pursued his own policy, which the Astors and much of Britain supported. Yet the fiction that a Cliveden conspiracy worked a malign influence over British foreign policy lingered for many years. 
After war began in 1939 Waldorf Astor's energies were devoted largely to Plymouth, which was heavily and repeatedly bombed by the Luftwaffe. Its rebuilding was begun long before the conflict ended, and he deserves the credit for commissioning Professor Patrick Abercrombie to lead the effort. In the spring of 1941 he collapsed with what may in fact have been a mild stroke. While he continued to lead the city and serve an unprecedented five years as lord mayor, his health was never robust again. Astor also decided the time for other changes had come: in 1942, after forty years as editor of 'The Observer', Garvin was forced to retire and plans were laid to invest ownership of the newspaper in a trust. In the same year Cliveden was made over to the National Trust, and Lord Astor became its tenant. In 1945, with his health in decline, he asked Lady Astor to retire rather than defend Plymouth, advice on which she acted but which caused an estrangement between them which lasted at least until, in 1950, he suffered a stroke. He died at his beloved Cliveden on 30 September 1952 and was succeeded as viscount by his eldest son, William Waldorf (1907-1966). 
Astor was a tall, handsome man, whose thoroughly natural smile turned away much wrath. His Anglo-American background and world view -- despite his charm and great wealth -- made him something of an outsider in British society. He was from boyhood, his love of sport and games notwithstanding, a serious man with the heart of a natural puritan. His enormous fortune made him all the more conscious of his responsibility to his fellow human beings and the good works he endeavoured to practise came naturally to him. Though sincerely ambitious in politics, he did not particularly love the spotlight; and he was always at his best as part of a company of like-minded colleagues -- leaving the centre stage to others. 


@@@@@


doc= 30491


Atcherley, Sir Richard Llewellyn Roger (1904-1970), air force officer, was born at 1 Mount Vale, York, on 12 January 1904, one of twin sons of Major (later Major-General Sir) Llewellyn William Atcherley (1871-1954) and his wife, Eleanor Frances, the younger daughter of Richard Micklethwait. His father, who divided his career between the army and the police, served between 1919 and 1936 as an inspector of constabulary. The family had lived in Shropshire for many years, and could trace their ancestry to the sixteenth century, when a Sir Richard Atcherley was mayor of London. Atcherley was educated at Oundle School, which he left without any special distinction, but with a burning interest in flying. He and his twin brother, David, were guided towards commerce, but applied on their own initiative for cadetships at the Royal Air Force College. Dick was accepted, but for medical reasons David was turned down; he went instead into the army, but managed to transfer later to the Royal Air Force and rejoin his twin. 
From childhood until the end of their lives Atcherley and his twin brother were extraordinarily identical in appearance; their voices, movements, and mannerisms were indistinguishable, and they had an uncanny mental affinity even when far apart. If one was posted abroad they would exchange the dog they owned in common, which was said to be unable to tell one from the other. In this remarkable partnership Dick just tended to be the dominant twin, and his career was the more spectacular. Serving first in fighter squadrons, he quickly proved his worth as an exceptional pilot, and in 1926 was selected as an instructor at the Central Flying School, where he brought aerobatic flying to a new degree of excellence. From this already elite assembly he was chosen as a member of the Royal Air Force high speed flight then being assembled for the 1929 Schneider trophy contest. Although he was disqualified during the competition, he set up both a new world speed record and a record for the course, flying a Supermarine seaplane of the type which formed the basis of the design of the Spitfire. In the same year, with Flight Lieutenant Stainforth, he won the king's cup air race. When he returned to squadron duty he was established as one of the world's foremost practical high speed pilots and a master of the art of exhibition flying. For the next few years he was invited to American aviation meetings at Chicago and Cleveland, where his flying performances became increasingly entertaining and hair-raising, including such feats as flying an aircraft while riding it pickaback dressed as a huntsman, or disguising himself as an elderly eccentric with no knowledge of flying and then giving a display whose terrifying craziness concealed his underlying mastery of the machine. It is not surprising that his universal nickname was Batchy. 
A period in the Middle East was followed by a posting as a service test pilot, which found Atcherley in his ideal medium. He next attended the Staff College, and some less welcome staff duty brought him to 1939 and war. He soon gained the command of a night fighter squadron, a new branch of operations and one beset with every possible problem, both human and technical. From there he was snatched away to command the air element of the British expeditionary force to north Norway. This short, desperate, and finally disastrous campaign gave full play for his energy, imagination, and powers of improvisation, but chiefly showed his ability to inspire those he commanded to efforts beyond anything they had thought possible. When the last of the British forces was withdrawn Atcherley was promoted group captain and appointed to the command of a night fighter training airfield at Drem in Scotland, where he applied all the lessons so bitterly learned in Norway, and for good measure invented a new system of airfield lighting which was later standardized throughout the service. With his brother commanding another Scottish airfield his creative spirit was at its highest, for the twins reacted on one another like spark and tinder, but their effervescence, unthinkable to most officers of their rank, never diverted them from the relentless pursuit of improvements in every aspect of flying which could lead to greater success in air operations. 
In 1942 Atcherley was made sector commander first of Fairwood Common and then of Kenley. From there, while flying a Spitfire, he was shot down into the channel and wounded. In 1943 he was sent to north Africa to command a group in the desert air force, and then returned to the staff of allied expeditionary air forces. There he invented the concept and designed the organization of the Central Fighter Establishment; when the war ended he was serving as its first commandant. He followed this by commanding the Royal Air Force Cadet College (1946-8). In 1949 he was appointed commander-in-chief of the new air force of a new country -- Pakistan -- whose pilots regarded with mingled awe and hilarity a commander-in-chief who could fly any aircraft they possessed as well as they could, and whose sense of humour still remained outrageous and unpredictable. 
In 1951 Atcherley was given the command of 12 fighter group, then in 1954 was sent to the United States as commander RAF staff, British joint services mission. His last appointment (1955-8) was as commander-in-chief Flying Training Command. The years had in no way modified his character, and to the end of his career he managed successfully to combine a uniquely flippant style with an underlying sense of duty so strong that he was unhappy during weekends and holidays, and truly at ease only when working. This made his retirement exceptionally hard to bear, but far worse was the loss of his brother David, posted missing on a jet flight over the Mediterranean in 1952. Although he remained outwardly unaffected, it was the heaviest blow of his life. 
Atcherley was awarded the AFC in 1940 and bar in 1942 and was promoted air vice-marshal in 1951 and air marshal in 1956. He was appointed OBE (1941), CBE (1945), CB (1950), and KBE (1956). 
What made Atcherley memorable was his character rather than his deeds, and particularly his power to combine brilliance and irreverence so that they became indistinguishable. He and his twin were the type of men whose ability, devotion to duty, and intensity of purpose allowed them to survive and prosper through careers studded with crashes, courts martial, and the type of gaffe which offended the more pompous heads of military and civil life. The great majority of their service loved them deeply; a minority, and a great many civilian officials, heaved a sigh of relief when there were no more Atcherleys in uniform. Dick Atcherley set a style which played a major part in determining the traditions of the youngest fighting service and created a legend which continued to influence it far beyond his actual impact upon events. Thus the future inspiration of the Royal Air Force would always include something of the influence of the Atcherley brothers, far more than that of greater and more important men. 
From 1959 to 1961 Atcherley was co-ordinator of Anglo-American community relations, and from 1959 to 1965 served as sales director of the Folland Aircraft Company. He was an early member of the British Interplanetary Society. There is a portrait at the Royal Air Force College, Cranwell, by Herbert Holt, and another much better one of his brother David by Eric Kennington at RAF West Raynham, which serves as well. 
Atcherley died at the Cambridge Hospital, Aldershot, Hampshire, on 18 April 1970. Neither brother married. 
Peter Wykeham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30492


Atkin, James Richard, Baron Atkin (1867-1944), judge, was born at 6 Tank Street, North Quay, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, on 28 November 1867, the eldest son of Robert Travers Atkin (1841-1872) of Fernhill, Kilgariff, co. Cork, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth ('b'. 1842). Atkin's mother was the daughter of Laurence Ruck of Newington, Kent, and his wife, Mary Anne, whose family home was in Merioneth. 
Atkin's parents were married in 1864 and within months they sailed for Australia to make their life on a sheep-farming station in Queensland. But Atkin's father damaged his chest in a fall from a horse and after about eighteen months in the country they moved to Brisbane where he became a newspaper editor and a member of the Queensland legislative assembly. After much bad health Atkin's father died at the age of thirty in 1872. The Hibernian Society of Queensland erected a monument to his memory and untimely death at Sandgate, near Brisbane. 
A year before her husband's death, Atkin's mother had brought her three sons back to her own family home in Merioneth. Mother and sons made their own home in Wales and Atkin grew up from the age of three and a half in Pantlludw, his grandparents' much loved house above the Dovey River. He always thought of himself as a Welshman. The influence of his grandmother was perhaps the most important and durable of Atkin's early life. In a short memoir which he wrote he described her powerful yet sympathetic personality, her gracious presence, and her detestation of all pretence in rank or religion. Atkin inherited her pet aversion, the sanctimonious Calvinist, and he described her as the greatest woman he ever met. 
In 1876 at the age of nine Atkin went away to a preparatory school in Bangor and then to Christ College, Brecon. From there he won a classical demyship to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he went at the age of seventeen to read classical moderations and 'literae humaniores'; he was placed in the second class in each. As well as narrowly missing a double first he also just failed to get a blue for tennis, a game which he continued to enjoy until well into his sixties. 
Atkin had largely supported himself through his education, winning scholarships to Brecon and to Magdalen, and finally the Arden scholarship to Gray's Inn. He chose the bar as his profession because a cousin of his grandfather, Edwyn Jones, had a substantial practice as a barrister. Jones helped the young Atkin in his earliest days at the bar and, because he was a bencher at Gray's Inn, it was to that inn that Atkin was admitted in 1887. At that time the inn was at a low ebb and its subsequent revival in fortune and prestige owed more to Atkin and his contemporary F. E. Smith than to anyone else. Atkin loved the institutions of which he had been a member, but none as much as Gray's Inn. He was treasurer three times and had the pleasure of calling his own daughter Rosaline to the bar there. 
Atkin was called in 1891, and set about choosing chambers for his pupillage by walking round the courts to listen to the advocates. One afternoon he came across a tall bearded junior waving his arms at a judge who was sitting listening benevolently, unperturbed by the display. It was clear that the junior had complete mastery of the matter in hand. This was Thomas Scrutton whose pupil he became and who later was his lifelong friend and colleague on the bench. Conditions in chambers were austere and the pupils, among them as Atkin's contemporaries the future Lord Wright and the future Lord Justice Mackinnon, toiled at a table which had come out of one of Scrutton's father's ships. 
As was then usual at the bar, Atkin's early years of practice were difficult and work was hard to come by. His luck turned when he was introduced by William Hemmant, a friend of his father's Queensland days, to the official assignee of the stock exchange. The last decade of the nineteenth century was one of feverish speculation on the exchange and there was much complicated work for the official assignee in unravelling the affairs of failed brokerage firms. Atkin was briefed in a series of actions arising out of these difficulties. His reputation was then becoming established and his practice broadened into every sort of commercial dispute as well as some of what were then described as 'fashionable' cases. He took silk in 1906 at the young age of thirty-nine. In an age of celebrated and histrionic jury advocates, Atkin's style was one of more gentle but resourceful persuasion, the angler, rather than the tragedian, who could cast flies over the judges. 
Atkin had become a frequent visitor to Hemmant's house in Sevenoaks and there met his daughter Lucy Elizabeth. The couple were quickly engaged but because of Atkin's modest means they were not able to marry until 1893, five years after their engagement. Lizzie Atkin was born in Brisbane in 1867 within twelve days and 100 yards of her future husband. It was a happy marriage. Lizzie was a splendid hostess and good amateur pianist and, like Atkin's mother and grandmother, a strong character of decided views and some presence. There were eight children of the marriage, six girls and two boys. The elder boy, Dickie, was killed in France in 1917 after a school career at Winchester College full of promise. Lizzie Atkin died in 1939. 
Atkin was appointed to the High Court bench in 1913. In 1919 he was promoted to the Court of Appeal, and in 1928 he was appointed to the final Court of Appeal as a lord of appeal-in-ordinary, with the customary life peerage. All accounts agree that Atkin was an instant success as a judge. Courteous and quick, he said little during the hearing, but when he did speak his interventions were penetrating and sometimes devastating. He enjoyed his time as a judge of first instance best. There he was in charge of his own court and did not have colleagues to contend with who might have different views. But it is surprising that he liked the Court of Appeal least. He regarded the mainly commercial business as dull. This is hard to credit. For he was the junior member of what was perhaps the best-equipped division of the Court of Appeal of any age: lords justices Bankes, Scrutton, and Atkin. This awesome trio cut through their business with great rapidity, and delivered judgments of precision and brevity which have stood the test of time. Scrutton and Atkin constantly disagreed. The arbiter was Bankes who presided with the air of a country gentleman. As Lord Denning put it, 'they fought for the body of Bankes' (Lewis, 93). 
The long struggle for mastery in the Court of Appeal never diminished Atkin's respect and affection for Sir Thomas Scrutton. He knew the passion for justice which was well concealed beneath that rugged exterior and irascible manner. But it was perhaps the nine-year experience with Scrutton which left Atkin with the name for being unpersuadable behind the scenes in the House of Lords, in the gap between the hearing and judgment, when the judges are comparing their views and attempting to align them. 
Atkin is best remembered as an appellate judge for his speech in 'Donoghue v. Stevenson' (1932) and for his lone dissent in 'Liversidge v. Anderson' (1941). In 'Donoghue v. Stevenson' (1931) a young woman claimed compensation from the manufacturer of a bottle of ginger beer which she said she had drunk while visiting a cafe, and then discovered contained the decomposing remains of a snail. A direct claim by the consumer against the manufacturer had never before succeeded. By a majority consisting of Atkin and two Scots, lords Thankerton and Macmillan, the appellate committee of the House of Lords decided that the claim could be maintained. Atkin considered that no more important problem had ever occupied the house; and he chose the case to express a conception of civil liability which related the parable of the good Samaritan to the law. Atkin's question, 'who in law is my neighbour?' ([1932] AC 580), has become one of the most celebrated judicial expressions ever formulated. For some time before this landmark judgment he had been developing in his mind the idea that British law had always necessarily ingrained in it a moral teaching, and he said as much in a lecture which he gave six months before the decision in the case. 'The idea of law is that the obligations of a man are to keep his word. If he swears to his neighbour, he is not to disappoint him. In other words, he is to keep his contracts... He is not to injure his neighbour by acts of negligence; and that certainly covers a very large field of law. I doubt whether the whole of the law of tort could not be comprised in the golden maxim to do unto your neighbour as you would that he should do unto you. ('Journal of the Society of Public Teachers of Law', 1932, 30)' 
'Liversidge v. Anderson' was a very different case. Liversidge had been detained under defence regulation 18B during the Second World War. The regulation provided for detention without trial and the home secretary declined to give reasons. The sole question was whether he had to do so. Atkin dissented alone in his view that the wording of the regulation required reasons to be given -- a view which has since been vindicated. He did not disagree that in the extremities of war the government might take power to lock up people without trial. But the case was not about the propriety of the regulations. It was about the meaning of words, and his argument was that they should bear their normal meaning in time of war as well as in peace. 'In this country, amid the clash of arms', he said, 'the laws are not silent' ([1942] AC 244). The speech employed language which was strong and emotive, and included a quotation from 'Through the Looking Glass' designed to pour scorn on the opposing view. It gave offence in some quarters. Among the offended were Lord Simon, the lord chancellor, and Lord Maugham who had presided at the hearing. Maugham was foolish enough to write to 'The Times'. But Atkin declined to have anything to do with the brouhaha, saying simply that he did not intend to discuss publicly any judgment once it had been delivered. 
Atkin's determination not to involve himself in public controversy in 'Liversidge v. Anderson' was characteristic. There was a complete absence of show in his make-up and he believed that a judge's public life should be confined to the courtroom. Although his memory is celebrated for these two decisions, his reputation deserves to be more broadly based. There was a humane spirit which ran through his work and which was founded on his lifelong Christian beliefs, nowhere more evident than in an important line of cases on the 'Workmen's Compensation Acts' for which he justly earned the name of being an employee's judge. Atkin was a strong judge. He decided cases early -- too early for some tastes. He wrote a terse and forceful prose occasionally lit by a vivid aphorism. He believed not only that the law should be morally based but also that it should be a sensible thing; and he was always testing his views against the expectations of the plain man. He had a clear idea of where the law should be going, but he had an unvarying respect for the development of judge-made law through precedent. He took no liberties with the decisions of earlier generations of judges. In Lord Denning's phrase he was 'a progressive within the law'. 
Atkin was elected to an honorary fellowship at his own college, Magdalen, in 1924, and FBA in 1938. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford in 1931, Cambridge in 1936, Reading in 1938, and London in 1939. He died of bronchitis on 25 June 1944 at Craig-y-don, Aberdyfi, and was buried in Aberdyfi. 


@@@@@


doc= 30493


Atkins, Sir Ivor Algernon (1869-1953), organist and choirmaster, was born on 29 November 1869 at Llandaff, near Cardiff, the sixth child and third son of Frederick Pyke Atkins (1830-1897), organist of St John's parish church in Cardiff, and his wife, Harriet Maria, 'nee' Rogers. He was educated privately, studying music with his father and Charles Lee Williams (organist of Llandaff Cathedral, 1876-82), and assisted his father at Cardiff before becoming sub-organist to George Robertson Sinclair at the cathedrals of Truro (1885-9) and Hereford (1890-93). In 1893 he was appointed organist of Ludlow parish church. As a non-resident scholar, he earned a BMus degree through Queen's College, Oxford. On 27 April 1899 he married Katharine May Dorothea 
(Dora; 1869/70-1954)
, the daughter of the Revd Edward Butler, of Llangoed Castle. They had one child, Edward Wulstan Ivor ('b'. 1904). 
The appointment which defined Atkins's career was that in 1897 to Worcester Cathedral, where he remained organist until 1950. The post involved conducting the Three Choirs festival, which included orchestral conducting. For this he had no training but gradual experience. In a 1938 performance of Rakhmaninov's second piano concerto, soloist and orchestra finished together, but Atkins was seen to conduct two extra beats. During his final active years, after the Second World War, Atkins's conducting was criticized by younger musicians accustomed to the rising standards encouraged by increased broadcasting and gramophone recording. Atkins's organ playing was not brilliant. But he was a tall, forceful man with considerable administrative skills. These he had brought to bear on the formidable task of restarting the Three Choirs festival after its cessation during the First World War. His achievement was recognized by a knighthood in the new year's honours of 1921. 
At Worcester Cathedral, Atkins cut through the Victorian accretions to revive the music of his Tudor predecessors Thomas Tomkins and Nathaniel Patrick. But the strongest association of his career was with Edward Elgar and his music. In 1902 he secured the first Three Choirs festival performance of Elgar's 'The Dream of Gerontius', in the teeth of ecclesiastical objections to J. H. Newman's Catholic text; thereafter 'Gerontius' became a staple of the festival. Atkins saw to it that later Worcester festivals included each new major work by Elgar, usually under the composer's inimitable direction, regularly revived and repeated. His friendship with Elgar, lasting forty years until the older man's death, was the greatest of Atkins's life. 
Atkins's Worcester festival programmes, from 1899 to 1948, showed imagination and balance. Parry, Coleridge-Taylor, Walford Davies, Vaughan Williams, Holst, and Walton conducted their own works. Atkins himself conducted Strauss's 'Tod und Verklarung' in 1902, as well as pieces by Wagner (act III of 'Parsifal', in the cathedral, raised eyebrows in 1911), Kodaly (repeatedly), and Szymanowski. However, he drew the line at Walton's 'Belshazzar's Feast' and prevented its inclusion in any Three Choirs programme during his lifetime. 
One of Atkins's talents was fitting original English texts back to great music suffering from mediocre translations. Thus he restored the words of the King James 'Bible' to his editions of Bach's 'St Matthew passion' (to which he persuaded Elgar to append his name as co-editor in 1911) and 'St John passion' (1929) and Brahms's 'German Requiem' (1947). At his last Worcester festival in 1948 Atkins conducted Debussy's 'The Blessed Damozel' with Rossetti's original words, which he had restored to it. He was an occasional composer, his biggest work a choral and orchestral 'Hymn of Faith' (setting Elgar's choice of words from scripture, 1905). He edited the 'Worcester Psalter' (1948) and Bach's 'Orgelbuchlein' (1916). He published an account of the early organists of Worcester Cathedral (1918), wrote a preface to 'Worcester Mediaeval Harmony' (1928), and collaborated on a printed catalogue of the Worcester Music Library (where he served as librarian from 1933 to his death). He retired from the cathedral organistship at Easter 1950. 
Atkins became an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music in 1910; doctor of music in 1920; and a fellow of St Michael's College, Tenbury Wells, in 1921. He was president of the Royal College of Organists in 1934-6. He died at his home, 8 College Yard, Worcester, on 26 November 1953, and was buried in the cathedral on 1 December. Lady Atkins, who was prominent in the life of the city and was the first woman to be high sheriff of Worcester, died in 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 30494


Atkinson, Sir Edward Hale Tindal (1878-1957), lawyer, was born in Beckenham, Kent, on 19 September 1878, the only son of Henry Tindal Atkinson (died 1918), county court judge, and his wife, Marion Amy Lewin. He was educated at Harrow School and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he was known to his friends as Tatters. He obtained a third in classical honour moderations (1899) and a second in modern history (1901). Atkinson's grandfather, father, and uncle were all members of the Middle Temple, to which, inevitably, he was called in 1902. He practised in chambers and joined the south-eastern circuit and the Hertfordshire and Essex sessions. The greater part of his work consisted of rating and local government cases and to a lesser degree taxation, fields in which he built up a substantial practice. 
Atkinson was elected to the Bar Council in 1913 and served until 1921. His practice was interrupted by the war, when he enlisted in 1917 as a lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and was transferred as a captain to the Royal Air Force in 1918, being promoted major in 1919. He went to Paris as legal adviser to the air section of the British delegation at the peace conference and became British secretary to the International Air Commission. For his work he was appointed CBE and received the French Legion d'honneur. On his return to his chambers in 1920 he soon re-established a successful practice. From 1928 to 1930 he was an additional member of the Bar Council and in 1929 he followed in his father's footsteps as a bencher of the Middle Temple, an unusual distinction for a junior. In the same year he was appointed the first recorder of Southend-on-Sea. 
In March 1930 Atkinson was appointed director of public prosecutions, somewhat unexpectedly and very much to his own surprise. Invited to visit the Home Office to discuss 'a certain matter', he went convinced that he had made some fearful blunder as recorder; when it was suggested that he should become director he refused to believe it, walked out of the room, and had to be fetched back. Unlike his immediate predecessors, Sir Charles Mathews and Sir Archibald Bodkin, he had not established a reputation in criminal law, but J. R. Clynes, who appointed him, had taken careful advice and the choice proved to be a good one. 
Once in the director's chair, Atkinson displayed his extraordinary grip of law. He was now called on to devote his days exclusively to the criminal law, in which his experience was limited. In addition, he knew none of his staff and few of the counsel engaged in that type of work. During his first two years he was haunted by the fear that he was not making a success of his appointment and he later described this period as the most unpleasant of his life. But he displayed greater knowledge of criminal law than was perhaps expected of him, and his doubts disappeared as his experience widened, particularly after he was appointed KCB in 1932. He also found that his administrative experience with the Ministry of Health, to which he had acted as a referee under the 'National Health Insurance Act', stood him in good stead. Soon he became involved in preparing possible wartime legislation. The defence regulations in use throughout the war, and immediately afterwards, were in no small measure the result of his advice. During the war he was deeply involved in many serious and important cases including, of course, all the spy cases. He expressed personal sympathy for enemy nationals who were caught, but had no patience with British subjects who assisted the enemy. 
Atkinson was a modest man with a quiet sense of humour who treated his staff with a rather shy courtesy. He was an excellent example of a gentle man: he never lost his temper or raised his voice; he was polite and considerate; he was also extremely generous, without ever seeking credit for his beneficence. His outlook on life was essentially liberal; he adhered to high moral standards, while tolerating human frailty. He exercised his official powers with shrewdness and with caution, and was 'usually sound' in his judgment as to which cases his department should take up, and how they should be conducted ('The Times', 27 Dec 1957). When Atkinson had time to consider a legal problem in detail he could write an opinion which was a masterpiece of clarity. But when he was expected to give a 'snap' judgment he often had to alter it on reconsideration. He was most reluctant to express such an opinion unless specifically asked, and in that event his advice was sometimes at fault because of his uncertainty. 
Atkinson retired in 1944 after a period in office that has been described as 'one of the least contentious in the history of the department' (Rozenberg, 25). The following year he was appointed chairman of the Central Price Regulation Committee, which was set up under the 'Prices of Goods Act', 1939, where his advice and experience on the enforcement of price control legislation were invaluable. Here again his shyness and reluctance to express anything other than a carefully considered opinion made his work in negotiating fair prices with trade associations more arduous than was necessary. He remained chairman of the committee until it was dissolved in April 1953. 
In 1948 Atkinson exceeded the records of his father and grandfather and followed his uncle by becoming treasurer of his inn. He has the distinction -- with two other treasurers -- of having his initials carved in the stonework of the entrance of the Middle Temple hall to commemorate the fact that all three held office during the period of post-war restoration. A lifelong bachelor, he was often to be found at his club, the Athenaeum. He died at his home, Clifton Lodge, St Margaret's Drive, Isleworth, Middlesex, after an accident, on 26 December 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 30495


Atkinson, John, Baron Atkinson (1844-1932), judge, was born at Drogheda, co. Louth, on 13 December 1844, the elder son of Edward Atkinson (1801-1876), physician, of Glenwilliam Castle, co. Limerick, and Skea House, Enniskillen, and his first wife, Rosetta (1809-1849), daughter of John Shaw McCulloch. From the Royal Belfast Academical Institution he entered Queen's College, Galway (a constituent college of the old Royal University of Ireland); there he gained scholarships in his first three years and two senior scholarships -- in mathematics in his fourth year and in natural philosophy in his fifth year. He graduated with first-class honours in 1861 and in 1862 he entered as a student both at King's Inns, Dublin, and at the Inner Temple in London. 
In 1865 Atkinson was called to the Irish bar, and in the same year took the LLB degree with honours; he became a bencher of King's Inns in 1885. On 22 March 1874 he married Rowena Jane Chute (died 1911) of Tralee, co. Kerry, at Christ Church, St Marylebone, London; they had four sons. 
Atkinson was called to the English bar by the Inner Temple in 1890, and was elected a bencher in 1906. Meanwhile his practice on the Munster circuit in Ireland was increasing and became large. In 1880, at an exceptionally early age, he became queen's counsel, and after appointment in 1889 as solicitor-general for Ireland and in 1892 as attorney-general he was sworn of the Irish privy council, also in 1892, but resigned with the fall of Lord Salisbury's administration. It was not until 1895 that Atkinson entered the House of Commons as Conservative member for Londonderry North and was once more appointed attorney-general. He continued in that office until, in 1905, he was appointed a lord of appeal in ordinary with the title of Baron Atkinson of Glenwilliam, co. Limerick, and was sworn of the English privy council. His knowledge of land and social problems in Ireland meant that his advice was highly valued by the chief secretary for Ireland, Gerald Balfour (later second earl of Balfour) in the framing and passing of the 'Irish Land Act' of 1896 and the 'Local Government Act' of 1898. 
Atkinson was the first Irish barrister to go straight from his legal practice to the House of Lords. His appointment called forth criticism for his reputation was that of a politician rather than a judge or great lawyer. However, his subsequent career as a judge dispelled any doubts about his competence. He would never have claimed to be a profound lawyer, but was known as a powerful advocate with a keen sense of humour. He took a prominent part in the Parnell commission and seemed unshaken by pressure put on him by the coalition government of the time to resign in order to satisfy the requirements of the party leaders. He resigned his seat as lord of appeal in 1928 and died at his London house, 39 Hyde Park Gate, on 13 March 1932, predeceased by his wife and their three eldest sons. An excellent portrait, by John St Helier Lander, was left to King's Inns, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 30496


Atkinson, Robert (1839-1908), philologist, born at Gateshead on 6 April 1839, was the only child of John Atkinson, who was a grocer there, and his wife, Ann. After education at the Anchorage grammar school close to his home from 1849 to 1856, he matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 2 July 1856, but he spent the years 1857 and 1858 on the continent, principally at Liege. There he laid the foundation of his knowledge of the Romance languages. On his return to Ireland he worked as a schoolmaster in Kilkenny until he won a Trinity College scholarship in 1862. From this time his academic progress was rapid. He graduated BA on 16 December 1863, and proceeded MA in 1866 and LLD in 1869. In 1891 he received the honorary degree of DLitt. On 28 December 1863 he married, at Gateshead, Hannah Maria ('b'. 1838/9, died in or after 1908), fourth daughter of Thomas and Elisabeth Whitehouse Harbutt of the town. Their only child, Herbert Jefcoate Atkinson, became a civil engineer. 
In 1869 Atkinson became university professor of the Romance languages, and from 1871 until near his death he filled at the same time the chair of Sanskrit and comparative philology. His masterly powers of linguistic analysis made him an admirable teacher, notably of composition in Latin and Romance tongues, while the immense range of his linguistic faculty proved to be of great benefit to his pupils. He also taught Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu, and other Indian tongues. He was a brilliant Hebrew scholar, and Persian, Arabic, and several languages of central and western Asia were familiar to him. In all the many forms of speech that he studied he acquired a mastery of colloquial idiom and of pronunciation, as well as of the literary style. In his later years he devoted his leisure to Chinese, and at his death he had completed a dictionary of that tongue. The key which he intended to accompany it, however, and without which it could not be used, he did not live to complete. The manuscript was presented by his widow to the library of Trinity College, Dublin. 
A scientific philologist, Atkinson was always intent upon analysis of the structure of a language rather than on its literature. He impressed on his pupils the principle of law in language, as opposed to theories of 'sporadic changes'. In this he long anticipated Brugmann and the new school of philologists. 
The most important outcome of Atkinson's study of Romance languages was a scholarly edition of a Norman-French poem attributed to Matthew Paris, and entitled 'Vie de Seint Auban' (1876). It showed 'his chronic hatred of incompetence' ('The Athenaeum', 74). In Sanskrit learning Atkinson confined himself to the language of the Vedas and to Sanskrit grammar, planning and partially writing a Vedic dictionary, and learning by heart, as Pandits had done for twenty-four centuries, the whole of the intricate masterpiece of the great grammarian Panini. In addition Atkinson was an advanced scholar in Coptic, the Christian descendant of the ancient Egyptian language. In two communications to the Royal Irish Academy ('Proceedings', 3rd ser., 3.24, 225) in 1893, he subjected to searching examination a series of Coptic texts recently published by Professor Rossi and M. Bouriant, protesting against their tendency to 'play hieroglyphics' with Coptic texts. In the decipherment of the ancient Egyptian language there is room, no doubt, for conjecture and hypothesis: in Coptic, he claimed, the rules of accidence and syntax are fully known, and editing and translation should proceed with scientific regularity. 
On 11 January 1875 Atkinson was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and in March became a member of its council. In 1876 he was chosen librarian. Secretary of council from 1878 to 1901, he was then elected president (1901-6). Meanwhile in 1884 he was Todd professor of the Celtic languages in the academy, and delivered an inaugural lecture on Irish lexicography on 13 April 1885. His Celtic work was that of a pioneer, being undertaken before many fundamental principles of old Irish grammar were recognized, and he edited two documents of the utmost importance for the student of the history of the Irish language. The first was 'The Passions and Homilies from the Leabhar Breac', with translation and glossary (Dublin, 1887; an important source for Middle Irish), to which he appended the 'Todd introductory lecture on Irish lexicography'. The second was Keating's 'Three Shafts of Death' ('Tri bior-gaoithe an bhais', Dublin, 1890), with glossary and appendices on the linguistic forms. He also wrote valuable introductions and analyses of contents for several of the manuscript facsimiles issued by the Royal Irish Academy, including 'The Book of Leinster' (1880), 'The Book of Ballymote' (1887), and 'The Yellow Book of Lecan' (1896). In his introduction to the last (p. 4) Atkinson restricts the value of medieval Irish texts to folklore and linguistics, claiming that they contain 'a very small quantity of what may be called imaginative literature'. This view, shared by such members of the Trinity 'establishment' as Professor Edward Dowden, so incensed Lady Gregory that she spent two years in the Royal Irish Academy Library translating saga tales, which she published as 'Cuchulainn of Muirthemne', 'a seminal book for writers of the literary renaissance' (U. O'Connor, 'Celtic Dawn', 1984, 150-51). With Dr John Bernard, later bishop of Ossory, Atkinson edited for the Henry Bradshaw Society in 1898 'The Irish liber hymnorum' (2 vols.). A 'Glossary to the Ancient Laws of Ireland', which he prepared for the 'Rolls Series' in 1901, was severely criticized by Whitley Stokes. To Irish, Atkinson added a knowledge of Welsh, and contributed a paper 'On the use of the subjunctive mood in Welsh' ('Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy', 1894). 
Atkinson's varied energies were by no means confined to philology: he was an accomplished botanist, a fine violinist, and an exponent of ju-jitsu. In 1907 his health failed. He died on 10 January 1908 at his residence, Clareville, Rathmines, near Dublin, and was buried at Waltonwrays cemetery, Skipton, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 30497


Atthill, Lombe (1827-1910), obstetrician and gynaecologist, born on 3 December 1827 at Ardess, Magheraculmoney, co. Fermanagh, Ireland, was the youngest of ten surviving children of William Atthill (1774-1847) and his wife, Henrietta Margaret Eyre, eldest daughter of George Maunsell, dean of Leighlin. Atthill's elder brother, John Henry Grey Atthill, became chief justice of St Lucia. His father, from a Norfolk family, after graduating in 1795 as second wrangler and Smith's prizeman, became a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, acted as chaplain (1798-1804) to his relative, John Porter, bishop of Clogher, and was thenceforth beneficed in Ireland. 
After attending the grammar school in Maidstone, Kent (1839-41), Atthill returned to Ireland to prepare for Trinity College, Dublin. In June 1844 he was apprenticed to Maurice Colles, a surgeon to the Meath Hospital, Dublin, and in July he entered Trinity. In July 1847, while under twenty, he obtained the licence of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and in 1849 he graduated BA and MB of Dublin University, and in 1865 MD. 
In 1847 Atthill became honorary surgeon to a charitable dispensary in Fleet Street, Dublin, where he gained valuable experience of typhus, smallpox, and other infectious diseases, and during the following winter was assistant demonstrator in the Park Street school of medicine. From 1848 to 1850 he was dispensary doctor of the district of Geashill in King's county. 
Atthill married in April 1850 Elizabeth (died 1870), daughter of James Dudgeon of Dublin, with whom he had one son and nine daughters. On 1 June 1872 he married Mary, daughter of Robert Christie of Manchester, and widow of John Duffey of Dublin, mother of Sir George Duffey, a president of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland. In 1850 Atthill settled in Dublin and was made assistant physician to the Rotunda Hospital in 1851. While in the Rotunda Hospital for the usual period of three years he endeavoured, without much success, to build up a private practice. A period of pecuniary struggle followed. In 1860 he was elected a fellow of the King and Queen's College of Physicians, and from that year to 1868 was registrar of the college. In 1868 there was a turn of fortune. He joined the staff of the Adelaide Hospital and was given charge of a ward for the treatment of diseases peculiar to women, the first appointment of the kind in any Dublin hospital. Gynaecology was practically a new specialism, and Atthill, by his teaching and writings, did much for its development. His 'Clinical Lectures on Diseases Peculiar to Women' (1871) was reprinted in the United States, translated into French and Spanish, and was long regarded as the best textbook in English on the subject. He was one of the first in Ireland successfully to perform the operation of ovariotomy, his first two cases being successful. In November 1875 he was elected master of the Rotunda Hospital, and he gave gynaecology a place almost as important as midwifery. He reorganized the working of that institution by the introduction of Listerian principles, and practically drove puerperal sepsis from the wards. From 1874 to 1876 he was president of the Dublin Obstetrical Society. He was president of the obstetric section of the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland in 1884-5, and again in 1895-7, and was president of the Academy 1900-03. In 1888 he was elected president of the King and Queen's College of Physicians (the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland after 1890), and from 1889 to 1903 represented the college on the General Medical Council. In 1898 he retired from practice, in which he had finally achieved great success. According to the 'British Medical Journal', 'He had a fine business capacity, and was a reliable guide in the disposal of money. His generosity was unostentatious but real' ('BMJ', 24 Sept 1910, 918). He died suddenly while counting his change on the platform of Strood railway station near Rochester, Kent, on 14 September 1910. He was buried on 17 September at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. His wife survived him. In 1910 he had published in the 'British Medical Journal' 'Recollections of a long professional life', afterwards reprinted for private circulation. Posthumously in 1911 there appeared his 'Recollections of an Irish Doctor', an interesting reminiscence of Irish life prior to the famine, and a modest description of Atthill's early struggles. 


@@@@@


doc= 30498


Attlee, Clement Richard, first Earl Attlee (1883-1967), prime minister, was born on 3 January 1883 at Westcott, 18 Portinscale Road, Putney, London, the seventh of the eight children of Henry Attlee (1841-1908), solicitor, and his wife, Ellen (1847-1920), daughter of Thomas Watson of London. 
Attlee described his family as 'happy and united', and he was brought up in a prosperous Anglican household of remarkable harmony. He followed his brother Tom to board at Northaw Place preparatory school in Hertfordshire when he was nine and then in 1896 at the age of thirteen went on, like all the boys in the family, to Haileybury College. Here he confirmed an unobtrusive atheism -- he became disenchanted with church attendance and religious observance -- and played rugby and cricket with the handicap of his small stature and lack of any real skill, but enjoyed the rifle corps. Perhaps surprisingly, in view of this mixed experience, Attlee remained devoted to his school, and kept a close eye on his contemporaries in later life. As he wrote to his brother in 1958 on the death of a fellow member of house, 'I last saw him at an O.H. dinner at Rawalpindi in 1928' (Attlee papers, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. c. 4794, fol. 69). He continued to follow the family trail by moving on to Oxford University, although the brothers went to different colleges: Attlee entered University College in 1901 to read history. More happy memories accumulated and a lifelong attachment was formed to the college, although apart from tutorials with Ernest Barker he found the teaching uninspiring. He left in 1904 with a second. 
Despite the air of serious endeavour pervading the family, Attlee came down from Oxford with no clear idea of a career to follow. His education, largely untroubled, had made no profound impact upon his character or ambitions. In autumn 1904 he entered the Lincoln's Inn chambers of Sir Philip Gregory, a leading conveyancing lawyer, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in March 1906. He had also had a spell in his father's firm of solicitors, which he found boring. Attlee devoted no great energy to the law, and was idling his life away in congenial London company, insulated from most practical cares by living at home. One unfriendly journalist later claimed how Attlee's path to politics had been set by his failure to make a decisive mark in life at school and university (C. Wintour, 'The man who couldn't quite', 'Evening Standard', 22 June 1948). It certainly required a marked diversion from his post-Oxford gentility to begin the move to socialist politics. 
The fundamental shift in Attlee's life came when he visited a boys' club in Stepney in October 1905. He took to the idea of social work of the settlement type quickly, and became the resident manager in 1907. Attlee's path to the East End had been helped by the fact that the club was supported by his old school Haileybury, and Attlee's initial visit with his brother Laurence was as much out of duty as of genuine interest. But the club was also secular in tone and military in organization, which chimed in with Attlee's preferences. The boys had to join the junior section of the Territorial Army and Attlee also took a commission. He enjoyed the drilling and nights spent under canvas, and found the whole experience absorbing. What was new to Attlee was understanding a different class and its way of life. As he described it in an autobiographical section in his later book 'The Social Worker': 'the rather noisy crowd of boys on bicycles with long quiffs of hair turned over the peaks of their caps, whom he had always regarded as bounders, become human beings to him, and he appreciates their high spirits, and overlooks what he would formerly have called vulgarity. (p. 212)' Attlee's success in getting on with East Enders was based on an acceptance of the fundamental equality and respect due to those of another class; indeed, that class's habit of trust and co-operation was superior to middle-class individualism. His shyness may also have helped him to win the East Enders' trust. As one of them recalled in 1945, 'He came to us as a shy little man. He became our friend because he had lived with us and got to know our problems and because he had no swank' (H. Swaffer, 'What Limehouse thinks of Attlee', 'Daily Express', 23 June 1945). This ability to get on with and earn the trust of working people delivered priceless dividends over thirty years later, when he formed the most crucial political relationship of his life: with Ernest Bevin. 
On a more practical level, Attlee was able to commit himself more fully to social work on the death of his father in 1908: he now enjoyed the psychological freedom to abandon the law and the financial freedom which exempted him from the need to earn a professional salary. Although his new life had linkages not only with his beloved school but also with the family's support for social service, it was a sharp break from the career at the bar which had seemed mapped out for him and from which he formally withdrew in 1909: 'I remember, on giving up practice at the bar, being congratulated by my friends in a poor district in much the same terms as would have been employed had I at last given up the drink' (Attlee, 'Social Worker', 207). 
Attlee soon realized that the conditions which shaped his charges' lives could be improved only by political action. From his brother Tom, a Christian socialist, came the chance to read and discuss the works of Ruskin and Morris, which provided both a moral and aesthetic rejection of industrialism. Rejecting the reformism 'de haut en bas' of the Fabians, Attlee joined the Stepney branch of the Independent Labour Party early in 1908. Because of its small size and the fact that he was one of the few with any time to spare, Attlee quickly became the branch secretary. In 1909 he became secretary at Toynbee Hall, the best-known of the East End university settlements, but after a year he left because the atmosphere there did not chime in with his socialism. He did some lecturing at Ruskin College, Oxford, and then in 1912 was appointed a lecturer in the social service department at the London School of Economics (LSE), after defeating Hugh Dalton largely because of his practical experience in the East End. By 1914 Attlee had carved a niche for himself in London left-wing politics. His involvement had built upon the sense of duty running in his family but also had distinctive elements of his own making. 
The First World War provided Attlee with a test of leadership which he grasped fully. He served with the 6th South Lancashire regiment, the tank corps, and the 5th South Lancashires. He saw action twice at Gallipoli, where he supervised the rearguard action at the evacuation of Suvla Bay, then in Mesopotamia, and finally in France in 1918. He caught dysentery at Gallipoli, was wounded by a British shell in Mesopotamia in 1916, and was wounded again in France before the armistice. He became a captain in 1915 and a major in 1917. He found little joy in the organization of depot life in Britain in 1916, nor did warfare itself hold any appeal. Fenner Brockway recalled him talking 'quietly in private conversations of the barbarities he had seen. He was appalled by the waste of young life' ('Attlee: as I Knew Him', 4). He also thought the class distinctions of the peacetime army 'a serious menace' (Lees-Smith, 1.38-42). What really interested him was developing a fighting unit with an officer group drawn from a wide social mix. Although he was often known in the 1920s as Major Attlee, and his moustache and clipped voice suggested an army background, viewed from a military perspective he was unlike the majority of officers. But a successful army career gives the confidence to lead men who may well be of superior intellect and ability and to take decisions vital to their fate. Francis Beckett is surely right to see in the war years evidence of the decisiveness and ruthlessness which characterized his premiership (Beckett, 55). 
In the 1920s Attlee established a place for himself in national politics by holding office in the two Labour governments led by MacDonald, and he also acquired broader interests by serving between 1927 and 1930 on the Simon commission on the government of India. But the East End continued to be important, and provided the gateway to Attlee's rise in the party in the 1930s. He had meanwhile moved to the suburb of Woodford in Essex following his marriage on 10 January 1922 to Violet Millar (1896-1964). She was the daughter of H. E. Millar of Hampstead. The year before their marriage Attlee had accepted the offer of a trip to Italy with her brother Cedric; Violet and her mother were also in the party. They were to have three daughters and a son during the course of a devoted marriage. 
Attlee stood unsuccessfully for Limehouse in the London county council elections of 1919, but was co-opted as mayor of Stepney, largely in recognition of his efforts during the municipal campaign, but also as an acceptable figure in an area where there was considerable rivalry between Jews and Irish Catholics. When his year as mayor ended in November 1920, he was elected an alderman by the other borough councillors, which meant a further five years in office. As mayor, Attlee organized a deputation of London mayors to press the claims of the unemployed before the prime minister, Lloyd George. His principal local interest, however, was in electricity: Attlee was convinced that municipally owned companies could supply electricity more cheaply than private ones. However, he almost came unstuck at the time of the general strike in 1926. As chairman of the Stepney borough's electricity committee, Attlee was threatened with bankruptcy and the ending of his political career when the courts supported the claim of an engineering company that its supply had been disconnected for using power during the strike. The appeal was heard when Attlee was in India, and its success, as he told his brother, 'was a great load off my mind' (Attlee to Tom Attlee, 9 Nov 1928, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. c. 4792). But the controversy had paid dividends; locals were impressed that Attlee had put himself at the head of their cause: according to his successor as mayor, 'he bore it all on his own shoulders. Before that, we knew he was our friend. Then we knew he was also our champion' (H. Swaffer, 'What Limehouse thinks of Attlee', 'Daily Express', 23 June 1945). 
This development of a local political base was helpful because Attlee's career in the 1920s had been effective but not outstanding. He was adopted as parliamentary candidate for Limehouse in 1919 and was returned as MP at the general election of November 1922; he held the seat until February 1950. His maiden speech blended the experiences of the war with new concerns about unemployment. Of the unemployed, he commented that they were 'the same men who saved us during the war. They are the same men who served side by side in the trenches' ('Hansard 5C', cols. 92-6). In Attlee's view, unemployment was caused by too much spending power being in the hands of the rich, who frittered it away on luxuries. Redirect purchasing power towards the necessities of life and employment would recover. In 1922 he became parliamentary private secretary to MacDonald when the latter was elected leader of the Labour Party, and in the first Labour government (January-November 1924) he served as under-secretary of state for war. In the period of opposition which then followed he spoke in parliament on electricity questions and local government matters. 
Attlee's other major activity was to join Simon's statutory commission to India, appointed by the Conservatives in 1927 to try and forestall what a Labour government might do by the granting of dominion status. Attlee's visit was undoubtedly valuable to him, and provided an absorbing experience, but it did not advance his position in Labour parliamentary politics. First, the commission was understood to be too moderate in its proposals, for while it recommended an increase in self-government for the provinces it was much more cautious about doing so at central government level. Second, its drafting kept Attlee out of ministerial office until 1930, while MacDonald took little interest in what Attlee had found out. 
Attlee came into office as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in spring 1930 on Mosley's resignation. He was, 'ex officio', a member of the Economic Advisory Council and later took on more specific departmental duties by running the Post Office. He thought the leadership was generally too squeamish towards the rich, and especially the 'rentiers', as it searched for a solution to the budgetary crisis of 1931. In his autobiography Attlee professed to have had little regard for MacDonald, but the unusual severity of his views may have been prompted by the recognition that his own support for MacDonald's leadership had lasted too long. 
For many Labour MPs whatever political credit they had accumulated in the 1920s was swept away in the electoral debacle of October 1931. Attlee was one of the lucky ones, and narrowly clung on to Limehouse by 551 votes. His commitment to the constituency had probably stood him in good stead; it was far more effective than anything he might have done in national politics. As most commentators have recognized, this was now Attlee's great opportunity. Those who had proved to be the most resilient were not the most talented. Thirty-two out of the forty-six MPs returned were trade-union-sponsored, and few of these were able speakers. With Lansbury and Cripps, Attlee took on in the party a leading role which could not have been predicted from his limited achievements of the 1920s. It brought with it both heavy parliamentary burdens but also the need to carry the message to the party outside, often to the strongholds in the north. Attlee had no doubt what that message should be: as he wrote to his brother, 'we want to get the party away from immediates and on to basic socialism' (Attlee to Tom Attlee, 16 Nov 1931, MS Eng. c. 4792, fol. 44). In 1933, after noting that 'everywhere I go I find reviving enthusiasm and great meetings' he also reported that 'George [Lansbury], Stafford [Cripps] and I all endeavour to give them the pure milk of the word and no blooming gradualism and palliatives' (Attlee to Tom Attlee, 7 Feb 1933, MS Eng. c. 4792, fol. 55). 
It was not difficult for Attlee to give them 'basic socialism' or 'the word', since he was firmly based on the left. His views were not especially schematic; he believed that socialist plans lost their appeal through being too rigid, and his scepticism about capitalism was moral rather than strictly economic. In the early 1920s he had shown some interest in guild socialism. As he put it simply and straightforwardly in 'The Labour Party in Perspective', published by the Left Book Club in 1937, 'the cause [of the evils of capitalism] is the private ownership of the means of life; the remedy is public ownership' (p. 15). Capitalism, thriving upon and intensifying the individualism of the nineteenth century, could too easily become selfish and indulgent; only socialism could look to the common good. This was seen as common ground in the party, rarely needing explicit or specific development. Thus the sections in 'The Labour Party in Perspective' dealing with proposals for sweeping nationalization provided no discussion of how they were to be implemented, nor any acknowledgement of the problems which might have to be faced. What really interested Attlee was how socialists might best use the government machinery to keep in view the long-term goals among the mass of day-to-day administration. Attlee's most concrete interest in economics at this time was his concern for the unemployed. He impressed trade unionists in the 1930s by showing more sympathy than most for the hunger marchers of 1934. 
This rather frenetic period bore fruit when Attlee deputized for Lansbury as leader of the Labour Party during the latter's illness from December 1933 to June 1934 and as a consequence was elected to the national executive committee for the first time. Some of the big names had begun to win their way back into the party, including Arthur Greenwood at a by-election in 1932, but the years after 1931 belonged to Attlee, and his competent understudying of Lansbury reinforced his position. Cripps made a vital contribution at this time. Attlee was hard pressed financially, and stepping in for Lansbury reduced the opportunities for supplementing his income. Attlee's thoughts of withdrawing from politics were banished when a donation from Cripps enabled the party to pay a salary to its deputy leader. Lansbury resigned the party leadership in October 1935 following the Brighton conference and Attlee was elected leader until the new session of parliament after the general election which followed almost immediately in November 1935. At this stage there was still no expectation that Attlee was to be leader on a more permanent basis, and his role in the election campaign had not decisively changed the position. 
The strongest candidate whom Attlee faced at this and subsequent challenges to his leadership was Herbert Morrison, whose background was stronger than Attlee's in both national and local government. He had been minister of transport in the 1929-31 government and leader of the London county council, both bigger jobs than Attlee had managed. Morrison was regarded by many as the favourite to become leader in 1935, and played the most prominent role in the general election campaign that year. However, Morrison came second to Attlee on the first ballot of the leadership contest and when the votes of the third-place candidate, Arthur Greenwood, were redistributed Attlee won comfortably. Three factors probably weakened Morrison's position. First, those MPs who had returned after the 1931 election voted for Attlee out of regard for his steady leadership both inside and outside parliament. Second, Morrison was regarded as very much a London-based politician without much sympathy for those outside, and the 'provincials' who had followed Greenwood then switched to Attlee on the second ballot. Third, Morrison did not have much support from the trade unions, principally because Ernest Bevin took against him. Attlee, in contrast, had considerable support from the trade unions, especially the miners. Two miner MPs, David Grenfell and Tom Williams, had supported his continuation as leader in October 1935. Moreover, Morrison lost himself many friends in the campaign itself through being evasive about how completely he would devote himself to the leadership of the parliamentary party in the light of his role on the London county council. 
This set a pattern for the future. Morrison was linked with further leadership challenges to Attlee in 1939, 1945, and 1947, but in all three cases the outcome was the same: failure, obviously, but also the compounding of his reputation as a schemer and the weakening of his stature. Although Attlee attracted frequent criticism as a leader because he appeared to lack charisma, and seemed not to be especially powerful or decisive, the fact that his major rival, Morrison, was also a man of greater personal and political flaws shows that Attlee's position was more secure than it might at first appear. The other figure occasionally considered as an alternative to Attlee was Arthur Greenwood, his deputy. Attlee had been glad to see him back in the Commons in 1932 as an experienced politician with a secure background in the party, and Greenwood did well in September 1939, when, with Attlee ill, he led the opposition with conviction as Chamberlain wavered towards Hitler. But Greenwood was never a serious candidate for leader on a permanent basis; drink had spoiled a promising career. 
The most difficult issue facing Labour in the 1930s was foreign policy, and the party was not able to reap any real advantage from Chamberlain's apparent paralysis in the face of a deteriorating international situation. Attlee's view was that nations should surrender some of their sovereignty over foreign affairs in the interests of international peace. Up to 1937 this was expressed as support for the League of Nations and progressive disarmament, with armed forces being only at the disposal of the international body. Economic co-operation too, it was thought, would diminish the causes of discord. Within the party this 'line' defined itself against two contrasting views: unilateral disarmament and a grouping of socialist nations against their capitalist rivals. While the former was perhaps easier to defeat, the latter did have as its strategic expression alliance with the Soviet Union, which made some sense. There was also Bevin's powerful voice to contend with, as he proclaimed the 'realism' of non-intervention in Spain (with which Attlee disagreed) and the value of rearmament, which the left abhorred. Rearmament focused these differences precisely. In the mid-1930s Labour had opposed increased spending on the air force, even though Hitler had announced conscription and the build-up of a military air force. Until June 1937 the party had voted against the estimates for defence expenditure. Although this was a conventional way of criticizing policy, it probably cut little ice with the wider electorate. In July 1937 the national executive committee decided that to continue to vote against arms estimates was wrong, and so the 'rearmers' had won the day. This endorsement of rearmament was accepted at the Edinburgh conference in October 1937, and Cripps's campaign for closer co-operation with the Communist Party was also defeated. But this shift to a 'harder' foreign policy could not remove the doubts surrounding Labour and foreign policy, and Attlee's refusal to support conscription in April 1939, on the ground that it would be less effective than relying upon volunteers, also encouraged the view that behind Labour's criticisms of Chamberlain lay a policy which was irresolute and impractical. 
The war was a transforming experience for the Labour Party, and for some of its key individuals. Both Bevin and Cripps emerged as masters in the exercise of a government machine enormously expanded by the war. Bevin showed real authority in his direction of Labour and in cabinet deliberations. This grew out of the impressive leadership of the Transport and General Workers' Union. But his development as an individual of parallel stature to Churchill was a factor of the war. Cripps had rescued himself from a reputation as a brilliant but maverick left-winger by an impressive performance as minister of aircraft production. Morrison also developed as a key figure on the home front, and also made important contributions to the role of the party. It was he who made the key speech which kept the parliamentary party loyal to the coalition in 1943, when it had become disillusioned with what it took to be the Conservatives' lukewarm attitude to the Beveridge report. 
For Attlee the experience was less dramatic: he did not emerge as one of the big men of the war. As leader of the Labour group in the coalition, he had major responsibilities thrust upon him from the outset. He was appointed lord privy seal in May 1940 at the start of the coalition, and was the chairman of the food and home policy committees. He and Greenwood were both acting as 'super, non-departmental co-ordinating ministers' (Chester, 'Lessons', 7). This role lasted until February 1942, when Attlee became secretary of the dominions and deputy prime minister. But 'Attlee had proved to be no heavyweight' when chairing the food and home policy committees, and his change of role in 1942 seemed to both confirm but also mask his lack of real influence (Addison, 280). He had to stand in for Churchill, especially when the latter was away from the country, and Attlee admitted to his brother in 1943 that 'it is not easy to sub for the P. M. It is obviously futile to put on Saul's armour, but I seek in a more pedestrian style to preserve a mean between dignity of language and dullness' (Attlee to Tom Attlee, 19 May 1943, MS Eng. c. 4793, fol. 33). 
Attlee's behaviour appeared to open up the danger that the war would pass Labour by. Within the government process the initiative had seemed by 1942 to have passed out of their hands and into those of Sir John Anderson, chairman of the lord president's council and a non-party figure, who acquired major influence over social and economic policy. Labour Party members outside the coalition were becoming increasingly restive over both the conduct of the war and the apparent foot-dragging over the social reforms inspired by Beveridge, which the population deserved both by virtue of the war effort and the experiences of the 1930s, and at the same time Attlee seemed to be a rather defensive and uninspiring figure who was unable to assuage these doubts. The possibility emerged of the party appearing to be a divisive and unpatriotic force during the war and therefore handing the Conservatives an electoral victory at its end. Unlike the Liberals in the First World War, whose split created a major opportunity for Labour, the Conservatives had remained united after the fall of Chamberlain and so posed a far more serious challenge. Events of course transpired wholly differently, with Labour winning a major victory which ushered in a great reforming ministry. A good deal of the credit for this lies with Bevin and Morrison, who overshadowed Attlee during the war, especially on the lord president's committee and in the deliberations about planning for the post-war period. Attlee, although he became chairman of the lord president's committee in September 1943, seems to have played a lesser role in shaping these deliberations. Given that the leftward shift in public opinion during the war took the Labour Party by surprise, and was underestimated by it, what role did Attlee play in Labour's transformation? 
Attlee set the context within which the other Labour ministers operated. First, this meant reviewing the machinery of government as it stood in May 1940. This was a matter in which Attlee had long been interested. In his 'The Labour Party in Perspective' he was particularly concerned at how administration of immediate policy eclipsed the development of longer-term strategy. Cabinet government as it operated in the 1930s was burdened with a good deal of business which was particular to departments and where the fundamental and the detailed were mixed rather than separated. Attlee had two solutions for this. The first was to assign key ministers without heavy departmental responsibilities to co-ordinate major policy areas, such as defence, social services, or economic policy. The second was to develop a committee system which would link departments and assist in resolving and clarifying issues at a sub-cabinet level. Attlee pursued both these approaches during the war. Apart from the secretaryship of the dominions he had no departmental responsibilities, but was involved right across the policy spectrum, from domestic to foreign affairs. This led to a good deal of committee work: 'he sat on every committee of importance, creating several of them himself' (Burridge, 142). One of the first tasks of Attlee and Greenwood in the Churchill coalition had been to reform the mass of committees which had developed around the cabinet in the 1930s into a more efficient system, which meant abolishing some and creating others. From this position Attlee exercised a powerful patronage of his own party men. He secured for Dalton, against Churchill's opposition, the directorship of subversive operations in occupied Europe. Between 1940 and 1945 the number of Labour junior ministers had increased from eight to seventeen. Moreover, Attlee was able to protect the planning for reconstruction from the meddling of both Beaverbrook and Bracken, and was not slow to criticize Churchill for his rambling and erratic conduct of cabinet business. He was generally thought more efficient at dispatching an agenda, and shrewder in strategic grasp, than the prime minister. 
A great benefit of the war from Attlee's point of view was his friendship with Ernest Bevin. Although they had known each other in the 1930s, it was only when they worked together on committees in the wartime administration that they came to appreciate each other's qualities. Bevin realized that Attlee was one of those rare politicians who could be trusted, and whom colleagues had seriously underestimated. Attlee perhaps gained more, in that he received unshakeable loyalty from one of the great figures of twentieth-century politics. He admired Bevin's intellectual capability and administrative grip, as well as the sheer fertility of his mind. Bevin was going to be the key figure in any post-war Labour administration. Had he lost faith in Attlee, rather than just being occasionally frustrated at his indecisiveness, then the hopes of those who schemed for the high office would have been more realistic. As it was, Bevin's refusal to consider Attlee's removal was the rock of his premiership and the obstacle on which all subversive efforts foundered. Once again, Attlee had evinced more loyalty from representatives of the working class than from those nearer his social rank. 
A good indication of Attlee's war record was the meeting with the party after the triumphant result of the general election held in July 1945. In view of Morrison's greater visibility and public success it was not unrealistic to envisage Attlee being replaced after the election but before accepting office. However, most MPs had no idea of the scheme: as one recorded, when he joined the party meeting, 'no one could doubt that Attlee had come into his own'. He did not disappoint his audience: 'Attlee's speech was typical. Without a trace of emotion he alluded to the tremendous nature of our victory' ('Diaries of James Chuter Ede', 28 July 1945, 228-9). Attlee took office as prime minister on 26 July 1945. 
Attlee's regard for Bevin which had developed during their wartime work was not merely of value in protecting his political position when prime minister: it was of crucial significance in shaping Britain's foreign policy after 1945. Attlee's friendship with Bevin deepened as time went on: 'The more I saw of him the greater was my affection for him' (F. Williams, 'Ernest Bevin: Portrait of a Great Englishman', 1952, preface, 8). Partly because Bevin carried such a heavy load, and partly no doubt because their larger strategy did not entail an obviously 'socialist' foreign policy, thereby risking continuing criticism from the left, Attlee sought to screen Bevin from cabinet scrutiny. Attlee often kept Bevin behind after cabinet meetings to discuss (and settle) major policy issues. In return, Bevin knew the value of Attlee's support and therefore sought his approval over even minor details. As Bevin told one of his officials, 'Better get Clem's agreement. I value his judgement and if things should go wrong we will be better off if he has agreed' (as recalled by Sir Frank Roberts, Bevin's principal private secretary; Ovendale, 39). 
Attlee showed no real change in his fundamental analysis of international relations after 1945. National sovereignty encouraged aggression: ceding part of that sovereignty to an international organization was therefore the key to world peace. So Attlee enthusiastically supported the United Nations. But he recognized that this organization was in its infancy. The UN in 1945-51 was not yet an integral part of nations' foreign policies, so it was inevitable that countries had to look to their own interests. NATO, with its direction of multi-national force at the Soviet Union, diverged sharply from the ideal of the 1930s whereby supra-national organizations should be inclusive and not confrontational. The reality of American supremacy and the likelihood of Soviet imperialism were the key facts which had to be acknowledged after 1945. In recognizing these, Attlee showed how foreign-policy imperatives had changed rapidly and fundamentally at the end of the war. For many the victory over Germany had been achieved more through the sacrifices of Stalin's people than through the material superiority conferred by the Americans, but the hope that the wartime experience would fulfil the expectations which some had expressed in the 1930s, of an alliance of the left between Britain and the Soviet Union, were soon dashed. 
Britain was still a world power, but with slighter resources great skill was required to maintain that position. Britain achieved a fairly ruthless assessment of its own imperial position, an assertion of independence in atomic defence, and the commitment of the USA to the defence of Europe. The price of this can be much debated. The economic crises which dogged the Labour government were in part an outcome of this strategy, because military payments which flowed out of the country to sustain British troops abroad accounted for a major part of Britain's payments deficit. Moreover, the terms of the American loan which enabled Britain to cover the cracks could not be sustained, both in respect of interest payments and the convertibility of the pound into the dollar in summer 1947. As the wartime alliance with the USA which Labour continued into the peace turned into one of American preponderance, the wisdom of this strategy might have been criticized, especially when it led to renewed rearmament at the outset of the Korean War in 1950. But in a world where Britain had many interests and few friends, the decision to maintain the Atlantic alliance was understandable. Moreover, Labour's domestic programme enabled the Attlee government to claim that the party's essential political agenda was being pursued. When Attlee addressed the houses of congress in November 1945 he was particularly concerned to stress how far Labour intended to preserve the core of the Anglo-American political tradition, namely individual freedom. He wanted to reassure the Americans of the gulf which separated the Labour Party from communism. But he was also forthright about the line of difference between them: 'You will see us embarking on projects of nationalisation, on wide all-embracing schemes of social insurance designed to give security to the common man. We shall be working out a planned economy. You, it may be, will continue in your more individualistic methods. ('Purpose and Policy', 150)' The resolution with which the Attlee governments faced challenges to the West in Europe and Asia was the first of many occasions when the party showed itself as aggressive in its defence of British interests as the Conservatives. Labour had become a committed 'war' party. 
The greatest responsibility for Labour's foreign policy was Bevin's. As Attlee famously remarked, to explain his apparently subordinate role, 'If you've got a good dog, you don't bark yourself' (Williams, 'A Prime Minister Remembers', 149). At the most general level, Attlee was initially sceptical whether Britain had the resources to sustain its empire, but over time the commitment from Bevin and the service chiefs, as well as American interest in a British role against communism, served to change this view. More specific examples of Attlee's influence, however, can be seen both in policy areas where he took charge, and also where he and Bevin acted in concert. India was the prime case of the former, where the normally low-key Attlee 'burned with fire' in his determination to achieve an orderly path to independence (Morgan, 'Labour in Power', 219, citing an aide of Louis Mountbatten, viceroy of India). The difficulties in achieving this aim lay with the eagerness of the Congress Party to move quickly to independence and the desire of the Muslims to establish Pakistan as their own separate state. Attlee realized that the Indian army could not easily maintain order, and therefore to delay would be to risk a humiliating retreat from a hostile territory. Under Attlee's direction the cabinet came round to the idea of partition, and it was his decision to replace the embattled Wavell with the more positive Mountbatten, as well as to set a particular date for withdrawal. This was a dreadful time for Britain: the same month of February 1947 when Attlee had declared Britain would hand over India not later than June 1948 (it actually took place nearly a year earlier, in August 1947) saw the announcement of the withdrawal from Greece and the eastern Mediterranean, as well as the intention to refer the Palestinian problem to the United Nations. The immediate post-withdrawal period was turbulent and violent, and, although Attlee had moved quickly, he seemed to have achieved a necessary escape rather than the orderly path to independence which he had professed to desire. 
In Europe the most decisive challenge to the West arose over Berlin, which was shared out between the allies as occupying forces, even though it lay deep within the Soviet zone of occupation. When the Soviet Union began to put pressure on the other occupying powers in Berlin by cutting off necessary supplies, it seemed possible that the difficulty of maintaining a western position in Berlin would encourage withdrawal. The most resolute grasp of the position, aside from that of the Berliners themselves, came from Bevin, backed by Attlee, in not only capitalizing upon the psychological as well as practical impact of an airlift of supplies, but also in relations with Moscow: 'never was Bevin's capacity for action and the value of his relationship with Attlee more clearly displayed' (Bullock, 575). 
Over Berlin, Attlee and Bevin had appeared, at least initially, to have moved more quickly than the Americans to a commitment to defend Berlin, and face the consequences of another war. Over Korea, towards the end of his time as prime minister, Attlee's role was rather different. Here his aim was to limit the USA's response to the defence of South Korea, and not to let it spill over into hostility towards communist China, which would have had damaging repercussions on British interests in Asia. One dimension to American policy which troubled Attlee was the possibility that the Americans would use the atomic bomb. Attlee's visit to Washington in December 1950 was intended to remove that possibility. How far President Truman was considering using the bomb is open to doubt, but Attlee was successful in striking up a rapport with Truman and encouraging a more measured American policy towards Korea. 
Attlee had also been instrumental in Britain's own development of the atom bomb, which in itself made a stark contrast to Labour's policy towards arms in the 1930s. The key decisions were taken in autumn 1946. Attlee's role lay partly in supporting Bevin's view that any British foreign secretary needed a nuclear deterrent in order to be able to negotiate as a major power, but also in the way the policy-making process was structured. The question was never laid before cabinet, and those who opposed the programme on financial grounds, namely Cripps and Dalton, were excluded from the secret cabinet committee which took the plunge. Although one of the main aims of British policy was to commit the USA to defend Europe, it was not apparent in 1946 that this had been achieved, and after the bruising negotiations over financial help for post-war reconstruction, some effective backing to British foreign policy was thought vital. While Attlee had been willing to set aside financial considerations in pressing ahead with a nuclear deterrent, he was critical of pressures for defence spending, which seemed to rely upon historic rather than current strategic considerations. Thus he was increasingly sceptical that the eastern Mediterranean, especially Greece, required a British presence. Britain's foreign policy under Attlee and Bevin embodied some fundamental decisions which, in assuming that Britain was to continue to be a major power, might have laid heavy burdens upon a small economy; traditional commitments, however, were not maintained uncritically. 
An obvious consequence of this activity was a far more public role for Attlee. However much Bevin was the major figure in British diplomacy, Attlee had an irreducible significance which demanded a public presence. Short in stature and diffident in demeanour, he did not become instantly recognizable, nor did his unobtrusive manner when travelling around London change this. As a woman told him when he was changing trains at Baker Street, 'Have you ever been told you look just like Mr Attlee?' 'Frequently', he replied (Beckett, 210). He was still laconic and downbeat in his public speaking, but this did not prevent him leaving a profound impression on those whose approach was more expansive. Nye Bevan congratulated him on his speech on the nature of the Labour Party to the houses of congress in November 1945, 'That was a noble speech. I felt very proud' (Campbell, 187). Attlee's calm deflation of Churchill's scaremongering during the 1945 election campaign, when the Conservative leader claimed that Labour might usher in a socialist version of the police state, was part of an effective performance, and the parliamentary party found in the succeeding years that Attlee continued to get the better of his opponent in Commons debates. 
The Attlee governments combined a forthright international position, backed by force, with an equally self-confident domestic policy which combined the difficult transition from a war to a peacetime economy with radical developments in social welfare. For the members of those governments they were a triumphant success. It was true that, by 1951, there were sharp differences of opinion about whether to continue with a programme of nationalization of industry, while the budget dispute of 1951 between Gaitskell and Bevan over health charges cracked the unity of purpose which had been so striking before. But as to the success of the overall project there seemed to be no doubt. Indeed the nervousness of the incoming Conservative government in 1951 about making inroads on welfare services showed how far Labour had prescribed the governing agenda. While legitimate doubts could be entertained about sacrificing industrial efficiency to achieving total output, the need to run a high level of exports with, at the same time, austerity at home, was producing real results. As prime minister and overall architect of this government of reform, Attlee deserves enormous credit. Because he was so apparently modest in his demeanour, at times slow to exert his authority, and subject also to challenges for his office, historians have sometimes been unsure just how much responsibility falls to Attlee rather than to the major figures who held office in his governments -- notably to Bevin but also, especially on the domestic front, to Stafford Cripps. 
The core discipline of the 1945-50 Labour government was economics. The expertise of Dalton, Gaitskell, and Jay, which was also brought to the service of Cripps, gave them confidence to chart a route towards counter-inflation and industrial growth as well as to defend their aims against the pressure from the Treasury to scale back the welfare state. The key wartime development which was their instrument, namely national income accounting, was one which left Attlee's world far behind. The new method of measuring activity was explained to him during the war by his assistant, the economist Evan Durbin. Attlee's economic analysis was driven by ethical considerations: a miner was productively employed whereas a butler or a footman was not. It was wrong to employ people in jobs that one might easily do oneself, especially in domestic settings. By contrast, national income measurement, as Durbin explained, had to give full weight to any activity which was paid for, 'however wasteful some of these may be judged by the moral standards of a socialist' (memorandum of 1 July 1943, Piercy papers, BLPES, 8/2). Attlee was never going to be fully at home with a system which set on one side some of his basic assumptions. It was, in fact, during a financial crisis -- that arising over the convertibility of the pound in the summer of 1947 -- when Attlee's lack of direction seemed to call into doubt his authority as a leader. For the first eighteen months of the peace the changeover from the war economy and the implementation of Labour's reform programme, although demanding, did not seem to involve any painful choices. In the first half of 1947 the government was shaken from three directions: by a shortage of fuel supplies during an especially harsh winter; by criticisms within the government from Bevan, Cripps, and Dalton over the slow progress towards iron and steel nationalization; and by the need to make sterling freely convertible under the terms of the American loan. Britain did not have the dollars to meet this requirement, but the cabinet took five weeks to decide to suspend convertibility. The same drift was apparent in 1949, when a weakening of the pound led eventually to devaluation. The upshot in 1947 was that Attlee faced critics over his apparent indecisiveness, their aim being to replace him with Bevin. In one of the best-known and most revealing episodes of Attlee's premiership Bevin refused to abandon him, and when Cripps persisted with his plan, he was disarmed by Attlee's offering him a new post as minister for economic affairs. 
It was for these skills of political management, of keeping a talented team on course, that Attlee is chiefly credited. As in the failed leadership challenge of 1947, this was sometimes a question of how to handle individuals. Thus Attlee had protected Bevin from undue scrutiny of his foreign policy, and he did the same for Bevan by shielding him from Morrison's criticisms of his plans for hospitals and housing. In reverse, his absence through illness when the Bevan-Gaitskell dispute began to fester and then explode was a telling indication of his significance. Attlee could be completely forthright and abrupt in his treatment of colleagues by letter. When Laski told Attlee that he lacked the qualities of a great leader, Attlee simply replied: 'Thank you for your letter, the contents of which have been noted. C. R. Attlee' (Harris, 254). More significantly, he was similarly direct towards Bevin when the latter criticized his position over India but did not offer a viable alternative plan. When Lord Ammon wrote to Attlee in 1950 complaining about his dismissal from the chairmanship of the National Dock Labour Board, he received the following terse reply: 'I have received your letter and noted your observations. I am quite unable to understand your attitude' (Attlee to Ammon, 29 Dec 1950, Attlee papers, box 53, fols. 70-71). 
But it was also a question of structures as well as people. Attlee had already in the 1930s given some thought to the problems which a reforming government might face in separating considerations of fundamental strategy from day-to-day administration. During the war he had played a part in developing, and had seen in operation, a cabinet system with attendant committees which was intended to deal with a vast volume of business and yet retain clear sight of essential strategic issues. Attlee was able to draw upon this system when in government. He set up a home affairs committee to cover legislation to which the government was committed, plus further committees on economic policy, production, defence, Commonwealth affairs, and nuclear defence. These each generated their own subcommittees. Attlee chaired defence and economic policy committees. The cabinet itself Attlee ran punctiliously, getting through the agenda and not letting it be waylaid by discursive exploration of policy issues. His was never the tactic of letting discussion run on until opposing arguments had played themselves out and a consensus emerged. Below the cabinet the intention was that the inter-departmental committee system would protect it from a good deal of lower-order decision-making as well as encourage the resolution of differences between departments. Perhaps inevitably, the system never worked perfectly, with many issues not of the first importance still reaching cabinet level. None the less, it was a valuable attempt to adapt government machinery for a party which would always come into office with reforming ambitions. Certainly under Churchill and Eden the system became far more disorganized, and was eventually revived by Macmillan for a purpose different from that which Attlee intended -- namely, to bolster Macmillan's own authority. 
There was a larger sense in which some of the problems of running a reforming government committed to planning were never solved. The biggest was to provide proper departmental and personal responsibility for economic planning separate from the role of the chancellor of the exchequer and the Treasury, which were concerned primarily with domestic government expenditure and external finance, both major areas at this time. It seemed that some progress had been made with the establishment in 1947, somewhat belatedly, of the ministry of economic affairs and the appointment of Cripps at its head. However, Dalton's resignation after his autumn budget in the same year brought Cripps to the chancellorship and unified two positions which ought to have been separated. Morrison had lost his economic co-ordinating functions as lord president when the ministry of economic affairs was formed. Home and overseas economic policy were brought under a new economic policy committee chaired by Attlee. This committee corresponded to Attlee's wish to have a small group of key ministers overseeing an area of policy. But machinery could not solve all the problems of government. The load on key individuals was enormous. One experienced observer, who had served the cabinet as a civil servant during the war, commented that 'during 1946-51 the most successful Minister in this field [economic policy], Sir Stafford Cripps, nearly killed himself by overwork and had to resign, and many of the leading people concerned, Ministers and officials, finished up worn out and much less fit than when they started. (Chester, 'Machinery of government', 362)' Co-ordination of the many different policy areas which planning required put an enormous, and sometimes unbearable, strain on the chief individuals involved. But to have left more decisions with departments would have threatened the success of planning and co-ordination. As Dalton recognized, this was a fundamental problem for a Labour government, which would always want to use the administrative machine to its fullest extent to fulfil its reforming purpose. But if anyone was responsible for directing the government machine in 1945-51 and for deciding how much it should attempt to do, then that person was Attlee. The fact that he had devoted particular attention to this aspect of the party's activities made the 'overload' experienced by his governments all the more poignant. 
Although, as in previous elections, Attlee campaigned well in the general election of February 1950, Labour's majority was reduced to five. Resentment towards austerity and the alleged sufferings of the middle classes from the effects of anti-inflation policies were probably explanation enough for the loss of seats, although Attlee himself drew attention to the way the Parliamentary Boundary Commission's changes had worked against them. Attlee's own seat of Limehouse had been absorbed into a single constituency for Stepney, and instead he contested West Walthamstow, which he won with a comfortable majority. However, the government lost two of its major figures when Cripps resigned in October 1950 and Bevin in March 1951, both on health grounds. Attlee's touch, too, seemed to weaken. As his government was battered by an internal crisis over the 1951 budget and faced challenges to its authority abroad when the Anglo-Iranian oil company was nationalized and Egypt claimed sovereignty over Sudan, so Attlee's reticent style of leadership seemed more and more a liability. The row which arose over Gaitskell's imposition of health charges had its origins in Cripps's period when he had wanted to put some limit on the expanding health budget under Bevan's control. But the amount at stake in Gaitskell's budget -- $23 million -- seemed minuscule in the light of the size of the budget and also in the context of the defence spending which Britain was being asked to shoulder for the Korean War. The dispute festered, and although it must be admitted that Attlee was ill in hospital with an ulcer, his guidance was minimal. He was in the awkward position of being more in sympathy with Bevan's views than with Gaitskell's, but having to support his chancellor in order to prevent his own authority from coming into question. His indecision undoubtedly made things worse, and the upshot was the damaging resignations in April 1951 of Bevan, Harold Wilson, and John Freeman. The lack of common purpose which the dispute revealed and intensified showed that the government was running out of steam. 
Attlee's choice of the date for the election which would resolve the problem of a tiny majority -- October 1951 -- also seemed flawed. It was influenced by Attlee's view that the king's projected tour of Africa in February 1952 demanded an early contest. It was very much Attlee's decision, and some of his colleagues questioned its merits. Had he waited until summer 1952, it is arguable that fairer economic conditions would have benefited the party. As it was, Conservative gains, notably (but not solely) in London and the south-east, supported by a weak Liberal presence, were enough to give them a majority of seventeen over Labour, and Attlee relinquished office on 26 October. 
The party then entered a period of acute internal dissension, driven by those around Bevan, which challenged Attlee's authority. His reticence in the face of these challenges -- during the conference at Morecambe in 1952, and in 1954-5 over defence -- appeared to underline how powerless Attlee was to stop the party's decline. Since it was widely believed that his continuation as leader of the opposition was a way of blocking Morrison's succession, his position seemed to lose its purpose. After Labour's defeat in the general election of May 1955, Attlee, who had held his seat at West Walthamstow, stepped down as party leader in December. He left the House of Commons on his elevation to the peerage as Earl Attlee and in November 1955 he entered the Lords. 
Attlee's stature in the labour movement was, however, still considerable, and he campaigned with good effect in the elections of 1959 and 1964, and also made an intervention in 1966. In his retirement he travelled extensively and wrote articles and reviews for the newspapers. In June 1964 his wife, Violet, died suddenly of a cerebral haemorrhage. Although Violet's health was frequently poor, she showed considerable stamina in acting as Attlee's driver during election campaigns, often covering long distances in idiosyncratic style. She was herself Conservative in politics, and could be awkward in her dealings with Attlee's staff, but the domestic happiness they enjoyed was a powerful support for his long career. Attlee died after pneumonia on 8 October 1967 in Westminster Hospital. The funeral service took place at the Temple Church on 11 October; until just before his death Attlee had lived in a flat in King's Bench Walk in the Temple. His ashes were buried on 7 November in Westminster Abbey. 
Attlee was sworn of the privy council in 1935, was made CH in 1945, and KG in 1956. He became an honorary bencher (Inner Temple) in 1946 and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1947. He was made an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford (1942), of Queen Mary College, London (1948), and of the LSE (1958). His son succeeded to the earldom. 
Contemporaries and historians have been struck by the discrepancy between a man so apparently ordinary in demeanour and habits and a career spent at the centre of British politics and government over a twenty-year period between 1935 and 1955. His life certainly was at one with his modest stature. His relaxation and pleasures outside politics were entirely consistent with his background and upbringing. He enjoyed the dinners and gatherings organized by the important, but not necessarily formative, institutions of his life, namely Haileybury College and Oxford. He was devoted to his family and took a close interest in children. Some of the poetry he wrote in his youth, such as 'Socialism' (1908) and 'Limehouse' (1912), refers to the hardships of children and the eventual fulfilment of family life which might follow political reform. He liked travel and had enough knowledge of European architecture to be concerned at the damage being done by allied bombing during the invasion of 1944. He was good at carpentry and enjoyed repairing the woodwork around his garden. 
Those who lead such deeply grooved lives, which draw their strength from certain institutions and settings, sometimes find the unpredictability and heavy demands of major office an enormous and visible strain. What is perhaps remarkable about Attlee is that he displayed no such doubts or soul-searching. This was not born of any self-deception. He knew he was very shy, and he appreciated he had few striking intellectual gifts, and that he owed a great deal to the Labour Party for the fame he achieved. He did not seem to have been moved by self-doubt, nor by any concern for the opinions others held about him, even though the institutions which he valued so highly -- school and university -- were those where the judgments of one's peers and betters were usually so important. His unrevealing autobiography, 'As it Happened' (1954), is the clearest example of his indifference towards some of the conventions of his own class. His experiences of war and social work must have given him the confidence to trust his abilities and judgments. His actions were always measured and never impulsive, as is sometimes the case with less secure men. This self-sufficiency may explain how he endured the rigours of high office for so long, surviving crisis after crisis with apparent vigour. When Francis Williams asked him how he could survive under such a heavy workload, his reply rings true: 'By not worrying. Clearing off every day's job before the end of the day. You take a decision and have done with it. No good keeping on asking yourself if you've done the right thing. It gets you nowhere. (Williams, 'A Prime Minister Remembers', 79)' Although a single life cannot epitomize so diverse an organization as the Labour Party, Attlee's combination of radical political views with support for so much that was conventional in society has summed up for many the limitations of British social democracy. When Attlee addressed the houses of congress in November 1945, he tried to reassure them about his government by pointing out that 'The Old School Tie can still be seen on the Government benches' ('Purpose and Policy', 149). But the larger context for this remark was that the party drew on a wide cross-section of the population. And this was the point about the party under Attlee, epitomized by his close relationship with Ernie Bevin. The public school, Oxford graduate, militarily experienced prime minister was in close step with the orphaned Bristol barrow boy who had left school at thirteen to become leader of one of the most powerful trade unions in Europe. Their judgments on matters big and small usually coincided. This showed what the party could achieve, by integrating the classes in a common purpose. That the two classes could learn from one another was what Attlee had discovered and practised in the East End, and its shining example was his relationship with Bevin. This was a powerful but transient achievement. While his relationship with Bevin may have realized Attlee's ideal for political life, the party could not perpetuate it, however often it resurrected the memory of 1945-51. The historic identity of the party with the trade unions seemed to weaken its claim to be an instrument of government. Although in Attlee's period his Treasury ministers had managed to reconcile their version of socialism with economic management, this was to become increasingly difficult. The Attlee governments appeared to be an interlude, perhaps created by the war, between the torment of 1929-31 and the nightmares of 1967-9 and 1978-9. When the party regained power in 1997, with a victory more emphatic than in 1945, it had fundamentally modified its relationship with the trade unions, and Blair, its leader, now spoke of the Attlee period not as a guide to what might be achieved, but as a warning of how divisions within the party could undermine its reforming purpose. The Attlee inheritance was finally exhausted. 


@@@@@


doc= 30499


Attwell, Mabel Lucie (1879-1964), illustrator, was born at 182 Mile End Road, London, on 4 June 1879, the sixth child of Augustus Attwell, a butcher, of Mile End, and his wife, (Emily) Ann, the daughter of George Harris, a coach builder. Attwell was educated privately and at the Coopers' Company School, where she showed an early talent for art. She later attended classes at Regent Street and Heatherley's art schools, but disliked the heavy emphasis placed on still-life drawing and copying classical casts, and she did not remain there long. Her preference lay in making sketches and drawings of imaginary subjects, arising out of her enjoyment of fairy stories, and it was through these that she became known. The acceptance of drawings for publication in such magazines as 'The Tatler' and 'The Bystander' led her to show her work to the agents Francis and Mills, and although they held out little hope of success they found that her sketches sold readily at 20 guineas each. From that time on, almost to the end of her life, they played an important part in gaining commissions for her and encouraging her to apply her art to a variety of purposes. 
On 4 June 1908 Attwell married the painter and illustrator Harold Cecil Earnshaw (1886-1937) with whom she had a daughter in 1909 and two sons in 1911 and 1914. One of her sons died in 1935. The appearance of one, two, or three of these children in drawings on the preliminary pages of her early illustrated gift books can serve as a rough guide to the sequence in which volumes -- always undated -- were published. During the First World War Earnshaw was badly wounded, losing his right arm, and running the family and business affairs thus devolved largely upon his wife. It was a responsibility which accorded well with Attwell's temperament, for this handsome woman was strong-willed and dedicated to her work, and she continued to develop and exploit an illustrative mode which brought her national fame. She had few interests outside her preoccupation with her family and her work, and she remained active as an artist, under her maiden name, to the end of her life. 
Attwell's career as an illustrator began with work done for magazines, which was always to be her standby. Around the turn of the century, however, she started to receive commissions from the publishing firm of W. and R. Chambers, and this led her into the field of book illustration. Initially she provided colour designs for trade bindings (for example, in M. Howitt's 'The Steadfast Gabriel', 'c'.1900) and sets of monochrome plates for children's stories (for example, in May Baldwin's 'That Little Limb', 1905). Before long, however, she was asked to undertake more ambitious work for the 'Raphael House Library of Gift Books', published by Messrs Raphael Tuck. Her earliest volumes in the series were 'Mother Goose' ('c'.1909) and 'Alice in Wonderland' (1910). In these books she was required to provide line-drawings printed in the text and colour work for twelve full-page half-tone plates, a formula which was followed in later additions to the series: 'Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales' (1913), an abridged version of 'The Water Babies' (1915), 'Children's Stories from French Fairy Tales', by Doris Ashley (1917), and 'Grimms' Fairy Tales' (1925). 
Attwell's illustrations for these gift books won the admiration of Queen Mary of Romania, a prolific writer (in English) of books and short stories for children. In 1922 Attwell was invited to spend several weeks at the royal palace in Bucharest, and she also illustrated two long stories by the queen which were published in a large gift-book format: 'Peeping Pansy' (1919) and 'The Lost Princess' (1924). The publisher of these, Hodder and Stoughton, also commissioned a set of illustrations for Sir J. M. Barrie's 'Peter Pan and Wendy', which was issued in a gift-book edition in 1921 and remained in print in various less ornate styles of production until the 1970s. 
Almost all Attwell's early book illustration was derivative. The early work for Chambers echoed that of her fellow illustrators Hilda Cowham (a personal friend) and Jessie Willcox Smith, and the gift-book illustrations were modelled on the work of other contemporary exponents of that genre -- John Hassall and the brothers Charles and William Heath Robinson. A poster which she designed for London Transport, and which may be numbered among the first of their very successful 'Travel by Underground' series ('c'.1918), owes a considerable debt to the work of John Hassall. 
Perhaps the most successful book of her whole career -- the 1910 'Alice' -- is the one in which Attwell was able to combine the linear strength of such artists with her own feeling for child gesture and homely detail, but before long she began to exploit the latter in a way which, while leading to wide commercial success, was at the cost of compositional values and the integrity of illustration and text to be illustrated. In such books as 'The Water Babies', 'Peter Pan', and 'Grimms' Fairy Tales' the graphic design was weakened through the introduction of too many extraneous elves and gauzy fairies, while the content of the portraiture in the pictures often ran counter to the intentions of the text. 
At the heart of this decline in the character of her book illustrations lay Attwell's growing reputation as an artist who could gratify adult susceptibilities towards the 'cuteness' of children. Rotund and cuddly infants had appeared in her early gift books, but they were also to be found in her magazine illustrations and in the long series of picture postcards which she designed for Valentine & Sons of Dundee from about 1914. Here she met the needs of a period when childhood was widely sentimentalized (as shown by the success of other artists such as Margaret Tarrant, and writers such as Marion St John Webb), and during the 1920s and 1930s Mabel Lucie Attwell children were ubiquitous. They figured on all kinds of nursery equipment, from calendars and nursery pictures to crockery and Chad Valley dolls, which were made from models which Attwell prepared in Plasticine. They appeared regularly in the 'Lucie Attwell Annual', which ran from 1922 to 1974 -- and the fact that this serial continued for ten years after her death shows how her stories or pictures might be reused. From 1924 a complex series of 'Lucie Attwell Picture Books', and books such as the 'Lucie Attwell Rainy Day Tales' (1931), were published, where previously published tales and pictures might be 'bulked', that is, selected promiscuously from the annuals or from other picture books and reproduced as they first appeared, or even with the pictures in reduced sizes or uncoloured, as in 'Lucie Attwell's Great Big Midget Book' (1934). Play books such as the doll-dressing album 'Peggy' (1921) and painting books (1934 onwards) were also published. 
Probably the happiest form in which Attwell's distinctive child pictures may be found is in individual pictures in some of her annuals and in her postcards. There the opportunity for cartoonist's wit, or even for self-parody, gives life to the subject. However, her delicate drawing in line and watercolour was often sadly coarsened by mass-production printing methods. Like the artist Kate Greenaway before her, Attwell exerted a considerable influence in adult reactions to children, which was not just to be found in her idealization of childhood as a time of dimpled, if cheeky, innocence, but also -- for small girls anyway -- in her creation, rather than reflection, of new fashions in dress and in the bobbing of hair. She died at her home, 3 St Fimbarrus Road, Fowey, Cornwall, on 5 November 1964. Her business was carried on by her daughter, Marjorie (known as Peggy), who had helped her in her later years. A centenary exhibition was held in her honour at the Brighton Museum between December 1979 and January 1980. 
Brian Alderson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30500


Aubrey, Melbourn Evans (1885-1957), Baptist minister and ecumenist, was born in the Rhondda on 21 April 1885, the eldest child of Edwin Aubrey and his wife, Elizabeth Jane Evans. His father was then pastor of Zion Baptist Church, Pentre, and subsequently ministered in Aber-carn, Glasgow, and Merthyr Tudful. Aubrey's boyhood was therefore set amid changing scenes. He early heard the call to the Christian ministry and, after proving himself an able student at Cardiff Baptist college, went on in 1908 to Mansfield College, Oxford, where A. M. Fairbairn was nearing the end of his principalship. In 1911 Aubrey was ordained to the ministry at Victoria Road Church, Leicester, as assistant to P. T. Thomson, a man of great ability and charm, who became his lifelong friend. Aubrey married in 1912 Edith Maria, daughter of Joseph G. Moore, a furniture dealer, of Watford, and they had one son and one daughter. 
After only eighteen months in Leicester, Aubrey was persuaded to undertake the pastorate of the historic Baptist church in St Andrew's Street, Cambridge, to which Robert Robinson and Robert Hall at one time ministered. Aubrey's gifts as a preacher and speaker matured quickly, and in spite of the difficulties brought by the war of 1914-18 he drew large congregations, which included many students and others connected with the university. T. R. Glover of St John's College became a deacon of the church, and Aubrey was one of the first consulted about the addresses which became 'The Jesus of History' (1917). 
In 1925, after twelve happy years in Cambridge, Aubrey was chosen to succeed J. H. Shakespeare as secretary of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland. He faced no easy task, for Shakespeare's health had given way some time before and the mind of the denomination was confused and uncertain as a result of sharp differences of opinion on church union. The first annual assembly for which Aubrey was responsible coincided with the general strike. His immediate task was the raising of a ministerial superannuation fund of $300,000. Thereafter he had to guide the Baptist denomination during the economic, constitutional, and international crises which preceded the Second World War, a period when almost all the British churches suffered severe losses from their membership. But he was a man of courage, wisdom, and resource, deeply devoted to his task, and his powers of leadership were soon recognized beyond the borders of his own denomination. In 1936 he was appointed moderator of the Federal Council of the Evangelical Free Churches and in 1937 he was made a CH. 
Aubrey was closely involved in the ecumenical movement and in 1937 was a prominent figure at the Oxford conference on church, community, and state and the Edinburgh faith and order conference. As a member of the Committee of Fourteen, he helped to draft the constitution of the World Council of Churches. During the war years of 1939-45 his steadiness and faith proved an inspiration to his colleagues at the Baptist Church House and to the churches in all parts of the country. He took a close interest in the work of Baptist and Congregational chaplains, and during a visit to the Mediterranean and the Near East he interviewed many servicemen whose thoughts were turning to the ministry. He had been appointed chairman of the Churches' Committee for Christian Reconstruction in Europe and was one of the first British churchmen to visit Germany at the close of hostilities. In 1947 he was appointed a member of the royal commission on the press, and in the same year, during a visit to Canada and the United States, was made an honorary LLD of McMaster University and an honorary DCL of Acadia University. From 1948 to 1950 he was a vice-president of the British Council of Churches, in the formation of which he had taken a deep interest. From 1948 to 1954 he served on the central committee of the World Council of Churches. For twenty-seven years he was a member of the executive of the Baptist World Alliance. 
These manifold activities did not deflect Aubrey from his constant concern for the spiritual welfare of the Baptist churches and the needs of ministers in Britain. In his personality strength, spiritual passion, and tenderness were blended. He was gifted both as a preacher and as an administrator and, without ever concealing his own convictions, successfully held together the diverse elements in the Baptist denomination during a period of no little difficulty. His services gained for him widespread confidence and gratitude, and on the eve of his retirement he was unanimously called to the presidency of the Baptist Union for 1950-51. There followed further visits to the United States, where a number of members of his family had settled, including his brother, Dr Edwin Ewart Aubrey, one time president of Crozer Seminary. Aubrey died at St Thomas's Hospital, Hambledon, Surrey, on 18 October 1957, survived by his wife. 
E. A. Payne', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30501


Aumonier, James (1832-1911), landscape painter, born in Camberwell on 9 April 1832, was the son of Henry Collingwood Aumonier, a jeweller, and his wife, Nancy Frances, daughter of George Stacy. The family was of French descent. A younger brother worked as an engraver and a nephew, Stacy Aumonier (1877-1928), became a landscape painter and decorative designer before becoming a successful short story writer. During James's childhood, which he spent in north London at Highgate and High Barnet, he showed an early enthusiasm for art: in a later letter to the writer on art Nancy Bell he reminisced about his early experiments in painting garden flowers with his small collection of watercolours and the fact that he was given various colours by a neighbouring coach painter for his first work in oil, a picture of Barking church after an engraving. At the age of fourteen he started work in an unknown business, but also attended evening classes at the London Mechanics' Institution, and subsequently at the Government School of Design, South Kensington. He was sufficiently successful in his studies to find work as a textile designer with a London firm. He married Amelia, daughter of James Wright, a gold beater, on 8 August 1863 and had two sons and two daughters, including Louise, who exhibited flower paintings at the London galleries. 
While working for the textile firm Aumonier began to paint out of doors in his spare time. Initially he sketched in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey and in Kensington Gardens in the early hours of the morning before starting work; he later took short train journeys out of London to places such as Epping Forest and Croydon. 'Old Farm Buildings, near Croydon' and 'Lane near Addington, Surrey', both painted in the Croydon area, were his first publicly exhibited works, shown in 1864, at the British Institution and at the Society of British Artists' galleries in Suffolk Street respectively. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1871, in which year he made the acquaintance of the artists Lionel Smythe and William Morison Wyllie (father of William Lionel Wyllie). The latter especially gave Aumonier much practical advice. In 1873 John Newton Mappin purchased 'An English Cottage Home' (Mappin Art Gallery, Sheffield) from the Royal Academy exhibition. This established Aumonier's reputation, although he continued to work at the textile factory for some time after. Aumonier's paintings were predominantly of the English countryside, peaceful landscapes characterized by the use of warm tints and an overall evenness of tone; contemporary critics admired his ability to capture atmosphere and the effects of light. He exhibited a great number of works at the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours; he was elected an associate in 1876 and a member in 1879. 'In a Gloucestershire Wood' was shown at the institute in 1883 and is now in the collection of Maidstone Museums and Art Gallery. Aumonier was one of the original members of the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours; his oils 'Sheep-Washing in Sussex' and 'The Black Mountains', exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1889 and 1905, are now in the Tate collection. A member of the short-lived British Society of Pastellists, he also worked in mezzotint, exhibiting 'The Close of Day' at the Royal Academy in 1886 and another such work, untitled, in 1888. He left England only once, when in 1891 he visited Venice and the Dolomites; he exhibited Venetian subjects at the Royal Academy in 1892 and 1893. 
In 1889 Aumonier received a gold medal for watercolour painting in Paris and was also the recipient of awards at exhibitions in Berlin, Brussels, Cardiff, Melbourne, and Manchester. On more than one occasion, at the beginning of the twentieth century, he received a number of votes in the elections of associate members of the Royal Academy but was unsuccessful. Aumonier was one of a group of painters including John Leslie Thomson, James Stevens Hill, and Arthur Douglas Peppercorn who held annual exhibitions of landscapes in oil at the Royal Watercolour Society's gallery. His first one-man exhibition was of watercolours and was held at the Leicester Galleries in 1908. He died on 4 October 1911 at 97 South Hill Park, Hampstead; his remains were cremated at Woking. In addition to the collections mentioned above, he is represented in the Leeds and Manchester city art galleries, as well as in public collections in Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 30502


Leigh, Augustus Austen (1840-1905), college head, born at Wargrave, Berkshire, on 17 July 1840, was the sixth son of James Edward Austen (from 1836 Austen Leigh), who when he died in 1874 was vicar of Bray (Berkshire), and Emma (died 1876), daughter of Charles Smith (1756-1814), MP, of Suttons in Essex. 
Austen Leigh entered Eton College as a colleger in 1852; in 1858-9 he played cricket for the school. In 1859 he entered King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar on the foundation; he gained a Browne medal for Latin ode, and a members' prize for Latin essay in 1862, graduated as fourth classic in 1863, and proceeded MA in 1866. In 1862 he became fellow of his college, where two of his brothers, Edward Compton Austen Leigh (1839-1916) and William Austen Leigh (died 1921), also held fellowships. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Lincoln (visitor of the college) in 1865, but his experience as curate of Henley-on-Thames, 1865-7, convinced him that he was unsuited for parochial work and he never proceeded to priest's orders. 
In 1867 Austen Leigh returned to King's College, where he spent the rest of his life. He was tutor (1868-81), dean (1871-3, 1882-5), and vice-provost (1877-89), and was then, on the death of Richard Okes, elected provost (9 February 1889), gaining a large majority over the other candidate, Henry Sidgwick. Shortly after his election he married, on 9 July 1889, Florence Emma ('b'. 1856/7), eldest daughter of George Benjamin Austen Lefroy. They had no children. Austen Leigh's work was that of an administrator, and his leading characteristics were fair-mindedness, courtesy, and unsparing industry. Although an essentially conservative figure, who set great store by college chapel and who regretted the ending of religious tests, he effected far-reaching changes in his college. As a result of a long series of reforms, which took shape in two successive bodies of statutes, ratified in 1861 and 1882 respectively, the college ceased to be a close corporation of Eton collegers. In the furthering of these reforms and in guiding their progress, lay the principal achievement of Austen Leigh's life. To him was largely due the establishment of a tutorial system, which turned the college into an effective centre of teaching. He also promoted closer relations between dons and undergraduates. As provost, he set about uniting the college, which had suffered from a division between the Etonian 'best set' and the outsiders recently admitted, and went on to preside with striking success over a period of remarkable intellectual growth. 
In 1876-80 and again in 1886-90 he was a member of the council of the senate of Cambridge University, and was vice-chancellor, 1893-5. From 1883 to his death he was president of the Cambridge University Musical Society and from 1886 president of the university cricket club. He was an active member of the governing bodies of Eton and Winchester colleges, from 1889 and 1890 respectively. His only published work was a 'History of King's College' (1899). On 28 January 1905 he died suddenly in his home, the provost's lodge in King's College, of angina pectoris, and was buried at Grantchester. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30503


Austin, Alfred (1835-1913), poet, was born at Headingley, near Leeds, on 30 May 1835, the second son and third child of the six children of Joseph Austin (died 1857), wool-stapler, of Leeds, and his wife, Mary Locke, sister of Joseph Locke (1805-1860), railroad engineer and MP for Honiton, Devon. Of a Roman Catholic family, Austin at the age of about six attended a day school in Headingley run by two Misses Summers, and then at the age of eight went to St Edward's, at Everton, near Liverpool, where he stayed for six years. In 1849 he enrolled at Stonyhurst College, Lancashire, and then transferred to the Roman Catholic Oscott College, near Birmingham. In 1853 he graduated with a BA from London University. In 1854 he decided upon law as his profession and entered the Inner Temple, London; he joined the northern circuit in 1857 and established quarters first in Figtree Court and later in Tanfield Court. 
Upon receiving an inheritance on the death of his uncle, Joseph Locke, in 1860, Austin gave up his fledgeling law career to devote himself entirely to the writing of literature. Earlier he had published a verse tale, 'Randolph: a Tale of Polish Grief' (1854), which had sold only seventeen copies ('Autobiography', 1.74), and a two-volume, overly sentimental and moralizing novel, 'Five Years of it' (1858). Strongly influenced by Byron's poetry, Austin wrote his first major poetic work, 'The Season: a Satire' (1861), dedicated to Disraeli, whom he admired. He followed it with the vitriolic 'My Satire and its Censors' (1861), mainly aimed at 'The Athenaeum' (which had harshly reviewed 'The Season') and its editor, William Hepworth Dixon. In 1862 he published the first draft of 'The Human Tragedy', an epic-type narrative poem. He revised and expanded this work several times, and issued the final version, set partly in the Risorgimento and the Franco-Prussian War, in 1891, but this first draft reflected his long-term spiritual struggles and religious doubts which he narrated more fully in his much later autobiographical poem, 'The Door of Humility' (1906). Although he never officially left the Roman Catholic faith, Austin's Roman Catholicism did not seem to play a major role in his poetry or his life. The extended version of 'The Human Tragedy' and the dramatic poem 'Fortunatus the Pessimist' (1892) he considered to be his best works ('Autobiography', 2.238). 
Disappointed with the cold reception of the 1862 version of 'The Human Tragedy', Austin temporarily stopped writing poetry and travelled several times to Italy, where he became close friends with the writer Thomas Adolphus Trollope and his first wife, Theodosia. In 1866 Austin began a 32-year association with 'The Standard', a tory organ, acting as leader writer from 1866 to 1896 and occasionally working as a special foreign correspondent -- for example, at the ecumenical council in Rome from November 1869 to February 1870, during the Franco-Prussian War at Prussian headquarters in 1870, and at the congress of Berlin in 1878. He retired from all journalistic work for 'The Standard' and other papers in 1898. He twice stood unsuccessfully for parliament as a Conservative; in 1865 for Taunton in Somerset and in 1880 for Dewsbury in Yorkshire. On 14 November 1865 he married Hester Jane Mulock (died 1929), an Irish protestant, the daughter of Thomas Homan Mulock of Bellair, King's county. After an extended honeymoon in Italy, in 1867 they leased Swinford Old Manor, at Hothfield, near Ashford, Kent, about 60 miles from London, where they lived until Austin's death. From 1863 onwards Austin was a frequent contributor of poetry and critical essays to major periodicals such as the 'Quarterly Review', 'Macmillan's Magazine', the 'Eclectic Magazine', 'The Academy', 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', and the 'Pall Mall Magazine', and in 1883 he and William John Courthope became joint editors of the newly founded Conservative journal the 'National Review'; Austin continued as sole editor of the journal from 1887 to 1895. From 1864 until his death he published over forty volumes of verses, poetical dramas, prose idylls, novels, and books of criticism. According to Michael Sadleir, at least one other novel, 'Jessie's Expiation' (1867), was written, under the pen-name Oswald Boyle (Sadleir, 1.12). 
One of Austin's earliest and best-known critical works was 'The Poetry of the Period' (1870), a collection of eight essays which he had previously published anonymously in the 'Temple Bar'. Several of the essays attacked Browning, Swinburne, Arnold, Morris, and, especially, Tennyson, dismissing them as insignificant or indifferent poets 'with no marks of greatness'. In the case of Tennyson, Austin wrote: 'Mr Tennyson is not a great poet, unquestionably not a poet of the first rank, all but unquestionably not a poet of the second rank, and probably -- though no contemporary perhaps can settle that -- not even at the head of poets of the third rank, among whom he must ultimately take his place. (Austin, 'Poetry of the Period', 4)' Another essay sparingly praised the poetry of the Roman Catholic poets Cardinal Newman, Aubrey de Vere, Father Faber, and Adelaide Anne Procter, and a final essay, 'Supernatural Poetry', concentrated on the spiritualistic poet-prophet Thomas Lake Harris. Austin's prose idylls 'The Garden that I Love' (1894) and 'In Veronica's Garden' (1895) proved to be two of his most popular works, the former going through five editions in two years. 'Prince Lucifer' (1887), a poetical drama, was dedicated to Queen Victoria on the occasion of her first jubilee. 'Flodden Field: a Tragedy' (1903), the only one of his several poetical dramas ever to be staged, was performed without success at His Majesty's Theatre in London in June 1903. 
On 1 January 1896, four years after Tennyson's death, Austin was appointed poet laureate in his place. This appointment probably was based more on his association with the prime minister, Lord Salisbury, and with his journalistic service to the tory party in 'The Standard' and the 'National Review', than on his poetic ability. Austin's first official poem as poet laureate, 'Jameson's Ride', appeared in 'The Times' on 11 January 1896, just ten days after his appointment. A tribute to the South African statesman Leander Starr Jameson, who invaded Transvaal on 29 December 1895 on an unauthorized and ill-fated march which led to his defeat and capture by the Boers, the poem was widely lampooned, parodied, and criticized. Not only was it inferior poetry, but the poet laureate's praise for Jameson was embarrassing to the government which had condemned the military action. Its poetic quality recalled Austin's famous lines on the prince of Wales's illness in 1871: '
Flash'd from his bed, the electric tidings came, 

He is not better; he is much the same. 
(P. Magnus, 'Edward VII', 1964, 114)' Although in his critical pronouncements Austin usually ranked as great poetry only epics and dramatic poems which combined love, religion, and patriotism, his own dramatic poetry was very seldom critically approved. His literary fame rests, almost totally, on his nature lyrics with their simple charm, such as those in 'English Lyrics' (1890), and on some of his prose idylls. Appreciatively called the 'laureate of the English Spring', he is at his best when expressing his intimate and genuine love of nature, and of the English countryside or its gardens. As Norton Crowell remarked, 'Few poets have been more thoroughly in rapport with their surroundings and more completely in love with nature' (Crowell, 258). Austin published his two-volume 'Autobiography' in 1911. A distinguished looking gentleman with a full head of white hair and a large white handlebar moustache, Alfred Austin died, childless, at his home, Swinford Old Manor, on 2 June 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 30504


Austin, Herbert, Baron Austin (1866-1941), engineer and motor vehicle manufacturer, was born on 8 November 1866 at Grange Farm, Deep Mill Lane, Little Missenden, Buckinghamshire, the second of five children of Giles Stevens Austin, a farmer, and his wife, Clara Jane, daughter of Willoughby Simpson, a customs officer in Rotherhithe. After beginning his education at the village school at Wentworth, Yorkshire, where his father was appointed farm bailiff on Earl Fitzwilliam's estate, Herbert Austin was educated at Rotherham grammar school and later at Brampton Commercial College, where he trained with a view to becoming an architect. 
During a period of apprenticeship entered into with a paternal uncle, Austin decided to train as an engineer. While he was awaiting a vacancy for an apprenticeship at the Great Northern Railway, in 1884 his mother's brother arranged an apprenticeship for him at the Melbourne engineering firm of Richard Parks, where the uncle was works manager. After two years Austin moved to another Australian firm, Cowans, in order to gain experience of high precision engineering; the company was an agent for printing machines and Crossley gas engines. He moved finally to Langlands foundry, which specialized in making steam engines and wheels for locomotives and machinery for the gold mining industry, where he completed his apprenticeship in 1887. During this time he continued to practise his talent for freehand geometric drawing, a favourite childhood pastime which he revived as a prize-winning student attending evening classes at the Hotham School of Art. 
Austin married Helen (died 1942), daughter of James Dron, a Melbourne merchant, in 1887; they had two daughters and a son. Shortly before his marriage, Austin had taken up his first appointment, as manager of a small general engineering business in Melbourne in a firm which was connected to Richard Parks & Co. The business had been set up to develop a new sheep-shearing machine for an inventor, Frederick York Wolseley, an immigrant from Dublin who since the 1860s had managed a sheep station. In 1876 Wolseley had patented a shearing machine and acquired a large sheep station where he pioneered its use. In 1887 he formed the Wolseley Sheep Shearing Machine Company (WSSMC) in Sydney. He was impressed with Austin's record as a reliable supplier of high quality parts, which reflected an engineering ability which Wolseley himself lacked, and persuaded him to join the company as chief engineer. This led to the Austin family's removal from Melbourne to Sydney, followed by their return to England in 1893. 
The circumstances which led to these changes included the winding up of the original WSSMC in 1889, when a new company of the same name, capitalized at $200,000, was formed in London. During the early 1890s Austin studied machinery in operation on a large sheep station. As a result he took out several patents for the improvement of Wolseley's machines, all of which in 1893 he assigned to the WSSMC. He also undertook to sell to the company all future patents relating to sheep shearing as part of a deal which brought him the managership of the company's operations, to be based from then on in a small workshop in central Birmingham. Although he received a share in the new company's equity, he was not a director. 
Austin's return to England in 1893 occurred when the company was in crisis, leading to the founder's resignation in 1894. The company's reputation had sustained serious damage as a result of the sale of a large amount of defective machinery, which Austin concluded was the result of the failure of local component suppliers to meet specifications with the precision required. His solution was to switch from assembly to manufacture. With great difficulty, he also persuaded the Wolseley directors to acquire a more spacious factory, the Sydney works, which allowed him to pursue a new policy of diversification. Until then the company had been an exporting business in a highly seasonal trade. Austin set out to alter the balance, beginning by adding to shearing machines the construction of machine tools for other trades and industries which generated a demand within Britain, particularly from cotton manufacturers and cycle makers; new products included lathes, screw cutting machinery, milling machines, high speed steam engines and castings, and gas engines. Austin also built up a business as a cycle agent, his first step in the direction of road transport. 
In 1894 Austin took out a joint patent with H. H. Mulliner, a leading coachbuilding firm, for a flat circular furnace for attaching metal tyres to wheels, but Mulliner withdrew from an initial alliance with Austin and the WSSMC in preference for a connection with the extensive newly formed, and ill-fated, Daimler Syndicate. After observing a 'horseless carriage' in Paris, either in 1895 or 1896, Austin, working in his own time during evenings and at weekends, constructed a motorized tri-car modelled on the French Bollee. The WSSMC directors agreed to invest $2000 in plant for vehicle manufacture under Austin's personal supervision, and the Wolseley Autocar Number 1, another three-wheeler, was exhibited at the Crystal Palace National Cycle Exhibition in December 1896. By building this vehicle, one of only a handful of experimental prototypes made before production was begun by the few companies which showed interest in the commercial potential of the motor car, Austin secured his place as one of the principal creators of a British motor industry. By 1897 the Autocar No. 1 incorporated several Austin patents, as did his first four-wheeled Wolseley vehicle of 1899/1900, which was built entirely from British parts and achieved a breakthrough to commercial success. In 1900 the 'voiturette', driven by its creator, won first prize from the 'Daily Mail' and a silver medal in the Auto-Club's 1000 mile trial. Relations between Austin and the Wolseley directors were not harmonious; he felt frustrated, dissatisfied at his exclusion from board discussions of policy issues, and disappointed by the directors' apparent lack of commitment to the commercial potential of the motor car. His own initiatives to form a company, for which he sought financial backing, failed. His achievements at Wolseley, however, led the directors of Vickers and Maxim, Britain's largest armaments manufacturer, who in 1896 had agreed in principle to enter the new industry, to decide to invest in Austin's vehicle enterprise, hitherto part of the WSSMC business under a contract nearing termination. 
The Wolseley Tool and Motor Company Ltd, capitalized at $40,000 and based at the Adderley Park works, was formed by Vickers in 1901. Austin was given a five-year contract as managing director, a salary, and 5 per cent of the company's annual net profits. After a period of nine months, during which he was free to spend half his time on the management of the WSSMC, his involvement with the latter was limited to that of director or consultant. He also received payment for the transfer of patents taken out in his name. Production commenced before the end of 1901; by the time the contract ended in 1906 more than 1500 Wolseley motor cars had been produced, the Wolseley marque had been established, and the company was the largest British motor manufacturer. Austin achieved an international reputation. 
Differences of opinion with Thomas and Albert Vickers over engine design precipitated Austin's departure shortly before the management contract expired. Convinced that he could only achieve his ambitions in the infant industry if he owned, controlled, and managed the business (a persistent theme of his private and public utterances throughout his life), by December 1905 Austin had persuaded the steel magnate Frank Kayser to provide mortgage and simple loans to the value of $11,350 for a new company. In addition to $3000 issued in the form of debentures, Austin held virtually all of the remaining capital, in the form of $5629 in ordinary shares, which he purchased with accumulated personal assets through savings and the sale of patents; together, these formed the financial underpinning for the Austin Motor Company Ltd. As one of the two founding directors, Kayser made financial guarantees which were also important in securing substantial overdraft facilities from the Midland Bank during the new company's crucial first few years. A further injection of capital in 1906 brought William Harvey Du Cros (1846-1918), managing director of the Swift Cycle Company, on to the Austin board of directors. In its first full year of production the company employed 270 workers and built 120 vehicles; in 1914, when it became a public company capitalized at $650,000, 1500 vehicles were produced by roughly 2300 workers. By that time the Austin Motor Company was probably the fifth biggest British motor manufacturer, after Wolseley (which continued to be the largest), Humber, Sunbeam, and Rover. Austin's position in the new company was similar to that in the Wolseley Tool and Motor Company, chairman and managing director for an initial five-year term. His shareholding was the same as that of Du Cros, each possessing almost one-half of the ordinary capital, though Austin also received a salary and 2.5 per cent of net profits. 
The First World War saw a transformation in the scale and scope of production at the Austin plant at Longbridge, as the product range changed from cars to armoured cars, ambulances and lorries, shells, guns, aeroplanes, generators, and pumps. Expansion in production was accompanied by an increase in employees to 20,000. Austin's services to the war effort were recognized in 1917 by appointment as KBE, and in Belgium by admission as commander of the order of Leopold II. After the war problems associated with the conversion of a hugely expanded manufacturing capacity from war to peacetime production created serious financial difficulties for the company. For peacetime purposes the works layout, which consisted of three separate complexes each comprising several buildings, was inconvenient, while much of the plant and equipment was unsuitable. Purchase of the large north and west works from the Treasury and the conversion to peacetime production necessitated a public issue in the form of $1 million preference shares in 1919. In addition, some of Austin's commercial decisions did little to alleviate post-war difficulties. Pre-war success had been based on the manufacture, assembly, and sale of relatively large, high quality, and expensive vehicles. Crucially, before the war ended Austin misinterpreted the significance of Henry Ford's single model strategy by deciding to limit car production after the war to the large, expensive Austin Twenty, first produced in 1919; the logic for doing so was the simultaneous manufacture of tractors and lorries which incorporated the same 20 hp engine. During the deep depression which struck the industry in 1921 the company's creditors, notably the Midland Bank, forced it into the hands of the official receiver. As a result, Austin cars were excluded from the prestigious annual Olympia Exhibition. 
This was a turning point both for Austin and for his company. The economics of car production in Britain had begun to be transformed by Henry Ford's English assembly plant shortly before the war, while after the war William Morris (later Lord Nuffield) succeeded in Anglicizing Ford's approach to the market, also on the basis of assembling, rather than manufacturing, vehicles. Austin's post-war financial crisis, therefore, occurred at a time when the company was most vulnerable because of the pace of change in the industry. In 1919 the Midland Bank's substantial financial support in the form of a mortgage and a large advance was extended, but only after Austin's two co-directors were replaced by bank nominees, one being a director of Portland Cement, the other a director of several financial organizations. In the reconstruction, which began in 1921, intervention went further. On the insistence of creditors, particularly the debenture holders and the Midland Bank, the managerial functions of finance, production, and organization were transferred to outsiders recruited to assume these key responsibilities. Austin, who remained as chairman though not managing director, accepted the appointments with reluctance, particularly that of Charles Richard Fox (Carl) Engelbach, whose responsibilities as works director initially set out by the creditors' committee he succeeded in modifying so that vehicle design continued to be his own personal responsibility. Even though he owned at least one-fifth of the voting shares in the company after financial restructuring, management by a committee, which was one of the reforms imposed by the creditors' committee, was clearly intended to remove overall control of corporate strategy from the founder. 
Loss of managerial control of the business which he had created, allied to his personal financial difficulties, may help to explain Austin's proposals to effect a merger with William Morris's business empire in 1924/5. Morris rejected this overture, while in the same year Austin's hopes of selling out to the American automobile manufacturer, General Motors, also came to nothing. Then approaching the age of sixty, in both instances the founder of the Austin Motor Company had clearly envisaged a secondary role for himself, limited to design and matters related to his professional engineering interests, rather than as a manager. In 1926, the creator of the Wolseley marque suffered a further personal blow when he was outbid by Morris, who acquired the Wolseley Motor Company from the receivers. Nevertheless, as a result of the 1921 reorganization the Austin Motor Company survived, and in two key aspects of management Austin continued to shape corporate policy. 
In 1918 he introduced a formal apprenticeship scheme involving attendance at technical colleges and which extended to training in engineering, a trade, or commerce. He also founded an Austin scholarship which enabled successful candidates to continue study at Birmingham University. While labour management was not his particular responsibility, his hostility to trade unions was reflected in the company's policy which neither the trade unions nor the Engineering Employers' Federation regarded as at all co-operative. Until the tightening of the labour market during the late 1930s, Longbridge was virtually a non-union company. 
The other aspect of the business which Austin dominated even more was that of design. After the war, serious difficulties faced by the Austin Motor Company led him to design cars which would appeal to a wider section of the population than had previous Wolseley and Austin models. This occurred in stages. The Austin Twenty single model policy was scrapped during 1921, when Austin designed a scaled down, lower priced version in the form of the Austin Twelve. Then came the innovation which captured a large section of the market, which before the war had been dominated by Ford and during the early 1920s by Morris; the Austin Seven, 'the baby Austin', entered the showrooms in 1922. 
By the end of the decade profits from the sale of this car enabled the Austin Motor Company to pay off huge debts to the bank and to other debenture holders, and by 1929 to begin resumption of dividend payments to holders of ordinary shares. Austin's diminished personal assets rose as a result of accumulating royalties from his patent on the Austin Seven, which he designed on his own initiative and initially without corporate support. Between 1925 and 1932 the car accounted for roughly half the company's production, at a time when roughly one-fifth of all cars made in Britain were made at the Longbridge factory. This national share rose to a quarter in 1933 and 1934 when, for a short time, Austin produced more cars than Morris. The boost to sales provided by the Austin Seven was sustained during the mid-1930s by the success of the Austin Ten, designed by Austin at the request of his co-directors, who on that occasion ensured full financial backing from conception to production, as a response to the innovative Hillman Ten. The Austin Ten was important in enabling the company to retain second place to the Nuffield organization in the face of intensified competition from the Rootes group, the Standard Motor Company, the Vauxhall Motor Company (General Motors), and from the new Dagenham plant of a thoroughly revived Ford Motor Company. 
Versions of the Austin Seven were produced on licence in France, Germany, and the USA, though with mixed results. The greatest overseas success occurred in Japan where, following a period when a company, later known as Nissan, had been infringing Austin patents, in 1934 the same Japanese company began to build cars under licence. This marked the beginning of the internationally successful Datsun motor car and the growth of a company which later, following the collapse of the British-owned motor industry, became one of the largest vehicle manufacturers in Britain. 
These achievements owed much to Austin's success as an engineer and a creative designer, though much less to his ability to manage financial, personal, or corporate affairs, or a large organization. At its peak during the late 1930s the company employed 20,000 workers and produced between eighty and ninety thousand vehicles. His working life was concentrated on Longbridge, though he continued as director of WSSMC, of which he was also chairman, between 1911 and 1933. His contribution to the motor industry and his professional standing among engineers were recognized in several ways. He was president of the Institute of British Carriage and Automobile Manufacturers in 1912, of the Cast Iron Research Association in 1929, of the Institution of Automobile Engineers in 1931, and of the Institute of Production Engineers in 1932-3. He was elected to an honorary life membership of the Institute of British Foundrymen in 1935, and of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1936; he became president of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders in 1934. In 1937 he was chairman of the government's shadow aero-engine committee. 
The philanthropic causes which received Austin's financial support included the Birmingham hospitals. He was chairman of the Birmingham General Hospital in 1932 and in 1940 became president of the Birmingham United Hospital. The largest donation he made was in 1932, when $250,000 was donated to Cambridge University to advance Lord Rutherford's research at the Cavendish Laboratory. In 1936 he became Baron Austin of Longbridge. He received an honorary degree of LLD from the University of Birmingham in 1937. Religion played no part in his life, though after the death of his only son, Vernon, who was killed in action in France in 1915, he embraced the philosophy of Pelmanism. A contemporary suggested that rather than diminishing, grief over his son's death intensified. 
In politics Austin was a Conservative, serving as MP for the King's Norton division of Birmingham between 1918 and 1924, when he was publicly silent on, though elsewhere an advocate for, the need for 'businessmen's government'. His public life was limited; until his death Longbridge absorbed most of his energies. He died at his home, Lickey Grange, near Bromsgrove, on 23 May 1941. Minutes before his death he signed documents approving the design for new car models. Austin's enduring legacy was his achievement as a professional engineer in helping to create the British motor industry; his managerial approach and style proved less effective in the large organization which his company eventually became, though any explanation for these limitations must take account of his temperament, as well as his personal financial embarrassments, and his grief following the death of his son. 


