@@@@@


doc= 30505


Austin, John Langshaw (1911-1960), philosopher, was born in Lancaster on 26 March 1911, the second son of the five children of Geoffrey Langshaw Austin (1884-1971), architect, and his wife, Mary Bowes-Wilson (1883-1948). After the First World War his parents moved to St Andrews, where his father became secretary of St Leonard's School. In 1924 Austin went to Shrewsbury with a scholarship in classics. He was awarded a classical scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1929 to read 'literae humaniores'. In 1931 he won the Gaisford prize for Greek prose and achieved a first class in classical moderations. The Greats course introduced him to serious philosophical studies, and gave him a lasting interest in Aristotle. Two years later he obtained a first in finals. His training as a classical scholar and linguist was an important influence upon his later philosophical work, both in respect of his fascination with the intricacies and subtleties of language and in respect of his demand for detailed attention to and precision in the description of the use of words. Of his teachers it was H. A. Prichard who, according to Isaiah Berlin (Berlin, 2), most impressed him. He seemed to Austin to be the most rigorous and minute thinker in Oxford. Prichard's preoccupation with the analysis of promising may have been the origin of Austin's later interest in speech acts. In 1933 he was elected to a fellowship by examination at All Souls. He remained there only two years, being elected to a tutorial fellowship at Magdalen College in 1935. 
It was at All Souls that Austin met Isaiah Berlin, with whom in the pre-war years he enjoyed numerous philosophical conversations. In 1936 they held a joint class for a term at All Souls on C. I. Lewis's 'Mind and the World Order', the first seminar on a contemporary philosopher held in Oxford. Many testified to the force and fertility of Austin's performance at this class. Berlin later described it as the best class he had ever attended. Austin was 'slow, formidable, and relentless' and 'dealt firmly with criticism and opposition of the intelligent and stupid alike, and, in the course of this, left the genuine philosophers in our class not crushed or frustrated, but stimulated and indeed excited' (Berlin, 8). In Berlin's view, this marked the true beginning of Austin's career as an independent thinker. In the spring of 1937, at Austin's suggestion, Berlin organized a discussion group that met weekly during term in Berlin's rooms at All Souls. Other members of the group were A. J. Ayer, D. G. C. MacNabb, A. D. Woozley, S. N. Hampshire, and D. MacKinnon. Discussions continued until the summer of 1939, ranging over the subjects of perception, a priori truth, counterfactuals, and personal identity. This little group was one of the two sources of post-war Oxford analysis. Austin's opposition to phenomenalism dates from this time, as does his conviction that many large-scale philosophical theories (such as phenomenalism) are muddles consequent upon the neglect of linguistic distinctions readily available to us if we but pay careful attention to the use of ordinary language. He was deeply suspicious of the philosophical jargon of the logical positivists and of received philosophical dichotomies (such as verifiable/meaningless). The group was not in the least doctrinaire, but Austin and Ayer typically clashed. Nevertheless, Berlin later wrote: 'the intellectual freshness and force, both of Austin and of Ayer, were such that although they were in a state of almost continuous collision -- Ayer like an irresistible missile, Austin like an immoveable obstacle -- the result was not stalemate, but the most interesting, free, and lively discussions of philosophy that I have ever known. (ibid., 16)' Before the war Austin lectured primarily on Aristotle and Leibniz. He published only one paper, 'Are there a priori concepts?' (1939), which was largely destructive. His reputation as a powerful, original thinker and fierce critic was already well established in Oxford, even though he had not yet found his own voice. 
During the war Austin served in the intelligence corps. He was the prime mover in the intelligence-gathering for the invasion of Normandy, and it was said of him that 'he more than anyone else was responsible for the life-saving accuracy of the D-day intelligence' (Warnock, 'John Langshaw Austin', 351). From 1944 he served in Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, reaching the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1945 he was appointed OBE, received the Croix de Guerre, and was made an officer of the Legion of Merit. 
In 1941 Austin married Jean Coutts ('b'. 1918), daughter of the late C. R. V. Coutts, actuary. His wife later took up a career in philosophy, and was a fellow of St Hilda's College, Oxford, from 1964 until 1986. They had four children: two sons, Charles and Richard, and two daughters, Harriet and Lucy. Austin, reserved and formal in public life, was very much a family man. His American pupil George Pitcher later wrote: 'The Austins... constituted, for me, one ideal of what a family can be'. 
After the war the philosophical scene in Oxford was transformed. Led by Ryle, the younger generation rapidly turned Oxford into the world centre for analytic philosophy. In this process Austin played a role second only to Ryle's. He rapidly found his own distinctive voice and direction. His 'Other minds' (1946) bears his hallmark: a discriminating eye for linguistic detail, a sensitive ear for the subtleties of linguistic usage, and a scintillating, sometimes caustic, wit. He published very little: a mere seven papers, all invited for special occasions ('Philosophical Papers', ed. G. J. Warnock and J. O. Urmson; 3rd edn, enlarged, 1979), an edition of H. W. B. Joseph's lectures on Leibniz (1949), and a translation of Frege's 'Grundlagen der Arithmetik' (1950). In 1952 he was elected to the White's chair in moral philosophy at Corpus Christi College. His outstanding administrative skills were at the service of the university. He was junior proctor in 1949-50 and was appointed a delegate of the Oxford University Press in 1952, serving as chairman of its finance committee from 1957 until his death. He was president of the Aristotelian Society in 1956-7, and was elected FBA in 1958. 
During his lifetime Austin's influence made itself felt largely through his teaching, not only in lectures and tutorials, but even more through his famous 'Saturday morning meetings', organized for the benefit of contemporary and junior non-professorial members of the subfaculty of philosophy. Austin 'regarded discussion not only as the best but as an indispensable instrument of progress in philosophy; and though he was utterly without pomp or pretension his intellectual power, serene lucidity, and astringent wit conferred on him a natural authority in any gathering of philosophers. He believed that by such co-operative discussion, conducted with sufficient care for detail, step-by-step progress could be made and recordable solutions of philosophical problems reached. ('DNB')' Among those who attended these meetings over the years were M. Dick, H. P. Grice, S. N. Hampshire, R. M. Hare, H. L. A. Hart, P. H. Nowell Smith, G. Paul, D. F. Pears, P. F. Strawson, J. O. Urmson, G. J. Warnock, and A. D. Woozley. The texts discussed included Aristotle's 'Ethics', Frege's 'Foundations of Arithmetic', Chomsky's 'Syntactic Structures', Merleau Ponty's 'Phenomenology of Perception', and Wittgenstein's 'Philosophical Investigations'. General topics examined included rules of games (with an eye on questions about meaning and rules for the use of words) in preparation for which each member of the group was given a book of rules to study, and aesthetics, for which an illustrated handbook of industrial design was scrutinized in order to find out what people actually say in aesthetic appraisal, when the topic is not so august as to inhibit good sense. Time was spent on investigating dispositional concepts apropos Ryle's 'Concept of Mind', and differences were sought between 'disposition', 'trait', 'characteristic', 'habit', 'inclination', 'susceptibility', and 'propensity'. This co-operative work was informed by the belief that within a given domain of discourse, ordinary language, by contrast with philosophical language, contains all the distinctions mankind has hitherto found useful to draw, and that these distinctions are likely to be useful. Moreover, through inattention, philosophers commonly misuse the instruments of ordinary language, and consequently generate confusion. Hence clarification of these distinctions in any given domain is likely to shed light on philosophical problems and doctrines. 
Although Austin is often thought of as a paradigmatic 'linguistic philosopher', he did not believe that the problems of philosophy are problems about language, or that all the problems of philosophy arise out of the misuse of ordinary language. He did not eschew introduction of technical terminology, as long as there is a genuine need for it and it is introduced clearly. He did not claim that ordinary language has the last word, but only that it may have the first word within a domain in which numerous distinctions are to be expected, such as that of excuses, as opposed, say, to time. Nor did he claim that the methods he pursued in his own chosen subjects were the only suitable methods for philosophy. On the contrary: one of his talks on method was entitled 'Something about one way of possibly doing one part of philosophy'. 
Austin's main contributions to his subject lie in three areas: perception, action, and the theory of speech acts. In 1947 he began lecturing on perception, and continued to do so intermittently until his death. These lectures, reconstructed from Austin's notes by G. J. Warnock, were published with the title of 'Sense and Sensibilia' in 1962. His general target was the phenomenalist doctrine that the argument from illusion shows that we never perceive, or directly perceive, material objects but only sense data, ideas, impressions, or sensa. The main exemplification of the offending doctrine which he chose was A. J. Ayer's 'The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge' (1940). He held this doctrine to be a scholastic or philosophical view, attributable to an obsession with a few words, 'the uses of which are over-simplified, not really understood or carefully studied or correctly described', and to 'an obsession with a few half-studied facts' ('Sense and Sensibilia', 3). Among the words are 'material object', 'illusion', 'deception', 'real' and its cognate 'reality', 'seems', 'looks', 'appears'. Among the 'half studied facts' are the phenomena of sticks immersed in water, mirages, and reflections. Austin showed how mistaken philosophical conclusions are reached through the misuse of these terms and through the misdescription of such phenomena. The crude dichotomy of objects of perception -- either material objects or sense data -- and its cousin -- either direct or indirect perception -- are, again, deeply misleading. And, as always, both members of each pair are equally questionable and in need of critical scrutiny. Not everything we perceive is a material object (shadows, voices, rainbows), and when it is not, it does not follow that what we perceive is a sense datum, let alone that it is not real (a rainbow is not 'unreal', and a 'real' rainbow may be contrasted with a painted one, not with an unreal one). It is mistaken to suppose that we perceive material things indirectly, by the reception of sense data. To see something indirectly may amount to seeing it through a periscope, but is not a matter of 'directly perceiving' a sense impression. That something is not real does not show that it is mere appearance. 'Real' is a word which takes its significance from what it is contrasted with, such as fake, artificial, bogus, toy, synthetic, and so on, none of which implies anything unreal. 'Looks', 'seems', and 'appears' are not synonyms, but have subtly differentiated roles, which Austin carefully described. 'Sense and Sensibilia' helped to put an end, at least for a generation, to the extravagances of phenomenalism and representationalism. 
Austin's contribution to the theory of action was made in two seminal articles: 'A plea for excuses' (1956) and 'Ifs and cans' (1956), and a short posthumously published paper, 'Three ways of spilling ink'. These generated fertile debate on responsibility and freedom, detailed work on the variety of conditionals, and systematic attention to the concepts of ability and possibility in relation to human action. 
Austin's most influential work was his theory of speech acts outlined in lectures entitled 'Words and deeds', first given at Oxford in 1952 and delivered as the William James lectures (published as 'How to do Things with Words') at Harvard in 1955. Edited by J. O. Urmson, they were published in 1962 (revised edn by J. O. Urmson and M. Sbisa, 1975). Here he distinguished between the kinds of acts one performs in uttering a sentence: the phonetic act of making certain noises, the phatic act of uttering certain grammatically well-structured words, the locutionary act of using a sentence with a given sense and reference, the illocutionary act performed 'in' performing the locutionary act, for example stating, promising, describing, thanking, and the perlocutionary act which one may succeed in performing 'by' performing the illocutionary act, for example deterring, inciting, persuading, misleading. Utterances may be further classified according to their illocutionary force into 'verdictives', such as estimating, convicting, 'exercitives', such as appointing, ordering, 'commissives', such as promising, guaranteeing, 'behabitives', such as apologizing, congratulating, and 'expositives', such as replying, conceding. The elaborate typology was intended as a preliminary step in the development of a comprehensive theory of speech acts. Indeed, Austin probably thought of his 'almost botanical classifications of locution-types much less as contributions to philosophy than as elements of a future 'Principia Grammatica'' (G. Ryle, 'Collected Papers', 1971, 1.273). Nevertheless, he thought that his 'botanizing' would 'also' yield a philosophical harvest. He declared that it would enable one 'to play Old Harry with two fetishes', namely the true/false fetish and the fact/value fetish, and so, yet again, to undermine oversimplified and unreflective philosophical dichotomies. This, sadly, he did not live long enough to do. Austin's work on speech acts stimulated extensive philosophical debate, and many of his distinctions became and remained part of the stock-in-trade of philosophy of language. It was equally influential among theoretical linguists. 
Austin was, his friend Herbert Hart recounted: 'often reserved in manner and on occasions formidable. But he had great natural courtesy, gaiety, and charm, and much manifest benevolence, especially for his pupils. His intellectual daring, power, and wit made his company a constant source of pleasure as well as of instruction. ('DNB')' He died of cancer on 8 February 1960 at his home, Walnut Tree House, Old Marston, Oxford. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30506


Avory, Sir Horace Edmund (1851-1935), judge, was born at 3 Pitts Place, Southwark, London, on 31 August 1851, the second son of Henry Avory (1826-1881), a solicitor who was clerk of the court at the central criminal court from 1860 until his death, and his wife, Margaret Kemp. He was educated at Gothic House College in Clapham, then at King's College, London, and Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar. Captain of the college boat club in 1872, he was awarded a third class in the law and history tripos the following year. He was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1875 and joined the chambers of Edward Thomas Edmonds Besley, a leader of the criminal bar. On 18 April 1877 he married Maria Louisa (died 1937), daughter of Henry Castle, a timber merchant, of Kingston, Surrey. They had two children, a son and a daughter. 
Avory practised on the south-eastern circuit and regularly appeared, both as prosecutor and as defending counsel, at the Old Bailey, not at that time acknowledged as a training ground for aspiring judges. It none the less gave him the opportunity to 'devil' for leading practitioners such as Sir Harry Bodkin Poland, Montagu Williams, and Sir Edward Clarke. Though not the most eloquent of advocates, he was a sound, even bold, lawyer whose practice grew rapidly. In 1889 he became a Treasury counsel (from 1899 the senior prosecuting counsel) at the central criminal court, and for the next twelve years he was engaged in most of the important criminal trials in London. He advised the director of public prosecutions on the Cleveland Street male brothel scandal, the notorious case (1889-90) involving telegraph boys which implicated Lord Arthur Somerset. He also prosecuted in many notable trials, including that of Oscar Wilde in 1895, the Jameson raid plotters in 1896, and those of Adolph Beck the same year and Horatio Bottomley in 1909. He also gave evidence to the committee of inquiry in 1904 into Beck's wrongful conviction and was exonerated from any blame. His objection, upheld by the judge, to a certain line of cross-examination was later said to have been partly responsible for the miscarriage of justice. 
Appointed king's counsel in 1901, Avory was an immediate success as a leader. He appeared in many of the major fraud trials of his generation, including the Liverpool Bank case (1902) and the prosecution of Whitaker Wright (1904). Judges listened attentively to his precise arguments and juries appreciated the clarity with which he put his clients' cases to them. Apart from crime, he also handled running down, defamation, licensing, and other judicial review cases. As junior to William Robson, later lord of appeal in ordinary, he also appeared for Earl Russell at the latter's House of Lords trial for bigamy (1901). 
Before his elevation to the judicial bench, Avory was appointed recorder of Kingston (1902; an unpaid post), a bencher of the Inner Temple from 1908, and commissioner of assize for the south-east and northern circuits in 1909 and 1910, respectively. He was appointed to the King's Bench and knighted in October 1910. Indeed it is as a trial judge that Avory will be best remembered. Many of his cases became 'causes celebres', such as the 'trial at bar' (the fiction that all King's Bench judges were sitting) of Sir Roger Casement, when he sat with Lord Chief Justice Reading and Mr Justice Horridge. Described as a dignified and courteous judge who discouraged levity, prolixity, and irrelevance and who preferred to limit his judicial interventions with counsel and witnesses, he was none the less subsequently criticized, in a libel case linked to the Oscar Wilde controversy, for taking 'every opportunity of telling F. E. Smith [whom he disliked], who of course could not retaliate, that he was straying from the point, or was out of order' (Buckmaster, 96). His legal directions are entitled to respect, though an early direction in 1911 on corroborative evidence was overturned by the court of criminal appeal. In 1928 his refusal to allow separate trials for the accused murderers Frederick Guy Browne and William Henry Kennedy, after the latter had denied any active part in the shooting of PC Gutteridge, was strongly contested by Kennedy's counsel but his ruling was upheld at the men's unsuccessful appeal. When, as in the Patrick Mahon murder trial in 1924, he exercised his discretion under the 'Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act' 1919 to remove women from the jury, his motive was no doubt his misplaced sense of chivalry. The pathologist Sir Bernard Spilsbury had described the murder scene as the most gruesome he had ever experienced. 
Avory's summing up to juries was usually a model of lucidity and accuracy and he was invariably unsympathetic to sentimental appeals. Although both Browne and Kennedy, before being sentenced to death, declared from the dock that they had received a fair trial, Avory was the recipient of more threatening letters than any other judge. Such missives did not disconcert him. He treated them as a joke and even preserved them in a scrapbook. His manner in court was certainly cold and at times stern and he was not averse to imposing heavy sentences, for example, the maximum of fourteen years' penal servitude (upheld, indeed effectively increased by a few weeks, on appeal) on a City fraudster, Clarence Hatry, in 1930. As a member of the divisional court, his knowledge of magistrates' law was invaluable while in the court of criminal appeal his opinion often influenced the other members of the court, for example, his round condemnation of Mr Justice McCardie's eccentric outburst at the Griffiths trial in 1931. 
On the retirement in 1923 of Sir Charles Darling, with whose courtroom theatricals and sense of humour Avory's restrained manner can be contrasted, the latter became senior judge of King's Bench. During the absence through ill health of Lord Hewart, the lord chief justice, he discharged the official duties of that office. In 1929 he became treasurer of the Inner Temple and in 1932 he was sworn of the privy council. He continued to sit in court regularly until his death, sixty years after his call to the bar. 
Avory chaired a committee whose deliberations led to the codification of the perjury, forgery, and larceny laws in legislation of 1911, 1913, and 1916, respectively. He also influenced the shaping of other criminal law statutes, including the 'Indictments Act' 1915, and the 'Criminal Justice Act' 1925. The 'Law of Evidence Act' 1938, passed after his death, owed much to his earlier involvement in a judicial committee whose establishment, on the initiative of Mr Justice Maugham, was agreed in 1931. 
Awarded an honorary LLD by Cambridge University (1911), Avory became an honorary fellow of Corpus Christi College in 1912 and a fellow of King's College, London, the same year. His great sporting love was golf, though to his regret his devotion to the game did not extend to stretching the licensing laws to permit golfers to buy intoxicating liquor after their round of golf but before the permitted licensing hours (see 'Brown v. Joyce', 1931). While fellow members of the Pegasus, Garrick, and United University clubs found him a pleasant and amusing companion, he did not go out of his way to cultivate friendships and preferred a limited circle of friends. Small in physical stature, 'it was said of him that he was spare of flesh and sparing of compliments, but never spared criminals' (Browne and Tullett, 277). Yet although he was widely perceived as austere, stern, unbending, 'almost insignificant in appearance' (Hastings, 95) -- indeed he has even been described as being 'desiccated in appearance' (Jackson, 288) -- those who knew him well (and few did) insisted that appearances were deceptive and that he could be kindly and generous. Sir Patrick Hastings, attorney-general in the Labour government of 1924, and who had joined Avory's chambers at the start of his career, was one of these. Apart from valuing his kindness, he considered Avory both 'one of the great figures of the English Bar' and a 'great Judge' (Hastings, 94, 124). It is indisputable that he was one of the more memorable judges of the twentieth century. However, a judge who, according to Travers Humphreys, saw the law both as his hobby (apart from golf) and as his profession perhaps enjoyed a more cloistered existence than others of his calling. He died in harness on 13 June 1935, of heart failure, at the Dormy House Club, Rye, Sussex, while on a golfing holiday, and was buried at Golders Green five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 30507


Ayerst, William (1830-1904), Church of England clergyman and missionary, was born on 16 March 1830 at Danzig. His father, 
On 28 September 1859 Ayerst married Helen Sarah Hough Drawbridge; they had ten children, of whom three sons and a daughter survived him. In the same year he went to India as rector of St Paul's School, Calcutta. In 1861 he was appointed to a chaplaincy on the Bengal ecclesiastical establishment; he served as senior chaplain with the Khyber field force from 1879 to 1881, and received the Afghan medal. After returning to London he was appointed by the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews as principal of its missionary college and minister of the Jews' Episcopal Chapel, Cambridge Heath. In 1882, however, he accepted the vicarage of Hungarton with Twyford and Thorpe Satchville, Leicestershire. In 1884 he opened at Cambridge, Ayerst Hostel, designed to aid men of modest means in obtaining a university degree and theological training. He resigned his living in 1886, but served as curate of Newton, Cambridgeshire, from 1888 to 1890, and continued his work at Ayerst Hostel until 1897. He was a well-known evangelical in the Cambridge tradition. 
In 1885 members of the Church of England in Natal who had stood by Bishop J. W. Colenso after his deposition from the see of Natal formally applied to the English archbishops through the church council of Natal for the consecration of a successor to Colenso. The request was refused. After some delay Ayerst accepted the offer of the bishopric, and again attempts were made to obtain consecration. This, in spite of Ayerst's persistency, was definitely refused by Archbishop E. W. Benson on 21 October 1891. In 1893 Ayerst married Annie Young Davidson. He passed his last years living quietly in London, and died on 6 April 1904 at his home, 146 Sinclair Road, Kensington, London. 
Ayerst's first son by his first marriage, also 


@@@@@


doc= 30508


Aylward, Gladys May (1902-1970), missionary, was born on 24 February 1902 in Edmonton, Middlesex, the eldest of the three children of Thomas John Aylward, postman, and his wife, Rosina Florence Whiskin, daughter of a surgical boot maker. After receiving an elementary education, at the age of fourteen she became a shop-girl, then a children's nanny, settling finally to be a parlourmaid. She was efficient and pleasant, liked frequent moves, and served in several well-known households in the West End of London. 
Gladys Aylward's father, who had been vicar's warden of St Aldhelm's Church, Edmonton, had joined a nearby gospel mission when she was nine; the Aylwards were brought up as active Christians, and in London a youth movement soon absorbed her free evenings to the exclusion of an earlier interest in the stage. In December 1929 she was accepted for missionary training by the China Inland Mission, which had been founded in 1865 partly to provide opportunity for men and women of strong faith but indifferent education; however, she was soon rejected as a willing yet hopeless student. Still intent on China, Gladys Aylward worked in the slums of Bristol and Swansea until she nearly died of double pneumonia. Back in Edmonton for convalescence, depressed by her failure to reach China, she went reluctantly with her mother to a Primitive Methodist meeting at Wood Green. Here she heard that a widowed Mrs Jeannie Lawson, an elderly member of a small independent mission in north China, needed a helper who must find her own way out. 
Gladys Aylward returned home that evening a different woman. She became a parlourmaid again to save money for the cheapest fare, by the Trans-Siberian Railway. In an incident afterwards made famous on film, she sat in an attic room in the South Kensington home of the daughter of Sir Francis Younghusband and put her few coppers on the bed and prayed: 'Oh God! Here's me. Here's my 'Bible', here's my money! Use us, God! Use us!' (Burgess, rev. edn, 18). 
On 15 October 1932 Gladys left Liverpool Street Station for China. She needed all her cockney wit and pluck to survive the passage through the Soviet Union, and reached north China via Japan to join Mrs Lawson, a prickly, unpredictable Scot, in the country town of Yangsheng, Shansi province. 
They opened an inn for muleteers as a means of evangelism. There Gladys Aylward learned Chinese by ear rather than by book. After her patron's death the mandarin made her inspector of feet, in the campaign against female foot binding, a post which gave her openings everywhere. With her tiny size (she was but 5 feet tall) and very dark brown hair, her humour, and entire lack of colour or cultural prejudice, she became a greatly loved and masterly story-teller of simple Christianity: the Jesus of Gladys Aylward was real and alive, to be talked to and consulted at every turn. 
Known as Ai Weh-te -- the nearest the Chinese could get to Aylward and which meant, felicitously, 'the virtuous one' -- Gladys became a Chinese citizen in 1936. Her best-known exploit, during the Japanese war, was in 1940 to lead 100 children through hardships and dangers to safety across the Yellow River. At Fufeng she fell dangerously ill, and on partial recovery worked as a 'Bible'-woman and among lepers. In 1949 she was given passage money, and returned to England after seventeen years. 
Gladys Aylward, whose adventures and achievements in China could be equalled by other missionaries, might have remained unknown had not her mother alerted Hugh Redwood, the celebrated religious journalist, who sent reporters to meet her. This led a BBC writer, Alan Burgess, to contact Gladys Aylward and dramatize her story on radio. In 1952 a publisher heard a repeat of the programme and suggested that Burgess should write a popular biography. His fictionalized 'The Small Woman' (1957) became a best-seller and later a memorable and moving film, 'The Inn of the Sixth Happiness' (1959). This she tried to stop and refused to see, because of the fictional love interest and her portrayal by a divorcee, Ingrid Bergman. 
Book and film together made Gladys Aylward eminent, the archetype of the selfless, dedicated woman of faith, brushing away hardships and danger as she had once brushed crumbs from her employers' tables. Gladys Aylward, more than many of her generation, brought the Christian missionary ideal before the general public. 
Gladys Aylward's last twelve years, apart from speaking tours, were spent in Taiwan. There her trusting nature made her the victim of embezzlement by the husband of an adopted daughter who helped her run an orphanage. She saved him from execution but attracted much unpopularity for putting temptation in his way. None the less, she lived it down, still the same uninhibited woman, intensely concerned about the poor and sinful, making Christianity vividly alive, with complete contempt for all she thought was wrong. 
Gladys Aylward died in Taibei (Taipei) after a few hours' illness on 1 January 1970. The Chinese buried her in a marble tomb in the hilltop garden of Christ's College, Tamsui (Danshui), overlooking the estuary and facing mainland China. 
John Pollock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30509


Ayrton, William Edward (1847-1908), electrical engineer and physicist, was born in London on 14 September 1847 to the accomplished barrister and linguist Edward Nugent Ayrton (1815-1873), and his wife, thereby joining a family long connected with law and music, and traditionally supportive of women's rights. William's uncle was Acton Smee Ayrton, a notably unpopular minister in Gladstone's first administration. William early embraced the study of mathematics in response to unsuccessful paternal efforts to make him learn a different language every day of the week. He performed outstandingly at University College School from 1859, especially in geometry, but still endeavoured to win classical prizes to please his father. Enrolling as a student at University College, London, in 1864, he won Andrews scholarships in mathematics in 1865 and 1866; in the latter year Ayrton became engaged to his cousin and fellow London student, Matilda Charlotte Chaplin, (1846-1883) ['see 'Ayrton, Matilda Charlotte], daughter of John Chaplin, a solicitor, and strongly encouraged her to train for the medical profession. In 1866-7 his talent was acknowledged by both George Carey Foster and Thomas Archer Hirst, whom he assisted in teaching experimental physics and mechanics respectively; Ayrton won praise too from Augustus De Morgan for his 'very scrutinizing turn' (Solomon and Mather, 65) in pure mathematics. 
Ayrton's interest in the Indian government telegraph service developed when, as an undergraduate finalist, he was asked to prepare ten students for the service's examinations. He took such interest in this work that, though achieving only second-class BA honours, he excelled in the service's entrance examinations. The secretary of state for India rewarded him by financing a year's study of electrical theory and laboratory technique with Sir William Thomson at the department of natural philosophy, University of Glasgow, for 1867-8; Ayrton later described this experience as the inspiration of his life (Ayrton, 'Kelvin in the sixties', 268). In the second service examination, Ayrton won a scholarship for study in Europe, so he then took the opportunity to gain practical experience of Post Office telegraph operations under William Preece at Southampton, and also at the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company works in London. 
As fourth grade assistant superintendent in the Indian telegraph service from 1 September 1868 Ayrton worked with the electrical superintendent, C. Louis Schwendler, to develop a speedy method for locating the prevalent faults in the overland telegraph lines that were severely impeding colonial communications. Their solution was so effective that it pre-empted emergency proposals to lay an alternative coastal submarine cable around the subcontinent, Ayrton accordingly receiving rapid promotion. He returned briefly on leave to London to marry Matilda Chaplin, on 21 December 1871 at St Matthew's parish church, Bayswater, London, she having been controversially ejected from her medical studies at Edinburgh University. Returning to India without Matilda, Ayrton deputized for Schwendler during the latter's illness and strove to improve the telegraph network in the Bombay and Calcutta districts. On leave in England in 1872 to study the signalling problems caused by dampness in porcelain line insulators, he was elected a member of the Society of Telegraph Engineers (STE). Up to mid-1873 he also assisted Sir William Thomson and Fleeming Jenkin in testing a new transatlantic cable for the Great Western Telegraph Company at Millwall and later at Mitcham. 
It was through the patronage of Thomson and W. J. M. Rankine at Glasgow University that Ayrton was offered a five-year contract as professor of physics and telegraphy at the Imperial College of Engineering in Tokyo, to commence in autumn 1873. Even for the dynamic young Ayrton, who characteristically embossed his notepaper with the motto 'Energy', the task set him by the Meiji government of turning samurai warriors into westernized English-speaking telegraph engineers proved daunting. According to family legend, after two suicides and one murder in his first term in Tokyo, Ayrton discouraged ritual sword wielding by discharging a large revolver into the ceiling of his small laboratory. He was not a gentle teacher, being quick to criticize passivity and slowness, but won over his students by employing them in collective class researches, and, in contrast to many European colleagues, in maintaining that the Japanese were indeed capable of independent scientific work. Soon Ayrton secured unprecedentedly lavish finance from the Meiji exchequer for a palatial new laboratory, although the execution of his designs brought him into considerable conflict with government officials and workmen. When it opened in 1877 its facilities and equipment compared favourably with contemporary laboratories in Britain and served as a model for several later institutions. 
After the birth of their daughter, Edith, in 1874, Matilda Ayrton continued to teach midwifery to Japanese women, and to entertain her husband's students and colleagues. The next significant arrival for Ayrton was John Perry who, soon after taking up the chair of mechanical engineering in 1875, began a long series of joint researches with him, Ayrton experimenting day and night at fever-heat. Ayrton's activities became yet more intensive after Matilda, showing early signs of tuberculosis, departed with Edith in early 1877 to complete her medical doctorate at the Sorbonne. More than twenty papers by Ayrton and Perry from the Tokyo laboratory were published in British and Japanese journals between 1877 and 1880; these included the first ever determination of the dielectric constant of gases, and studies on the viscosity of dielectrics, Japanese magic mirrors, seismology, telegraphic tests, and contact electricity -- a paper on the latter winning praise, if not agreement, from James Clerk Maxwell in 1879. As a later colleague, H. E. Armstrong, said of their Japanese period: 'In those days what Ayrton and Perry did not know or do or claim to have done was not worth knowing, doing or claiming' (Armstrong, 751). 
Ayrton antagonized the Meiji administration by insisting that foreign supervision was necessary for the operation of its national telegraph system, and his contract at the Imperial College was not renewed. He nevertheless came to be venerated as the founder of electrical engineering in Japan, and 25 March is still acknowledged as 'Electricity day' to commemorate the occasion in 1878 on which he and his students opened the nation's first public electric lighting system at Tokyo's central telegraph station. Relinquishing to Perry his role as Japanese secretary for the STE, Ayrton became honorary editor of its 'Proceedings' and chairman of its editorial committee for seven years after he returned to London in the autumn of 1878. Employed as an adviser to the telegraph company, Latimer, Clark, and Muirhead, he also soon took an interest in the newer technologies of electrical power and lighting. It was at the British Association meeting in Sheffield in 1879 that Ayrton first proposed alternate current transmission with step up and step down transformers as the safest and most economical means of distributing energy over long distances, a system almost universally adopted by the end of the twentieth century. 
His reputation as an expert on both technical and educational matters won him the City and Guilds professorship of physics (later electrical engineering) at Finsbury in the autumn of 1879. Ayrton's teaching for this archetypal experiment of British technical education was initially undertaken in rooms borrowed from the Cowper Street School. Here dozens of day students and hundreds of evening students each year received a training in electrical measurement and construction techniques; indeed so broad was the constituency of Ayrton's uniquely practical course that, on at least one occasion in 1886, about three-quarters of the audience at STE meetings were Ayrton's former students. The popularity of his evening classes caused such overcrowding in 1881, however, that the laboratories often descended into chaos; the situation improved markedly with the opening of the purpose-built Finsbury Technical College in 1883 on an adjacent site. 
Ayrton's fertile collaborations with Perry continued in London much as in Tokyo, particularly after Perry became a Finsbury colleague in 1881, the year in which Ayrton became a fellow of the Royal Society. Their researches, and now also patents, focused very much on the practical applications of electromagnetism, the restless Ayrton generally posing the practical problem, the less worldly Perry suggesting a solution which was then criticized and improved by Ayrton until both were satisfied. After experimenting, like many contemporaries in 1880-81, with televisual techniques of 'seeing at a distance', they soon devoted most of their energy to developing portable measuring instruments for lighting engineers. In 1881 they christened their first proportional reading devices for gauging current and potential difference as 'ammeters' and 'voltmeters' respectively. Dissatisfied, however, with the need for users to multiply readings by a contingent and unstable calibration value, they accomplished the first direct-reading instruments by late 1883. These radically new devices yielded numerical values at a glance, using a range of innovative techniques such as a proportional spiral spring; these were very widely adopted but were soon improved beyond recognition by others in the electrical industry. Ayrton and Perry's unparalleled instrumental output during the period 1881-4 also included dynamometers, wattmeters, dispersion photometers, and an ingenious ohmmeter for measuring resistance. Their clock-based domestic electricity meter would have made them a substantial fortune from royalties when such devices came into wide use in the 1890s if the pair had bothered to renew their 1882 patent. 
Ayrton and Perry also undertook much work in developing electric motors and new forms of traction. In November 1882 Ayrton startled London traffic by driving the first ever electric tricycle at the illegal speed of 9 miles an hour through the City, thereby demonstrating the virtues of batteries made by the Faure Accumulator Company (founded by Sir William Thomson and others) to which he and Perry were consultant engineers in 1882-3. Otherwise more sensitive to safety issues, the pair invented the block contact switching system in 1884 that automatically prevented two electric trains from travelling on the same stretch of track; on the grounds of safety and economy they also successfully campaigned for the introduction of insulated returns on electric railways. Ayrton and Perry assisted at trials of Fleeming Jenkin's telepherage system of telegraphing goods, later used in ski-lift ('teleferique') systems round the world. Of their remarkably fruitful creative partnership at Finsbury, Perry later wrote: 'in that pioneering time, mere living was delightful' (Perry, 'The Electrician', 188). 
Domestic life for Ayrton in London was rarely joyful, however, since Matilda's health steadily deteriorated from 1879; despite wintering in the Alps with Edith, she died from tuberculosis in July 1883. He had by then already met Phoebe Sarah (Hertha) Marks (1854-1923) ['see 'Ayrton, (Phoebe) Sarah], a Cambridge-educated mathematician, at a party when taking an uncommon break from laboratory work in October 1882. She was the daughter of a jeweller, Levi Marks. About a year after Matilda's death, Hertha and 'Will' pursued their common interest in mathematics and electrical science, and she enrolled to study with him at Finsbury in October 1884. After a courtship that revolved around her critical proof-reading of his 'Practical Electricity: a Laboratory and Lecture Course' (1887), the couple were married on 6 May 1885, Hertha having reconciled her orthodox Jewish mother to the union. Thereafter, the scientific careers of William and Hertha Ayrton were closely entwined yet complementary; he encouraged her scientific lecturing and research, while taking great care to establish the independence of her achievements. Their daughter, Barbara Bodichon Ayrton, was born on 3 April 1886; she married Gerald Gould in 1910, and as Barbara Gould became a Labour MP in 1945. 
In the autumn of 1885 Ayrton began teaching in the imposing City and Guilds Central Institution at South Kensington, on the design of which he had been consulted by the architect, Alfred Waterhouse, four years previously. Initially Ayrton was reluctant to take up the professorship of physics (later electrical engineering) at the Central since the terms of appointment prohibited commercial consultancy; he accepted the position in the spring of 1884 only after Oliver Lodge had declined it. Finding the Central building still incomplete in October, for the 1884-5 session Ayrton taught a handful of Central students, along with Hertha, alongside their juniors at Finsbury. Undeterred by accusations of failure at the small number of students initially enrolling at his and colleagues' courses in South Kensington in 1885, Ayrton implemented a wide-ranging scheme of advanced training in the theory and practice of applied physics, illustrated sympathetically by 'Engineering' in November and December 1888. So dedicated did Ayrton's steadily growing small band of students become to the pursuit of high precision in physical experiments that it was not unusual to find them working with him in the laboratory at night to avoid disturbance from passing traffic. 
Just as he had in Japan, Ayrton invited his third-year students to participate with him and his assistant, Thomas Mather, in collective research projects. Many of these involved developing and applying new techniques of electrical measurement, notably the secohmmeter for measuring self-induction (1886-7), alternating current frequency measurers (1889), and shunt devices (1894); the proposal made by Ayrton and his student, H. C. Haycraft, that ammeters and voltmeters be used to expedite laboratory measurements caused great controversy, however, among physicists in 1894. After Perry broke off his partnership about 1890, finding Ayrton too far away and undertaking the lion's share of the work anyway, Mather became Ayrton's chief research collaborator. Remote from the industrial districts of London, and barred from much commercial consultancy, Ayrton's activities with Mather generally concerned instruments for the physics laboratory, most notably the enduringly popular Ayrton-Mather galvanometer. Cognate with this move, Ayrton invited Hertha to take over his researches on the resistance of the electric arc light after she ascertained errors in the results he had intended to announce at the Chicago International Exhibition of 1893. Following his earlier work for the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) electrical standards committee (whose reassembly he had instigated in 1880), from 1896 Ayrton also collaborated with John Viriamu Jones on resistance standards and a high-precision form of Kelvin current balance in preparation for the opening of the National Physical Laboratory in 1902. Ayrton's individual contributions to research in physics and engineering were recognized in the award of royal medal by the Royal Society in 1901. 
Thriving on disputation and possessing his father's analytical powers and legal acumen, Ayrton was long sought after as an expert witness, especially for patent work, although he accepted engagement only for cases that he considered just. Several times during the 1890s Ayrton used such skills to fend off plans to run an electric underground railway beneath Exhibition Road, collaborating with Arthur Rucker at the neighbouring Royal College of Science in 1890-91 to prove the magnitude of the electromagnetic threat thereby posed to their delicate laboratory researches. Ayrton prepared his many public speeches with the same rigour and meticulous accuracy as he conducted his laboratory work, and delivered them with considerable authority and panache. So popular, for example, was his lecture on 'The electric transmission of power' at the BAAS meeting at Bath in 1888, that by popular request he repeated it the following day. Similarly memorable was Ayrton's address as president of section A of the BAAS in 1898, his venture into the little charted territory of the physics of smell being inspired by the unusual olfactory sensitivities of the female Ayrtons. 
Ayrton was highly active in London's science and engineering societies, attending nearly all meetings of the Physical Society of London (a forebear of the Institute of Physics), and was its president in 1890-92. Often in attendance when electrical papers were presented to the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE), it was none the less the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE -- as the STE was retitled in 1888), that was the mirror of Ayrton's life. He contributed to thirty-two papers read before its meetings in the ICE's rooms, and spoke in well over a hundred discussions, thereby publicizing the stream of novel techniques and devices emanating from his Finsbury and South Kensington laboratories. So devoted was Ayrton to advancing the interests of the IEE that, after his return from Japan, he served on its council continuously (in a variety of capacities) for the rest of his life, acting as president in 1892-3. Especially concerned to improve the IEE's often precarious finances, as honorary treasurer from 1897 to 1902 he presided over a $10,000 increase in the institution's fund to build its own premises. 
In 1899 Ayrton helped Hertha secure an opportunity to be the first woman to read a paper to the IEE, although it was solely on the merits of her researches on the hissing of the electric arc that she was elected its first female member that year. After publishing 'The Electric Arc' in 1902, she deferred further research to tend to Will after his health collapsed; he was suffering from high blood pressure and insomnia brought on by overwork. Returning to the Central again in 1903, he was commissioned by the Admiralty to solve the problems of roaring and wandering in its arc lit searchlights; these were solved only after Hertha Ayrton showed that these adverse phenomena were analogous to the hissing of smaller arc lights. Frustrated that the Admiralty overlooked her major contribution to the reports, and supportive of work by their friends the Pankhursts against cognate injustices, both became members of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) in 1906. Strongly sympathetic to the militance of the suffragettes' campaign for women's enfranchisement, one of Ayrton's last public acts was to ride at the head of the WSPU's historic parade through Hyde Park in June 1908. 
Despite recurrent ill health, Ayrton acted as dean of the City and Guilds College from 1904, overseeing its amalgamation into Imperial College in 1907, and somehow combined his college duties with several major trips abroad. In 1903 he participated in the Moseley commission to study education in the USA, and he went to southern Africa for the BAAS meeting in 1905, at which he was very critical of plans to install a hydroelectric plant at Victoria Falls to distribute power across the Cape. Such relentless activity further weakened his arterial system, however, and he died at home at 41 Norfolk Square, Hyde Park, London, on 8 November 1908. He was buried four days later at Brompton cemetery without religious rites, but with a choral service of sacred music, addresses being read by his son-in-law, Israel Zangwill, who had married his daughter Edith, and John Perry. A phenomenally energetic character, and often fearlessly critical -- a quality some regarded rather as prickliness -- the bearded and dashingly handsome Ayrton played a central role in the early history of electrical engineering, the development of the IEE, and in the promotion of women's rights. That he was far too busy -- or latterly too ill -- ever to write an autobiography might explain why so many of Ayrton's accomplishments that were recognized by his contemporaries have long been left undervalued by historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 30510


Azad, Abul Kalam (1888-1958), politician and author, was born on 11 November 1888 in Mecca, Arabia. His father, Sheikh Khairuddin Dehlavi (1831-1908), was an Islamic scholar and Sufi who had migrated to Mecca about the time of the 1857 revolt and there had married an Arab woman, the niece of the mufti of Medina. Azad, the youngest child, had one brother and three sisters. His name at birth was Muhiyuddin Ahmad, but he adopted Abul Kalam Azad ('free') as his pen-name in his teens, and that is the name by which he is known. The circumstances of his ancestry and birth meant that Azad was fluent in both Arabic and Urdu, which influenced his later thought and writing style. 
In 1898 Khairuddin returned to India with his family and settled in Calcutta at the request of his many Sufi disciples in that city. Azad's mother died a year later, with the result that his father became the dominant figure in his upbringing. Azad was educated at home by his father in the traditional Indo-Islamic curriculum, which included Arabic, Persian, and Urdu languages, a thorough study of the 'Koran', the traditions of the prophet Muhammad ('hadith'), Islamic philosophy and theology, as well as mathematics. Contrary to some sources, he never studied at Cairo's al-Azhar, though he augmented his home-based religious education with insatiable reading, and his scholarly temperament and reputation for learning earned him the honorific 'maulana', indicating one who is trained in the Islamic religious sciences. He completed his education in his teens, and was married young. He and his elder brother, Abun Nasir, were married to sisters, the daughters of one of Khairuddin's disciples. Azad and his wife, Zulaikha (died 1943), had one son, who died young. 
Azad's intellectual precocity led him to revolt against his father's influence and against what he considered the rigidity of his education. His reading introduced him to the writings of Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan, especially his commentary on the 'Koran', which opened up the world of Islamic modernism and the possibility of a reinterpretation of the scriptures. Given Azad's fluency in Arabic, he was able to read the works of Sheikh Muhammad Abduh and other Arab intellectuals, including Rashid Rida and the al-Manar group of Cairo, and thus learned of new religious and political ideas, including nationalism, in the Arab world. Further, Calcutta in the early twentieth century was a hotbed of Indian nationalist activity, with which he sympathized. His nationalism, consequently, derived from sources both Indian and Islamic; he saw no reason why the two should conflict. 
Azad began to write for Urdu newspapers as a young man. In 1904 he started a journal, 'Lisan us-Sidq', in Calcutta. During the next few years he served as editor of 'an-Nadwa' of Lucknow in 1905-6, and of 'Vakil' of Amritsar. In Lucknow he worked with Maulana Shibli, another consummate Urdu stylist in both prose and poetry, who encouraged him to be true to his religious training through the medium of his writing. In Amritsar he reported on current affairs, with a concentration on events in the Muslim world. He also made at least one trip to the Middle East, in connection with the hadj. He then returned to Calcutta, where he was at the time of his father's death in 1908. He refused to succeed Khairuddin as a religious guide, but instead chose to guide the reading public religiously and politically through his journalism. 
In July 1912 Azad began his most famous journalistic venture, the weekly 'al-Hilal'. For the next four years, through 'al-Hilal' and its successor, 'al-Balagh', Azad became known as an eloquent proponent of religious reform based almost exclusively on the 'Koran', and as an advocate of Muslim political activism. His elegant prose had some of the emotional content of verse, and his Urdu, replete with Persian and Arabic words, added to his learned reputation. He broke with the loyalist politics of the Muslim League and supported Indian nationalism, and he sympathized with Turkey during the Balkan wars of 1912-13. In the First World War, when Turkey and Britain were enemies, his pro-Turkish stance led to a forfeiture of 'al-Hilal''s security deposit. He then began 'al-Balagh', but that too was closed in 1916. He was interned by the British in Ranchi, Bihar, from 1916 until after the war, released only in January 1920. During his internment he wrote a lyrical autobiography, 'Tazkirah', and began a translation and commentary on the 'Koran', 'Tarjuman al-Quran'. 
Following his release Azad joined forces with Mahatma Gandhi and the Ali brothers in the combined 'khilafat' and non-co-operation movement against the British. This movement brought about a co-operation between Hindus and Muslims in Indian nationalist politics as never before, and featured the Gandhian technique of non-violent protest against British dominance. Muslim religious and political leaders, including Azad, were concerned about the punitive European treaty of peace with the Ottoman caliphate ('khilafat') following the First World War, but they also saw the 'khilafat' as an issue that could unite all Indian Muslims against the British. Gandhi saw the issue as a means of gaining a Muslim following for the Indian National Congress in its bid to represent all Indians in the movement for independence. Between 1920 and 1922 Azad became an accomplished orator and political figure. He was imprisoned in 1922, as were Gandhi and the movement's other leaders. Released in 1923, Azad was elected president of the special session of the National Congress held in Delhi to decide the future course of nationalist action. He called for Hindu-Muslim co-operation, but divisions over tactics persisted in the Congress through the 1920s. Gandhi again launched a nationwide civil disobedience movement in 1930, against the salt tax. Azad took part and was again imprisoned, but during the late 1920s and early 1930s he concentrated on his commentary on the 'Koran'. 
Azad became prominent in nationalist politics again after the 1937 legislative elections, the first held under the 1935 'Government of India Act', which established provincial autonomy and expanded the legislatures. He was chosen as a member of the National Congress's parliamentary board to supervise its provincial ministries. In 1940 he was elected president of the Congress and held that office until 1946, an unusually long tenure resulting from the disruptions of wartime and the fact that the Congress leaders spent most of the war imprisoned. While a prisoner in Ahmadnagar Fort, he wrote 'Ghubar-i-khatir', an epistolary memoir that reveals more of his spiritual and intellectual odyssey than any of his other works. 
As president of the Congress Azad played a pivotal role in the negotiations leading to India's independence, particularly during the Simla conference in 1945 and the cabinet mission of 1946. He remained adamantly opposed to partition, feeling that a division of India would do more harm to Indian Muslims than good. His disagreement with the politics of the Muslim League and with its leader, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, was fundamental. During the formation of the provisional government in 1946 Jinnah demanded for the League the right to name all Muslim members, while the Congress, with Azad in mind, maintained its right to name a Muslim. Azad, sensing that he was an obstacle to agreement, relinquished his presidency of the Congress to Nehru in July 1946 and stayed out of the provisional government when it was formed in September. He joined the government as education minister in January 1947 and remained in that office until his death. 
Azad was a broken man after the 1947 partition, having lost the struggle to preserve India's unity. In the final decade of his life he presided over India's education policy, made many speeches on official occasions, and dictated a memoir of his political life, 'India Wins Freedom' (1959; a complete version of the text was first published in 1988). In declining health as a result of a neglect of exercise and heavy smoking and drinking habits, he fell and broke his hip; he then suffered a stroke and died on 22 February 1958 in Delhi and was buried there in a tomb in front of Jama Masjid. He will be remembered for his intellectual integrity, his eloquent contributions to Urdu literature, and his courageous insistence that Muslim culture was an integral part of India's cultural life. 


@@@@@


doc= 30511


Azariah, Vedanayagam Samuel (1874-1945), bishop of Dornakal, was born on 17 August 1874 in the church rectory of Vellalanvilai, a village located in the Madras presidency of south India. He was the younger of the two children of the Revd Thomas Vedanayagam (1821-1889), Anglican priest, and his second wife, Ellen. He became the first Indian bishop of an Anglican diocese and leader of agrarian depressed class and non-Brahman conversion movements to Christianity. 
Azariah received his early education in schools established by the Church Missionary Society in Megnanapuram and Tinnevelly. From 1893 to 1896 he studied mathematics at Madras Christian College, where he was drawn into Christian missionary work through the inspiration of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA). He led spiritual meetings and evangelistic outreach for the YMCA in Madras during his college years and, in 1896, took a full-time position as a YMCA secretary, first in the Madura and then in the Tinnevelly districts. Azariah worked for the YMCA until 1909, attempting to revive Christian life in rural south India by establishing a grass-roots network of YMCA branches in the towns and villages of his large districts. 
Azariah's primary goal during his early career was to recruit Indian missionaries who would devote their lives to carrying the gospel to the unevangelized regions of India and beyond. He gradually extended his universe of activity and influence from his native Tinnevelly (where he established the first major indigenous Indian missionary society in 1903), to greater India (establishing the indigenous National Missionary Society in 1905), to wider Asia (touring Japan and China in 1907), and finally to the West, where Azariah burst upon the international missionary scene in 1910 with an impassioned speech to the Edinburgh World Missionary Conference against Western missionary paternalism toward 'native' Christians. 
Although his work for the YMCA, the Indian Missionary Society (IMS), and the National Missionary Society (NMS) necessitated much travel during his early career, Azariah was always anchored at home by a strong and secure family life. He married Anbu Mariammal Samuel (1876-1950) on 29 June 1898 in a simple ceremony that, to his delight but to the bride's grandmother's distress, cost less than 40 rupees. During their long and harmonious marriage the couple had four sons and two daughters, in addition to at least one child who died in infancy. 
Just as Azariah was gaining international recognition as an effective promoter of Indian missions he received what he interpreted as a divine call to conduct evangelism himself in a specific locality. In 1909 he resigned from the YMCA and the NMS to become superintending missionary for the IMS in Dornakal, located in a small railway depot in the rural Warangal district of south-eastern Hyderabad state. Here, within the favourite hunting grounds of the nizam of Hyderabad, Azariah became a missionary to the Telugu-speaking depressed and non-Brahman classes. He lived first in a tent and travelled through the villages by foot, bullock cart, and bicycle, with his food and 'Bible' tracts hanging in a bag suspended from his handlebar. 
Azariah's self-imposed obscurity in rural Dornakal did not last long. He was soon recruited into Anglican church leadership by Bishop Henry Whitehead of Madras (1853-1947), who persuaded his fellow bishops in India and civil authorities in Madras and London to constitute Dornakal as the centre of a new diocese with Azariah at its head. Azariah was consecrated as the first Indian Anglican bishop on Sunday 29 December 1912 in St Paul's Cathedral, Calcutta; and he remained the first and only Indian bishop of an Anglican diocese until his death. 
During an age dominated by secular nationalism Azariah focused his energies mainly on sub-national local evangelism and transnational ecumenism. Azariah led grass-roots conversion movements of roughly 200,000 depressed class and non-Brahman Telugus into the church in his diocese; and he promoted education, temperance, and economic uplift in Andhra's villages. He also became the chief spokesman for non-Roman Catholic Indian Christians in key ecumenical fora: the National Christian Council, the Joint Committee on Union in south India, the Lambeth conferences of 1920 and 1930, the conferences on Faith and Order in Lausanne (1927) and Edinburgh (1937), and the International Missionary Council Conference at Tambaram (1938). Azariah was at least partly responsible for the first unification of episcopal and non-episcopal churches since the Reformation, which took place in south India two years after his death. The University of Cambridge awarded him the honorary degree of LLD in 1920. 
As a man of faith in an age captivated by ideology Azariah rarely entered the political fray. One notable exception occurred in 1932, when he joined with Gandhi and other Indian nationalists to oppose the government's expanding policy of granting separate electorates along communal lines. Azariah's brief alliance with Gandhi in opposition to British policy was shattered later in the decade, however, because of a controversy over religious freedom in India. Azariah's advocacy of depressed class conversion movements to Christianity in this new age of mass, communally-based politics threatened Gandhi's bid to secure the allegiance of the untouchables within the political fold of his charismatically Hindu form of messianic nationalism. As a result, Gandhi considered Azariah to be his 'enemy number one' (private information). 
Azariah rose to prominence in an age electrified by political nationalism, but he was neither very political nor very nationalistic. He was certainly influenced by Indian nationalism's desire for independence from Western control and, within the ecclesiastical arena, he helped the church to develop a more secure Indian identity and greater administrative independence from Western organizations. Azariah built both an Indian-style cathedral and an Indian-led clergy for his diocese. But he never advocated radical separation from either the Western church or the British empire. He worked to create an indigenous Indian form of Christianity, but never a Christianized form of Indian nationalism. His close association with Telugu depressed classes in the Dornakal diocese, who generally preferred British rule to the perceived threat of 'Hindu rule' or 'Brahman rule', made the bishop wary of Congressite plans for independence. Bishop Azariah's sympathy for Indian nationalism's broadest aspirations was always subdued and moderated by local and transnational concerns. 
Azariah died in Dornakal on 1 January 1945 of complications from a malarial fever contracted during a trip to rural areas of his diocese. He was buried the next day at Dornakal Cathedral. His wife survived him. He was known throughout Dornakal as Thandrigaru, a Telugu term meaning 'honourable father', and he is remembered by Indian Christians today for his humble devotion to the needs of often neglected village congregations. 


@@@@@


doc= 30512


Bacharach, Alfred Louis (1891-1966), food scientist and musician, was born in Hampstead, London, on 11 August 1891, the son of Otto Leonhard Bacharach, a stockbroker, of Hampstead, and his wife, Alice Eva Wagner. He lived throughout his life in Hampstead. Bacharach was educated at St Paul's School, where he was a foundation scholar, and at Clare College, Cambridge (1910-13), where he read natural sciences. It was at Cambridge that the first of his interests, an intellectual commitment to left-wing political views, became apparent. He involved himself with the Independent Labour Party, joined the Fabian Society, and developed a concern that continued for nearly forty years with the affairs of the Working Men's College in north London. His commitment to socialist ideas was recognized during the tenure of the Labour government of 1924 by his appointment to the controlling bodies of a number of educational establishments including the Borough Polytechnic and Kynaston School. 
Although Bacharach was deeply concerned with political theory and widely admired for his intellectual stature in this field, this was only one of his interests; many of those who came into contact with him in one sphere were only dimly aware of his other enthusiasms. His second great love was for music. He was an accomplished pianist and he gathered other musicians about him to play and talk. Out of this came the four books for which, as editor and author, his name became widely known. 'The Musical Companion', of which there was also a later edition, was first published in 1934, 'Lives of the Great Composers' in 1935, 'British Music of our Time' in 1946, and 'The Music Masters' appeared in instalments between 1948 and 1954. These works helped to establish for Bacharach a considerable reputation as a connoisseur of music. 
On leaving university in 1913 Bacharach worked for three years in the Wellcome Chemical Research Laboratories and then, for a further year, in the Wellcome Chemical Works. In 1920 he was employed by the firm of Joseph Nathan & Co. Ltd, later to become the Glaxo Laboratories, where he remained for thirty-five years. At that time there were problems with artificial baby foods: even when dried cows' milk, which was imported from New Zealand, was mixed with other ingredients in order to make it resemble human milk as closely as possible, it was not uniformly satisfactory as an artificial substitute. There was, for example, the danger of rickets, caused by a lack of vitamin D. Bacharach threw himself into the study of that vitamin, one form of which, as was demonstrated by research, could be manufactured by irradiation. Bacharach attacked the problem of measuring the amount of the vitamin present both in concentrated preparations and in the mixtures in which the concentrates were incorporated. At that time the only way to do this was to administer the test substance to young rachitic rats and examine the degree to which their condition was ameliorated. Bacharach was among the first to apply rigorous statistical techniques to improve the precision of such experiments. He also introduced, at least in British practice, the use of pure-bred rats in the tests. 
Without being a profound scientific thinker, any more than he was a great musician or a major political figure, Bacharach was a keen observer of the passing scene and an expert commentator. His agile mind was at its most sparkling in discussion, suggestion, and debate. Whether it was on the council of the Royal Institute of Chemistry, of which he became a fellow and a vice-president, as chairman of the food group of the Society of Chemical Industry, as a member of the Chemical Council or of the council of the Society of Analytical Chemistry, or as president of the Nutrition Society, which he played a part in founding and of which he was the first honorary treasurer, Bacharach could be found debating and discussing, stimulating more pedestrian colleagues to delight, despair, admiration, or exasperation. He was invariably urbane, never dull, often the catalyst bringing about the collision of ideas from which something new emerged. In 1938 he published 'Science and Nutrition'; in 1941, jointly with F. A. Robinson, he produced an English translation of Laszlo Zechmeister's 'Principles and Practice of Chromatography'; and in 1946 he edited 'The Nation's Food'. 
There was yet a fourth strand to Bacharach's disparate interests -- the complement to his virtuosity as a talker. This was his passion for grammatical exactitude. He held that scientific writers, as much as any others, might from time to time benefit if their attention was drawn to syntactical order; and so unflaggingly (and in violet ink) Bacharach dealt out deserved, and good-humoured, reproof. In his later years he would visit outlying branches of the learned scientific societies to which he belonged and deliver his lecture, 'Writing wrongs', the principles of which guided his actions, while meting out his judgments as a member of their publications committees. In 1950 he ceased to control the nutritional laboratories at Glaxo but, as head of the publicity services group, set about improving the standard of the company's literature. 
There are some scientists who advance knowledge by working silently in their laboratories, there are others who found businesses or build machines. Bacharach was more than a man of science, he was an outstandingly eclectic man of his time. His major contribution was to make his contemporaries think. 
On 13 March 1931 Bacharach married Elizabeth Owen ('b'. 1902/3) and they had two sons. He died on 16 July 1966 at 26 Willow Road, Hampstead, his home for many years. 
Magnus Pyke', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30513


Backhouse, Sir Edmund Trelawny, second baronet (1873-1944), Sinologist and fraudster, eldest of the four surviving sons of Jonathan Edmund Backhouse, first baronet (1849-1918), a banker, and Florence (1845-1902), youngest daughter of Sir John Salusbury Salusbury-Trelawny, was born on 20 October 1873 at The Rookery, Middleton Tyas, Yorkshire. The naval officer Roger Roland Charles Backhouse and the political activist Harriet Jane Findlay were among his siblings. Educated at St George's School, Ascot (1882-6), and then at Winchester College, he entered Merton College, Oxford, as a 'postmaster' (foundation scholar) in 1892. At Oxford, Backhouse rebelled against his provincial, middle-class, Quaker origins, spending some $23,000 in three years on a cult of Ellen Terry, on jewellery, and on buying his way into a set of homosexual aesthetes. His studies -- first classics, then English literature -- were interrupted by a nervous breakdown in mid-1894. Although he had returned to Merton by the end of the year, he left Oxford in 1895 without taking a degree. His debts caught up with him shortly thereafter, and he seems to have fled abroad at the end of the year, at which point his affairs were wound up and bankruptcy proceedings initiated. Backhouse probably visited Greece, Russia, and the United States in this period, but next surfaced for certain in Cambridge, in July 1898, studying Chinese for three months with H. A. Giles. To China Backhouse went at the end of the same year, probably under family diktat: he was never to live in Britain again, but received an allowance from his father, and then, after the latter's death in 1918, from the estate, until his own death. 
Failing to find a career in the Chinese customs service Backhouse worked unpaid from 1899 for G. E. Morrison, providing translations of Chinese documents for this influential correspondent of 'The Times', who acted as his patron and who also attempted, unsuccessfully, to repair Backhouse's relations with his father. Through Morrison he came to know J. O. P. Bland, secretary of the Shanghai municipal council and Shanghai correspondent for the paper. In 1909 Bland and Backhouse began their own collaboration on what was to become the most successful, and most disputed, contribution to modern Chinese history then published in Britain. 'China under the Empress Dowager' (1910) consisted largely of documents translated by Backhouse, and polished by Bland, who constructed around them a vivid narrative of the latter days of the Qing dynasty and the Boxer uprising of 1900. The centrepiece of the volume was the purported diary of Jingshan, the Manchu official in whose house Backhouse was billeted in the aftermath of the rising. Backhouse claimed to have found the diary on entering the house, but is now known to have been, if not its forger, then certainly a close party to the forgery. He deposited the published sections in the British Museum in 1910, but his ineffective responses to challenges against the authenticity of the diary in the 1930s indicate that he knew full well that it was a fraud. Morrison, who knew Backhouse better than anyone at this point, always believed it to be so. 
Backhouse's reputation as a Sinologist, however, was cemented by this work, and by a further volume with Bland, 'Annals and Memoirs of the Court of Peking' (1914), and his collaboration with Sir Sydney Barton on a revision of Hillier's 'Pocket Dictionary of Colloquial Chinese' (1918). On this basis he began fishing for an academic position in Britain. He was elected to the chair of Chinese at King's College, London, in December 1913 but never took it up, preferring to wait instead for the Oxford professorship, for which he appeared to be heir apparent. Backhouse had been smoothing his way back into Oxford with substantial donations of valuable Chinese books to the Bodleian Library in 1912 and 1914-15, but was to be disappointed in 1920 when W. E. Soothill was elected to the post. Thereafter his dealings with the Bodleian became more and more puzzling; he was advanced money to purchase books which never arrived in Oxford, or scrolls which turned out to be crude forgeries. The consequently strained relations between the Bodleian and Backhouse terminated in 1924 -- but not before his name was added to its benefactors' roll of honour, inscribed in stone. 
Such strange activities had, in fact, become the singular feature of Backhouse's life. In Peking (Beijing) he had found employment in a variety of fields, using his language skills and contacts. He was a fixer and then an agent (1908-10) for the railway concession hunter Charles, sixth Lord ffrench, and an agent for the sale of battleships (1910-17) and of banknotes (1915-17). He was also trusted by Sir John Jordan at the British legation with a fantastic scheme to buy up surplus rifles in China for the British army in 1915. Backhouse's earliest activities on behalf of ffrench and the American Willard Straight appear to have been legitimate, and successful, but later he began to concoct contracts and contacts. Backhouse 'sold' six phantom battleships in 1916 for John Brown & Co. and 650 million imaginary banknotes that same year for the American Banknote Company of New York. In 1915 he assembled an imaginary flotilla of cargo ships, laden with rifles and machine-guns, whose progress down the Chinese coast from Shanghai to Canton (Guangzhou) is minutely recorded in the Foreign Office archives, but which never in fact existed. The complications created by these various plots, which unravelled at much the same time, caused him to flee China for Vancouver for a year in late 1917. He succeeded his father as baronet in 1918, but inherited nothing in the will, although his family footed much of the bill for his frauds on condition that he did not leave China. 
In China, Backhouse's affairs became rather less ambitious in the 1920s and 1930s. He retreated further into the eccentric seclusion in Peking for which he was already well known -- avoiding even accidental contact with Westerners, and dressing always in Chinese clothes. He seems to have been involved in various schemes, mostly shadowy or speculative, involving Chinese antiques and other articles, and to have been somewhat in thrall to his Chinese secretary. Backhouse was intermittently consulted as a scholar by the British legation but, while occasionally threatening writs against those who denied the authenticity of the Jingshan diary, he published nothing. His much vaunted projects, notably a new dictionary to trump Giles's standard work, were probably imaginary. His inactivity, and his reclusive behaviour, drew to him an air of scholar-gentlemanliness which impressed the small British colony in the 1930s, notably his first 'Dictionary of National Biography' biographer, the painter Hope Danby. 
The Sino-Japanese War after 1937 made life somewhat difficult for foreigners in Peking. Backhouse was forced to seek temporary refuge in the British legation in 1937, and in 1938 almost returned to Britain at the expense of his wearily loyal and worried family. He took final refuge in part of the unoccupied former Austrian legation in Peking's legation quarter in 1939, after the destruction of his house. There he drew to himself the admiring attention of the Swiss consul, Dr Richard Hoeppli, whom he regaled with tales of his lifelong, mostly homosexual, sexual adventures. Backhouse's notorious unpublished two volumes of memoirs, minutely detailing his intimacy with, among many others, Lord Rosebery and the Dowager Empress Cixi, were written at Hoeppli's request, and are largely constructed around imaginary interactions between himself and the blue-blooded and infamous. While vivid and pungent, the two books, 'Decadence Mandchoue' and 'The Dead Past', are drearily pornographic, enlivened only by splenetic outbursts against all those who had somehow conspired to suppress their author. These memoirs, fittingly, formed his last and posthumous contribution to the Bodleian. 
Refusing (he claimed) repatriation in 1942, the by now sclerotically anti-British baronet stayed on in Japanese-occupied Peking. He converted to Catholicism in 1942, hoping that the church in Peking would provide him with money and shelter, as he was an enemy alien in distressed circumstances. This hope does not appear to have been realized. He died on 8 January 1944 in the Catholic Hopital St Michel, Wangfujing, Peking, and was buried at the Chala Catholic cemetery at Pingzemen. 
Backhouse developed a considerable reputation as a Sinologist, but hardly deserved it. He was certainly linguistically gifted, but his intellectual arrogance was considerable, and unfounded, while even his mastery of Chinese has not stood up to thorough examination. He was throughout his life hermitic, eccentric, evasive, litigious, profligate, and a gross snob; but he was also charmingly gentlemanly and persuasive. His fraudulent successes often owed as much to the ignorance and snobbery of those he duped as they did to his own skills. His Sinological successes owed much to the poor state of Chinese studies in Britain. 
Backhouse's entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' was the sole biographical note published about him until 1976, and much of the information recounted here was not at all widely known before then. His singular and lasting reputation is not as a Sinologist but as a fraud, fantasist, and forger, and to this fact he is indebted to his elegant biographer, Hugh Trevor-Roper. Backhouse may indeed in his memoirs have been the chronicler of, for example, male brothel life in late-imperial Peking, and there may be many small truths in those manuscripts that fill out the picture of his life, but we know now that not a word he ever said or wrote can be trusted. 


@@@@@


doc= 30514


Backhouse, Sir Roger Roland Charles (1878-1939), naval officer, was born on 24 November 1878 at The Rookery, Middleton Tyas, Yorkshire, the fourth son (a twin with his brother Miles) of Sir Jonathan Edmund Backhouse, first baronet (1849-1918), and member of a well-known Quaker banking family, and his wife, Florence (1845-1902), youngest daughter of Sir John Salusbury Salusbury-Trelawny, ninth baronet, and member of a famous and ancient Cornish family. The sinologist Edmund Trelawny Backhouse and the political activist Harriet Jane Findlay were among his siblings. At fourteen he entered the training ship 'Britannia' at Dartmouth as a naval cadet. After passing out in 1894, he received his commission, and was appointed a midshipman in the battleship 'Repulse' of the channel squadron. In 1895 he was transferred to a small cruiser in the Pacific squadron, HMS 'Comus'. Backhouse remained in the Pacific until returning to Britain in 1898. After being promoted to the rank of sub-lieutenant in March 1898, he gained the maximum five first-class certificates and was promoted lieutenant in March 1899. There followed a year's service in the Mediterranean on board the battleship 'Revenge', where he began to make his name as a gunnery expert. He confirmed this early promise by winning the Egerton prize in 1902. After this achievement he was shuttled back and forth between serving on the staff of the gunnery school ship 'Excellent' at Portsmouth and as gunnery officer on a number of battleships at sea, including service on board the new 'Dreadnought'. 
A man of great personal charm and integrity, Backhouse cut a rather imposing figure. Standing at 6 feet 4 inches tall, fit and lean, he was appreciated within the service for his drive, energy, and tenacity. In 1907, aged twenty-nine, with his career advancing successfully in the Royal Navy, Backhouse, popularly known to all as RB, married Dora Louisa, the sixth daughter of John Ritchie Findlay, of Aberlour, Banffshire. This was in every way a successful marriage. Dora proved to be a very supportive partner and they had four daughters and two sons. Backhouse was promoted commander at the end of 1909, and in March 1911 began a period of nearly three and a half years at sea as flag commander to three successive Home Fleet commanders-in-chief: Sir F. C. B. Bridgeman, Sir G. A. Callaghan, and Sir John Jellicoe, in their flagships 'Neptune' and 'Iron Duke'. Promoted captain at the outbreak of war on 1 September 1914, Backhouse rejoined Admiral Jellicoe's staff and distinguished himself both as the gunnery expert and in compiling battle orders. The future first sea lord recommended that the quality of his work deserved a 'mention in dispatches'. 
In November 1915, at the age of thirty-seven, Backhouse took command of the light cruiser 'Conquest' and was attached to the Harwich force under Commodore Sir Reginald Yorke Tyrwhitt. It was a hectic time, and Backhouse and his ship were in the thick of a number of naval skirmishes. On 25 April 1916 he was caught up in the bombardment of the Suffolk port of Lowestoft by a force of German battle cruisers. Backhouse, supported by two other light cruisers and sixteen destroyers, was commanded by Tyrwhitt to intervene and draw off the enemy's fire. 'Conquest' was hit and set on fire by a number of 12 inch shells, killing twenty-three of the crew and wounding sixteen others. Once the shellfire had ceased, Backhouse left the bridge and instantly took personal charge of the clean-up operation that did much to keep the 'Conquest' afloat and enable it to limp back to port. Afterwards he received a commendation from the Board of Admiralty for the speed and effectiveness of his action, which had saved his ship and its company from foundering. 
After Admiral Sir David Beatty assumed command of the Grand Fleet in November 1916, Backhouse joined Admiral Sir W. C. Pakenham, the newly appointed commander of the battle-cruiser squadron, as his flag captain and gunnery expert on board the 'Lion'. A bout of ill health brought him ashore in the summer of 1918, but he had recovered sufficiently to take up a desk job at the Admiralty before the war ended on 11 November 1918. After the armistice he remained in Whitehall for several years, and was appointed director of naval ordnance in September 1920. He was sent to sea again in January 1923 in command of the battleship 'Malaya'. After a twenty-month attachment in the Atlantic Fleet, Backhouse was brought home to attend a series of senior officers' courses at Portsmouth, during which he was promoted rear-admiral at the age of forty-six in April 1925. After achieving flag rank, Backhouse was sent to the 'Iron Duke' in May 1926 to exercise command of the 3rd battle squadron of the Atlantic Fleet. A year later he returned home for a well-earned period of rest and recuperation on half pay. 
Backhouse was appointed third sea lord and controller of the navy at the Admiralty in November 1928. He remained at his post throughout a crisis-strewn period in which financial and economic problems arose to batter both the Royal Navy and the governments of the day, causing significant 'casualties' on all sides. Promoted vice-admiral in October 1929, Backhouse had fought a long, hard battle with the Treasury mandarins over the Admiralty estimates. It was therefore with a profound sense of relief that he left the tortuous in-fighting of Whitehall to hoist his flag in the 'Revenge' and take command in March 1932 of the 1st battle squadron, and become second in command of the Mediterranean Fleet under Admiral Sir Ernle Chatfield and subsequently Admiral Sir W. W. Fisher. Backhouse, who was knighted in 1933, remained in the Mediterranean until May 1934, and was promoted admiral while on station in February 1934, at the age of fifty-five. By this time he had made a name for himself as something of a tireless workaholic and an officer who pushed himself as hard as he drove his staff. Unwilling to accept sloppiness in either thought or deed, he did not suffer fools gladly, and could be quite withering with those who crossed him. Hardened by experience and confident in his own ability, Backhouse lavished immense care on all matters -- great and small -- that were passed to him for his scrutiny. Unfortunately, this attitude gained him the reputation of a micro-manager who found it almost pathologically difficult to delegate authority to others around him. Although this unflattering description of his working habits was rather exaggerated, it was not a totally erroneous picture of his performance in command, as his next appointment showed. 
In August 1935 Backhouse was made the commander-in-chief, Home Fleet, with his flag in the battleship 'Nelson'. He took as his chief of staff the 52-year-old Bertram Home Ramsay, an old friend from their days on the 'Dreadnought' and a highly opinionated character who had made flag rank earlier in the year. Backhouse and Ramsay both liked their own way, and both relished making decisions and controlling events. They did not work well together. Within two months Backhouse was writing to Chatfield that Ramsay's appointment was not working out in the way that he had hoped, and that unless the younger man was prepared to rein in his own impetuous temperament he would have to go. Unwilling to change and accommodate his chief, Ramsay asked to be relieved of his post in December 1935. Supported by the Admiralty, Backhouse survived the Ramsay episode and prospered. He remained at the helm until April 1938, when it was announced that he would succeed Lord Chatfield as first sea lord and chief of naval staff later in the year. Before he took up his post at Admiralty House in August 1938, he was appointed first and principal aide-de-camp to George VI. 
Backhouse could not have taken over as first sea lord at a more ominous time for the British government. Europe appeared to be on the verge of war over the 'Sudetendeutsch' problem. Backhouse and the two other chiefs of staff -- Air Chief Marshal Sir Cyril Newall and Lieutenant-General Viscount Gort -- all thought the United Kingdom militarily so vulnerable as to require a political solution to the Czech problem; otherwise, the country might be drawn into a war with Germany, and possibly with the other members of the anti-Comintern pact (Italy and Japan) as well. Although Backhouse supported the Munich agreement on pragmatic grounds, his political chief, the cantankerous first lord -- Alfred Duff Cooper -- reacted angrily by denouncing appeasement and resigning from the government in protest. Duff Cooper's exit in early October allowed Chamberlain to appoint his friend the seventh earl of Stanhope as first lord. A more conciliatory fellow than his predecessor, Stanhope had little real knowledge of naval affairs, and came to rely heavily upon Backhouse's expertise in the few months that they worked together. 
As first sea lord, Backhouse demonstrated repeatedly that he was not obsessed with detail and bureaucratic minutiae and that he was prepared to overhaul the administrative machinery of the Admiralty and cast aside some of the Royal Navy's inter-war strategic concepts. Overwhelmed by work during the recent Czech crisis, he was convinced that inefficiency prevailed within the Admiralty's administrative structure. By establishing the Binney committee to look into the organization of the naval staff and make recommendations for change, Backhouse was intent on delegating and decentralizing policy making as much as possible. He also sought to reform British strategic doctrine, which he considered had become hazardous because it still required the main fleet to go to Singapore if war broke out with Japan. As news filtering back from central Europe became gloomier, Backhouse became more adamant in his belief that the Mediterranean and the Middle East region were burgeoning theatres of military and economic importance to the United Kingdom, and that they should not be subordinated to the 'Singapore strategy'. Driven by the need to break the mould in strategic thinking, Backhouse brought in the innovative Vice-Admiral Drax, lodging him temporarily in the Admiralty, with instructions to devise a set of war plans that might leave the Royal Navy less exposed against the worldwide menace posed by the German, Italian, and Japanese fleets. What emerged from Drax's voluntary confinement in the Admiralty was a strategic plan that tossed aside the essential element of the Singapore strategy in favour of concentrating British naval and air power in the Mediterranean, north Africa, and Middle East at the outset of a future war. The aim would be to defeat the Italians, seen as the weakest among the United Kingdom's potential enemies. Even so, both Drax and Backhouse still envisaged a scaled-down version of a Far Eastern commitment -- a 'flying squadron' of two capital ships, an aircraft-carrier, a cruiser squadron, and a destroyer flotilla -- to deter the Japanese from interfering with or overrunning British possessions in the region. Although he did not live long enough to push these strategic concepts in Whitehall, the plans were consistent with Backhouse's view that the capital ship was still the most potent weapon in a fleet's arsenal. Although somewhat myopic about its vulnerability to aerial bombardment on the high seas, Backhouse was alive to the dangers posed by submarines to all naval craft, and urged his technical staff to design a new type of escort vessel with a strong anti-aircraft armament that would make it suitable for anti-submarine warfare as well as escort and patrol duties. 
Hitler's seizure of the rump of Czechoslovakia in mid-March 1939 roughly coincided with the onset of Backhouse's fatal illness. What appeared to be a long and persistent bout of influenza was eventually diagnosed as a brain tumour: a terminal condition which forced him to retire in May and from which he died in London on 15 July 1939, shortly after being promoted admiral of the fleet. His wife survived him. 
A man of consummate ability, who was scrupulous and fair and immensely liked by those who knew him well, Backhouse did not remain long enough as first lord to dispel the jaundiced impression -- formed by some of his contemporaries at the time and by a host of naval historians subsequently -- that he was a weak and indecisive leader who offered his staff little operational guidance. This unflattering assessment of his qualities is both exaggerated and unjust. Backhouse was not half-hearted about anything. An officer who expected no more and no less of his staff than he was prepared to give himself, Backhouse was not given to self-doubt, and was prepared to back his own judgement and not become a mere slave to tradition. Efficiency was his watchword, and this ensured that he could not do everything himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 30515


Bacon, John Mackenzie (1846-1904), astronomer and aviator, born at Lambourn Woodlands, Berkshire, on 19 June 1846, was the fourth son of John Bacon (1809-1871), vicar of Lambourn Woodlands, a friend and neighbour of Charles Kingsley and Tom Hughes, and his wife, Mary Lousada, of Spanish ancestry. His great-grandfather was John Bacon RA, and his grandfather John Bacon (1777-1859), sculptor. After education at home and at a coaching establishment at Old Charlton, near Woolwich, with a view to the army, he matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1865, and gained a foundation scholarship in 1869. Eye trouble compelled an 'aegrotat' degree in the mathematical tripos of 1869. His close friends at Cambridge included William Kingdon Clifford, Francis Maitland Balfour, and Edward Henry Palmer, the orientalist. 
From 1869 to 1875 Bacon worked with his eldest brother, Maunsell, at Cambridge as a pass 'coach'. On 11 April 1871 Bacon married Gertrude (1849-1894), youngest daughter of Charles John Myers, fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and vicar of Flintham, Nottingham; they had two sons and one daughter, Gertrude. After taking holy orders in 1870, he was unpaid curate of Harston, Cambridge, until 1876, when he settled at Coldash, Berkshire. His pastoral activities were limited by his own tubercular tendencies and his wife's nervous breakdown. He assisted in parochial work, was a poor-law guardian, initiated cottage shows, and encouraged handbell-ringing and agriculture. 
Bacon acted as curate of Shaw, 4 miles from Coldash, from 1882 until 1889, when his 'The Curse of Conventionalism: a Remonstrance by a Priest of the Church of England' boldly challenged the conventional clerical attitude to scientific questions, and brought on him the censure of the orthodox. Thereupon he abandoned clerical work and the clerical collar, and devoted himself to scientific study. Though still a believer, he declined to preach until 'I can have a lantern screen stretched across the chancel arch and a photograph of the Orion Nebula or some other glory of the heavens, to talk about' (G. Bacon, 173). 
Astronomy and aeronautics had interested him from boyhood, and much of his life was devoted to stimulating public interest in these subjects. On 10 February 1888 he became a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, before which he read in 1898 a paper on 'Actinic qualities of light as affected by different conditions of atmosphere'. With the British Astronomical Association, which he joined in 1895 (and of which he became a member of council and of the eclipse committees), he witnessed at Vadso, in the extreme north-east of Norway, the total eclipse of the sun on 9 August 1896. In December 1897 he led a party to Buxar in India for the solar eclipse of January 1898, and took the first animated photographs of the eclipse, but the films mysteriously disappeared on the voyage home. Of this eclipse Bacon gave an account in the 'Journal' of the association (8.264). Bacon, as special correspondent to 'The Times', observed the solar eclipse of 28 May 1900 at Wadesborough, North Carolina, and made further experiments with the cinematograph. 
From kite-flying Bacon early turned to ballooning and to the acoustic and meteorological researches for which it gave opportunity. His first balloon ascent was made from the Crystal Palace on 20 August 1888 with Captain Dale. He recorded enthusiastically, 'I left this world about 5.15...' (G. Bacon, 151). Experiments in 1899 proved that sound travelled through the air less rapidly upwards than downwards. In August of that year he successfully experimented from his balloon with wireless telegraphy. In November 1902 Bacon crossed the sea from the Isle of Man to Galloway. On the voyage he proved the theory that the sea bottom was visible and could be photographed from a great height. Bacon photographed from his balloon, at a height of 600 feet, the beds of sand and rock 10 fathoms deep in the bottom of the Irish Sea; these photographs were exhibited at the Royal Society's soiree at Burlington House in the spring of 1903. With J. Nevil Maskelyne, Bacon began experiments in the inflation of balloons with hot air by the vaporization of petroleum, in place of coal gas, thereby greatly quickening the process and producing some very tense flights in craft potentially extremely explosive. Bacon also researched into the causes and cure of London fog, insisting on the need for stronger currents of air through the streets, by widening thoroughfares and increasing the number of open spaces. 
Bacon became active and successful as a popular scientific lecturer and writer. He read before the Society of Arts papers on 'The balloon as an instrument of scientific research' (published in the 'Journal of the Society of Arts', 17 Feb 1899), and 'Scientific observations at high altitudes' (ibid., 24 Jan 1902). In a paper at the Cambridge meeting of the British Association on 'Upper air currents and their relation to the far travel of sound' (1904) he summarized his subsequent acoustic experiments in balloons. Bacon died of pleurisy at his home, Sunnyside, Coldash, on 26 December 1904, and was buried in Swallowfield churchyard, near Reading, four days later. Only the previous year (7 October 1903), he had married a second wife -- Stella, youngest daughter of Captain T. B. H. Valintine of Goodwood -- with whom he had a second daughter. His elder daughter, Gertrude, a frequent companion on his expeditions, wrote his biography. 


@@@@@


doc= 30516


Bacon, Sir Reginald Hugh Spencer (1863-1947), naval officer, was born on 6 September 1863 at Wiggonholt rectory, Sussex, youngest of the eight children of the Revd Thomas Bacon and his wife, Emma Lavinia, daughter of George Shaw of Teignmouth. He entered the Royal Navy via the 'Britannia' in January 1877. Rated midshipman on leaving, and already known to his peers as Porky, he was appointed (January 1879) to the 'Alexandra', flagship of Sir Geoffrey Hornby and then of Sir Beauchamp Seymour, 'the swell of the ocean', in the Mediterranean. After good results at Greenwich he was promoted lieutenant in August 1883 and went to sea in the sail training-ship 'Cruiser' before specializing in torpedoes and qualifying at 'Vernon'. He became torpedo officer in two flagships of the channel squadron, 'Northumberland' and 'Camperdown'. He returned to 'Vernon' until promoted commander in June 1895, when he was appointed to the cruiser 'Theseus' in the special service squadron which was suddenly withdrawn from the Mediterranean in January 1897 to reinforce the West African squadron under Sir Harry Rawson in dealing with the critical situation in Benin resulting from the massacre of an English party. Bacon accompanied the by now traditional naval brigade up country as intelligence officer, for which he was appointed to the DSO and mentioned in dispatches. Six months later, having written a spirited account of the expedition entitled 'Benin, City of Blood' (1897), he was sent to the 'Empress of India', which took part in the queen's jubilee review before joining the Mediterranean Fleet. In 1898 she was ordered to Crete to join Admiral Sir Gerard Noel's punitive expedition after the massacre of the British vice-consul and his family. So far Bacon's had been the classical career of an enterprising officer of his day. The advent of Sir John Fisher as commander-in-chief, the Mediterranean Fleet, was to have a shattering effect on even so rhadamanthine an institution as the Royal Navy but it brought Bacon opportunities of which he took full advantage. Fisher welcomed ideas from junior officers; Bacon was quick to respond to his admiral's request for suggestions about the tactical deployment of torpedo boats. Fisher's approval of his proposals was instant and rewarding; on his recommendation Bacon was promoted captain in June 1900, only five years since he had been promoted commander. 
Bacon's first appointment was to evaluate the technical aspects of the Paris Exhibition of that year; the next to attend one of the early war courses at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. Thereafter he oversaw the introduction of submarine boats into the Royal Navy. G. J. Goschen's last act before he retired as first lord had been to order five Holland submersibles from America, to be built under licence by Vickers and by Maxim. Bacon was appointed inspecting captain of submarine boats, a post which he held until 1904 and which made him father of 'the trade', as the Submarine Service is affectionately known, supervising both the construction of its boats and the training of their crews. 
Fisher became first sea lord on Trafalgar day, 1904, and at once recruited Bacon -- said to be the cleverest officer in the Navy -- to be his naval assistant. After working on the new designs committee with the specifications of the revolutionary 'Dreadnought' and the new battle cruisers, and commanding the 'Irresistible' in order to gain the sea time needed for further promotion, he was appointed in January 1906 to 'Dreadnought' as her first captain. It was while he was in the Mediterranean that he obliged Fisher with private letters, ostensibly about the fleet in general and the seagoing reaction to board innovations and experiments, but occasionally commenting on individuals. However apart from a reference to certain admirals 'getting at the King', he was careful not to identify brother officers, doing so only once and that a junior; but the suspicion that he informed on a fellow officer stuck, an odium from which his standing never quite recovered. He lacked the gift of drawing loyalty or affection from his officers and men; and when the texts were almost inadvertently quoted by Fisher in his feud against Lord Charles Beresford in 1909, the effect may have contributed to Bacon's decision to retire from the service. He had served as flag captain and chief of staff to Sir Francis Bridgeman when he hoisted his flag in the 'Dreadnought' as admiral in the Home (Reserves) Fleet; in 1907 he relieved Jellicoe as director of naval ordnance, in the middle of a controversy concerning the choice of a centralized fire-control system. Fisher and Jellicoe favoured Pollen's invention, but Jellicoe left the Admiralty for the fleet, and Bacon opted for the cheaper but less accurate system designed by Captain F. C. Dreyer. This was a controversial and, as events were to show, a mistaken decision, and though Bacon could scarcely have missed the flag list in July 1909, he was perhaps fortunate in being invited by McKenna to join the board as third sea lord and controller, again relieving Jellicoe. But he had been offered the post of managing director of the Coventry ordnance works and calculating that because of his short time at sea he would be unlikely to obtain any significant command afloat, he asked for his name to be transferred to the retired list that November. 
By August 1914 Bacon had produced a new howitzer, of which he took a detachment to Flanders in 1915, commanding the force in the rank of colonel 2nd commandant, Royal Marines. To the astonishment of many of his naval contemporaries and the fury of some, he was recalled to active naval service by Churchill, then first lord, and appointed to relieve Rear-Admiral Horace Hood in command of the Dover patrol and as senior naval officer, Dover. He was promoted vice-admiral late in 1916, and early in January 1917 proposed to Jellicoe, who had become first sea lord, a seaborne assault on the Belgian coast, using monitors to push floating piers ahead of them, and landing 14,000 men with artillery and transport over open beaches while Ostend and Zeebrugge were bombarded by other inshore craft. This promising scheme was never mounted because the army failed to co-ordinate its part of the plan. In 1918 the two ports were raided, but in accordance with plans amended significantly in the light of criticisms made by Bacon when the originals had been sent to him by mistake -- they were being circulated in confidence to other officers while he was still in command at Dover. 
Bacon's days there were numbered once Sir Eric Geddes became first lord in July 1917. Fortified by the appointments of Admiral Wemyss as deputy first sea lord and Rear-Admiral Roger Keyes as director of plans, Geddes set up a channel barrage committee under the latter on 13 November. This irked Bacon, whose conceit shone through in a series of petulant letters he sent to the first lord. These did not endear him to an equally self-confident man. But Bacon was the man in the job, and as such he was supported by Jellicoe, for too long for the latter's own good. Eventually their hands were forced. Bacon was cornered over the use of nets, mines, and searchlights and then over the disposition of his surface forces. Intelligence of numerous and safe transits of the Dover Strait by U-boats tipped the scales; Wemyss was adamant that he should go. Jellicoe was reluctant to relieve him. Wemyss contemplated resignation. A. J. Marder has argued that the primary cause of Jellicoe's dismissal was the impending sacking of Bacon, and it was indeed Jellicoe who was sacked by Geddes at Christmas time 1917 in a manner which still astonishes. Wemyss replaced Bacon with Keyes on new year's day 1918: an instant and significant increase in U-boat sinkings spoke for itself. 
Bacon's considerable abilities were too valuable to lose, and again it was Churchill, now minister of munitions, who redeployed them, making him controller of the ministry inventions department. He was advanced to the rank of admiral in September 1918 and his name finally went onto the retired list on 31 March 1919. He moved to Hampshire and devoted himself to shooting and to chairing the Romsey bench, spending his summers at his house near Lerici in Italy. He also turned to writing, in a faintly pompous tone more reminiscent of Beresford than of Fisher. His autobiography needed two volumes, 'A Naval Scrap Book, 1877-1900' (1925) and 'From 1900 Onward' (1940); two more were devoted to the Dover patrol, and in 1923 he accepted Jellicoe's request to act as his literary representative when the official Jutland report was published. This led to Bacon writing 'The Jutland Scandal' (1925), 'Dedicated to those two neglected goddesses, Justice and Truth, now worshipped in an obscure corner of the British Pantheon' (Bacon, 'The Jutland Scandal', dedication) which even Jellicoe thought was a shade too strong -- 'the criticism is obvious but he has overdone it... I am sorry that he rubbed it into Beatty so hard' (Winton, 292). To others it seemed able if trenchant; in the service there was some repugnance at the title. In 1929 he published the standard biography of Fisher, again in two volumes; sympathetic but not sycophantic, though now rather outdated. Seven years later he managed to deal with Jellicoe in one thick volume, an authorized work though he did not have access to all the admiral's papers, and refused to have the manuscript vetted by his literary executors. 
Bacon married in 1894 Cicely Isabel (died 1955), daughter of Henry Edward Surtees MP, of Redworth Hall, co. Durham. They had one daughter and two sons; the elder was killed at Loos and the younger died while a naval cadet. Edward VII had appointed Bacon CVO in 1907; he was promoted KCVO in 1916, and appointed KCB for his work at Dover. He enjoyed several foreign awards. Undeniably a man of brilliant professional attainments, with a most original mind and probably the cleverest of the many able young officers of his time, he justified Fisher's selection as a disciple in the promotion of many major reforms. He won early and accelerated promotion by merit, and his development of the submarine force alone would secure his fame. His work at Dover enhanced it. He was unfortunate in his manifestation of self-sufficiency and self-satisfaction. Bacon died at his home, Braishfield Lodge, near Romsey, on 9 June 1947, and was buried in Romsey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30517


Badcock, Sir Alexander Robert (1844-1907), army officer, born at Wheatleigh, Taunton, on 11 January 1844, was third son of Henry Badcock JP (died 1888) of Wheatleigh, and Georgina 'nee' Jeffries. His father's family had long been connected with a bank in Taunton. Educated at Elstree School, Harrow School, and Addiscombe College, he was commissioned ensign on 1 October 1861, and promoted lieutenant on 1 October 1862 and captain on 1 October 1873. He married in 1865 Theophila Lowther, daughter of John Shore Dumergue of the Indian Civil Service, judge, of Aligarh. They had four sons, all of whom entered the army, and a daughter. 
After a brief period of duty with the 38th regiment and then with the 29th Bengal native infantry, Badcock entered in 1864 the commissariat department, in which he remained until 1895, achieving notable success and rising to the post of commissary-general-in-chief in December 1890. In his three earliest campaigns, Bhutan (1864-5), the Black Mountain expedition (1868), and Perak (1875-6), he attracted notice for his organization, winning the thanks of government. He was principal commissariat officer under Sir Frederick Roberts in the Kurram field force (1878-9), taking part in the forcing of the Paiwar Pass and other actions. Returning from furlough when operations were resumed, he joined the Kabul field force, and owing to his careful preparations Roberts found in Sherpur, when it was invested, supplies for men stored for nearly four months and for animals for six weeks. Badcock also assisted in recovering the guns abandoned near Bhagwana. When the Kabul-Kandahar field force, consisting of 9986 men and eighteen guns with 8000 followers and 2300 horses and mules, started on 9 August 1880 he relieved Roberts's 'greatest anxiety', and the force reached Kandahar, 313 miles from Kabul, on 31 August with a margin of supplies. For these services he received the brevets of major and lieutenant-colonel, and the CB. Roberts reported to government that he knew of no officer so well qualified to be placed at the head of the commissariat in the field. He was promoted brevet colonel on 2 March 1885, major-general on 1 April 1897, and lieutenant-general on 3 April 1900. 
In 1885 Badcock collected transport for the Sudan campaign, and in 1895 was created a CSI and received the thanks of government for his services in connection with the Chitral relief force. He was appointed quartermaster-general in India on 7 November 1895. He also acted as secretary in the military department (1890-91) and was president of a committee to consider the grant of compensation for the expense of provisions (October 1894). On his retirement at the expiration of his term of office as quartermaster-general in 1900, he took an active part in the organization of the imperial yeomanry for service in the South African War, and was appointed member of the Council of India, receiving on 26 June 1902 the KCB. He died at his home, 44 Grosvenor Road, Westminster, London, on 23 March 1907, while still holding that office, and was buried at Taunton. 


@@@@@


doc= 30518


Baddeley, Mountford John Byrde (1843-1906), compiler of guidebooks, born at Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, on 6 March 1843, was the second son of three children of Whieldon Baddeley, solicitor, of Rochester, Staffordshire, and his wife, Frances Blurton Webb. His elder brother, Richard Whieldon Baddeley (1840-1876), was the author of several novels and a volume of poems, 'The Golden Lute' (1876), which was published posthumously. After education at King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham, Baddeley obtained a classical scholarship at Clare College, Cambridge, and after matriculating in October 1864, graduated BA with a second class in the classical tripos in 1868. In 1869 he was appointed assistant master, and subsequently he became housemaster, at Somersetshire College, Bath. From 1880 to 1884 he was assistant master at Sheffield grammar school. 
After retiring from teaching Baddeley settled at The Hollies, Windermere, and later moved to 2 Lake View Villas, Bowness-on-Windermere. Intimately acquainted with the Lake District and keenly interested in local affairs, he was chairman of the Bowness local board until its dissolution in 1894, and supported movements for preserving footpaths and for popularizing the area as a pleasure resort. On his initiative signposts were placed by the Lake District Association on mountain paths, and a flying squad of young members was organized to report periodically on the condition of the passes. The new road from Skelwith Bridge to Langdale, and the drive along the west side of Thirlmere, which was completed by the Manchester corporation in 1894, were largely due to Baddeley's active intervention. He was opposed to the multiplication of railways or of local industries, favouring legislation for the 'preservation of the scenery' (M. J. B. Baddeley, 'English Lake District', 1880, introduction). 
From 1884 to 1906 Baddeley, who was an untiring walker through most parts of England and a close observer of nature, mainly occupied himself with preparing the 'Thorough Guide' series of guidebooks for Great Britain and Ireland. The series opened with the 'English Lake District' (1880; 21st edn, 1956), Baddeley's most popular work. The series soon extended to fifteen titles, covering Scotland, northern and western England, Wales, Ireland, and the Isle of Man. Baddeley's guides were accurate, concise, and practical. He had the gift not only of describing natural scenery but also of forming a comparative estimate of its beauty. He paid special attention to the needs of the walker; although an enthusiastic mountaineer he deprecated hazardous adventure. 
In 1891 Baddeley married Millicent Satterthwaite, daughter of Robert Henry Machell Michaelson-Yeates of Olive Mount, Windermere. They had no children. Baddeley died on 19 November 1906, at his home, 2 Lake View Villas, Bowness, of pneumonia, which he contracted on a visit to Selby while revising one of his Yorkshire volumes; he was buried at Bowness. His wife survived him. In 1907 a clock tower was erected at Bowness in his memory by public subscription from friends and admirers in all parts of the British Isles. 


@@@@@


doc= 30519


Badeley, Henry John Fanshawe, Baron Badeley (1874-1951), civil servant and engraver, was born at Elswick, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 27 June 1874, the elder child and only son of Captain Henry Badeley (1842-1881), of Guy Harlings, Chelmsford, and his wife, Blanche (died 1929), daughter of Christian Augustus Henry Allhusen of Elswick Hall and of Stoke Court, Stoke Poges. He was educated at Radley College and Trinity College, Oxford. A small energetic figure, he represented Oxford against Cambridge in athletics in the years 1895 to 1897, running in the quarter mile. He was also an accomplished oarsman, although golf remained his favourite form of relaxation. In 1902 he sold Guy Harlings, the family estate which he had inherited from his father. 
In 1897 Badeley won first place in a civil service competition for a clerkship in the parliament office and left Oxford without taking a degree. His career was remarkable for its loyalty to, and affection for, the institution which he served. He developed an interest in matters parliamentary, legal, and heraldic. After studying under Frank Short at the Royal College of Art he was elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers, and was almost at once appointed honorary secretary (1911-21). In 1914 he was elected a fellow and exhibited regularly until his death. His combined interest in heraldry and line engraving turned his talent for the latter towards the engraving of bookplates. His work in this field became widely known and he executed commissions for a large number of individuals and institutions, which included plates for the library of the House of Lords. 
In 1919 Badeley became principal clerk of the judicial office and judicial taxing officer of the House of Lords. Here his energy and capacity for making personal contacts soon enabled him to break through formalities, and he became the adviser both of the lord chancellor of the day and of the law lords, as well as of all those members of the legal profession whose business brought them to the house. 
The turning point of Badeley's career came in 1930 when he was appointed clerk assistant of the parliaments, while retaining the principal judicial clerkship. This was the first known promotion to the table of the House of Lords from the staff of the parliament office, and it opened for Badeley himself and for his successors an avenue to the top of their profession. Badeley reached this pinnacle in four years, becoming clerk of the parliaments in 1934. He was clearly suited for this office, although his qualifications differed somewhat from those of his predecessors. His strength lay in the force of his personality, coupled with a quick intelligence and a broad practical knowledge of parliamentary affairs. 
Badeley was appointed KCB in 1935. He had also been made CBE in 1920 for his work as county director of auxiliary hospitals and Voluntary Aid Detachments in the county of London (1917-19). From 1919 to 1923 he was president of the county of London branch of the British Red Cross Society. 
On reaching the age of seventy in 1944 Badeley was due to retire, but he was granted by the crown an extension of five years. When this final term of service was completed he was created, in 1949, a member of the house he had served so well with the title of Baron Badeley of Badley in the county of Suffolk. Badeley took a devout interest in religious questions, and held pronounced Anglo-Catholic views. He was uncompromising in his attachment to his religious beliefs, and this formed a side of his character that was unsuspected by those who knew him on casual acquaintance only. In 1948 he was made an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. Badeley died at 35 Weymouth Street, London, on 27 September 1951. He was unmarried and the peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 30520


Powell, Robert Stephenson Smyth Baden-, first Baron Baden-Powell (1857-1941), army officer and founder of the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides, was born at 6 Stanhope Street, Paddington, London, on 22 February 1857, the sixth son of the Revd Baden Powell (1796-1860), Savilian professor of geometry at Oxford, and his third wife, Henrietta Grace (1824-1914), eldest daughter of Admiral William Henry Smyth (1788-1865), who claimed descent (almost certainly incorrectly) from John Smyth of Virginia (1580-1631), and who also incorrectly claimed she was a great-niece of Nelson. Sir George Smyth Baden-Powell was his brother. His father, a liberal theologian, died in 1860. Robert was brought up within a large, closely-knit family, dominated by his mother, who governed her children's lives well beyond childhood. Manipulative, and obsessively concerned with social status and family advancement, she moved to London and attempted on limited means -- her total income was between $700 and $800 p.a. -- to promote the careers of her sons. She wrote, 'I am determined not to make any new friends unless very choice people indeed' (Jeal, 24). In 1869 she changed the family name from Powell to Baden-Powell, partly to set her own children apart from their half-siblings and cousins. She also quartered the Powell arms with those of the duke of Baden, to which she was not entitled: surprisingly, the College of Arms agreed to this. Henrietta was not close to Robert (known as Stephe, pronounced Steevie), and he grew up craving parental affection and esteem. He was to show considerable theatrical talents, combined with a deep emotional reserve. 
Baden-Powell was educated at home until 1864, at dame-school in Kensington Square, London, and in 1867 briefly at a small private school in Cheshire, before going in 1868 to his father's old preparatory school, Rose Hill, in Tunbridge Wells. In 1870 he was sent to Charterhouse School as a gownboy, on the nomination of the duke of Marlborough, so receiving a free education on the Charterhouse Foundation. He showed little interest in his studies, but was a successful goalkeeper in the school football eleven. He was a keen cadet, and shot for the school at Wimbledon. The school, which moved from London to Godalming, Surrey, in 1872, allowed him to explore local woods, giving him a taste for outdoor adventure, an enthusiasm encouraged by the headmaster, William Haig Brown (1823-1907). At the same time he showed talent for acting and mimicry, as well as sketching and drawing ambidextrously. Baden-Powell acquired a number of nicknames and was seen as 'a bit of a card'. He made almost no close friends among his peers, but remained a loyal Old Carthusian and was later president of the Old Carthusian Club. 
Baden-Powell's mother planned he should attend Oxford University, then enter the army as a university candidate. In 1876 he failed the entrance examinations to Balliol College and Christ Church, Oxford, a fact which he later omitted from his autobiography. However, he succeeded in the army examinations, passing second into the cavalry and fifth into the infantry. Excused Sandhurst, because war with Russia seemed imminent and more officers were wanted, he was gazetted lieutenant in the 13th hussars, then stationed in Lucknow, on 11 September 1876. He left England on 30 October. Baden-Powell did not enjoy his first two years: he failed to make friends, was bullied, and found the regiment's elitism overbearing. He went home on sick leave in December 1878. Failing to change regiment, he attended a musketry course at Hythe, Kent, before returning to India in the spring of 1880. Stationed at Kandahar in Afghanistan, in the aftermath of the Second Anglo-Afghan War, he was mainly involved in mapping and reconnaissance work, laying the foundations of his later military reputation. Upon moving to Quetta in the summer of 1881 he met another young officer of the regiment, Kenneth McLaren (died 1924), whom he nicknamed 'the Boy' for his youthful looks. Sharing enthusiasm for polo and pigsticking, on which Baden-Powell later wrote an authoritative handbook, 'Pig Sticking and Hog Hunting' (1889), they lived together and were almost inseparable. The friendship was one of the most important relationships in Baden-Powell's life. He served as an adjutant from 1882 to 1886, and was promoted captain in May 1883. Keen to be noticed, and to supplement his income, he published 'Reconnaissance and Scouting' (1883) and regularly sent sketches to the 'Daily Graphic'. In November 1884 Baden-Powell's regiment was ordered to Natal in readiness to support Sir Charles Warren's Bechuanaland expedition. He published 'Cavalry Instruction' in 1885, which was well received, and returned to England in November. 
Baden-Powell had yet to make his mark, and his next nine years were frustrating. His poor academic training led to his failing to secure admission to staff college in November 1886 -- he blamed an attack of fever -- and, lacking a military patron, he was forced in November 1887 to accept the position of aide-de-camp (later he was promoted military secretary) to his uncle, Sir Henry Smyth (1825-1906), the commander-in-chief of Cape Colony. He joined an expedition against the Zulu, and came to admire their discipline, physical beauty, and prowess. He found his official duties irksome, but enjoyed colonial informality. Lacking an alternative, he followed his uncle to Malta in October 1890, with the rank of brevet major. He undertook a number of gentlemanly espionage trips in the eastern Mediterranean between 1890 and 1893, embellished accounts of which appeared in 'My Adventures as a Spy' (1915). Promoted major in 1892, he was stationed in Ireland from late 1893. 
Baden-Powell's fortunes changed in November 1895, when he was picked by the commander-in-chief, Lord Wolseley, to raise and command the native levy for Sir Francis Scott's expedition against King Prempeh of Asante, inland from the Gold Coast. Heavily dependent on Chief Andoh of Elmina, Baden-Powell's thousand-strong pioneer force participated in the successful invasion of Asante. Scott secured the submission of Prempeh who, to Baden-Powell's regret, chose not to fight. His later account, 'The Downfall of Prempeh' (1896), was dedicated to Chief Andoh. It was on this campaign that he began wearing his distinctive wide-brimmed pointed hat: balding, he preferred to be photographed hatted. Still eager to earn more money, he was the 'Daily Chronicle''s correspondent on the expedition, and he sold his sketches to 'The Graphic'. Promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel, he was appointed in April 1896 chief staff officer to Sir Frederick Carrington (1833-1913), who had been charged with the suppression of the Ndebele (Matabele) uprising in Southern Rhodesia. He reached Bulawayo in June and was responsible for the administration of logistics. He undertook reconnaissance in the Matopos and was nicknamed by Ndebele 'Impeesa' ('hyena'): in his later accounts he changed it to 'the wolf that never sleeps'. He was in battle, and met Rhodes, whom he greatly admired. Commanding a column of the 7th hussars and others in the Somabula Forest, 100 miles north-west of Bulawayo, he ordered in September 1896 the court martial of, and confirmed the death sentence on, the captured rebel chief Unwini, whom he believed largely responsible for the continuation of the uprising in the area. Unwini was shot. Baden-Powell's action may have shortened the uprising but was of doubtful legality since martial law had not been proclaimed, and it might have destroyed his career. He was exonerated by a court of inquiry but criticized by the British radical press, especially Henry Labouchere's 'Truth'. His military reputation enhanced, Baden-Powell returned to England in January 1897 and quickly wrote 'The Matabele Campaign' (1897). 
In February 1897, on his promotion to lieutenant-colonel, Baden-Powell took command of the 5th dragoon guards. On arrival in India he reduced regimental drill and ceremonial, gave attention to reconnaissance and training (ideas later incorporated into his 'Aids to Scouting', 1899), and was unusual in taking a close personal interest in the welfare of his men. He built them a soda water factory and a temperance club, warned them against venereal disease, and tried unsuccessfully to dissuade them from visiting the local brothel. He also continued his amateur dramatics and practical jokes. 
In July 1899, as the situation worsened in South Africa, Baden-Powell was selected for special duties. With the title commander-in-chief, north-west frontier forces, he raised 500 irregulars, with the aim of tying down Boer troops, and maintaining the loyalty of the local natives. On arrival Baden-Powell, extremely vulnerable to Boer attack, decided to occupy the border town of Mafeking, with its 1500 white and 5500 black inhabitants. Because the town was not easily defended, Baden-Powell had to improvise defence works, at the same time maintaining civil and native morale and continuing to harry the Boers besieging the town. It is estimated that during October and November 1899 some 6000 to 8000 Boer troops were in the vicinity, deployments which significantly reduced their military strength in other areas. The siege lasted 219 days, and Baden-Powell's reports, with their cheeky and jaunty style, increasingly attracted public interest at home. 
As the siege lengthened Baden-Powell's priorities had to be the sustaining of morale as food supplies diminished, while remaining prepared for a Boer attack. This he achieved largely through force of personality, using fully his theatrical, reconnaissance, and organizational abilities. He ordered the attack (26 December) on the Boer outpost, the Game Tree Fort. The operation was bungled, causing unnecessary casualties: the worst blunder of the siege. In early January his difficulties increased on his being told by his military superiors to hold out until May 21, six to eight weeks longer than he had been led to expect. News of Mafeking's final relief reached London on the evening of 18 May, and provoked an outburst of popular patriotism throughout the country, and in many other parts of the English-speaking world. Baden-Powell acquired a heroic status. Later historians have disagreed about the significance of the Mafeking crowds, but the celebrations clearly crossed existing class, religious, and political divides. The 'Manchester Guardian' concluded: 'And the story is all the more moving because the defence is an achievement not so much of professional soldiers as, to a great extent, of men and women before the war we should not have been able to distinguish from the average Englishmen in the colonies. ('Manchester Guardian', 19 May 1900, 9b)' Baden-Powell's role in the defence of Mafeking gave him a unique status for the rest of his life. 
Baden-Powell was promoted major-general in August 1900 and ordered by the new commander-in-chief, Lord Roberts, to form a police force to aid pacification once the war was concluded. In setting up the South African constabulary -- for which he designed an idiosyncratic uniform with American stetsons and special badges -- Baden-Powell, with his views on training and welfare, faced much obstruction from the military and civilian authorities, still engaged in fighting the war. In June 1901 he had to take home leave from exhaustion, and by his return in January 1902 the force was fully established. 
In late 1902 Baden-Powell was appointed inspector-general of cavalry (from May 1904 redesignated inspector of cavalry), his first War Office posting. He did not enjoy it, disliking a desk-bound routine, and having little talent for military politics. His popular status created jealousies, and senior cavalry officers resisted his attacks on their expenses. His principal concern was with the quality of cavalry training, and as part of his efforts at improvement he founded in 1904 the cavalry training school at Netheravon on Salisbury Plain, Wiltshire, and in 1906 was one of the founders of the 'Cavalry Journal' (see Warren, 'EngHR', 1986, 384, n. 1). In the contemporary debates about the future role of the cavalry Baden-Powell expressed his belief that it would have to adopt a more individualistic and reconnaissance role, using the rifle as its main weapon, rather than retain its traditional emphasis on mass formations, 'esprit de corps', and the use of the lance. His 'Cavalry Training' (1904), reflecting these views, prompted fierce resistance from the conservatives, led by Lieutenant-General Sir John French (1852-1925) and Major-General Douglas Haig (1861-1928). In subsequent editions the offending sections were removed. Baden-Powell later acknowledged that he had not anticipated the effects of mechanization on the role of the cavalry. 
Baden-Powell's popular status also made him an attractive figure to voluntary organizations seeking his endorsement. In particular he became aware that his military manual 'Aids to Scouting' (1899) was being used by church organizations, such as the Boys' Brigade and the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), and also that the popular press could be useful in promoting his own reputation and ideas. He became a vice-president of the Boys' Brigade in May 1903, and conducted a major inspection at Glasgow in April 1904. Gradually he became convinced that his training methods, with their focus on individual responsibility, fitness, and reconnaissance, could be used in a non-military environment. He also absorbed domestic concerns about physical deterioration, moral degeneracy, juvenile crime, blind-alley employments, 'wasters' and 'slackers'. R. B. Haldane (1856-1928), secretary of state for war, persuaded him that character training should be at the centre of any scheme of boy instruction. Although pressed by Roberts and the National Service League to back the campaign for compulsory military training, Baden-Powell had already identified the scout's training as the best way to train future citizens. Meetings with the Legion of Frontiersmen and the American naturalist Ernest Thompson Seton (1860-1946) -- founder of the American boys' organization the Woodcraft Indians -- gave him more ideas and encouraged him to place his training ideas in an outdoor context, something consistent with his upbringing and professional experience. A growing contact with the newspaper magnate Sir C. Arthur Pearson (1866-1921) led him to write a training manual for boys in the summer of 1907, and to hold an experimental camp on Brownsea Island in Poole harbour, Dorset, in July. Twenty-two boys from public schools and the local Boys' Brigade were divided into four patrols with animal and bird names, and did swimming, fieldcraft exercises, scouting games, and survival training, led by Baden-Powell, wearing long shorts and an old trilby, assisted by 'Boy' McLaren: six of the Brownsea boys later died on the western front. 'Scouting for Boys' was published in fortnightly parts in January 1908. Within each of its chapters (or camp fire yarns, as they were called) Baden-Powell brought together all his training ideals, placing them in an attractive camping and frontier-based environment. Linked to this were recommendations on how the individual scout might improve himself in the company of other scouts, so as to become a happier individual and better citizen. Underpinning this approach was a personal pledge to keep the scout promise (that 'on his honour' he would be loyal to God and the king, that he would help other people at all times, and keep a series of simply expressed scout laws). Separate sections were included for church and youth leaders on how to use these ideas in their own programmes. The book was an eclectic pot-pourri of advice, stories, and games in the style of the popular boys' journalism of the day, and was an immediate success. Through its many editions and translations it has remained continuously in print, and is estimated to have sold more copies worldwide than almost any other text, excluding the 'Bible'. 
Scout troops sprang up quickly around the country, some independently and others attached to existing organizations such as the Boys' Brigade and the YMCA. Early examples included those in Glasgow, Birkenhead, and Croydon. Possibly to his surprise, Baden-Powell found himself impelled to form his own organization, the Boy Scouts, during 1908. From then on his life was inextricably connected with the movement he had founded. He designed a scout uniform that was practical, attractive, and redolent of frontier adventure: soon it was recognized everywhere, and it was used virtually unchanged until the 1960s. Having been promoted lieutenant-general in June 1907 he was commander of the Northumbrian division of the new Territorial Force from 1908 to 1910. As scout troops were set up around the country he found the small office in London, paid for by Pearson, increasingly inadequate. Rivalries and misunderstandings proliferated, of which the most troublesome was with Sir Francis Vane, bt (1861-1934). Centred on London, and involving clashes of personality as well as principled arguments about militarism and the hierarchical nature of the early headquarters structure, this dispute threatened the existence of the fledgeling organization in the late autumn of 1909. A small breakaway association, the British Boy Scouts, was established with Vane as its president. Impatient with bureaucratic structures, Baden-Powell found himself forced into forming a national committee to support the growing number of local associations. The team was brought together after the first national rally of scouts at the Crystal Palace, London, in September 1909. Sea Scouts were introduced in 1910 with Baden-Powell's brother Warington (1847-1921) writing their training manual. In March 1910 Baden-Powell retired from the army to devote himself fully to the scouts. He secured royal patronage, George V reviewed scouts in Windsor Great Park in July 1911, and a royal charter was granted in January 1912. It is estimated that there were some 100,000 scouts by 1910. 
Such was the public interest generated that girls also wanted to become scouts. At first Baden-Powell seems to have anticipated a co-educational movement, but facing criticism that a scout's training would encourage tomboyish attitudes, he agreed to produce a separate training manual for girls, in association with his sister Agnes. Even so, many elements of 'Scouting for Boys' were included in 'How Girls can Help Build up the Empire: a Handbook for Girl Guides' (1912). 
The Girl Guides Association was formally incorporated in September 1915, and both movements spread widely, at first largely in the English-speaking world, but also in Europe, and later in Africa and Asia. Within the United Kingdom Girl Guides Baden-Powell's wife, Olave (1889-1977) ['see 'Powell, Olave St Clair Baden-, Lady Baden-Powell], whom he had married in 1912, became increasingly dominant; with his backing she replaced and excluded Agnes Baden-Powell and became chief commissioner in 1916. 
Baden-Powell always insisted that individual character training was at the centre of his scouting method, rejecting accusations of militarism and resisting overtures from Roberts and others. Nevertheless among the early scouting volunteers his ideas were capable of more than one interpretation, and Baden-Powell steered a slightly uneven course on the militarism question between 1908 and 1910. Many of his adult enthusiasts came from among existing church workers with boys. As a result his character-training scheme had to acquire a more explicit religious and moral underpinning than was contained in 'Scouting for Boys', yet without losing its non-denominational character. Before and during the First World War Baden-Powell resisted attempts to incorporate the scouts into a national cadet scheme. Rather he argued that a war requiring mobilization of the nation's resources created opportunities for trained civilian war-service by boys and girls. Of the many examples the scouts' national coast-watching scheme was the best known. Under pressure to form a section for younger boys, Baden-Powell in 1916 started the Wolf Cubs, based partly on his friend and admirer Rudyard Kipling's 'Jungle Books': Kipling became an honorary scout commissioner. Baden-Powell later provided for young men over eighteen, which he did less convincingly around the theme of chivalric dedication and service in his 'Rovering to Success' (1922). A lasting advantage of the scout movement has been its benefactors' generosity, locally and nationally. For example, the 6th Richmond, founded in 1916, still uses the building donated by Lady Archer. In 1918 the movement received a major benefaction, Gilwell Park, Essex, bought for it by a Scottish rubber magnate, W. F. de Bois MacLaren. There Baden-Powell established the movement's national and international training centre for scouters. He preferred it to the London Imperial Headquarters and was often there. By 1918 scouts and guides were established features of national life in Britain and the empire, and, with variations, throughout the world. 
From 1918 to 1939 the scout and guide movement grew worldwide, though banned in totalitarian states. In Britain the movement's rivals, the older uniformed organizations and the newer left-wing organizations including the Woodcraft Folk and the Young Communist League -- the latter in 1927 sent Baden-Powell a coffin -- did not approach them in popularity. With their global appeal and unifying philosophy scouts and guides were well placed to express the prevalent internationalism, in ways which included great international camps (jamborees), of which the first was held at Olympia, London, in August 1920, and at which Baden-Powell was proclaimed chief scout of the world. Scouting and guiding were seen as a junior League of Nations, and Baden-Powell and his wife travelled much, encouraging and supporting both movements, and being accorded a reception similar to that of a head of state. Nor were these activities simply symbolic. As the founder, Baden-Powell tried to resolve differences and disputes in very different cultural, political, and religious circumstances, particularly in India and South Africa, where he was only partially successful. By 1939 the total world membership of the scout and guide movement was about 5 million. 
Before his return to England in 1902 Baden-Powell's life had been almost exclusively military and familial, the latter dominated by his mother. His closest personal relations had been with McLaren, and he had had no intimate female liaisons. Increasingly put under pressure to marry by his mother, he was attracted by the idea of family life and having his own children, and he made several proposals of marriage. He was apparently not attracted to women of his own age, preferring older widows or much younger women. It has been alleged that he was a repressed homosexual. In January 1912, on a world tour, he met on SS 'Arcadian' Olave St Clair Soames. Thirty-two years his junior, she also had had a complicated family and emotional upbringing. They were immediately attracted to each other. For her, he represented a heroic figure, cast in a mould of idealism; for him, she reflected energetic, enthusiastic, unconventional, physical femininity. They were married at St Peter's Church, Parkstone, Dorset, on 31 October 1912. Nervous prior to his engagement, Baden-Powell found early married life difficult, its physical side giving him intense headaches and disturbing dreams, which only ceased on their sleeping apart. But after the birth of their three children (a boy, followed by two girls), it was a happy, supportive, companionate partnership, in which each was dedicated, almost exclusively, to scouting and guiding. Baden-Powell wanted to have the ideal scouting and guiding family, but his status and hopes were apparently an oppressive burden for his son, (Arthur Robert) Peter Baden-Powell (1913-1962), despite the great efforts made by his now elderly father to adjust his excessive ambitions for his son. All his children married in his lifetime, and his younger daughter, Betty, later took over her parents' role as head of the movement's first family. 
Baden-Powell was increasingly honoured at home and internationally. Having been knighted in 1909, he became a baronet in December 1922, GCVO in 1923, and, recommended by Ramsay MacDonald, first Baron Baden-Powell of Gilwell in September 1929, an honour announced at the international jamboree held at Arrowe Park, Birkenhead, to celebrate the 'coming of age' of scouting. Later he was appointed to the Order of Merit (1937), and awarded the Carnegie Wateler peace prize (1937). Previously, he had been master of the Mercers' Company (1913). He received many honorary degrees -- including an Oxford DCL (1923) and a Cambridge LLD (1931) -- and foreign decorations. Throughout the inter-war period Baden-Powell continued to write extensively on scouting, as well as commenting on contemporary affairs in a light, journalistic style. At first he admired the apparent dynamism of Mussolini's Italy and Hitler's Germany, but later he revised his opinion. Nevertheless he continued to be naively optimistic about the value of continuing the contacts between youth organizations across Europe. Like many of his generation he was more fearful of Bolshevism than fascism, and he supported the Munich agreement. His opinions on national and international politics attracted leftist criticism then and later. Not a systematic thinker, Baden-Powell failed to see that equality of opportunity could not be achieved by voluntary action alone. In fact, he had little time for politics of any kind. In matters of religion he was formally an Anglican, but was extremely intolerant of denominational differences, founding his simple faith on the worship of nature and doing good to others. 
In October 1938 Baden-Powell and his wife retired to their bungalow Paxtu, at Nyeri in Kenya. There he lived quietly, reading and corresponding; typically, his last memorandum was in protest against a proposed compulsory state youth training service in late 1940. He gradually weakened, and he died peacefully at Paxtu on 8 January 1941. He was buried in St Peter's churchyard, Nyeri, the next day, as was his widow in 1977. Among many memorial plaques, both lives are commemorated in Westminster Abbey. He was succeeded as baron by his son, Peter, who defied his own mother's wish that he should not take his father's title 'since there was only one Lord Baden-Powell' (Jeal, 575). 
Baden-Powell was slim and spare in physique, and of medium height. Although he enjoyed the uniforms and insignia of success his personal tastes were simple, tending to the austere. He slept on an open verandah for most of his married life. His principal recreations were fishing and sketching. He could be stubborn and eccentric, and not everyone enjoyed his taste for practical jokes and amateur dramatics, but almost all his later scouting associates were inspired by his vision, versatility, and energy which, in many cases, transformed their lives; he remained for them, simply, 'the Chief'. 
Baden-Powell's remarkable career has been more argued over since his death than during his lifetime. In 1900 he was a popular patriotic hero, seen as exemplifying all that was best in the British character. In 1941 he died, lauded as a figure of global significance, having founded the two largest youth organizations in the world. Since 1941 both reputations have been attacked. Some historians (Gardner, Willan, and Pakenham) have alleged that at Mafeking his theatrical style was merely self-promotion, covering military incompetence and indecision, as well as hiding racial assumptions, which led him to starve Africans, and expose them to greater danger than white inhabitants. The most detailed and balanced examination of the evidence (Jeal) refuted these charges, while recognizing that Baden-Powell failed in his later accounts to acknowledge sufficiently the African, especially BaRolong, military contribution. Baden-Powell's successful defence of Mafeking was not strategically significant after its first two months: it proved, however, to be a heroic episode of considerable domestic importance in one of the first wars in which civilian reaction to military events was a critical factor in the overall conduct of war. Commentators have also focused on Baden-Powell's intentions in writing 'Scouting for Boys'. For some, the book reflected all the anxieties of the Edwardian governing classes -- physical deterioration, the threat of class-based politics, fears of military and imperial weakness -- and the need to establish new forms of social control (Springhall, Rosenthal). For others, it was an innovative book, providing an imaginative, recreative training programme in the outdoors, based on non-denominational religious and moral principles (Warren, Wilkinson, Jeal). In these interpretations, the book's broader social purpose lay in the better training of future citizens and happier, more fulfilled individuals. This was to be achieved through personal self-improvement and team participation, linked to a readily understood moral and spiritual code, based on an inclusive brotherhood. Both interpretations can find supporting evidence in Baden-Powell's writings between 1900 and 1910. 
Taking the longer view, the Boy Scout and Girl Guide movements remained very much the creation of their founder, even though both he and they showed a considerable capacity to adapt and change. Each was dedicated to the individual development of character through a training scheme which was based on the small group (the patrol), and each focused on ideas of voluntary social or civic service as a means of individual fulfilment and social improvement. Both sought the development of the whole person, physically, mentally, and spiritually, and were committed to ideals of a common humanity, believing that this informal training in personal development could be best achieved through camping and outdoor activities. As such, both organizations were seen as a progressive force by almost all commentators in their founder's lifetime. Only in his final years, in the United Kingdom at least, did it become clear that scouting and guiding had to be part of the range of voluntary and statutory provision for the development of future citizens. 


@@@@@


doc= 30521


Bailey, Sir Abraham, first baronet (1864-1940), financier and politician in South Africa, was born at Cradock, Cape Colony, on 6 November 1864, the only son of Thomas Bailey (died 1905) of Keighley, Yorkshire, a shopkeeper of Queenstown, which he represented in the Eastern Circle division for the Afrikaner Bond in the Cape legislative council. His mother was Ann Drummond (died 1872), daughter of Peter McEwan of Muthill, Crieff, Perthshire. Bailey was educated in England at the Keighley trade and grammar School and at Clewer House, near Windsor. 
After leaving school Bailey worked for a while in a textile firm. Returning to the Cape in 1881 he temporarily ran his father's business until he joined in the Barberton gold rush, arriving there in July 1886. He began dealing in shares with a capital of $100 which he lost. Borrowing $10 from a friend, he took out a broker's licence, and started dealing on the Barberton stock exchange. Leaving Barberton in March 1887, he went to the Witwatersrand goldfields where he became a foundation member of the Johannesburg stock exchange in January 1888. Soon Bailey started acquiring mining properties and extensive real estate operations. 
Described as a 'freewheeling promoter' rather than a company developer, Bailey nevertheless played a significant role in the capitalization of the mining industry, particularly in the period immediately after the South African War. In 1897 he formed a company which, by Rand standards, was modest. This was the South African Gold Mines Company which had very substantial holdings of deep-level shares and properties by 1904. In 1905 he entered into a partnership with Julius Jeppe and founded what became the South African Townships, Mining and Finance Corporation, ranked among the 'big ten' which controlled Rand gold mining ['see 'Randlords]. Bailey was chairman of the latter as well as of the London and Rhodesian Mining and Land Company, one of the greatest holders of land and mining properties in Rhodesia, having taken a keen interest in the future of that country since the establishment of his friend Cecil Rhodes's British South Africa Company in 1889. He was a director of the influential London-based Central Mining and Investment Corporation Ltd and among the first shareholders in Rand Mines Ltd. 
In 1894 Bailey married Caroline Mary (died 1902), elder daughter of John Paddon, a Kimberley merchant. His second wife, whom he married on 5 September 1911, was Mary (1890-1960) ['see 'Bailey, Dame Mary, Lady Bailey], only daughter of Derrick Warner William Westenra, fifth Baron Rossmore. Mary Bailey was well known as an airwoman in the early days of flying and in 1930 was created a dame of the British empire for her services to aviation. Bailey and his first wife had a son, John Milner (1900-1946), who succeeded him as second baronet, and one daughter. There were a further two sons, including James Richard Abe Bailey (1919-2000), and three daughters from his second marriage. 
Known as the prince of the South African racing scene, Bailey became one of the largest breeders and owners of racehorses both in England and in South Africa, where he established a stud farm in Orange Free State and bred a fine line of winners. Bailey was an unusually successful gambler at the track as well as on the stock exchange. His most famous horse, Son-in-Law, which won the Cesarewitch and the Goodwood Cup, was also a great sire. Son-in-Law's son Foxlaw won the 1927 Gold Cup and Straitlace won the Oaks in 1924. Bailey's classic success was winning the Oaks in 1936 with Lovely Rose, and he was second in the Derby of 1935 with Robin Goodfellow. Bailey also took a keen interest in farming, and raised all kinds of livestock using scientific methods on his farm in the Colesberg district of the Cape. 
Bailey began his public service on the Johannesburg health committee in the early 1890s. He was a member of the Reform Committee and for his part in the Jameson raid of 1895 was sentenced to two years' imprisonment, afterwards commuted to a fine of $2000. He served in the South African War as an intelligence officer in the 11th division and helped to raise an irregular corps. He rose to the rank of major, was twice mentioned in dispatches and received the king's and queen's medals and five clasps. During the war he formed a lasting friendship with the young British war correspondent Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill, later acting as his financial adviser. Churchill's daughter Diana married Bailey's eldest son, John, in 1932 but the union was short lived. In 1902 he entered the Cape legislative assembly as Progressive representative for Barkly West, Cecil Rhodes's old constituency, but resigned in 1905. After responsible government was granted to Transvaal in 1906, he represented Krugersdorp from 1907 to 1910 in the legislative assembly, becoming the opposition whip to the administration of General Louis Botha. He actively promoted the union of the four South African colonies, helping to finance 'The State', the organ of the Closer Union Society, which was founded to popularize the cause. 
In 1915 Bailey was elected to the South African parliament as an independent member representing his old constituency, Krugersdorp, but sitting with General Botha's South African Party and not with the Unionists as was expected. He retained the seat until his defeat at the general election of 1924. During the 1914 rising and the South-West Africa campaign Bailey had served under General Louis Botha with the rank of major, and was awarded the Croix de Guerre. He was similarly honoured by France in the First World War. He held strong views on political issues, especially on the Indian question, and in 1922 publicly expressed the wish that all the Indians should leave South Africa. 
Through his South African Mails Syndicate and its two mouthpieces, the 'Rand Daily Mail', Transvaal's leading morning newspaper, and the 'Sunday Times', founded by him, as well as through his great wealth, Bailey was able to exercise considerable influence. From the early 1920s he divided his time between England and South Africa. He was famous for the hospitality which he dispensed at Rust-en-Vrede, his Muizenberg home near Cape Town, and at his London residence, 38 Bryanston Square. His skill and tact as a host made his homes places for the interchange of opinions and debate and at times neutral territory for the settlement of political differences. The critical meeting of 3 December 1916 which led to Lloyd George succeeding Herbert Asquith as prime minister was held at 38 Bryanston Square, and Bailey also urged Lloyd George to have Churchill in his new government. In March 1933 generals Smuts and Hertzog met at Rust-en-Vrede to form a coalition government for South Africa, although Bailey personally did not participate in these deliberations. 
Bailey was an all-round sportsman whose great love for sport went back to 1894 when he captained the Transvaal team in the Currie cup cricket tournament at Newlands in the Cape. He also financed the visit of a South African cricket team to England in 1904. In his youth he had been a boxing enthusiast, trained by J. R. Couper whom he successfully backed in the famous fight against Wolf Bendorff (backed by B. Barnato), on 26 July 1889. Bailey was made a KCMG in 1911 for his services in promoting the unification of South Africa, and created a baronet in 1919 for services rendered during the First World War. He died at Rust-en-Vrede on 10 August 1940, having suffered the amputation of both legs, the first in July 1937 and the second in April 1938. He was buried five days later at Rust-en-Vrede. Under the terms of his will he left a quarter of his estate to the Abe Bailey Trust, which was to be established to further good relations between all white South Africans. His pictures at Bryanston Square were also put in trust for the nation. He bequeathed $100,000 or $5000 a year to the Royal Institute of International Affairs, for research. In 1925 he had purchased the valuable library of Charles Aiken Fairbridge, prominent Cape Town solicitor and book collector, and donated it to the South African Library, Cape Town. He also financed the addition of a wing to the library to house the collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 30522


Bailey, Cyril (1871-1957), classical scholar, was born on 13 April 1871 in Kensington, London, the eldest child (of six) of Alfred Bailey, barrister and sometime Stowell law fellow of University College, Oxford, and his wife, Fanny Margaret, eldest daughter of George Coles, rubber merchant, of the firm of Warne & Co. He was cousin and godchild of Walter Leaf, editor of the 'Iliad' and chairman of the Westminster Bank. Educated at St Paul's School (captain of the school in 1888-90), he went up to Balliol College, Oxford, as a scholar in 1890; he was to remain intimately connected with both institutions all his life. As an undergraduate he won the Hertford and Craven scholarships, but not the Ireland. Like many of his family, he was a good athlete -- as cricketer, walker, cyclist, and mountaineer (member of the Alpine Club). He acted for the Oxford University Dramatic Society, and in later years he was active in producing Greek plays. He was of middle height, with a characteristic springy walk; his face is described as 'brown, lean, ascetic' (Lawrence Jones, 'Balliol College Record', 30). He aged slowly. 
After taking a first in Greats (1894), Bailey was immediately offered a fellowship and tutorship at Exeter College; in 1902 he was able to return to Balliol as fellow and tutor; here he stayed for the rest of his career, retiring in 1939, but teaching again in the Second World War. Balliol was at that time the leading classical college in Oxford, and for twenty-five years Bailey shared with Arthur Pickard-Cambridge the tutoring of pupils of exceptional ability; some were known as 'Picker's boys', others as 'Cyril's boys'. Pickard-Cambridge went on from his college tutorship to become a vice-chancellor and a prominent figure in national higher education; Bailey took the other option and stayed on, combining the burdens of a conscientious college tutor not only with research and publication but also with a considerable load of administration. 
He was a tutor of the old style, spending many hours with undergraduates, sitting and talking informally in his rooms in the evening, and on reading parties in England and in the Alps. He was a much loved tutor, who had the gift of sympathy, and many of his former pupils stayed in touch for decades; all those who knew him remark on his talent for friendship. He also found time to be a leading figure and trustee of the Balliol Boys' Club, a successful venture which brought together undergraduates and young men of the town. He wrote a short history of the club (1953). This activity was one expression of his concern for redressing the perceived injustices of society and spreading the benefits of education much more widely. His experience with the boys' club led to his becoming chairman of the Oxford Youth Advisory Committee; for his work in this area he was made CBE in 1939. 
Bailey was a highly successful lecturer, though he used to comment wryly on the complete lack of instruction or help for novice lecturers. In the fashion of the time, much of his teaching took the form of 'composition', stylish translation from English into Greek and Latin prose and verse. Bailey was an elegant composer, and he had a fine presence and delivery; he was a natural choice as the university's public orator (1932-9). But he was not, like some Oxford and Cambridge dons of the time, content with this sort of scholarly activity. He had a lifelong interest, which issued in a number of substantial books, in the philosopher-poet Lucretius, one of the greatest of Latin poets, and in the Greek philosopher Epicurus, whose system Lucretius versified in his extraordinary poem 'De rerum natura' ('On the nature of the world'). 
In 1900 Bailey published, at the age of twenty-nine, a text of Lucretius in the 'Oxford Classical Texts' series. The series itself was new; not many British classical scholars at the time had any real mastery of the exacting techniques of editing a text, and those commissioning the first volumes made a number of mistakes. As Bailey observed later, it was 'much too early really, as I knew little about Lucretius and almost nothing about the principles of creating a text' (unpublished autobiography). Housman was characteristically severe: 'Some care, some judgment, and some independence are shown here, but not quite enough' ('The Classical Papers of A. E. Housman', ed. J. Diggle and F. R. D. Goodyear, 1972, 523). A second edition appeared in 1922. Bailey produced in 1926 'Epicurus', a collection of the fragments and the evidence for this important thinker. The book is useful, but it is not all-inclusive; it did not replace the more voluminous work, 'Epicurea', of Hermann Usener. In 1928 appeared 'The Greek Atomists and Epicurus', a study of the background of Epicurus's philosophy. It was well received, but in these books he avoided tackling the extremely difficult problems posed by the newly appearing papyrus fragments of Epicurus. That sort of abstruse and detailed philological work was not really to his taste. 
The crown of Bailey's long Lucretian labours was his massive edition of 'De rerum natura', with translation and commentary, in three volumes, which appeared in 1947. All his work has the great merit of clarity of thought and elegance of expression; it is no surprise that he succeeded in the extremely difficult task of producing a skilful and readable English translation of Lucretius. Housman had criticized Bailey's Latin text of 1900 as too conservative; that of 1947 had become still more so. The commentary is rich in illustrative material, and the reader is in the presence of a guide who is fair-minded, judicious, and well informed. Critics were generally respectful, but some remarked on a comparative weakness in the editor's mastery of, or interest in, early Latin. Sometimes, too, one does not quite find the sort of sharply angled discussion which would illuminate particular problems; and Bailey does not respond very readily to a certain vertiginous quality in Lucretius' style, a sense of violence and extremity, so strangely at odds with the Epicurean philosophy of serenity and calm. 
Bailey is the only tutorial fellow of an Oxford or Cambridge college to have been invited to the University of California to give the Sather lectures, the most prestigious set of lectures in the classical field. In 1932 he gave a set of eight lectures, which were published as 'Phases in the Religion of Ancient Rome'. The book is very much in the spirit of Warde Fowler, of Lincoln College, Oxford, who had a great influence on him. The American trip made a great impression, and in his unpublished autobiography he makes interesting comments on a range of things that struck him, not all favourably -- he records his shock at seeing a black professor being isolated at a separate table in a college refectory. Three years later appeared 'Religion in Virgil', a slightly disappointing production, in which the desire to set out the evidence in full and with fairness seems to have been indulged at the expense of exploring Virgil's thought or endeavouring to give answers to the questions raised. 
Bailey had been convinced by Gilbert Murray of the vital importance for the classics of popularization. He edited a collection of essays, 'The Legacy of Rome' (1923) to which H. H. Asquith contributed an introduction; the book was a great popular success. He also saw the importance of maintaining close links between classicists in universities and teachers of the subject in schools, and he was assiduous in visiting schools, a regular examiner in school certificate examinations, and for years the chairman of the annual joint conference affectionately known as 'Dons and beaks'. He was elected a governor of his old school, St Paul's, in 1901, and served for fifty years. He also served as a governor of Marlborough College. After his retirement, living in the village of East Hanney, he became a member of the governing body of the village school. 
At that period Bailey also served on the parochial church council and the Wantage rural district council: he was the sort of man whom people wanted on their committees and similar bodies. He was president of the Old Pauline Club from 1921 to 1931, 'after which', he used to say, 'they reduced the maximum term to three years' (unpublished autobiography). He was a founder member of the Governing Bodies Association. Closer to his academic interests, he was a delegate of the Oxford University Press from 1921 to 1946, playing a central part in the decisions of the press in that difficult time. He devoted many hours and infinite tact to the long struggles and the bitter quarrels that plagued the early years of the project to produce an 'Oxford Latin Dictionary' to replace that of Lewis and Short. Work on the book began in 1932, but the first fascicle was not published until 1968, eleven years after Bailey's death on 5 December 1957, at his home, The Mulberries, East Hanney. His contribution to the project, of which he was for some years senior co-editor, was very great. 
Bailey was the best-loved Balliol figure of his time and probably the most widely known, both to undergraduates and to old members. Many people expected him to be elected master of the college in 1924, in succession to A. L. Smith. When the college elected A. D. Lindsay, Bailey's response was both publicly and privately magnanimous. The charm of his personality was felt very widely. Eduard Fraenkel, a great emigre scholar, who was sometimes impatient with the amateurishness of British classicists, was asked which he put higher, Bailey or Pickard-Cambridge. The audience expected that preference would be given to the more technically irreproachable work of Pickard-Cambridge on the Attic theatre. After a short pause, Fraenkel replied with a line of Aristophanes ('Frogs', 1413): 'One I think is clever, but the other is my delight'. 
In January 1912 Bailey married Gemma Creighton (died 1958), youngest daughter of Mandell Creighton, historian of the papacy and bishop of London. She was Gilbert Murray's secretary, and they met at a class on Horace which Bailey was giving for women undergraduates at Oxford -- both facts, in their different ways, being marks of his comparatively liberal attitudes. The marriage was unassailably happy. They had three daughters and one son. In 1923 she published a 'Short History of Lady Margaret Hall'. That college was one of their shared interests: Bailey was chairman of the council of Lady Margaret Hall from 1921 to 1939, and was elected an honorary fellow. He was also an honorary fellow of Balliol, received honorary degrees from Oxford, Durham, Wales, Glasgow, and California, and -- the honour which, he recorded, gave him most pleasure -- was elected FBA in 1933. 
Music played an important part in Bailey's life. He was among the moving spirits of the Oxford Subscription Concerts, and for years he was a devoted member of the Bach Choir ('one of the deepest joys of my life'; unpublished autobiography), becoming its president, although by his own account his singing was less than ravishing. He published a lively memoir of its controlling genius, Sir Hugh Allen. Bailey was a man of deep Christian faith, regular in his attendance at the college chapel. There is a drawing of him in chalk by Sir William Rothenstein and an etching by Andrew Freeth, both in Balliol. Those who knew the sitter regard the latter as the better likeness. 
Bailey's career, like that of Russell Meiggs in the next generation at Balliol, is in a sense a period piece. For a certain time, roughly perhaps from 1840 to 1990, there were scholars of first-rate ability and international reputation who preferred not to seek promotion, titles, or even relief from the duties of teaching, and who were content with the position of tutor at an Oxford college, lavishing much of their time and energy on their pupils. They are not likely, in the present atmosphere of British academic life, to have many successors. 


@@@@@


doc= 30523


Bailey, Sir Edward Battersby (1881-1965), geologist, was born in Marsden, Kent, on 1 July 1881, the third of six sons of James Battersby Bailey, medical practitioner, and his wife, Louise Florence, daughter of Isaac Carr, a Cumberland farmer. Bailey was educated at Kendal grammar school and went by open scholarship from there to Clare College, Cambridge. He gained first-class honours in both parts one (1901) and two (1902, geology and physics) of the natural sciences tripos and gained the Harkness scholarship (1902). 
Bailey joined the geological survey as a field geologist in 1902. His studies of igneous rocks in the Scottish lowlands soon identified him as a skilled interpreter of the composition and history of ancient volcanoes. He enjoyed writing, and with Charles Thomas Clough and H. B. Maufe he described the geological mapping of Glencoe, demonstrating the relics of a large sunken volcano, called a 'cauldron-subsidence', surrounded by ring fractures, some occupied by igneous rocks later termed 'ring-dykes'. This fostered the recognition and study of ring-dykes elsewhere in the world. In 1910 came his revolutionary description of the general geological structure of the western Grampians as strata, some transported great distances, bent into recumbent folds of which the limbs were partly replaced by low-angled faults or slides. Bailey was uncertain of the depositional order of the strata within the folds but in 1930, after other workers had demonstrated the significance of current-bedding and graded bedding, he showed that the Ballachulish Slide was developed in the lower limb of a syncline. Later it was realized that the concept of recumbent folding applied to the whole of the Grampians. 
In 1914 Bailey married Alice (died 1956), daughter of David Meason of Kirkwall, and a sister of the wife of Sir John Flett; they later had a son and a daughter. The following year, Bailey's geological work was interrupted by the First World War; he served from 1915 to 1919 with the Royal Garrison Artillery. Wounded twice, losing his left eye and much use of his left arm, he was awarded the Military Cross and the French Croix de Guerre with palms. He was also made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur and he retired from the army with the rank of lieutenant. 
Bailey's fertile brain was unaffected by his war wounds and in 1919 he was given charge of west highland fieldwork and he saw through the press the complex geological map of Mull (1923) which he had helped to construct and which depicts the results of two great cauldron-subsidences and of gravitational differentiation of Tertiary magma; also there are crater lakes, pillow lavas, and ring-dykes. During the mapping, in 1922, Bailey studied a very pure white sandstone by Loch Aline, on the mainland opposite Mull; this, he inferred, formed the desert shores of the same sea that deposited the chalk of the English Downs. In the Second World War, when normal shipments of optical glass from overseas ceased, the purity of the Loch Aline sands was recalled and they were extensively mined and used. 
In 1930 Bailey took up his appointment as professor of geology at Glasgow University. Some of his lectures to his Glasgow undergraduates were incorporated into his 'Introduction to Geology' (1939), written with his colleagues J. Weir and W. J. McCallien. His book 'Tectonic Essays, Mainly Alpine' (1935), also written during his years in Glasgow, still proves good reading. Among his researches were inferences concerning ancient submarine earthquakes and the accompanying tidal waves affecting sedimentation. These led other workers subsequently to develop the concept of turbidity-currents of high density and their effects on present-day ocean configuration. 
Bailey's stay in Glasgow ended in 1937 when he was offered the directorship of the geological survey and its newly sited museum at South Kensington. The war, which occupied six of the eight years of his directorate, caused a change in his plans for the survey; these are outlined in his book 'Geological Survey of Great Britain' (1952), as are the activities of his staff, diverted from regional geological mapping to successful work on minerals associated with the war effort. The museum was evacuated and became the headquarters of London region civil defence; from 1940 to 1942 Bailey was lieutenant commanding the geological survey and London region section of the Home Guard. In 1943 he visited Malta to advise on water resources there. He also worked extensively on the production of the two sheets of the 10-mile-to-1-inch geological map of Great Britain, which, however, was not published until 1948, whereas he retired in 1945, the year in which he was knighted. 
Following his retirement, in collaboration with McCallien, Bailey then started researches into the origin of associated serpentine, pillow lava, and radiolarian chert in Scotland, Turkey, and Italy. He also prepared a second edition of the 'Geology of Ben Nevis and Glen Coe' (1960) and he wrote biographies of Sir Charles Lyell (1962) and of James Hutton (1967). Bailey's first wife died in 1956, and in December 1962 he married Mary M. W. Young, who survived him. 
Bailey was a tallish man of excellent physique; he had gained a freshman's heavyweight boxing medal at Cambridge. Always a keen walker, he had spartan habits and a strong personality. Dedicated to his work, he inspired others but at times he was over-enthusiastic or even intolerant, thus antagonizing some. Honorary doctorates were given to him by the universities of Belfast, Birmingham, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Harvard. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1930 and awarded a royal medal in 1943. A foreign member of the national academies of Belgium, India, Norway, Switzerland, and the United States, he was also an honorary member of many geological societies and received several prestigious medals, including the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society (1948). One of the best-known and most colourful geologists of his time, he died in the Royal Free Hospital, London, on 19 March 1965 and was cremated at Golders Green. 
C. James Stubblefield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30524


Bailey, Frederick Marshman (1882-1967), explorer and naturalist, elder son of Major (later Lieutenant-Colonel) Frederick Bailey of the Royal Engineers, was born on 3 February 1882 at Lahore, where his father served in the Indian army for a few years. Later his father became head of the Indian forestry survey department and, on retirement from the army on health grounds, lecturer in forestry at Edinburgh University. His mother was Florence, daughter of John Clark Marshman, who had landed with his missionary parents in India in 1799. Marshman became the 'Times' correspondent and was one of the founders of the newspaper the 'Pioneer of India'. 
F. M. Bailey was educated at Edinburgh Academy, where, to his disappointment, he spent only three years before going to Wellington College and then to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. His first commissioned posting was in 1900 to the Middlesex regiment, which was then in the Nilgiri hills in India. There he became interested in birds, butterflies, and plants -- an interest which he maintained throughout his travels, and which produced valuable material and many new species for museums in India and Britain. He transferred to the Durham light infantry, in which he developed proficiency in polo. His horsemanship, and the influence of Lord Roberts, a family friend, led to his posting to the 17th Bengal lancers. Hoping to see active service, in 1903 he asked to be transferred to the 32nd Sikh pioneers, whom he accompanied to Sikkim. This introduced him to Tibet, a country which intrigued him for the rest of his life and brought him a high reputation as an explorer. 
Bailey was a member of the mission to Lhasa in 1903-4 led by Francis Younghusband to resolve the intransigence of the Tibetan government in implementing the Anglo-Chinese convention of 1890. On successfully completing this mission Bailey, now proficient in Tibetan, was given his first opportunity to explore when sent to report on the trade and trade routes between India and Gartok, in western Tibet. He travelled hundreds of miles, and lived for weeks at a time at a height of over 14,000 feet. Although only twenty-two, he gave a most detailed report on this assignment, which was published by the government of India (1905). In 1905 he applied to be transferred to the political department, and later that year went to Gyantse as trade agent to relieve the official due for leave. After the official's return, Bailey was for two years in the Chumbi valley, a wedge of Tibet which thrusts south of the Himalayas between Sikkim and Bhutan. It was a suitable area in which to pursue his interest in natural history. In 1911, accompanied by his young Tibetan servant, he embarked on an expedition to explore the Tsangpo River, discover its source from the Tibetan plateau, and find out whether, as previously reported, it had falls of some 150 feet in height. An approach from the south was barred by unfriendly hill people and was totally discouraged by the Indian government, so Bailey decided to enter in the east from China; he therefore obtained a passport in Peking (Beijing) which allowed him to travel through Szechwan (Sichuan) and Yunnan. He travelled to Ichang (Yichang) on the Yangtze (Yangzi) by steamer and from there hired a small boat to take him through the Yangtze gorges. He trekked through this most difficult mountainous area to Tatsienlu (Dajianlu) and eventually to Batang on the Tibetan frontier. He did not, however, manage to reach the Tsangpo, but returned to India through Mishmi country. In his book 'China -- Tibet -- Assam' (1945) he gave a fine account of this journey. 
Hoping to solve the mystery of the Tsangpo Gorge, Bailey set out in 1913 with Captain Henry Treise Morshead, Royal Engineers, who worked on the survey of India and, in defiance of official orders, they entered Tibet from Assam. Their three-and-a-half-month journey has been described as one of the longest and most remarkable journeys of exploration completed on foot in the twentieth century. It proved that the Tsangpo broke through the Himalayan range to emerge on the plains of India as the Brahmaputra. In Bailey's opinion the chief results of this expedition were to map some 380 miles of the Tsangpo, to discover the two portals of the Tsangpo Gorge, and the high mountains Gyala Peri and Namcha Barwa, and to recognize that the Subansiri was another river which had its source in Tibet and pierced the main Himalayan range. On this expedition he discovered the renowned blue poppy, and collected fragmentary flowering specimens on which the species 'Meconopsis baileyi' was based. It was Kingdon Ward who introduced the plant to Britain in 1924 from seeds from the same locality. 'No Passport to Tibet' (1957) was Bailey's account of the journey. As a result of his discoveries, Bailey was appointed CIE in 1915. 
In 1915 Bailey was sent to France with the 31st Sikh pioneers. Wounded at Ypres, he returned to Britain. On recovery he was dispatched to Gallipoli with the Gurkhas, only to be wounded again by a bullet which passed through both his legs. Pronounced unfit for active service, he returned to the political department of the India Office. In 1916 he was posted to India, where he worked for two years as political officer in Kohat and then Charsada. In March 1917 he was sent as a political officer to Shustar, Persia. Early in 1918 he was ordered to Kashgar in Chinese Turkestan and then to Tashkent in Russian territory to report on the conditions in the region following the revolution of 1917 and the collapse of the eastern front under German pressure. Subversive movements seemed likely to affect the equilibrium on the north-west frontier of India; Bailey tried to establish good relations and influence the Tashkent authorities in favour of the allies. Because of the hostility of the Bolshevik government in Russian Turkestan, he had to go underground. Since he understood and could speak limited Russian, he could repeatedly change his identity. Despite having a price on his head, he got himself recruited into the Russian counter-espionage service, with the task, among other duties, of tracking a foreign agent named Bailey. He was thus able to reach Bukhara and finally Mashhad in Persia. His 'Mission to Tashkent' (1946) tells the fascinating story of these dangerous adventures. 
Bailey married on 7 April 1921 Irma, only child of William Hepburn, second Lord Cozens-Hardy, a barrister and secretary to his father, the first Lord Cozens-Hardy, when master of the rolls. There were no children. In the year of his marriage he was appointed political officer in Sikkim and, while living in Gangtok for seven years, he was able to travel into Tibet and Bhutan. He became a personal friend of the Dalai Lama, with whom he could converse freely. He next spent some months as a political officer in central India before going to Srinagar, Kashmir, as resident, and eventually to Nepal as British minister. He retired in 1938. After the outbreak of war in 1939 he joined the Home Guard and was in charge of the north Norfolk auxiliary units. For almost two years he was a king's messenger based at Miami and Washington. 
Bailey was an unassuming man of handsome appearance and military bearing and spoke in a soft voice. He was modest and gentle-mannered, with immense charm and persuasiveness, and a fine sense of humour which earned him the nickname Hatter. Although he sometimes defied authority, his results usually justified his resolve. In 1912 the Royal Geographical Society granted him the Gill memorial award and in 1916 its gold medal. He also received in 1920 the premier award of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, the Livingstone gold medal. In natural history his major interest was butterflies, which he collected in all his travels. His specimens were given to the British Museum (Natural History) and his cabinets of duplicates went to the Metropolitan Museum in New York. His fine collection of birds, mostly from Nepal, and his collection of mammals, were donated to the British Museum. He published a number of papers on many aspects of natural history. Bailey died at his home, Warborough House, Stiffkey, Norfolk, on 17 April 1967. 
George Taylor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30525


Bailey, Sir George Edwin (1879-1965), electrical engineer and industrialist, was born in Loughborough on 19 October 1879, the tenth child of Thomas W. Bailey, master tailor, and his second wife, Ann Wilmot. He was educated at Loughborough grammar school, and entered the works of the Brush Electrical Engineering Company, Loughborough, as an apprentice, continuing his technical education at the University College, Nottingham. After a period as leading turbine draughtsman, he left the Brush Company in 1907 and joined the British Westinghouse Company at Trafford Park, Manchester, as a draughtsman in the engine department, rising to chief draughtsman in 1909. He married, in 1910, Margaret Fanny (died 1971), daughter of Thomas Bolesworth, farmer, of Loughborough; they had one daughter. In 1913 Bailey became superintendent of the engine department, and was later responsible for manufacture; this determined his future career and interest in production and manufacture. During the First World War, British Westinghouse raised a body of defence volunteers at Trafford Park, captained by Bailey. 
In 1919 British Westinghouse became the Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Company, a name which was to become known throughout the world. Bailey was appointed as works manager, and in 1927 took a seat on the board, becoming director and general manager of manufacture. 
In 1929 Metropolitan-Vickers was merged with the British Thomson-Houston Company and the Ediswan Electric Company to form Associated Electrical Industries Limited. Although the individual companies retained their own identities, Bailey was made responsible for the co-ordination of production in the group. In 1938 the company was involved with Robert Watson-Watt in producing the first radar sets, and George Bailey was proud to be involved with many technical developments in heavy-bomber production, with the first axial flow gas turbine to fly (the forerunner of the jet), and with much equipment for the navy and air force, including the first thousand radar sets ordered by the government. In what he regarded as 'the engineers' war', Bailey led the company through a great manufacturing programme. On 22 December 1940 the Trafford Park works was heavily bombed, but under Bailey's direction tools and materials were obtained from elsewhere and production resumed with little interruption. For his service during the war Bailey was knighted in 1944. The same year, he was appointed chairman of Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Company. 
In the following two years Bailey became managing director, and then deputy chairman, of Associated Electrical Industries. In 1951 Oliver Lyttelton (later Lord Chandos) entered the government as secretary of state for the colonies and Bailey took his place as chairman of the company until 1954, when Chandos returned, after which Bailey continued as director, retiring in 1957. 
Bailey was a man of strong character, and it was undoubtedly his great energy and single-mindedness that caused him to be chosen for heavy responsibility in his early years. He was notable for his ability to handle men, and, despite his critical outlook and sometimes more than trenchant comments, he left no rancour. He was adept at devising various ways of maintaining good communications with his employees and his relations with the trade unions, although robust, were always sincere, and caused no ill feelings. The company boasted what was probably the first works committee in the country, anticipating the Whitley councils by nine months. Although Bailey regarded himself as a very hard man, he was far more sympathetic and sentimental about other people's misfortunes than he cared to admit, and often arranged for help to be given anonymously. He gave unremitting support for a wide range of extramural activities for the company's employees, such as choral singing, amateur dramatics, and boxing. He also assiduously encouraged an evening school, which offered tuition for women and girls in cookery, sewing, and dressmaking. 
During the war Bailey served as a member of the engineering and industrial panel of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and as a member of the committee which considered the position of skilled men in industry, led by Sir W. H. Beveridge, as well as serving on the industrial panel of the Ministry of Production. At various times he was president of the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association, the Engineering and Allied Employers' National Federation, the Manchester District Engineering Employers' Association, the Manchester Engineering Council, and the Institute of Production Engineers. His skill and wide experience were used to the full after the blitz on Manchester, in supervising the restoration of badly damaged factories in the district. His contribution to the Manchester Defence scheme earned him the appointment of CBE in 1941. 
Despite his heavy responsibilities and the many calls on his time, Bailey never lost interest in golf, fishing, and gardening. Like his father before him, he was a good gardener and his chief interest was in the cultivation of carnations, in which he specialized. Bailey died at his home, Downside, Compton, Berkshire, on 14 October 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 30526


Bailey, John Cann (1864-1931), writer on literature, the third son of Elijah Crosier Bailey, solicitor and clerk of the peace for Norwich, and his wife, Jane Sarah, daughter of William Robert Cann, of Cavick House, Wymondham, Norfolk, was born at Cavick House on 10 January 1864. He was educated at Haileybury College and at New College, Oxford, where he obtained second classes in classical moderations (1884) and 'literae humaniores' (1886); he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1892. He moved to London with sufficient private means to enable him to stand for parliament (he unsuccessfully contested the Sowerby division of Yorkshire in the Conservative interest in 1895 and 1900), but with few social contacts other than those which he had formed at university. Bailey's easy, agreeable, and intelligent conversation gave him, however, a ready entrance into the metropolitan society of the 1890s. On 26 April 1900 he married Sarah Kathleen (died 1941), the eldest daughter from his second marriage of G. W. Lyttelton, fourth Baron Lyttelton. They had three daughters, the youngest of whom predeceased Bailey. Herself a spirited conversationalist, his wife gave him not only a very happy home life but the association of several important brothers-in-law, including Neville Gerald Lyttelton, army officer, Arthur Temple Lyttelton, suffragan bishop of Southampton, and Alfred Lyttelton, lawyer and statesman. He was a constant and valued member of the Literary (dining) Society, of which he eventually became president, and, as might be expected of so ardent a Johnsonian, was immensely gratified by his election to 'the Club'. 
Bailey's intense pleasure in good talk may possibly have restricted his literary output, but his literary ambition was always circumscribed. He related that when people asked him to write a 'magnum opus' he used to counter by enquiring: 'If I write it, will you buy it and will you read it?' It is arguable that his best work was, in fact, slight in compass. He himself may have rated highest his 'Milton' (1915), a little book, but many of his contemporaries felt that 'Dr Johnson and his Circle' (1913) gave his particular powers their fullest scope. Bailey's other publications include 'Studies in some Famous Letters' (1899); an edition of the 'Poems of William Cowper' (1905); 'The Claims of French Poetry' (1907); 'Some Political Ideas and Persons' (1921); 'The Continuity of Letters' (1923); an edition of the 'Diary of Lady Frederick Cavendish' (2 vols., 1927), the author being his sister-in-law; and 'Shakespeare' ('English Heritage' series, 1929). Bailey was a constant contributor to the 'Times Literary Supplement', for which he did much important, though anonymous work; to the 'Quarterly Review', of which he was deputy editor in 1907-8 and again in 1909-10; to the 'Edinburgh Review' and the 'Fortnightly Review'; and to the 'London Mercury'. 
As chairman (1912-15) and president (1925-6) of the English Association, Bailey made a further contribution to the study of English letters; and as chairman (1923-31) of the executive committee of the National Trust, and also of the Fulham branch of the Charity Organization Society, he disclosed a practical interest in things of beauty and in matters of social welfare. During the First World War he worked in the intelligence bureau of the Department of Information, and was responsible for propaganda in France, Spain, and Italy. In 1918 he moved to the Foreign Office's political intelligence department, where he was involved in the planning for the Paris peace conference. 
Never a strong man physically, Bailey was still actively involved in the literary world when he died, at his home, 4 Onslow Gardens, Kensington, London, on 29 June 1931. He was buried on 2 July in the churchyard of Wramplingham near Wymondham, as befitted one who valued both his connection with the county of Norfolk and his membership of the Church of England. His outlook had been that of a broad-churchman. 


@@@@@


doc= 30527


Bailey, Kenneth (1909-1963), biochemist, was born on 18 August 1909 at Alsagers Bank, near Stoke upon Trent, the fourth child and elder son of Bertram Bailey, colliery clerk, and his wife, (Elizabeth) Florence Buckley. He received his early education at the Orme Boys' School, Newcastle under Lyme, on leaving which he enrolled at the University of Birmingham, where he achieved a BSc degree with first-class honours in 1931, and took his PhD in 1933. The award of a Beit fellowship in 1933 took him to the Royal College of Science, Imperial College, London. There he came under the influence of William Thomas Astbury, who visited the laboratory periodically to discuss the analysis and denaturation of proteins. This led to a scientific collaboration and the development of a friendship between the two very different men. 
Bailey's work soon showed a remarkable understanding of the physical, chemical, and biological facets of protein structure and in 1939 the Rockefeller Foundation awarded him a travelling grant to join E. J. Cohn and J. T. Edsall at Harvard. In December 1939, however, he returned home, to work first at Porton and then at the Low Temperature Research Station in Cambridge. Later he joined a team investigating organo-phosphorous compounds in the university biochemical laboratory at Cambridge. He obtained a Cambridge PhD in 1944. After the war he was granted an ICI fellowship, which released him to do research on the chemistry of muscle and the coagulation of blood: both projects brought him once again into contact with Astbury. In 1948 he became an assistant director of research in the university and was elected a fellow of Trinity College. In 1953 he obtained a Cambridge ScD, was elected FRS, and spent a few months as visiting professor at Washington University, Seattle, where he finished editing, with Hans Neurath, 'The Proteins' (1954), the first work to treat the subject comprehensively. In 1961 he became a reader in biochemistry. 
Bailey made no attempt to build up a research school of his own: he firmly believed that worthwhile discoveries were made only by those who 'played about' at the bench. He never wanted more than one or two junior workers with him and refused offers of chairs at home and abroad. His researches were notable for their impact on the development of biological science. One was his clear demonstration in 1951 with F. R. Bettelheim, independently of the Leeds group under Lorand, of the nature of the action of thrombin on fibrinogen. This work led to the isolation of the fibrinopeptides and for the first time to an understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the formation of the fibrin clot. 
Bailey's other great achievement was his discovery in 1946 of the protein tropomyosin, which, although originally isolated from skeletal muscle, was later shown to be present in most eucaryotic cells. He purified, crystallized, and characterized the protein in a way which could not be faulted even with the much more sophisticated methods of protein fractionation later available. Tropomyosin was the first fibrous protein to be crystallized and Bailey immediately recognized the uniqueness of the properties of this remarkable protein with 100 per cent greekLetteralpha-helical content. It was not until after his death, however, that the importance of tropomyosin for the function of all contractile systems depending on actomyosin was appreciated. In vertebrate skeletal muscle, in association with the troponin complex, tropomyosin is concerned with the regulation of the interaction of actin with myosin and hence contraction itself. 
Bailey also made another less direct but nevertheless important contribution, through his research student, B. B. Marsh, to the understanding of the regulation of contraction in muscle. Marsh's investigation, under Bailey's direction, of the changes which occur in post-mortem minced muscle tissue, resulted in the discovery of the Marsh factor, the further study of which by other investigators subsequently led to the discovery of the calcium pump of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. 
Bailey was always somewhat reserved, and his gentle demeanour could often mask a deep intuitive understanding of people and affairs. He had, moreover, the rare gift of being able to express himself in lucid and, when needed, in vivid language. He was unmarried. His later years were marred by severe recurrent depressive illness and he committed suicide in Cambridge on 22 May 1963. 
A. C. Chibnall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30528


Bailey, Dame Mary, Lady Bailey (1890-1960), aviator, was born in London on 1 December 1890, the only daughter and the eldest of three children of Derrick Warner William Westenra, fifth Baron Rossmore (1853-1921), and his wife, Mittie Naylor (died 1953). On 5 September 1911 she married, as his second wife, Sir Abe Bailey, first baronet (1864-1940), a South African mining magnate, financier, and politician. They had three daughters and two sons, including James Richard Abe Bailey (1919-2000); the eldest son eventually succeeded his father as third baronet. Lady Bailey took an early interest in aviation and she trained as a pilot with the London aviation club at Stag Lane in 1926, gaining her Royal Aero Club certificate on 26 January 1927. Despite her inexperience, in July 1927 she broke the women's altitude record in a light aircraft by climbing to 17,283 feet in a D. H. Gipsy Moth, taking Mrs Geoffrey de Havilland as a passenger, and she was the first woman to fly across the Irish Sea. She also took a course in navigation. Her almost casual approach to flying showed the benefits of light aircraft for personal travel, and the increasing independence of women, even those with children, was highlighted by her exploits. 
On 9 March 1928 she set off from Croydon for a solo flight to South Africa, using a de Havilland Cirrus Moth that had been fitted with additional fuel tanks. Her course lay via Malta, Tripoli, Cairo, and along the Nile to Khartoum, before heading for Tabora in Tanganyika. Unable to find Tabora, she landed to ask the way, and wrecked her machine beyond repair by attempting to leave in gusty conditions. She telegraphed her husband to order another aircraft, which was delivered to her by the South African Air Force twelve days later. She resumed her journey and arrived at Cape Town on 30 April 1928. Contrary to the hopes of her husband, she then decided to make the return flight. Her aircraft was again damaged, and her departure was delayed until 21 September. Her return route was to take her across the Sahara Desert, via Kano in Nigeria, and Dakar in French West Africa. The route had not previously been used, and the Sudanese government forbade women to fly solo, so for that leg of the journey she was accompanied by Captain Bentley of the South African Air Force, who had made a record flight from London to the Cape in 1927. Thick fog delayed her crossing of the channel from France, and she finally arrived back in England on 16 January 1929, a bitterly cold day. 'I have just gone to see my husband', she told reporters at Croydon (Cluett, 23). She had completed 18,000 miles in the air; for this, in 1930, she was awarded the Britannia trophy, presented for meritorious performance in the air. She was appointed DBE for services to aviation in the same year. Lady Bailey entered the king's cup air race in 1927, 1929, and 1930, and she flew in the international challenge competitions round Europe in 1929 and 1930. Lady Bailey continued to fly for many years, and she settled at Kenilworth, near Cape Town in South Africa after the death of her husband in 1940. She died there on 29 August 1960. A memorial service was held for her at St Clement Danes, Strand, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30529


Bailey, Philip James (1816-1902), poet, was born in Nottingham on 22 April 1816, the only son of Thomas Bailey (1785-1856), merchant, newspaper editor, and author, and his first wife, Marie-Anne, 'nee' Taylor ('c'.1791- 'c'.1818). He showed an early interest in his father's poetical tastes, which his father stimulated by taking him to see Byron's lying-in-state at the Old Blackamoor's Head in Nottingham High Street, and by encouraging him to learn by heart the whole of 'Childe Harold'. Educated in Nottingham, he was tutored in classics by Benjamin Carpenter, a Unitarian minister. In his sixteenth year Bailey matriculated at Glasgow University with a view to the Presbyterian ministry; but quickly renouncing this ambition, he began in 1833 to study law in a solicitor's office in London, and on 26 April 1834 he was entered a member of Lincoln's Inn. His legal studies were interrupted by his poetic pursuits, and in particular by the reading of Goethe's 'Faust'. He felt compelled to produce his own version of the legend, and retired for that purpose in 1836 to the seclusion of his father's house at Old Basford, near Nottingham, where after three years he completed the original version of his poem 'Festus'. It was printed in Manchester by W. H. Jones, and published at his father's cost without the author's name in London by William Pickering in 1839. 
On the whole the reception of 'Festus' was enthusiastic. If 'The Athenaeum' (21 December 1839) pronounced the idea of the poem to be 'a mere plagiarism from the 'Faust' of Goethe, with all its impiety and scarcely any of its poetry', Bulwer Lytton, R. H. Horne, and Mary Howitt joined with other leading figures in a chorus of praise, and some of these reviews are reprinted in the second edition. 
Bailey married Anne Reed on 23 April 1840 at St Giles, Camberwell, and on 7 May of that year he was called to the bar, although he never practised. The couple had a daughter and a son (baptized Philip Festus James) but the marriage was not happy, in part because of the wife's intemperance. Anne Bailey lived off and on with her mother, and Bailey returned to Nottingham to help his father edit the 'Nottingham Mercury'. 
A second edition of 'Festus' appeared in 1845. Bailey had made large additions, and when Tennyson wrote to Edward FitzGerald urging him to order it, he also cautioned 'You will most likely find it a great bore but there are really 'very grand' things in Festus' ('Letters of Alfred Lord Tennyson', 265). The second edition brought 'Festus' its remarkable popularity in America; seventeen 'editions' of a version pirated in Boston were called for in the first nine years, and it was also reprinted numerous times in Philadelphia, Louisville, and New York. Bailey became something of a 'lion' for visiting Americans of the transcendental stamp. Nathaniel Hawthorne visited in the 1850s and described the poet as a 'dark, handsome, rather picturesque-looking man, with a grey beard, and dark hair.... there is a sadness glooming out of him, but no unkindness nor asperity' (N. Hawthorne, 'English Note-Books', 2 vols., 1856, 2.92). Unfortunately, the processes of addition and recasting went on in later editions until, in the eleventh or jubilee edition of 1889, the work reached more than 40,000 lines. That volume incorporated the greater part of three volumes of poetry, which Bailey had published separately. These were 'The Angel World, and other Poems' (1850), which attracted the attention of the Pre-Raphaelites, and was noted by W. M. Rossetti for review in 'The Germ'; 'The Mystic, and other Poems' (1855); and 'The Universal Hymn' (1867). Although the popularity of 'Festus' fluctuated, it was alive at the end of the nineteenth century, and a 'Festus Treasury' was edited by Albert Broadbent in 1901. 
Bailey's poetic power was never so fresh and concentrated as in the first edition of 'Festus'. His later additions turned the poem into a theological and metaphysical treatise, for which some critics claimed high philosophical merits, but beneath which the poetry was smothered. Theodore Watts claimed that the poem contained 'lovely oases of poetry' among 'wide tracts of ratiocinative writing' ('The Athenaeum', 1 April 1876). Bailey was often regarded as the father of the 'spasmodic' school of poetry, and satirized as such along with Alexander Smith and Sydney Dobell by W. E. Aytoun in 'Firmilian' (1854); but in his last year he denied the imputation in a long letter in which he restated, with a self-satisfied seriousness, the intention of his work. 
Bailey wrote a play on the subject of Aurungzebe, admired by Talfourd but, despite an introduction to Macready, the play was not produced and was finally destroyed by Bailey in a fit of despondency. Besides the volumes afterwards incorporated in 'Festus', he published 'The Age: a Colloquial Satire' (1858). 
In 1856 Bailey received a civil-list pension of $100 in recognition of his literary work. After the death of his father in the same year, Bailey began an unsettled time of living in a number of seaside villages. His marriage became worse, and with the advent of the new divorce law escape was possible. The court for divorce ruled in his favour on 27 May 1862, after adultery with a Mr Shenton was proved; Bailey's son testified, though both he and the daughter were estranged from their father thereafter. On 24 February 1863 Bailey married Anne Sophia (died 1896), daughter of Alderman George Carey of Nottingham. In 1864 they settled in Jersey, and from there paid frequent visits to Europe, including Rome and Naples, where Bailey witnessed the eruption of Vesuvius in 1872. In 1876 he returned to England, where he settled first at Lee near Ilfracombe, and in 1885 at Blackheath. Finally he retired to The Elms, 54 Ropewalk, in his native Nottingham. In 1901 Glasgow University conferred an honorary LLD degree on him in his absence. He died after an attack of influenza on 6 September 1902, and was buried in Nottingham cemetery on the 9th. 


@@@@@


doc= 30530


Bailhache, Sir Clement Meacher (1856-1924), judge, was born at Leeds on 2 November 1856, the eldest son of the Revd Clement Bailhache, a Baptist minister and secretary to the Baptist Missionary Society, and his wife, Emma, daughter of Edward Augustus Meacher, of Ivinghoe, Buckinghamshire. The Bailhaches were Huguenots who had settled in Jersey. 
Bailhache was educated at the City of London School and at London University, where he graduated LLB in 1877. He practised as a solicitor at Newport, Monmouthshire. In 1881 he married Fanny Elizabeth, the daughter of Herman Liebstein, a member of the Chancery bar; they had a son and two daughters. 
Bailhache's powers as an advocate led him to enrol at the Middle Temple and he was called to the bar in 1889. He was made a bencher in 1912. He joined the south Wales circuit, where he was already well known, and was an immediate success. Within ten years he was receiving briefs in important cases in London. He was expert in commercial law, and City firms using the newly established commercial court were quick to recognize his merits. 
In 1908 Bailhache became king's counsel, when the favourite leaders of the commercial court were T. E. Scrutton (afterwards lord justice) and J. A. Hamilton (afterwards Viscount Sumner). Their speedy elevation to the bench gave Bailhache the lion's share of commercial work. He was so busy in the commercial court that he seldom appeared in cases which attracted publicity. But there was no one better at explaining a complicated set of facts and arguing for legal principle to be applied. His arguments and addresses were notoriously short, often limited to the single, best point. 'Few leaders at the bar have said so little or said it so well', was the judgement in his obituary in 'The Times'. 
In 1912 congestion in the common-law courts led Lord Haldane, who had just succeeded Lord Loreburn as lord chancellor, to promote Bailhache to the bench as an additional judge. The customary knighthood followed that year. As a judge, Bailhache usually presided in the commercial court where he was at his best. Quick to a fault, he got through a great quantity of work. It was said that he did not pay enough attention to the arguments of counsel, and his summary treatment of cases led to some successful appeals. His judgments were easily delivered and well expressed, and, however difficult the case, he preferred to deliver judgment at the end of proceedings. 
Bailhache decided many important wartime cases in the commercial court including 'Sanday v. British and Foreign Marine Insurance Company' (1915, constructive total loss by declaration of war) and 'Becker Gray & Co. v. London Assurance Corporation' (1915, whether putting into port to avoid capture was a loss covered by insurance). Both judgments were affirmed in the Court of Appeal and in the House of Lords. 
As a criminal judge Bailhache was less successful. He saw no reason why swift and businesslike methods should be confined to the commercial court and was known, for example, to ask counsel whether there was really any defence to the charge. His direction to the jury in 'Director of Public Prosecutions v. Beard' (1920), on the effect of drunkenness upon criminal responsibility, led to an appeal to the House of Lords. Bailhache had said that if the accused was so drunk that he did not know what he was doing, or did not know that what he was doing was wrong, the defence of drunkenness succeeded to the extent of reducing the crime from murder to manslaughter. Their lordships held that he was wrong to apply the test of insanity to a case of drunkenness. The conviction for murder was upheld, with an intimation, however, that the death sentence would not be carried out. 
Bailhache did no extra-judicial public work, apart from chairing a committee in 1916 to inquire into allegations about the aircraft supplied to the Royal Flying Corps and into reports on the administration and command of the RFC. He disliked all social occasions and pomp. A lifelong Baptist and teetotaller, he was addicted to smoking a pipe to and from court and even on such formal occasions as the Mansion House dinner for the judges. Bailhache died suddenly from a cerebral haemorrhage at Beach Cottage, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, on 8 September 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 30531


Baillie, Charles Wallace Alexander Napier Ross Cochrane-, second Baron Lamington (1860-1940), colonial governor, was born in London on 29 July 1860, the fourth child and only son of the politician and author Alexander Dundas Ross Cochrane-Wishart-Baillie, first Baron Lamington (1816-1890), and his wife, Annabella Mary Elizabeth (died 1917), elder daughter of Andrew Robert Drummond, of Cadlands, Hampshire. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford (1877-81), graduating BA. In 1885 he became assistant private secretary to Lord Salisbury, and after an unsuccessful candidature at North St Pancras in the same year, he entered parliament as Conservative member for that constituency in 1886. He spent only four years in the House of Commons, succeeding his father as Baron Lamington in 1890. 
Lamington was an enthusiastic sportsman and traveller, and after visiting Central America he undertook a lengthy expedition through Indo-China in 1890-91. Following the presentation of papers on this journey to the Royal Geographical Society of London, he was elected an honorary fellow of the society, and later appointed to its council (1908-12) and was vice-president from 1912 to 1915. On 13 June 1895 he married Mary Haughton Hozier (died 1944), lady of the bedchamber to the princess of Wales and youngest daughter of the first Baron Newlands. They had two children. On 10 October 1895 Lamington was appointed governor of Queensland, arriving in the colony in 1896 and serving until 1901. In November 1899 Lamington called upon Andrew Dawson to form a short-lived administration, which became the first Labour government anywhere in the world. But in his dispatches Lamington demonstrated his clear dislike of the growing strength of socialism in Australia and he feared that the federation of the country could lead to its dominance. Queensland was at the time afflicted by a seven-year drought. To gain an understanding of the hardship this was causing, and also to investigate the condition of the indigenous peoples, Lamington travelled widely in Queensland and New Guinea. 
In 1901 Lamington returned to his Lanarkshire estates, and two years later was appointed administrator of Bombay. There he took a keen interest in the conditions of the people and social reform. He resigned as governor in 1907 as a result of the serious illness of his wife. 
Lamington was active in the territorial movement. He was lieutenant-colonel of the Lanarkshire yeomanry, and an honorary colonel of the 6th battalion of the Scottish Rifles (Cameronians). He was also captain of the Royal Company of Archers, the king's bodyguard for Scotland. During the First World War he vigorously encouraged recruiting, and in 1919 he went to Syria as commissioner of the British relief unit. Lamington retained an interest in movements supporting the welfare of subject peoples and minorities within the empire, and a greater mutual understanding between West and East. He was a member of a range of organizations working in this field. 
On 13 March 1940 Lord Lamington was present at a meeting of the Royal Central Asian Society at Caxton Hall. At this meeting a man in the audience rose and fired several shots at the occupants of the platform, killing Sir Michael O'Dwyer and wounding others: Lamington was shot in the arm. 
Described as 'tall and straight, with an erect and soldierly carriage' and as having a 'scientific mind and manner of thought' ('Queensland 1900', 2), Lamington was appointed GCMG in 1900 and GCIE in 1903. He also had the singular honour of having a popular Australian dish named after him -- a small, rectangular, plain sponge cake, dipped in chocolate and rolled in desiccated coconut -- the 'lamington'. Lamington died at Lamington House, Lanarkshire, on 16 September 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 30532


Baillie, Sir James Black (1872-1940), moral philosopher and academic administrator, was born on 24 October 1872 at West Mill, Cortachy, Forfarshire, the second son of William Baillie, forester, afterwards farmer, and his wife, Agnes Black. He was educated at Haddington School, the University of Edinburgh, and Trinity College, Cambridge (1897-1901), and continued his studies at Halle, Strasbourg, and Paris. In 1900 he was appointed lecturer in philosophy at University College, Dundee, and from 1902 to 1924 he was professor of moral philosophy at the University of Aberdeen. His first book, 'The Origin and Significance of Hegel's Logic', appeared in 1901; a further exposition of Hegel, 'An Outline of the Idealistic Construction of Experience', followed in 1906, and a translation of his 'Phanomenologie des Geistes' (as 'Phenomenology of Mind'), in 1910. On 31 March 1906 he married Helena May James (1865/6-1958), daughter of John Gwynne James, solicitor, of Hereford; there were no children of the marriage. 
Baillie served from 1915 to 1917 in the intelligence division of the Admiralty, and from 1917 to 1919 as an arbitrator in industrial disputes for the Ministry of Labour, developing negotiating skills which were to stand him in good stead in his later career. He was made OBE in 1918. From 1920 to 1924 he was chairman of the trade boards for the flax and hemp, aerated waters, linen and cotton household goods, and jute industries. His last major philosophical work, 'Studies in Human Nature', appeared in 1921. 
Baillie was appointed vice-chancellor of the University of Leeds in 1924, and there devoted considerable energy to the expansion and development of the university. He inaugurated an ambitious building scheme, and his term of office saw the completion of numerous new buildings for scientific and medical departments and of the Brotherton Library, and the commencement of the students' union and the main entrance block. Earlier attempts at fund-raising through general appeals had not been notably effective; Baillie preferred to make direct approaches to wealthy individuals, a tactic which proved highly successful. A meeting with Mussolini led to the Italian government's endowment of a lectureship in Italian, and to Baillie's becoming a knight commander of the 'ordine della corona d'Italia'. He received a British knighthood in 1931. 
Baillie had a commanding presence, and on public occasions displayed a gracious manner; unfortunately he did not see fit to deploy it in dealing with his colleagues at Leeds, where his abrasive and overbearing style aroused considerable ill feeling, and his abrupt volte-faces caused bewilderment. His private diaries teem with vitriolic abuse against his staff. Unswervingly convinced of his own rightness, he reacted with baffled rage to any opposition. It is unsurprising therefore that he failed to gain an extension of his term of office beyond the official retiring age. Baillie held the conventional prejudices of his day: he commented disparagingly on the supposed 'black blood' in Lord Harewood's family, and expressed distaste at the appointment of John Rothenstein, a Jew, as director of the Leeds Art Gallery. He combined a dour prudery with a taste for salacious gossip. 
While vice-chancellor at Leeds, Baillie's work in the wider public sphere continued. He was a member of the royal commission on the civil service set up in 1929, chaired a court of enquiry into the Hull trawling industry in 1935, a government committee on wages and conditions in the road haulage industry in 1936, and an arbitration tribunal for the Trinidad oilfields in 1938; he was a member of the London conscientious objectors' tribunal. 
On his retirement in 1938 Baillie moved to Weybridge, where he died of pulmonary embolism and prostate cancer on 9 June 1940. He was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, following a funeral service at Hersham parish church, Surrey, on 12 June. A selection from his religious commonplace book ('Privatissima') was published in 1952 as 'Reflections on Life and Religion', edited by Sir Walter Moberly and Oliver de Selincourt. Baillie is presented as Sir John Evans in Michael Innes's novel 'The Weight of the Evidence' (1944). 


@@@@@


doc= 30533


Bain, Alexander (1818-1903), psychologist, was born on 11 June 1818, the second child of eight of George Bain, an impoverished Calvinist weaver of Aberdeen, and his wife, Margaret Paul. Bain left school at the age of eleven but, via evening classes at the mechanics' institute and adolescent autodidactic labours, he gained entrance to Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1836, graduating joint top in 1840, his course comprising classics, mathematics, science, and philosophy. A lifelong religious scepticism dated from this period. Until 1845 he remained at Marischal College as assistant in moral philosophy (1841-4) and teacher of natural philosophy (1844-5), but applications for the chairs of natural philosophy and moral philosophy failed through objections to his religious views. A year as Andersonian professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at Anderson's University, Glasgow, followed (1845-6), but his progress was still hampered on religious grounds, and he moved to London to take up the post of assistant secretary under Edwin Chadwick at the metropolitan sanitary commission of the Board of Health. Drawn into London's radical intellectual circles, his horizons now broadened. This group included Herbert Spencer, G. H. Lewes, Thomas Carlyle, George and John Grote, Harriet Martineau, George Eliot, and J. S. Mill, whose influence was especially significant; Bain subsequently collaborated with J. S. Mill in editing his father's, James Mill's, 'Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind' (1873), and in 1882 he published 'James Mill: a Biography' and 'John Stuart Mill: a Criticism with Personal Recollections'. Bain began publishing articles in the 'Westminster Review' in 1840 and contributed to various popular educational series issued by the Edinburgh publisher, Chambers. During these years of struggle up to 1860 there was little upon which Bain declined to write -- the physical sciences, the Greeks, travel, and town water supplies being among the topics receiving his attention (though he rejected George Eliot's request for a review of Auguste Comte). 
In 1851 Bain resumed his academic career at the all-women Bedford College, London, where he lectured on moral science and geography until 1854. During 1854 he visited Paris, meeting Comte, with whom he was deeply unimpressed. By contrast, F. Longet's 'Anatomie et physiologie' largely inspired Bain's final approach in 'The Senses and the Intellect' (1855, a project initiated in 1848) and it was during this period that he prepared this and the companion, 'The Emotions and the Will' (1859), which were his most influential works. In 1855 he married Frances Anne Wilkinson (died 1892) and in 1856 spent the summer in Germany. He obtained an examinership in the University of London (1857-63) and became examiner in moral science for the Indian Civil Service (1858-70). In 1860 he finally obtained the chair of logic at the University of Aberdeen (following unification of the older King's and Marischal colleges); he was backed by the home secretary, Sir George Cornewall Lewis, against the wishes of the principal, Colin Campbell (who preferred James McCosh), and fellow cabinet member, the duke of Argyll. Bain's teaching duties included English grammar and rhetoric along with mental and moral philosophy. 
Bain's reputation rests primarily on his being one of the founders of modern psychology, most crucially by virtue of 'The Senses and the Intellect' and 'The Emotions and the Will' (posterity's verdict on 'The Study of Character with an Estimate of Phrenology', 1861, being universally uncharitable). Revised editions of these continued in use as textbooks in both Britain and the USA into the 1890s. Alongside these, his founding, in 1876, and funding and editorship, until 1892, of the journal, 'Mind', was of considerable significance for psychology's emergence as a formal discipline, providing the primary English language forum for psychological papers until the appearance of more specialist journals in the USA in the 1890s ('Mind' becoming devoted to philosophy thereafter). Bain himself contributed numerous papers and notes until 1894 (many of which were later reprinted in the 'Dissertations on Leading Philosophical Topics', 1903). 
Bain's psychological work was novel in several respects. Most obviously, his approach appeared to transform philosophical questions into empirical 'scientific' ones. While elements of the Scottish realist tradition of Thomas Reid, whom he 'read over again and again' (Bain, 234) in the early 1850s, and Dugald Stewart continued to lurk, under J. S. Mill's influence Bain substantially converted to the rival doctrine of associationism. Unlike Mill, however, he wished to found his account on the latest empirical scientific findings, emanating primarily from physiology. (An earlier interest in phrenology had been a harbinger of this orientation.) Essentially his method was to provide a systematic, natural history type of classification of mental states on the basis of the associative mechanisms by which they were lawfully generated. The works resulting from this fusion of associationist theory, physiology, and natural historical method thus bore a fundamentally scientific rather than philosophical character, linking associative mental processes with available knowledge of the nervous system and cerebral functioning. Thus, in learning, the establishment of habits was understood as involving the creation and progressive strengthening of relevant nerve pathways in the brain. Despite being associationist, Bain's account was less passive than those in earlier philosophical versions of this doctrine, the organism being understood as actively striving to make sense of the world, although he proposed nothing as distinct as an ego or self underlying this. Rather than simple, passive associations it was the capacity for active discrimination which constituted the core psychological process. The nervous system was spontaneously active, rather than merely reactive, and Bain's treatment of the role of spontaneous movements in facilitating the development of voluntary behaviour of an increasingly discriminative kind adumbrates modern notions of feedback loops. In adopting this perspective Bain was among the first major writers to incorporate the 'energy' concept fully into psychological theorizing and to insist on the firm physiological grounding of all psychological phenomena. While it is routine to credit pioneers with anticipating future developments in their fields, Bain managed this to a remarkable degree which only began to be appreciated from about 1980. Most classic theories of the child's cognitive development (including James Mark Baldwin's, Alfred Binet's, and Jean Piaget's) had important roots in Bain's analysis. His account of habit constituted the point of departure for William James's subsequent treatment of the topic and American learning theory generally (anticipating what E. B. Thorndike called the 'law of effect' for example, and introducing the notion of trial and error learning -- although he used this rather more broadly than later learning theorists to cover rational as well as random learning). Moreover, C. S. Peirce, founder of the American philosophical school of pragmatism, took his lead from Bain's view of belief as 'that upon which a man is prepared to act'. 
Bain always stressed psychology's practical importance, particularly for education (notably in 'Education as a Science', 1878), and continued publishing works attacking metaphysical idealism (for example, 'Mind and Body: the Theories of their Relation', 1872) and promoting the new discipline, most successfully in 'Mental and Moral Science: a Compendium of Psychology and Ethics' (1868), as well as in 'Logic' (1870). His educational concerns yielded the two-volume 'English Composition and Rhetoric' (1867, enlarged 1887) and works on English grammar. His concern with social issues and the applicability of psychology resulted in a further set of anticipations of later disciplinary interests in social norms, occupational psychology, testing, and training, although he never ventured into quantitative psychometrics. 
Although psychological rather than philosophical, Bain's system was transitional in two fundamental respects: first, while empirical and physiologically based it remained non-experimental, observational (often introspectionist), and descriptive (unlike contemporary developments in Germany initiated by W. Wundt and G. T. Fechner); second, Bain never fully assimilated the evolutionary vision which provided the unifying theoretical framework within which psychology first crystallized as a scientific discipline after 1870. Regarding the latter, this ironically helped the early success of his books 'vis-a-vis' Herbert Spencer's rival 'Principles of Psychology' (1855), the thoroughgoing evolutionism of which many initially found unacceptably radical. While he increasingly ascribed a role to heredity, his explanatory mode remained that of identifying the 'bottom-up' assembly of associative connections and discriminations rather than evolutionary functionalism. 
Traditionally, historians of psychology located Bain firmly in the associationist camp, but this probably underestimates how far his thinking, especially in the 1850s and 1860s, continued to be influenced by his native Scottish realist philosophical background, and in 1860-61 he was still publishing papers sympathetic to phrenology in 'Fraser's Magazine'. While abandoning Scottish realism's cruder 'faculty' analysis, his own fourfold classification of mental phenomena continued to bear a formal resemblance to this, as the very titles of his two major works indicate, even if he viewed them as dynamically interrelated segments of a single energy distribution process rather than distinct sets of powers. 
Besides his own work Bain edited 'The Moral Philosophy of Paley' (1852), G. Grote's 'Aristotle' (1872), and G. Croom Robertson's philosophical remains (1894). He received an honorary LLD from the University of Edinburgh (1869) and a civil-list pension of $100 after 1895. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry's assessment of his writings as 'lucid' would now receive little assent and if conceding his 'exceptional gift of methodical exposition' most would consider this a euphemistic way of putting it. Probably reflecting readers' reactions more accurately, E. Valentine, in the 'Biographical Dictionary of Psychology', describes his style as 'ponderous, verbose and lengthy'. 
Bain's work was frostily received by pious Scottish academics and the equally pious American mental and moral philosophers who dominated psychology teaching in the USA until the late 1880s. Yale's president, Noah Porter, attacked his 'cerebral' approach vehemently in 'The Sciences of Nature versus the Science of Man' of 1871 (although he was sympathetic to the German experimentalists who, as he saw it, eschewed Bain's physiological reductionism). In the intellectual context of American-Scottish mental and moral philosophy Bain's was a particularly irritating presence, not least since he was both a native and based in the heartland of that tradition -- Thomas Reid himself having been a professor of philosophy at Aberdeen. 
After retiring from his chair at Aberdeen in 1880 Bain remained active and was twice elected lord rector of the university, defeating Lord Randolph Churchill on the second occasion. In 1892 he presented a paper on the relationship between introspective and psychophysical experimental methods at the Second International Congress of Experimental Psychology in London. Following his wife's death that year, he married Barbara ('b'. 1858/9), daughter of John Forbes, sheriff clerk of Banffshire, and his wife, Eliza Young, in a civil ceremony on 14 April 1893. There were no children from either marriage. Bain's health failing, in 1895 he withdrew from the strenuous public life he had so long enjoyed. This had extended to widespread popular lecturing and support for causes such as public libraries and mechanics' institutes. Any image of Bain's personality is now dourly dominated by his daunting capacity for hard work, as a writer, scholar, editor, administrator, committee man, and propagandist for the cause of education. This edifice should not obscure the extent to which he was also a genuinely creative and doggedly independent thinker, and one held in much affection by his contemporaries, many of whom benefited directly from his support. In 1896 his health suffered a temporary breakdown, probably from influenza; however, he resumed work on recasting the curriculi of Aberdeen University and promoting the extension of Marischal College buildings. He had revisited Paris in 1876 (meeting Theodule Ribot) and Germany (1885), where he met Wundt, H. Helmholtz, H. Ebbinghaus, E. Haeckel, E. Du Bois-Reymond, and the young American psychologist James McKeen Cattell (who acted as interpreter in his encounter with Wundt). Bain died at his home, Ferryhill Lodge, Polmuir Road, Aberdeen, on 18 September 1903, survived by his second wife. He was buried in Aberdeen. His 'Autobiography' appeared posthumously in 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 30534


Bain, Francis William (1863-1940), scholar and writer, the third son of Joseph Bain (1826-1911), archivist and antiquary, of Sweethope, Bothwell, Lanarkshire, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Edward Piper, of Alston, Cumberland, was born at Bothwell on 29 April 1863. He was elected an exhibitioner (1877) and a scholar (1878) on the foundation of Westminster School, becoming captain of the school in 1881. He went as a Westminster scholar to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1882. He obtained a second class in classical moderations (1884) and a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1886), and was also a blue for association football for four years from 1883 to 1886, captaining the Oxford University team in his fourth year. In 1889 he was elected to a fellowship (which he held until 1897) at All Souls College; in 1890 he married Helen Margarita (died 1931), daughter of Henry Blandford, of Blandford, Dorset. 
In 1892, to the surprise of many of his friends, Bain took a post in the Indian educational service as professor of history and political economy at the Deccan College at Poona, where he remained until his retirement in 1919, after serving, in addition, as junior principal in 1908 and as senior principal in 1911. He was appointed CIE in 1918, and when he left Poona he received an address in a silver casket expressing the enthusiastic appreciation of many hundreds of former students not only for his teaching but for his deep sympathy with, and insight into, the higher elements in Indian life and thought; he was regarded 'not only as a professor but also as a prophet and a philosopher'. 
After 1919 Bain lived quietly in London, paying frequent visits to All Souls, where, as in the years before 1914, he was always an eagerly awaited guest; but deeply affected by the death of his wife (1931) and of his only child, a daughter (1934), he retired into a self-imposed isolation, broken with difficulty even by his most intimate friends, which continued for the rest of his life. He died at 59 Bridge Avenue, Hammersmith, on 24 February 1940. 
Bain, as an undergraduate, developed the views on life, philosophy, politics, and literature which he maintained with increasing tenacity to the end. Aristotle was for him 'the master of the wise'. In politics he was a tory with a creed based on his interpretation of Bolingbroke and Disraeli; for whigs, Liberals, and modern Conservatives he had a profound contempt. He freely discussed Indian political reform, and his biographer described him as a 'Tory who condemned dictatorial rule, an imperialist who wanted Indians to fight for self-rule' (Mutalik, 48). In modern physical and natural science he saw only a perversion of judgement and of the facts; the classical economists and most historians he regarded as ability corrupted by original sin; but into imaginative literature of all types he had a wonderful insight. He was remembered by students as an inspiring teacher and a lasting intellectual influence. He could expound with fascinating lucidity views which he was convinced were fundamentally wrong, and instruct his Indian students that 'this is what they must say' and then demonstrate its perversity and errors. Deep in Bain's mind was an inspiring mystical element which at Poona was richly nourished by his study of Indian life, religion, and the Sanskrit classics, which he learned to read after arriving in India. He also developed some proficiency in Marathi. 
In his early years Bain published two or three volumes of fiction, philosophical pamphlets, and a remarkable essay, 'The English Monarchy and its Revolutions' (1894), full of penetrating observations, all of which attracted no attention; but in 1899 he found the right scope for his genius when he published 'A Digit of the Moon', a Hindu love story, professing to be a translation from a Sanskrit manuscript. Even experts were at first taken in, but its quality both in imagination and style captured a large and critical public, which rightly hailed it as unique in English literature. It was followed by twelve other similar Hindu love stories, the last of which, 'The Substance of a Dream' (1919), was as successful as its predecessors. The stories were reprinted between 1913 and 1920, and a few of them again in the 1950s. Translations appeared in several European and Indian languages. After 1919 Bain ceased to write. 
Bain's personality was even more impressive than his best writing. Strikingly handsome, when stirred by his company he exercised almost a witchery over his friends; and in the common room at All Souls his conversation in that congenial atmosphere, discussing any and every topic, and soaring at times into flights of imaginative eloquence, was an experience impossible to describe, but thrilling to have shared. His loyalty to the college and to a limited circle of friends earned from all an affection as strong as was the admiration of his genius. Copies of most of Bain's writings are in the Codrington Library at All Souls. Besides those mentioned above, there may be noted his biographical study, 'Queen Christina of Sweden' (1890), 'On the Realisation of the Possible and the Spirit of Aristotle' (1899), and the essay 'De vi physica et imbecillitate Darwiniana' (1903) which summarizes his homage to Aristotle and his views on 'modern science'. A list of the published writings is to be found in the biography of Bain by K. Mutalik. 


@@@@@


doc= 30535


Bain, Sir Frederick William (1889-1950), chemist and industrialist, was born on 22 March 1889 at Macduff, Banffshire, the son of James Bain, agent for the Macduff Commercial Company, and his wife, Isabella Strachan. Educated at the Banff Academy, he was only seventeen when the death of his father put an end to his hopes of a university career. He moved with his mother and younger sister to Aberdeen, where he worked for a company distributing fertilizers and in his spare time attended chemistry classes at the university. In 1915 he went to Flanders as company quartermaster sergeant in the 4th (territorial) battalion of Gordon Highlanders, which he had joined in 1908. 
He soon received his commission, was mentioned in dispatches, and awarded the MC for gallantry, but on Christmas day 1915 he was severely wounded and lost his left arm in a bomb accident. Upon his recovery he entered the Ministry of Munitions, and soon became deputy director in the section of the trench warfare supply department which was responsible for the supply of materials for chemical warfare. 
When the war ended Bain found himself without a job and handicapped by illness. By chance he met Christopher Clayton of the United Alkali Company and he went with him to Liverpool as his personal assistant. He was soon a director of the company and on the formation of Imperial Chemical Industries in 1926 he entered the new combine with enthusiasm, becoming vice-chairman, in 1931, and later chairman, of the general chemicals group. He became an executive manager of ICI in 1939, a director in 1940, and a deputy chairman in 1945, an appointment which he held until his death. 
Between 1941 and 1944 Bain was seconded to the Ministry of Supply as chairman of the Chemical Control Board, and he was also chairman of the chemical planning committee of the Ministry of Production (1942-4). For these services he was knighted in 1945. After the war he was one of the most active presidents (1947-9) the Federation of British Industries has ever known. He was a member of innumerable committees and councils, including that of the Society of Chemical Industry, and one of his particular interests was the Association of British Chemical Manufacturers, of which he was for several years vice-chairman and of which he was made an honorary member and honorary vice-president shortly before he died. 
Although Bain had studied chemistry he made no claim to be a chemist. The knowledge he had acquired was nevertheless invaluable to him in the career which he made for himself. With typical courage, undaunted by his small beginnings and his physical misfortune, he seized his slender opportunity and turned it to success. Hard work and natural ability played their part, but they were informed and vitalized by a tremendous zest for life, which enabled him to bring a cheerful enthusiasm to everything he undertook. He played as hard as he worked, for he had many gifts and wide interests. He loved plays and poetry, and good talk of an evening with his friends, when he could always prove himself the master in any argument over Burns, Milton, or Shakespeare. Those friends were many, for 'Freddy's' cheerful and generous personality was magnetic. Informal and eminently approachable, he had a remarkable memory for names and a gift for leadership, which was never more happily exercised than in his devoted work for Toc H, particularly in Lancashire where he was a pioneer of the movement. Social work, politics (he was always a staunch Liberal), and the repertory theatre also claimed his vigorous attention while he was in Liverpool. In later years he travelled widely on business and at the time of his death he was one of the joint chairmen of the Anglo-American Council of Productivity. He was everywhere welcome and respected, but he received no recognition which he valued more than the honorary LLD of the University of Aberdeen awarded in 1950. 
On 4 October 1921 Bain married Isabel Margaret Adeline, daughter of J. G. Adami, vice-chancellor of the University of Liverpool. They had one son, after whose birth his wife unfortunately suffered almost continuously from ill health until her death in 1945. 
Bain died in Westminster Hospital, London, on 23 November 1950, as the result of a fall on 14 November, which might have been insignificant had he not lacked an arm to save himself. 
J. D. Pratt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30536


Bain, Robert Nisbet (1854-1909), translator and historian, was born on 18 November 1854 in London, the eldest son of David Bain (died after 1912), Cape and India merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Cowan of Liverpool. After education at private schools, he spent some years as a shorthand writer in the office of Messrs Henry Kimber & Co., a firm of solicitors at 79 Lombard Street. From an early age Bain showed a talent for languages and an interest in literature. His aptitude for languages was useful when he entered the department of printed books in the British Museum as a second-class assistant in 1883; he easily headed the list of candidates in the entrance examination. In due course he was promoted to first-class assistant (the earlier designation of assistant keeper). 
Besides his official duties at the British Museum, which mainly consisted of selecting and cataloguing books in the lesser-known languages of Europe (that is, Slavonic, Scandinavian, and Finno-Ugrian), Bain found the time for serious study of the history and literature of these countries. While on a visit to Germany in the early 1880s, he came across a novel. 'The unfamiliar name of the author attracted me, and when the obliging and erudite bookseller enlightened my ignorance... I pocketed the volume, curious to discover what a Magyar's idea of a good novel might be.' After reading Mor Jokai's novel in German he 'there and then determined to learn Hungarian' in order to be able to read Jokai's novels in the original (Bain, 137). Bain followed up his momentary decision with great fortitude and became the most prolific translator of Hungarian fiction in the nineteenth century. Between 1891 and 1904 he translated nine full-length novels by Jokai and a volume of short stories, thereby being chiefly instrumental in introducing Jokai to the English reading public; some of his translations were in print for nearly twenty years in many editions. It was also via Hungarian that Bain translated the original Turkish folk-tales collected by Dr Ignac Kunos (1896). 
Bain also translated from other languages, including Finnish (short stories by Juhan Aho, 1893), Danish (stories by J. L. I. Lie, 1893, and a selection of Andersen's fairy tales, 1893, which he followed up by a sympathetic treatment of his life, 'Hans Christian Andersen', 1895), Russian (stories by Tolstoy and Maksim Gorky 1901 and 1902), and others. 
As a translator, Bain admired colourful narrative and exotic background, hence his predilection for folk-tales and arch-Romantic novelists, like the Hungarian Jokai. He often took liberties with the original, abridging or condensing it freely, with the tacit approval, if not at the initiation, of his chief publisher, Messrs Jarrold. Contemporary critics were apt to notice this practice: 'The translation is fluent and at times, indeed, too free' declared 'The Athenaeum' (20 February 1892) about his first rendering of Jokai into English. 
Besides his literary work Bain's output of historical writing was also voluminous. Of this most is devoted to seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Russian and Scandinavian history. Overviews of 'Scandinavia, 1513-1900' (1905) and of 'Slavonic Europe, 1447-1796' (1908) were published in the 'Cambridge Historical Series'. Bain produced a volume on the rise of modern Russia under Peter the Great ('The First Romanovs, 1613-1728', 1905) and other monographs of the same period. He contributed several chapters to the 'Cambridge Modern History' (vols. 3, 5, 6, 11) on east European and Scandinavian history. His entries in the tenth and eleventh editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' on the same subjects, including well-written biographies of leading historical and literary figures, withstood the test of time for about half a century, most of them being rewritten or replaced only in the 1960 edition. 
Bain was forty-two years old when on 29 July 1896 he married his cousin, Caroline Margaret Boswell Cowan (1862/3-1909), daughter of Charles Cowan. In his youth Bain was a fairly good gymnast and lightweight boxer. He was a zealous high-churchman and in his later life he was for some years a sidesman and a regular attendant at St Alban's Church, Holborn. He travelled in Europe on several occasions, the last time in 1908 when he visited Germany and Switzerland for a few weeks' respite from his failing health. According to his contemporaries it was the constant hard work which characterized his whole life that was ultimately responsible for his premature death at the age of fifty-four on 5 May 1909 at 7 Overstrand Mansions, Battersea Park, but the official cause of death was stated to be heart failure and malignant disease of the liver. His burial took place in Brookwood cemetery on 8 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 30537


Bainbridge, Francis Arthur (1874-1921), physiologist, was born on 29 July 1874 at Stockton-on-Tees, co. Durham, the elder son of Robert Robinson Bainbridge, a chemist, and his wife, Mary Sanderson. Educated at the Leys School, Cambridge, where his contemporaries included Joseph Barcroft and Henry Dale, he gained an entrance scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1893. He studied physiology and took a first class in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1895 and 1897). He then entered St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, to complete his medical training, obtaining his Cambridge MB degree in 1901 and the MD in 1904. 
At this period medicine did not appeal to Bainbridge, and seeing no permanent opening in pure physiology, he devoted himself for a time to pathology and bacteriology. In 1905 he became Gordon lecturer on pathology at Guy's Hospital, where he began studies on urine secretion by the frog kidney, to which he was to return later. In the same year he married Hilda Winifred, daughter of the Revd Edward Thornton Smith, of Bickley, Kent, with whom he had one daughter. In 1907 he went as assistant bacteriologist to the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, where his study and classification of paratyphoid and food-poisoning bacilli gained wide recognition, and formed the basis of his Milroy lectures at the Royal College of Physicians (1912). Throughout this period he had carried out research in the physiological laboratory at University College, encouraged particularly by Ernest Starling. In 1911 Bainbridge became professor of physiology at Durham University and was able to devote himself to physiology. Bainbridge joined the RAMC in 1914 and combined the duties of his chair with those of a medical officer at a local hospital. In 1915, when a chair of physiology was instituted at St Bartholomew's Hospital, he returned to London to fill the post, which he occupied until his premature death, at his home, 37 Clarence Gate Gardens, London, on 27 October 1921. He was elected FRS in 1919. 
Bainbridge was of slight physique and had indifferent health. He was not regarded as an impressive teacher, though his lucidity of mind rendered him a very successful one. However, he was a brilliant experimenter, who gave careful thought beforehand to proposed research, and possessed both ingenuity in devising experiments and high technical skill in carrying them out. Thus his contributions to physiological science were of lasting value. Among these were his early work on the activity of lymph gland cells and the mechanism of lymph formation, on urinary secretion and the effect of partial removal of the kidneys, and on the physiology of the gall bladder, and his studies on the circulation. In this last work he established that an increase of pressure on the venous side of the heart acted as a stimulus, which through the nervous system accelerated the rate of the beat, a control mechanism he discovered to be partly due to depression of the vagus nerve, and partly due to the stimulation of the sympathetic supply to the heart. Apart from numerous scientific papers, Bainbridge produced a scholarly monograph on 'The Physiology of Muscular Exercise' (1919), a masterly review of the subject, and with his former colleague from Durham, J. A. Menzies, wrote 'Essentials of Physiology' (1914). 


@@@@@


doc= 30538


Baines, Frederick Ebenezer (1832-1911), promoter of telegraphy, was born on 10 November 1832 and baptized at Chipping Barnet, Hertfordshire, on 19 January 1834. He was the younger son of Edward May Baines, surgeon, of Hendon and Chipping Barnet and his wife, Fanny. 
Educated at private schools, Baines early showed interest in practical applications of electricity, and, helped by his uncle Edward Cowper, and an elder brother, G. L. Baines, mastered, when fourteen, the principles of telegraphy, constructing and manipulating telegraphic apparatus. Two years later, through the influence of Frederick Hill, an uncle by marriage, and Rowland Hill, he was put in charge of a small public telegraph office belonging to the Electric Telegraph Company, and situated within the post office at St Martin's-le-Grand, London, where he remained for three years. 
In April 1855 Rowland Hill recommended Baines for the post of clerk in the correspondence branch of the General Post Office. After a few months Baines's knowledge of railways earned him a transfer to the home mails branch. His leisure was devoted to schemes for extending the telegraph network through submarine cables. He planned to avoid the necessity for lines to cross hostile lands. He devised one cable route to the Canary Islands and the West Indies, another crossing the south Atlantic and rounding the Cape of Good Hope to Australia. In a letter to 'The Times' (14 September 1858) he further advocated the connection of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts by a line across Canada. His most important scheme, which he drew up in 1856, was for the government acquisition of existing telegraph systems. This was not the first such proposal, but it was the first to detail practical methods of organizing the transfer, and to list the expected benefits, supported by reliable figures. The government's permission to proceed came only in November 1867, and control of existing telegraph systems was transferred to the Post Office on 5 February 1870. Baines's knowledge of telegraphy was helpful in bringing the new public service into operation, including all the main features of his original scheme -- free delivery within a mile, the creation of a legal monopoly, and a uniform sixpenny rate, irrespective of distance. 
In 1875 Baines was made surveyor-general for telegraph business, and in 1878, with a view to decreasing the danger of invasion and increasing the efficiency of the coastguard service, he proposed the establishment of telegraphic communication around the coast of the British Isles, to be worked by the coastguard under the control and supervision of the Post Office. The proposal, renewed in 1881, and again in 1888, was adopted by the government in 1892. 
In 1882 Baines was made inspector-general of mails, and assistant secretary in the Post Office under Sir Arthur Blackwood. He organized the parcel post service, introduced by Fawcett in 1883, and before leaving the Post Office had extended the service to the British colonies and most European countries. Different views and systems of postal administration on the continent made his task difficult. He became CB in 1885, and married, in 1887, Laura, eldest daughter of Walter Baily, barrister, of Hampstead. He retired through ill health on 1 August 1893. 
Baines lived for the greater part of his life at 1 Wentworth Mansions, South End Road, Hampstead, where he took an active interest in parochial work. He assisted in the acquisition of Parliament Hill Fields for the public use, was a member of the Hampstead select vestry, and in 1890 edited 'Records of Hampstead'. He was also an enthusiastic volunteer, serving as both a non-commissioned and a commissioned officer. His latter years he devoted to literature. His main work, 'Forty Years at the Post-Office' (2 vols., 1895), reminiscences written in an agreeable style, contains valuable details of reforms at the Post Office both before and during Baines's connection with it. He also published 'On the Track of the Mail Coach' (1896), and contributed an article on the Post Office to J. Samuelson's 'The Civilisation of our Day' (1896). 
Baines died on 4 July 1911 at his home in Hampstead, and was cremated at Golders Green. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30539


Baird, Andrew Wilson (1842-1908), tidal surveyor, was the eldest son in a family of five sons and four daughters born to Thomas Baird, of Woodlands, Cults, Aberdeen, and his wife, Catherine Imray. He was born in Aberdeen on 26 April 1842 and was educated in the town first at the grammar school and then at Marischal College. Baird entered the Military College of the East India Company at Addiscombe in June 1860 and was transferred to the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in January 1861. He was commissioned lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 18 December 1861 and, after instruction at Chatham, sailed for India on 1 March 1864. His first assignment was to help with harbour defence and reclamation work in Bombay. During 1868 he served as assistant field engineer to the Abyssinian expedition under Sir Robert Napier. For his work as traffic manager of the railway from the base he was mentioned in dispatches and received the war medal. 
In December 1869 Baird became assistant superintendent of the trigonometrical survey of India and was employed on the triangulation in Kathiawar and Gujarat. His health suffered from the extreme heat and he went on furlough in the spring of 1870. While at home he married in Aberdeen on 14 March 1872 Margaret Elizabeth, only daughter of Charles Davidson, of Forrester Hill. In Britain he studied methods of tidal observations and their reduction by harmonic analysis using the method of Sir William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin. Tidal observations were initially undertaken for the survey of India only to determine the mean sea level for the trigonometrical survey, but, on his return to India in December 1871, Baird extended their scope to investigate changing sea level, setting up self-registering gauges, which he himself calibrated and adjusted, for long periods at three stations in the Gulf of Cutch. 
In 1876 the governor-general in council commended Baird's work, which Baird described to the British Association at Glasgow that year. In 1877 it was decided to extend systematic tidal observations under the supervision of Baird, who had become deputy superintendent in the trigonometrical survey department. He organized a new department of the survey to cover the coast from Aden to Rangoon, with its centre at Poona. Over an area that included India, Burma, Ceylon, and the Andaman Islands, Baird began to record, collate, and process precise data on tides. In July 1881, while in Venice as one of the commissioners from India to the third International Congress of Geography, Baird exhibited the use of tidal and levelling apparatus in a canal and for this was awarded the gold medal of the first class. After some eighteen months on furlough in England, Baird resumed his tidal duties in March 1883. In August that year the wave which followed the volcanic eruption of Krakatoa, Java, was traced in all his tidal diagrams and Baird sent a paper on this subject to the Royal Society, of which he was elected fellow the following May. 
From July 1885 to August 1897 Baird was master of the mint at Calcutta and Bombay and also assistant and deputy surveyor-general of India. On 12 August 1889 he became permanent mint-master at Calcutta. He reorganized the manufacturing department and successfully advocated the withdrawal of worn and dirt-encrusted coinage. He reached the rank of colonel on 9 April 1896 and retired on 20 April 1897. He was created CSI in June 1897. On his return to Britain he bought a small property at Palmers Cross, near Elgin. He died suddenly of heart failure in London on 2 April 1908 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His wife, five daughters, and two sons survived him. 
By the time of his death forty stations covered by Baird's department were regularly reporting tidal observations, a fact which speaks highly of his scientific and administrative skills. He had organized the first extensive tidal studies using harmonic analysis which, with his improvements, was subsequently widely adopted. He was the author of many papers on tidal observations and surveying. 


@@@@@


doc= 30540


Baird, John Logie (1888-1946), television engineer, was born on 13 August 1888 at The Lodge, West Argyle Street, Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, Scotland, the youngest of the four children of the Revd John Baird, minister of the West Parish Church, Helensburgh, and his wife, Jessie Morrison Inglis. Baird was educated at three schools in Helensburgh, between 1893 and 1906 when he was admitted to an electrical engineering course at the Glasgow and West of Scotland Technical College. In 1914 he was awarded an associateship of the college and then attended Glasgow University as a final year BSc degree student, but did not sit the examinations. In 1916, having obtained a position as an assistant mains engineer with the Clyde Valley Electrical Power Company, he applied for military service but was declared medically unfit. In 1918 he resigned from the Clyde Valley company to follow, full time, various entrepreneurial business ventures. 
Baird had a flair for marketing, and from 1917 to 1922 sold -- at different periods in Glasgow, the West Indies, and London -- medicated socks, boot polish, solid scent, jam, honey, fertilizer, coir fibre, and soap. His initiatives were mostly successful, even though he was dogged by the ill health which was a feature of his life. In 1922 he retired to Hastings to recuperate from a severe illness and, while there, began to study the problems of transmitting and receiving visual signals, namely, television. His resources were meagre: he lacked formal research training, he did not have access to workshop or laboratory facilities, and his financial position was precarious. Nevertheless, he rented an attic and began to assemble apparatus using what were, on the face of it, most unpromising materials. His investigations attracted some very modest support, and by April 1925 Baird was able to demonstrate, in public, at Selfridge's Oxford Street store, in London, the transmission of crude outlines of simple objects. Later, on 2 October 1925, he succeeded in reproducing an image of an object, which had tone gradation. A formal demonstration was given to about forty members of the Royal Institution on 26 January 1926. This was the world's first demonstration of television (albeit at a very rudimentary stage), which had been sought by many inventors since 1878, when the possibility of 'seeing at a distance' was first proposed. It was an outstanding achievement. Subsequently his basic television scheme was adopted by inventors and companies in France, Germany, the USA, and elsewhere. 
An examination of Baird's 'modus operandi' in the 1920s shows that he endeavoured to emulate the policies which, from 1896, had ensured success for Marconi and his companies. Baird and his supporters followed a plan which embraced publicity and the demonstration of 'firsts', the accumulation of patents, and company formation. Television Ltd was registered on 11 June 1925, Baird Television Development Company Ltd was established in April 1927, and Baird International Television Ltd was launched on 25 June 1928. Baird tried to anticipate every conceivable application of television and to safeguard by patent protection its practical implementation. He eventually held 178 patents: of these, eighty-eight were granted by the end of 1930. From 1926 to 1931 Baird demonstrated, sometimes for the first time ever, low-definition noctovision (in which subjects were illuminated by infra-red rays), daylight television, colour television, stereoscopic television, phonovision (the recording of sound and image on a gramophone disc), large-screen television, and zone television. Unfortunately, the exaggerated and premature claims made by Baird's business partners reflected adversely on Baird himself. However, a critical appraisal of his early work, to 1931, shows that his thoughts on television, and the realization of those thoughts, were entirely consonant with the television concepts of the well endowed Bell Telephone Laboratories, whose demonstrations in the same period were unsurpassed anywhere. On 30 September 1929 the BBC transmitted, using the Baird 30-line system, its first experimental television broadcast. Later, on 22 August 1932, the first public (in the UK), 30-line television service was inaugurated by the BBC; it remained in operation until 15 September 1935. 
In November 1931, in New York, Baird married Margaret Cecilia (died 1996), a concert pianist, daughter of the late Henry Albu, diamond merchant, of Johannesburg. They had one son, Malcolm, and one daughter, Diana. 
Baird's 'blind spot' was to ignore for too long the inevitable move towards high-definition television, using very high frequencies and all-electronic means. When the London television station was opened by the BBC on 2 November 1936, two systems of television were employed, on an alternate basis. The ensuing trial highlighted the advantages of the 405-line, all-electronic system recommended by Isaac Shoenberg of EMI compared to Baird Television's 240-line system, which was based on mechanical scanning. The former was chosen for the new station, and the last BBC transmission using the Baird system was sent out on 30 January 1937. 
Undaunted, Baird continued his work, concentrating on large-screen, colour, and stereoscopic television. He had his own private laboratory (set up in 1933) and he operated entirely independently from Baird Television Ltd. In December 1936 he demonstrated 120-line theatre television using a 2.4 x 2 metre screen; and in February 1938 he displayed large-screen (3.65 metres x 2.75 metres) colour television pictures. Both demonstrations were at the Dominion Theatre, London. 600-line colour television and stereoscopic colour television systems were shown in December 1940 and December 1941 respectively. Baird was the first person, anywhere, to design, construct, and exhibit (in 1944) a multi-gun colour television tube (the telechrome tube). 
Despite poor health, Baird continued his endeavours until he died, from coronary thrombosis, at his rented home, Instow, 1 Station Road, at Bexhill, Sussex, on 14 June 1946. He was buried in Helensburgh cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30541


Bairnsfather, (Charles) Bruce (1887-1959), cartoonist and writer, was born at Strawberry Bank Cottage, Murree, Punjab, India, on 9 July 1887, the eldest son of Lieutenant (later Major) Thomas Henry (Tom) Bairnsfather (died 1945), a Scottish officer in the Indian army, and Amelia Jane Eliza (Janie) Every (died 1959), daughter of a former deputy lieutenant of Derbyshire. Both of Bairnsfather's parents were descended from a common grandfather, Sir Edward Every, eighth baronet. His mother was a talented amateur painter, specializing in birds on silk, and his father also composed comic songs. He had two younger brothers: Malcolm Harvey Bairnsfather (1890-1891), who died of meningitis when a baby, and Thomas Duncan Bairnsfather ('b'. 1897), who died in the Second World War. 
Bairnsfather was brought to England in 1895 and stayed with his mother's brother, the rector of Thornbury, near Bromyard, Herefordshire, before being enrolled at Rudyard Kipling's old school, the United Services College, Westward Ho!, Devon (1898-1904). Frequently caned for doodling in his books, he was a failure academically though he won a prize for drawing. His parents returned to England in 1899 and he was transferred to an army crammer, Trinity College, Stratford upon Avon, in 1904 while also attending evening classes in art at Stratford Technical College. At the age of seventeen he sold his first drawing, an advertisement for Player's navy mixture, for 2 guineas. Having chosen the army as a career, he failed the entrance exams to Sandhurst and Woolwich officer cadet schools but eventually managed to gain a commission as a second lieutenant in his father's old regiment, the Cheshires. 
Disillusioned with military life, however, Bairnsfather resigned in 1907 to become an artist, studying under Charles van Havermaet and Dudley Hardy at the John Hassall School of Art in Earls Court, London. Unsuccessful as a professional poster artist, he returned to the family home at Bishopton, Warwickshire, and took a job as an electrical engineer at Spensers Ltd, Stratford, specialists in gas and electric country-house lighting. Beginning as a junior installing lighting at the Old Memorial Theatre, Stratford, he later travelled widely for the company. During this period he took part in a number of amateur theatrical productions, specializing in female impersonations, and was 'discovered' by Marie Corelli, the novelist, who lived locally and who arranged for him to audition for Sir Edward Moss's Empire music-hall group. (Bairnsfather backed out.) She also introduced him to the 'tea king', Sir Thomas Lipton, and he subsequently drew advertisements for Liptons, Player's cigarettes, Keene's mustard, and Beechams, and won a poster competition organized by an opera company. 
In the First World War Bairnsfather served as machine-gun officer with the 1st battalion Royal 1st Warwickshires in France, eventually attaining the rank of captain. While stationed near Armentieres he drew the first of his famous 'Fragments from France' cartoons ('Where did that one go to?', 'The Bystander', January 1915) but did not see it published until he was hospitalized in April 1915 after suffering shell-shock and damage to the hearing in his left ear during the second battle of Ypres. Later, when posted to 34th division headquarters at Sutton Veney, Salisbury Plain, he drew his most celebrated cartoon, 'Well, if you knows of a better 'ole, go to it' ('The Bystander', 24 Nov 1915), featuring two soldiers in a shell-hole during a bombardment. His best-known character, the pipe-smoking, walrus-moustached Midlands Tommy 'Old Bill' Busby -- 'dim, dull and honest' and usually wearing a scarf and balaclava helmet with his uniform -- first appeared in 'When the 'ell is it going to be strawberry?' ('The Bystander', 15 Sept 1915). Though very popular with the troops ('The Bystander''s sales rocketed and in 1916 alone more than 250,000 copies were sold of 'Fragments from France', the first of eight collections of his drawings), the establishment objected strongly to 'these vulgar caricatures of our heroes' and questions were asked in parliament. None the less his works so improved morale that he was promoted officer-cartoonist and transferred to the intelligence department of the War Office to draw similar cartoons for the French, Italian, and American forces. In 1921 he married a 34-year-old Australian-born divorcee, the Hon. Mrs Cecilia Agnes (Ceal) Scott, 'nee' Bruton (1886/7-1966), the former wife of the Hon. Michael Scott OBE (fifth son of the third earl of Eldon) and sister of the stage writer Helen Jerome. They had one daughter, Barbara Bruce Bairnsfather ('b'. 1922), and he had a stepdaughter, Heather Scott ('b'. 1908). 
The 'Old Bill' character, along with his younger friends Bert and Alf, was immensely popular both during and after the war, and Bairnsfather's celebrity continued to be such that he was the subject of one of the first talking motion pictures (1927), took part in the first experimental television transmissions from Alexandra Palace in north London (1936), and was invited to write, direct, and produce Canada's first major movie, 'Carry on, Sergeant!' (1928). 'Old Bill' himself appeared in books, plays, musicals (including C. B. Cochran's 'The Better 'Ole' in 1917, which gave Sybil Thorndike her first West End role), silent and talking films (including 'The Better 'Ole' in 1926, featuring Charlie Chaplin's brother Syd, and Alexander Korda's 'Old Bill and Son' in 1941, co-starring John Mills), and comic strips ('Daily Graphic', 'Passing Show', 'The Illustrated', and 'Judge'), and was reproduced on pottery, playing cards, jigsaw puzzles, postcards, and other merchandise. 'Old Bill' dolls were manufactured, a waxwork of the character appeared in Madame Tussaud's (1930), and a bus named after him became part of the collection of the Imperial War Museum in London (complete with 'Old Bill' radiator mascot). However, perhaps surprisingly, he was not used in government poster campaigns until the Second World War. Bairnsfather's characters also had considerable influence on the work of other cartoonists, notably (during the Second World War) the American Bill Mauldin ('Willie & Joe') and the Welshman W. J. P. Jones ('The Two Types'). Sir David Low's 'Colonel Blimp' (created in the 1930s) later attracted similar censure by the military and government authorities. 
Although Bairnsfather repeatedly denied that 'Old Bill' was based on a single person -- as he said, 'he was simply a hieroglyphic for a most prevalent type' (Bairnsfather, 'Carry on, Sergeant!', 54) -- many suggestions have been made regarding his original model. Bairnsfather was not a good businessman (he was sued for bankruptcy in 1932) and benefited less than others from royalties on his work. However, he supplemented his earnings from cartoons by numerous lecture tours in Great Britain, the United States, and Canada; music-hall variety acts; illustrated journalism in, for example, 'The Graphic', 'The Tatler', 'Life', and 'New Yorker'; scriptwriting; and by producing books of light-hearted memoirs. He also edited his own popular weekly magazine for the 'Bystander' group, 'Fragments' (1919-20). 
Early in 1942, after the USA had entered the Second World War, Bairnsfather was appointed official cartoonist to the American forces in Europe. He held the rank of captain and wore an American uniform. As well as contributing to 'Stars and Stripes' and 'Yank' he also drew cartoons at American bases and as nose art on aircraft. 'Old Bill Does It Again!' was published in 1940, followed by 'Old Bill & Son' (1940), 'Jeeps and Jests' (1943), and 'No Kiddin'' (1944). After the war he continued his lecture tours, talks, and other work but as an artist and performer never succeeded in breaking away from 'Old Bill' in his many incarnations. 
In appearance Bairnsfather was clean-shaven, with brown eyes and prematurely thinning hair (he often wore a cap or trilby to hide this.) Also, unusually for one of his background, he had tattoos -- a cobra on one arm and a butterfly on the other. He disliked describing his work as 'cartoons', preferring 'pictures' or 'drawings', and he once said that his religious beliefs were 'a mixture of The Sermon on the Mount, Kipling's 'If', Omar Khayyam and Astronomy' (Holt and Holt, 39). Bruce Bairnsfather died on 29 September 1959 in the Royal Infirmary, Worcester, of acute renal failure after treatment for cancer of the bladder. He was survived by his wife. Cremated at Cheltenham crematorium, his memorial plaque mistakenly gives his age as seventy-one (he was seventy-two). In 1980 a blue plaque was erected to his memory at 1 Stirling Street, Kensington, London (one of his London studios). 


@@@@@


doc= 30542


Bairstow, Sir Edward Cuthbert (1874-1946), musician, was born in Huddersfield on 22 August 1874, the eldest child and only son of James Oates Bairstow, wholesale clothier, and his wife, Elizabeth Adeline, 'nee' Watson. His father had a tenor voice and was a member of the Huddersfield Choral Society. Bairstow was educated at the high school, Nottingham, where his grandparents lived, until in 1889 his father retired and the family moved to London where he attended the Grocers' Company's School at Hackney Downs, and later had coaching from a private tutor. In Huddersfield he had been taught the organ by Henry Parratt (brother of Sir Walter Parratt), and in Nottingham by Arthur Page. Soon after arrival in London he had lessons from John Farmer, then organist of Balliol College, Oxford, and later (1892-9) he was articled to Sir Frederick Bridge, organist of Westminster Abbey. During this time he became organist of All Saints' Church, Norfolk Square, Paddington. In 1894 he obtained the degree of BMus at Durham University, proceeding to DMus in 1900. In 1899, on Bridge's recommendation, he was appointed organist of Wigan parish church and he conducted the Wigan Philharmonic Society (1901-6) and also the choral society at Blackburn. On 11 June 1902 he married Edith Harriet ('b'. 1875/6), daughter of John Thomas Hobson, a government inspector of alkali works. They had two sons and a daughter. In 1906 Bairstow was appointed to the more important post of organist at Leeds parish church. In addition to his church duties he had a busy life teaching, lecturing, performing, composing, and travelling each week to conduct the Blackburn St Cecilia Society (1903-13) and the Preston Choral Society (1907-13). At the Leeds triennial festival in 1907 he was official organist under the conductorship of Sir Charles Stanford. 
Another chapter of Bairstow's life began in 1913 when he became organist and master of the choir at York Minster, where he remained until his death. The increased duties of his cathedral work made it impossible for him to continue conducting the choral societies in Lancashire but, now that his reputation as a choral trainer was established, he accepted the invitation to conduct the York Musical Society (1913-39), the Bradford Festival Chorus, and the Leeds Philharmonic Society. At York Minster, Bairstow's devoted work with the choir and music generally became well known and widely appreciated and perhaps reached the highest level of excellence during the 1300th celebrations in 1927. The Bairstows' home at 1 Minster Court, York, became well known for its hospitality towards other artists. 
In the 1920s Bairstow became known as a judge at musical competition festivals in Britain, and in 1928 he also judged in Canada. His natural ability, teaching experience, and fearless judgements had a stimulating effect on the movement. He was much in demand, although he realized that he was not 'popular'; consequently he often remarked 'I have judged at every competition festival in the country -- 'once'.' 
On the death of Joseph Cox Bridge in 1929, Bairstow accepted the chair of music at Durham University. The professorship at that time was non-resident and he was able to continue his work at York Minster. At Durham he set himself to raise the standard of the degree in music. In 1932 he was knighted, and he received the honorary degrees of LittD (1936) from Leeds and DMus (1945) from Oxford. For various periods he held office as president of musical bodies such as the Incorporated Society of Musicians and the Royal College of Organists; of the latter he was for many years an examiner and member of the council. 
Probably Bairstow's chief influence was through his many pupils, who included the composer Gerald Finzi. He was a born teacher, although his strictness and insistence on regular, disciplined work did not endear him to all his pupils, Finzi among them. His success was due to his uncanny insight into the problems of teaching, to his sympathy, patience, perseverance, enthusiasm to stimulate the imagination of the pupil, appreciation of honest work done, and above all to his great love of music. His courage, forthright speech, and transparent sincerity made him greatly beloved by many, even though they were sometimes misunderstood by and embarrassing to a few. 
Bairstow published two textbooks on music, 'Counterpoint and Harmony' (1937) and 'The Evolution of Musical Form' (1943), and one on singing, 'Singing Learned from Speech' (1945), written in collaboration with his friend H. Plunket Greene. His published compositions, which reveal the influence of Brahms and Stanford, include church and organ music, songs, partsongs, and chamber music. For the coronation of George VI in 1937 he wrote the introit. His 1913 communion service in D was perhaps his most important work, while the austerely beautiful anthem 'Let all mortal flesh keep silence' became firmly established in the repertory of church music. Bairstow died in Purey Cust Nursing Home, York, on 1 May 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 30543


Bairstow, Sir Leonard (1880-1963), aeronautical engineer, was born on 25 June 1880 at Halifax in Yorkshire, the son of Uriah Bairstow, a commercial clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth Lister. He attended schools in Halifax, from where he went, in 1898, on a scholarship to the Royal College of Science, London. There he became a Whitworth scholar in 1902. In 1904 he entered the engineering department of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) at Teddington, Middlesex, where he worked under T. E. Stanton on the problems of fatigue and of aerodynamics. In 1909 he moved to the new section of aerodynamics and became the principal in charge. There he carried out pioneer investigations into wind tunnel design, tested models, and measured the aerodynamic derivatives in the NPL wind tunnel. One of his assistants at the time was E. F. Relf. 
In 1917 Bairstow was appointed to the Air Board where he worked for Sir David Henderson on aircraft design and aerodynamics research. As deputy to Alexander Ogilvie he co-ordinated the departmental work on structural strength, aerodynamics, performance, and airscrews. In 1920 he was appointed professor of aerodynamics at Imperial College, London, and in 1923 he became Zaharoff professor of aviation and head of the department of aeronautics. 
Bairstow was a member of the advisory committee of aeronautics (later the Aeronautical Research Committee and during the Second World War expanded into the Aeronautical Research Council) from 1921 to 1955 and was its chairman from 1949 to 1952. He served on over fifty committees and had an unequalled record of service. In 1917 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and appointed CBE. He gave the seventh Wilbur Wright memorial lecture in 1919 -- an event well remembered for the subsequent controversy in which Bairstow's references to S. P. Langley's 'heavier than air' aircraft were ultimately justified. The first edition of his 'Applied Aerodynamics' was published in 1920; it was the first, and for many years the only, comprehensive textbook in this field. He was chairman of the council of the Royal Aeronautical Society in the year 1922-3. He married, first, Eleanor Mary Hamer (died 1926); they had one son and one daughter. In 1930 he married Florence Katharine, the eldest daughter of D. J. Stephens, of Llandaff. 
Bairstow was involved in two great controversies, whose outcome ultimately had considerable effect on the development of aeronautical research. Bairstow was a doughty fighter, always well equipped with extensive knowledge and powerful arguments, and it required considerable new experimental work and most careful theoretical exposition to convince him of his mistakes. 
The first controversy arose over discrepancies between the measurements of aerodynamic derivatives made in an aeroplane in flight at the Royal Aircraft Establishment by W. S. Farren and G. P. Thomson and measurements made in wind tunnels at the NPL. Bairstow argued, with reason and conviction, that measurements made in a wind tunnel, by skilled observers, with accurate instruments, under ideal conditions, must be more reliable and were more reproducible than observations made by a pilot distracted by the problems of manoeuvring an aircraft. Tests on a standard aerofoil carried out in foreign laboratories failed to resolve the matter, which was eventually traced to a difference of turbulence between wind tunnels and the free air. Bairstow himself was finally convinced of the effects of turbulence in wind tunnels, and the long-running controversy ultimately led to important advances in the design of wind tunnels and the use of models. 
The second controversy was over the theory of the 'boundary layer' of airflow round an aeroplane or wind tunnel model advanced by Ludwig Prandtl in 1904. Bairstow held that mathematical theory should encompass the whole surrounding air mass, rather than a thin layer, and he was inclined to reject Prandtl's argument. He was eventually persuaded to adopt it, whereupon he invented a rapid and precise method of solving the necessary equations. His criticism of Prandtl's theory was undoubtedly justified and it was not until M. J. Lighthill had developed the theory of differential equations with singular perturbations that an adequate theory could be constructed. Bairstow should be remembered not only for his part in these controversies but also for his considerable contributions to knowledge of the stability of aircraft. 
Bairstow's main contributions to aeronautical science were in matters of stability, but he also dealt with solutions of equations of motion in perfect and viscous fluids, and in his early days at NPL he investigated some engineering problems of explosions and strength of materials. In the course of his investigations into stability, Bairstow made a number of small gliding models from mica sheets and aluminium foil. He also applied the model method to the design of wind tunnels, and in later papers he studied the stability of balloons and airships. His researches on the tail oscillations which occur in an aeroplane represent the first attempt to understand the important problem of flutter. 
Bairstow's experience led to his appointment to two government committees which investigated the accidents to the airships R 38 and R 101. Unfortunately his earlier work, which would have permitted calculations of the structural stresses due to aerodynamic forces on the R 38, had not been consulted and it was not until after the accident that the accidents investigation subcommittee (in 1922) called attention to the dangerously low factor of safety. 
In the case of the R 101 the airworthiness of airships panel, under the chairmanship of Bairstow, was intimately associated with the airship's design and construction and would have made the complete re-examination of the aerodynamic calculations necessitated by modifications to the original design, but unfortunately the refusal of a cabinet minister to postpone the date of the projected flight to India made this impossible. The immediate cause of the R 101's crash in 1930 was the stormy weather over northern France which caused a substantial loss of gas from the balloons, which fretted against the metal structure. 
Bairstow retired from Imperial College in 1945. He was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society the same year, and received its gold medal in 1946. He was knighted in 1952. He died at the county hospital in Winchester, Hampshire, on 8 September 1963, and was cremated at Southampton four days later. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30544


Bajpai, Sir Girja Shankar (1891-1954), administrator and politician in India, was born in Lucknow on 3 April 1891, the second of the three sons of Sir Seetla Prasad Bajpai, chief justice of Jaipur state, and his wife, Rukmini Shukla (died 1945). Having won a science scholarship from Muir College, Allahabad, to Merton College, Oxford, Bajpai switched to history and in 1915 entered the Indian Civil Service. He was perhaps its most brilliant Indian member in the inter-war years, becoming the youngest secretary to the government of India, member of the legislative assembly, and member of the viceroy's executive council. He was also the first Indian in the British period to be officially involved in international affairs, as agent-general for India in the United States. Immensely industrious, persistent, and persuasive, fluent in French, Persian, and Bengali and a stylist in English, a good speaker, matching in repartee and debate men of the calibre of Bhulabhai Desai and M. A. Jinnah, he was a fine craftsman in all the fields he entered. 
Chosen in 1922 for Lord Balfour's team for the Washington conference on naval disarmament, Bajpai went on to participate in the League of Nations in Geneva, in the second round-table conference in London, and in negotiations with other countries of the British empire and Commonwealth, notably South Africa, on the problems of Indian expatriates. In 1941 Whitehall allowed India to have its first representation in an independent country, and Bajpai was sent as agent-general to Washington, where he was to serve until 1946. He impressed not only Roosevelt and other Americans, but several international figures, such as the eminent French columnist Pertinax, who described him as 'un sort de Voltaire au sein de l'Empire Britannique' ('a sort of Voltaire at the heart of the British empire'). Bajpai was, however, to incur bitter criticism in his own country, where his name was associated with British propaganda against Gandhi and the Indian National Congress in the United States during the war. 
In his legislative years Bajpai had developed friendly contacts with some of the Indian political leaders, such as Bhulabhai Desai, Satyamurti, K. M. Munshi, M. R. Jayakar, and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru. His views on political freedom and how to secure it from Britain were very much like theirs. There is evidence that these Indian leaders also had misgivings about the policy of the Congress in the early 1940s. Bajpai had the unenviable duty of publicly defending in the United States the policies and actions of the government of India at a time of great nationalist upheaval when popular alienation from the raj was at its peak. The publication of American records has, however, revealed that he was not only urging the British government to abandon rigidity in its attitude on the constitutional issue, but also persuading the Americans to urge on the British government a more conciliatory policy towards India. Bajpai's deputy in Washington, Humphrey (later Lord) Trevelyan, wrote in his memoirs: 'Bajpai earned the respect of the British and Americans. He conducted himself with dignity and honesty tempered with adroitness. For this he was abused by his countrymen' (Trevelyan, 238). 
Nehru's letter to Bajpai asking him to continue in service after the transfer of power was not exactly couched in a cordial tone, but it must be said to Nehru's credit that he did not take long to recognize Bajpai's talents and experience. He appointed him head of the department of external affairs as secretary-general. Bajpai influenced decisions of high policy until 1952, when ill health obliged him to retire. His outstanding career was crowned with his appointment as governor of Bombay state in 1952. He died there in harness on 5 December 1954 and was cremated on the same day, full of honours, a great Indian who also cared deeply for the British heritage. He was appointed CBE in 1922, CIE in 1926, KBE in 1935, and KCSI in 1943. 
A strong supporter of the Commonwealth, Bajpai played a key role in drafting the final constitutional formula for enabling India to remain in it as a republic. His mastery of the Kashmir question briefly brought him back to diplomacy in 1953, when he led the Indian delegation in talks with Pakistan and the UN representative Frank Graham. He is, however, perhaps best remembered for his advice -- which Nehru accepted before Bajpai left the foreign office, but which other influences later negated -- to raise the boundary issue with China. 
The chairman of the UN Kashmir commission, Josef Korbel, described Bajpai, as 'a small man with a shy smile, perfect manners and ivory cut hands, with the English of Shakespeare and himself the quintessence of ancient Indian culture and Oxford schooling' (Korbel, 123). Korbel added that Bajpai 'was a great diplomat of the English school', and his long interaction with the British certainly shaped him greatly, but he was unusual in his day for the broader influence deriving from his love and experience of Europe, especially France, supplemented by a deep understanding of the United States. Above all, he was quintessentially Indian, in personal commitment, no less than in his personal life. Outwardly a little austere, Bajpai had an air of detachment designed to ensure a privacy he prized, so that he could turn to reading and to things of beauty, particularly carpets, paintings, and flowers, and cultivating fine roses. With all his elegant manners and courtesy, he had a puckish streak, poking fun, yet willing to be its object. A devoted family man, Bajpai and his wife, Maharajdulari Misra (died 1967), had four daughters and three sons. Nothing would have pleased him more than that his two surviving sons succeeded him as secretaries to the government of India, one of them as ambassador to the United States, providing the rare example of father and son occupying the same chair in Washington. 


@@@@@


doc= 30545


Baker, Sir Benjamin (1840-1907), civil engineer, was born at Keyford, Frome, Somerset, on 31 March 1840, the son of Benjamin Baker and Sarah Hollis. His father, a native of co. Carlow, Ireland, became principal assistant at ironworks at Tondu, Glamorgan. After being educated at Cheltenham grammar school, Baker was for four years (1856-60) apprentice at Price and Fox's Neath Abbey ironworks. At this time he had an affair with a young Welsh woman, with whom he had an illegitimate daughter. Her parents emigrated with their daughter to America, and Baker was ignorant of the birth for eight years. 
Baker moved to London in 1860 to join the staff of William Wilson, a business associate of John Fowler, working on the construction of the Grosvenor Road railway bridge and Victoria Station. On completion of the work he joined Fowler's staff. Fowler persuaded Baker that his talents had a future in Britain when early in his career he contemplated emigrating to the colonies; he became Fowler's partner in 1875, and was associated with him until Fowler's death in 1898. As a consulting engineer Baker rapidly gained the highest reputation for skill and knowledge, and was consulted by the British and Egyptian governments, by colonial administrations, and by local and other authorities. The credit for the design and execution of the great civil engineering achievements with which Baker's name is associated was necessarily shared by him with Fowler and many other colleagues, but Baker's judgement and resource were highly important factors in the success of these undertakings. 
In the 1860s Fowler was heavily involved with the underground railway system of London. As assistant in Fowler's office, Baker was employed on the construction of the Metropolitan Railway, its St John's Wood extension. In 1869 he became Fowler's chief assistant in the construction of the Metropolitan District Railway from Westminster to Mansion House. In his 1881 paper, 'The actual lateral pressure of earthwork', he discussed some fruits of this experience ('PICE', 65, 1880-81, 140-241), and described the work itself in 1885 (B. Baker, 'The Metropolitan and Metropolitan District railways', 'PICE', 81, 1884-5, 1-33). Subsequently Fowler and Baker acted as consulting engineers for the first 'tube' railway the City and South London Line, opened in 1890 (later part of the Northern Line), and with J. H. Greathead were the joint engineers for the Central London Railway, opened in 1900. In the construction of this line Baker carried out the plan suggested by him in 1874, of making the line dip down between the stations in order to reduce the required tractive effort. This subsequently became standard practice on tube railways. After Greathead's death in 1896 Baker also acted as joint engineer with W. R. Galbraith for the Baker Street and Waterloo (Bakerloo) Railway. Almost his last act before his death was to attend the opening of the Euston-Angel extension of the City and South London Railway; Basil Mott and David Hay were his partners in work on this project. 
In the early years of his career Baker began to study structural theory and the strength of materials. For 'Engineering' he wrote a series of articles on long span bridges in 1867, and another, on the strength of beams, columns, and arches, in 1868. Both series were published in book form, as was his paper on the lateral pressure of earthwork. A third series, on the strength of brickwork, was written in 1872. These publications established Baker's international reputation, and were extensively abstracted and translated. In the work on long span bridges, published at a time when Fowler's practice was actively considering a major crossing of the Severn, Baker concluded that the longest span could be achieved using cantilevers supporting an independent girder. This system was finally adopted for the Forth railway bridge. To his early training in the Neath Abbey ironworks he owed the foundation of his thorough knowledge of the properties and strength of metals, on which he wrote many papers. Baker's technical writings displayed a rare ability to illustrate engineering principles in a way which even a lay audience could understand. This was seen, for example, in his illustration of the cantilever principle by a human model in his lectures on the Forth railway bridge. This specialist knowledge enabled him to play a principal part in association with Fowler in the design of the Forth Bridge. This, the longest span bridge in the world at the time, was begun in 1883 and completed in 1890. Baker worked almost continuously on site, carrying out numerous tests on the steelwork and research into wind pressure. His services were rewarded by the honour of KCMG (17 April 1890) and the prix Poncelet of the Institut de France. The success of the bridge paved the way for the widespread use of structural steel. 
From 1869 Baker was also associated with Fowler in investigating and advising upon engineering projects in Egypt. One of these was for a railway between Wadi Halfa and Shendi and a ship incline at Aswan, and another was a project for a sweet-water canal between Alexandria and Cairo, which was never built. 
For the remainder of his life Baker played a prominent part in the engineering work which distinguished British involvement in Egypt in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. He was consulted by the Egyptian government on various occasions on the repair of the Nile delta barrage and when, after several years' investigation, schemes were prepared by Sir William Willcocks in 1894 for the storage of the waters of the Nile for irrigation purposes, Baker was appointed to the commission which approved the project for a reservoir at Aswan and chose a site for the dam. To meet objections to the partial submergence by this plan of the temples at Philae, the height of the proposed dam was reduced from 85 to 65 feet. The work, for which Baker was consulting engineer, was begun in 1898 and was completed in 1902, when Baker was made KCB and was appointed to the order of the Mejidiye. The dam was 6400 feet in length, pierced by 180 sluice openings at different levels. Baker was also consulting engineer for a subsidiary dam which was built at the same time at Asyut, below Aswan. When the contractors, John Aird & Sons, had this work well in hand, with a large part of their contract time to run, Baker, realizing the advantages of early completion of the dam, advised the Egyptian government to cancel the contract and to instruct the contractors to finish the work at the earliest possible moment, regardless of cost, leaving the question of contractors' profit to be settled by him. His advice was followed, the work was completed a year early, and the value of the extra year's supply of water was estimated to be $600,000. The Aswan Reservoir was from the first found to be inadequate to meet demand and as no suitable site could be found for another reservoir above the site, it was decided to raise the dam there to about the height originally proposed by Willcocks. Baker solved the difficult problem of uniting new to old masonry so as to form a solid structure by building the upper portion of the dam as an independent structure which could be united to the lower by grouting with cement when it had ceased to settle and contract. Just before his death he went to Egypt to settle the plans for this work (completed in 1912), as well as preliminary plans for a bridge across the Nile at Bulaq. 
Smaller but important works which Baker also undertook included: the vessel which he designed with John Dixon in 1877 to transport Cleopatra's Needle from Egypt to England, a project which first brought his name to the notice of the general public ('Cleopatra's Needle', 'PICE', 61.233); the Chignecto Rhip Railway, for which Fowler and Baker were consulting engineers, commenced in 1888 and abandoned in 1891 owing to financial difficulties; the Avonmouth docks (in association with Sir John Wolfe Barry, 1902-8); the Rosslare and Waterford Railway; the widening of the Buccleuch Dock entrance at Barrow; and the construction of the bascule bridges at Walney (Barrow in Furness) and across the Swale near Queenborough. 
Baker gave much professional advice on structures at home and abroad. He advised on three important works of Thomas Telford -- the Menai Bridge, Buildwas Bridge, and Over Bridge at Gloucester -- doing much to ensure their survival. He acted as consultant with Allan Duncan Stewart (1831-1894), who had earlier assisted in the Forth railway bridge design, on the Wembley Tower project, conceived as the tallest structure in the world but soon abandoned. When the roof of Charing Cross railway station collapsed on 5 December 1905 he at once examined it, at some personal danger, and gave useful advice. He had earlier been consulted by Captain J. B. Eads in connection with the design of the St Louis Bridge across the Mississippi (1868) and in regard to the first Hudson river tunnel when the latter faced failure, he designed a pneumatic shield which enabled the work to be completed (1888-91). His fame as a bridge engineer led to him acting jointly with Fowler as consultant to Schneider and Hersent's scheme for a cross-channel railway bridge. Nowhere were his abilities appreciated more highly than in Canada and the United States. He was an honorary member of both the Canadian and the American Societies of Civil Engineers and of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
Baker served from 1888 until his death on the ordnance committee, of which he became the senior civil member on the death of Sir Frederick Bramwell in 1903. He was active in many government inquiries and regularly gave evidence on parliamentary bills. He was a member of the committee on light railways in 1895, and of the committee appointed by the Board of Trade in 1900 to inquire into the loss of strength in steel rails. To the London county council he reported in 1891, with Alexander Binnie, on the main drainage of London, and in 1897, with George Frederick Deacon, on the supply of water to London from Wales. On Fowler's death in 1898 he retained many of Sir John's consultancies, maintaining the office at 2 Queen Square Place, Westminster, under the name of Baker and Hurtzig. His partner, Arthur Dameron Hurtzig, continued the practice after Baker's death. In addition Baker had a partnership with Frederick Shelford, acting as consultants to the crown agents. 
Baker was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1867, a member in 1877, a member of council in 1882, and president in 1895, remaining on the council until his death. During his presidency the council was enlarged to give the membership overseas and outside London better representation and the system of election was modified. Baker was a major influence on the foundation of the Engineering Standards Committee, forerunner of the British Standards Institution, by ICE and the other leading engineering institutions. He helped draft the first British standards relating to bridges and building construction. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1890 and a member of its council in 1892-3, and was one of its vice-presidents from 1896 until his death. 
Baker was president of the mechanical science section of the British Association at Aberdeen in 1885. He was also active in the Royal Institution, in the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (on the council of which he sat from 1899 until death), in the Society of Arts, and in the Iron and Steel Institute. He was an associate of the Institution of Naval Architects and an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects. Honorary degrees were conferred upon him by the universities of Cambridge (DSc, 1900), Edinburgh (LLD, 1890), and Dublin (MEng, 1892). 
Baker died suddenly from syncope at his home, Bowden Green, Pangbourne, on 19 May 1907, and was buried at Idbury, near Chipping Norton. He was unmarried and left the bulk of his estate to his sister, Mrs Fanny Maria Kemp, and her family. 
A memorial window, designed by J. N. Comper, was unveiled by the earl of Cromer on 3 October 1909 in the north aisle of the nave of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30546


Baker, Henry Frederick (1866-1956), mathematician, was born at 1 Clement Court, Cambridge, on 3 July 1866, the son of Henry Baker, a domestic butler, and his wife, Sarah Ann Baker, 'nee' Britham. After attending various small schools he entered the Perse School, Cambridge. He was awarded a sizarship at St John's College, Cambridge, in the summer of 1883, but remained at school in order to prepare for the entrance scholarship examination to be held in the following December. He was elected to a foundation scholarship and began residence in October 1884. In 1887 he was bracketed senior wrangler with three others, and in the following year he was placed in the first division of the first class in part one of the mathematical tripos. He was elected into a fellowship of St John's College in 1888 and remained a fellow for nearly sixty-eight years. In 1889 he was awarded a Smith's prize. 
In 1893 Baker married Lily Isabella Homfeld Klopp (1871-1903), daughter of Otto Charles Klopp, a merchant, of Homfeld House, Putney, and originally from Leer, Germany. They had two sons. He spent the whole of his working life in Cambridge, first as a college lecturer, then as a university lecturer (1895-1914), holding the special Cayley lectureship (1903-14), and finally as Lowndean professor of astronomy and geometry (1914-36). He was elected FRS in 1898 and received the Sylvester medal in 1910. He was awarded the De Morgan medal of the London Mathematical Society in 1905 and was president of the society in 1910 and 1911. In 1913 Baker married again, his first wife having died prematurely (aged thirty-two) in 1903. His second wife was Muriel Irene Woodyard (1885-1956), daughter of Henry Walter Woodyard, an engineer. She was eighteen years his junior. They had one daughter. 
Baker's whole life was devoted to the service of mathematics, through research, and by his power to communicate his enthusiasm to his pupils. His researches covered a wide range of subjects, but chronologically they fall into two distinct periods. In the earlier period, which lasted until about 1911 or 1912, Baker's main interest was in the theory of algebraic functions and related topics, although his work on this often had a bearing on other branches of pure mathematics, to which he made useful contributions from time to time. Subjects on which he wrote included invariant theory, differential equations, and Lie groups; moreover, his work on algebraic functions led him, after the turn of the century, to consider wider problems in the theory of functions, especially functions of several complex variables. While many of Baker's papers were noteworthy in their day, it was his two books, 'Abel's Theorem and the Allied Theory, Including Theta Functions' (1897) and 'An Introduction to the Theory of Multiply Periodic Functions' (1907), which were his most lasting contributions to mathematics during this first period. 
Some of the problems which Baker was considering when he wrote 'Multiply Periodic Functions' led him to take an interest in geometry; on the one hand he came to read T. Reye's 'Geometrie der Lage', and on the other he came in contact with the work of the Italian school of geometers on the theory of complex algebraic surfaces. Their work, and the closely related analytic theory of Emile Picard, achieved the difficult generalization of Riemann's ideas from one complex variable to two. These subjects fascinated him, and he soon began to write on them. He made the work of the Italian geometers the subject of his presidential address to the London Mathematical Society in 1911 which became one of the classic surveys of the subject, and he was soon recognized as a leader of British geometers. On the death of the Lowndean professor, Sir Robert Ball, in November 1913, Baker was the obvious choice of those electors to the chair who wished to appoint a geometer. It was, however, contested by other electors who wished to continue the astronomical traditions of the chair. The deadlock was only broken when, quite exceptionally, the appointment was passed to the chancellor, who selected Baker. Baker had no intention, however, of neglecting that part of his responsibilities which related to astronomy, and for many years he lectured with considerable success on gravitational astronomy and wrote some useful papers on this subject. He was among the first in Britain to understand Poincare's novel reformulation of celestial mechanics. For the rest of his life, however, his real love was geometry; for over twenty years he taught and wrote on it, and it is for the work done as a professor that he will best be remembered. His own contributions are summed up in a treatise of six volumes, entitled 'Principles of Geometry' (1922-33). He continued working on geometry after his retirement and published his last paper when he was eighty-six. 
Baker's standing as a mathematician has to be judged against the background of the mathematical traditions in the university. He early came under the influence of Arthur Cayley and from him derived his concern with algebraic manipulations. But Cayley was an old man and pure mathematics in Cambridge had little in common with the exciting things which were going on in the subject on the continent. A. R. Forsyth, who succeeded Cayley as professor in 1895, strove hard to bring the continental ideas into Cambridge, but was not himself able to assimilate the continental standards of rigour. Baker, who learned much during visits paid to Klein at Gottingen, picked up these standards by reading the works of Leopold Kronecker and Karl Theodor Wilhelm Weierstrass as a young man. He was a better mathematician than Forsyth, and presented the advanced theory of complex functions in a much more comprehensive, comprehensible, and therefore influential way. His early training, however, led him to prefer the objectives of the older Cambridge mathematicians, using the new ideas primarily as tools. The result was that in his fifties he was little affected by the revolution brought about among the Cambridge mathematical analysts by G. H. Hardy in the first decade of the twentieth century. During this period Baker's position was essentially that of one of the leaders of the older generation. 
When he changed his interests to geometry, Baker again came to the subject at an awkward stage. In spite of the great advances which the Italians had achieved in the theory of surfaces, it was already apparent that their methods were not proving adequate, and indeed the proofs of a number of the most important theorems had already been shown to be faulty. Baker did not invent any new methods and his work was largely devoted to examining the difficulties, and to using algebraic methods of the type used years before by Cayley to examine special cases. This he did extremely well, but his work served to make it still clearer that radical changes in approach were necessary before real progress could be made. This was not the case in projective geometry. In that field there were no structural problems, and each individual problem was an end in itself. It was here that Baker was at his best, for at heart he believed that the object of mathematics was to solve special problems completely, basic principles and general theories being of less interest to him. The fact that Baker did not achieve any major breakthrough was to a large degree due to his native modesty; he had an admiration amounting to veneration for the great masters of mathematics, and he could not imagine that he could ever take his place beside them. 
While Baker's original contributions to mathematics were considerable, his forte lay in expounding the work of others and in inspiring the younger generation of geometers. In this last he was conspicuously successful. Between 1920 and 1936 he attracted around him a large following of young and enthusiastic geometers, many of whom won Smith's prizes and subsequently achieved high positions. An important feature of the school he founded was his Saturday afternoon seminar or 'tea party', one of the earliest seminars held in Cambridge. This was the focus of the great activity in geometry which he stirred up, and was the essential key to his success. 
In appearance Baker was a heavily built man, with a thick moustache. This made him rather formidable to strangers and as he was also very shy some found him difficult to approach at first. But once the barriers were broken down his pupils found him less awe-inspiring, although they always treated him with great respect. The protocol at his tea parties was strict, and a pupil could not stay away without an acceptable excuse, but provided the rules were obeyed the atmosphere was extremely friendly. Baker died at his home, 3 Storeys Way, Cambridge, on 17 March 1956, and his widow survived him by only a few months. 


@@@@@


doc= 30547


Baker, Sir Herbert (1862-1946), architect and author, was born on 9 June 1862 at Owletts, Cobham, Kent, the fourth of the eleven children of Thomas Henry Baker (1824-1904), gentleman farmer and JP, and his wife, Frances Georgina (died 1916), daughter of William Davis of Rochester. After a rural childhood at Owletts and a public school education, Baker trained as an architect in London before embarking on one of the great imperial careers in British architecture. He designed major government buildings in South Africa, India, Rhodesia, and Kenya, as well as imperial works in London and Oxford. Baker was also an accomplished domestic architect, the designer of several war memorials, and the rebuilder of the Bank of England. A literary man, Baker produced grand-manner classicism at the core and on the periphery of the British empire during the sunset decades of that architectural tradition and political era. 
Baker briefly attended Haileybury College, then in 1873 entered Tonbridge School, where he excelled in mathematics and captained both the cricket and football teams. At this point he decided upon a career in architecture, largely because his parents thought him skilled in drawing. A cousin in London, Arthur Baker (1841-1896), was an architect and young Herbert went to him about 1880 for his first professional training. After a three-year pupillage Baker joined the more established firm of Ernest George and Peto, where he rose to become the partners' leading assistant. Baker also pursued studies at the Royal Academy School of Design and took sketching trips across Britain and northern Europe, often in the company of his younger office-mate Edwin Lutyens. He won the Royal Institute of British Architects' Ashpitel prize (1889) for the highest score in the associate examination before opening his own office in Gravesend in 1891. One year later he set out to seek his fortune in South Africa. 
Baker travelled to the Cape Colony in 1892, ostensibly to assist in the nascent fruit farm operation of his brother Lionel. A chance meeting with Cecil Rhodes led to the commission for the prime minister's Cape Town residence, Groote Schuur (completed in 1896). Baker developed his so-called Cape Dutch style from careful study of early Dutch and Huguenot homesteads, favouring simple massings of whitewashed walls and random-laid stone, generous verandas, broad tiled roofs, high gables and chimneys, and wood-beam interior ceilings. Altogether, Baker designed some 300 South African houses, including The Woolsack (Cape Town, 1900) for Rudyard Kipling and the Big House (1902-5) for the duke of Westminster. Before the South African War (1899-1902) Baker worked in the British Cape Colony. Afterwards, he was invited by the British high commissioner, Alfred, Lord Milner, to help reconstruct and integrate into the British system the defeated Transvaal and Orange Free State. Shifting his post-war practice northward, the architect moved to Johannesburg in 1902, building his home, Stonehouse, which he shared for a while with several of Milner's young, Oxford-educated colonial administrators. 
During the South African War, Baker's patron Rhodes had sent the architect on a Mediterranean study trip in 1899-1900. When the empire-builder died two years later, Baker designed a stoa-like memorial, composed of a U-shaped, open Doric colonnade, on the side of Table Mountain above Groote Schuur (1905-8). When South Africa's four colonies formally united in 1910, Baker's political connections with the general and politician Jan Smuts secured him the commission for the main government office complex in Pretoria. Drawing inspiration from Greek hillside sanctuaries, Baker's Union Buildings (1910-13) sprawl across their own acropolis-like site on the slope of Meintjes Kop, with two massive office blocks linked by a semicircular colonnade embracing an outdoor amphitheatre designed for large public gatherings. A pair of tall towers symbolized the 'two races of South Africa' (British and Dutch). From elevated corner offices ministers could look out from columnar loggias to 'gather inspiration and visions of greatness' (Baker, 60). 
Altogether Baker spent some twenty years in South Africa, having been given, as he said, 'the opportunity for an architecture which establishes a nation' (Baker, 48). Besides mansions and official complexes, he built cathedrals in Pretoria and Johannesburg, Pretoria's rail station, a Johannesburg medical institute, commercial offices, colleges, and also mineworkers' villages on the Witwatersrand. Baker's partners in South Africa were Ernest Willmott Sloper (1871-1916), Francis Fleming (1875-1950), Franklin Kendall (1870-1948), and Francis Masey (1861-1912). 
In 1904 the architect returned briefly to England, where he renewed a boyhood acquaintance with a distant cousin, Florence Edmeades (1878-1965) of Nurstead Court, Kent, daughter of Major-General Henry Edmeades and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Collings. They married on 21 June 1904, when Baker was aged forty-two, and together had four children: Ann, Henry, Allaire, and Alfred. 
Despite great success in South Africa during the prime of his life, Baker recognized the limits of a career located on one imperial fringe. In 1912 he welcomed the opportunity to collaborate with his old friend Lutyens in the designing of a vast new government complex at New Delhi. The fifty-year-old Baker left South Africa, moved his family and practice back home to England, and travelled out to India as needed over the next decade and a half. 
In India, Baker successfully argued for the positioning of Lutyens's Viceroy House and his secretariat buildings at the same level on either side of the crest of Raisina Hill. This created an acropolis-like platform and symbolized to Baker the equality of the colonial bureaucracy and executive. Baker's pair of quarter-mile-long, matching secretariat buildings (1912-27) flanked the ceremonial King's Way up to the viceroy's house. The secretariat buildings themselves were composed of thick, dark-stone basements surmounted by lighter-coloured office storeys, projecting loggias as at Pretoria, plus skyline towers, turrets, and high central domes. The overall massing bore reminiscences of Greenwich Hospital (begun in 1696). 
Off the King's Way to the north-east, Baker also constructed a new legislative building (1917-29). This was a circular structure at Lutyens's insistence, three storeys high and 570 feet in diameter. Behind its sweeping colonnade lay a central domed hall symbolizing a united India, plus three semicircular halls for the council of state, the legislative assembly, and the chamber of princes, the last of which Baker emblazoned with specially invented heraldic escutcheons. 
Baker's purpose was to 'graft' the 'ordered beauty' of a Wren-inspired English classical composition -- which the architect thought symbolized 'good government' and the 'idea of law and order' -- with selected features of an otherwise unruly Indian architecture: for example, wide overhanging 'chajjas' to block the rain and sun, pierced window screen 'jaalis' for shade and ventilation, and open columnar 'chattris' for skyline interest and guard shelters (Baker, 63 and 219-21). Along with their warm wall colours, generous interior courtyards, and small recessed windows, Baker's hybrid buildings functionally adapted European classicism to a tropical climate. At the same time they deliberately symbolized the larger imperial project, in which Indians could politically elevate themselves only by grafting their own culture onto British constitutional structures. 
Back in his home near Westminster Abbey (first at 14 Barton Street and then 2 Smith Square), Baker in the 1920s and 1930s established with his partner Alexander T. Scott (1887-1962) a flourishing practice in his native country. He designed a series of church renovations, City banks, and a Thames bridge at Mortlake, as well as the imperial India House (1928-30), South Africa House (1930-35), Royal Empire Society (1938), and London House, a Commonwealth students' hostel for the University of London (1936-8). Here Baker transposed his grand-manner classical style evolved on the imperial periphery back to the metropolitan core: broad wall surfaces, pitched tile roofs, discrete ornamental flourishes, and large, loose-jointed geometrical massings. 
Baker also possessed a more informal public manner which confirmed his early loyalties to the arts and crafts movement. This was evidenced in the brick, stone, and flint Church House (1935-40; bombed and rebuilt), built as the administrative headquarters for the Church of England, and emblazoned with carefully researched saints' arms and emblems. At Rhodes House in Oxford (1929), for his late patron's scholarship students, Baker's rough stone exteriors, tile roofs, and interior oak ceilings and whitewashed walls synthesized classical grandeur with Cotswold vernacularism in an attempt to be, as Baker explained, 'as styleless and elementary as possible' (Baker, 136). 
Baker served, too, as one of the architects for the Imperial War Graves Commission from 1917 to 1928. Advocating the symbolism of the cross and the atmosphere of the English churchyard, and utilizing a sombre classical palette, he supervised the construction of over 100 cemeteries in France and himself designed the memorial cemeteries for the South African missing at Delville Wood and for the Indian missing at Neuve Chapelle. At home he produced several schools' war memorials, including what is often considered his greatest masterpiece, the war memorial cloister at Winchester College (1922-4), a simple four-square block beneath a solid pitched roof, 'a work after my own heart', wrote Baker, 'building in a manner which I loved in the architecture of my native country, flint and stone, oak roof-trees, all made living in expression with symbols, heraldry, and sculpture' (Baker, 97). 
Baker's last great public commission occurred in the heart of the City of London. Here Baker rebuilt the Bank of England (1921-42), razing the entire pre-existing 3 acre complex, except for the early nineteenth-century perimeter walls erected by John Soane. In stages Baker erected a steel-framed, stone-clad office building, seven storeys at its highest, with a ring of vaulted, top-lit, Soanean bank halls along the lower perimeter base. Always attentive to symbolism, Baker tried to embody the Bank of England's 'tradition of the private house' and 'that invisible thing, Trust' (Baker, 123-4). He created a domiciliary executive core and lavishly embellished the building with allegorical sculptures, marble mosaics of historic coins, Greek inscriptions, and wall paintings depicting contemporary bank staff at work. At the bank Baker employed a whole host of artistic collaborators, notably the sculptor Charles Wheeler and the artist D. Y. Cameron. Today Baker's mixed reputation rests largely on the perceived failures of this his most prominent English building. The Bank of England's stacked superstructure rests uncomfortably on the low base, and critics continue to resent the loss of the earlier building, conveniently ignoring Soane's wilful destruction of his own predecessors' work as well as the existential perils faced by any capitalist architecture. 
In his personal as well as professional life, Baker lived amid Britain's leading imperial protagonists. He numbered among his friends and acquaintances Rhodes, Kipling, Smuts, Milner, T. E. Lawrence -- who wrote 'Seven Pillars of Wisdom' (1926-35) while living upstairs from Baker in Barton Street -- and of course that other great imperial architect Lutyens, with whom Baker's fortune and fame has been inextricably linked. 
After their early London friendship, Lutyens had visited Baker in South Africa, and in 1908 the two briefly discussed joining formally as partners. In India after 1912, antagonisms arose over aesthetic and administrative matters, which were only much later soothed, when in the 1920s and 1930s the two became rival bank headquarters builders in the City of London. Historians have judged Baker the lesser of the two architecturally and Baker frankly credited his friend's superior handling of 'abstract and geometrical qualities' and the 'Shakespearean quality' of Lutyens's architecture, 'with its wit, fun, vitality, and rare beauty' (Baker, 67 and 208). Baker, on the other hand, concentrated on legible symbols, messages, sentiments, and significations. 'Content in art, national and human sentiment, and their expression in architecture, seem to me to be of the greatest importance' (Baker, 68). Towards this end, Baker's public buildings were usually composed with symbolic meaning and festooned with appropriate heraldry, sculpture, painting, and inscriptions. Modernist eyes have favoured Lutyens's inventive handling of classicism's broad masses and surfaces, above the more literary approach of Baker, the less naturally assured artist. 
On a personal level, Baker's friends knew him as a British patriot and pious Anglican, reserved, idealistic, and with an underlying gentleness. 'I like the look of that young man', Rhodes reportedly remarked after their first meeting, 'he doesn't talk too much' ('The Times', 6 Feb 1946, 7e). Outside architecture, literature was Baker's chief intellectual interest. He translated French verse, was a member of the Literary Society Dining Club, and besides the biography 'Cecil Rhodes by his Architect' (1934) also wrote texts explaining several of his buildings' decorative programmes, including 'The Church House: its Art and Symbolism' (1940). Baker's own autobiography, 'Architecture and Personalities' (1944), is chock full of quotations and allusions and is perhaps the most literary memoir ever penned by an architect. 
In physical appearance, the well-built architect possessed a high, broad forehead and strong, prominent features, with eyes sloping down seriously at the ends. From Baker's schooldays athletics was a passion, and he continued playing cricket in South Africa. While in India he rode regularly in the mornings and was known to run the 3 miles back and forth between his home and office. When Baker returned to live in England he was active in Kent county cricket, designed a new grandstand at Lord's, and hosted rustic cricket parties for his colleagues at the family home, Owletts. 
Throughout Baker's life Owletts and the Kent countryside remained touchstones of his personality and inspired his love of local materials and fine craftsmanship. The four-square, red-brick Owletts, with its high tiled roof and massive pair of chimneys, had been built in 1683 and came into Baker's family in 1796. Baker spent his boyhood there and lived at Owletts as much as in London when he returned from South Africa. In his memoir Baker described 'the life of the country' as 'the deeper part... of my being', and himself as 'one born and bred in an English home and amongst English fields' (Baker, 210 and 215). He enjoyed working in the Owletts garden, with its bird-bath made of salvaged Bank of England Corinthian capitals, and he donated the house to the National Trust in 1937. At the beginning of the war, physically disabled from a stroke suffered some years earlier, Baker retired to Owletts, where he died after a short illness on 4 February 1946. His wife survived him. An old cherry tree from the orchard provided wood for a casket, handmade by Baker's three sons to hold their father's ashes, which was interred in Westminster Abbey on 12 February 1946. 
The end of Baker's life marked also nearly the end of Britain's overseas empire and the grand-manner classical style with which his career was so strongly connected. After going out to South Africa to seek his fortune, Baker became that emerging nation's most significant architect, before returning in middle age to the heart of empire to fashion, in Lutyens's shadow, great public buildings for New Delhi and the metropolis itself. 
For his efforts and talents Baker was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (1900) and a member of the Royal Academy (1932). He was knighted in 1926 and created KCIE in 1930. He was awarded the royal gold medal for architecture (1927) and honorary doctorates at the universities of Witwatersrand (LLD, 1934) and Oxford (DCL, 1937). Baker himself in 1912 endowed a travelling scholarship for young South African architects to the British School at Rome, and out of a bequest of $60,221 left $5000 to the Royal Academy of Art for advanced students from Great Britain, Northern Ireland, and the Commonwealth. An architectural firm bearing Baker's name continued to operate until the early 1970s. 


@@@@@


doc= 30548


Baker, Herbert Brereton (1862-1935), chemist, was born at Livesey, near Blackburn, on 25 June 1862, the second son of John Baker, curate in charge of Livesey, afterwards vicar of St John's Church, Blackburn, and his wife, Caroline Slater. Ill health kept him indoors; he could read before he was four years old and at ten he had read most of his father's library. He was educated first at Blackburn grammar school and then at Manchester grammar school, where, changing from the classical to the science side, he came under the influence of Francis Jones, often referred to by him as 'the best of all teachers'. A Brackenbury scholarship at Balliol College and a school Brackenbury award enabled Baker to go to Oxford where, with Harold Baily Dixon as his tutor, he in 1883 obtained a first class in natural science. From 1883 to 1885 he was demonstrator in chemistry at Balliol and private assistant to Dixon, who communicated to Baker his own enthusiasm for investigation and led him into that field of research to which later he contributed so notably -- the influence of moisture on chemical change. 
In 1886 Baker went as chemistry master and head of the science side to Dulwich College. Here he built up a most successful science side; the excellence of his teaching and his own interest in research were an inspiration to many of his pupils. During his time at Dulwich, Baker attained an eminence rare for a schoolmaster; some of his most remarkable results were obtained while he was there, and he was elected FRS in 1902. In the same year he was appointed headmaster of Alleyn's School, Dulwich, but in 1904 he returned to Oxford as Lee's reader in chemistry at Christ Church, of which he was elected a student and tutor. Here he was responsible for the teaching of inorganic chemistry in the university and his experimentally illustrated lectures were highly popular. On 21 March 1905 he married Muriel ('b'. 1875/6), only child of Harry James Powell, partner in the Whitefriars glassworks. She too was a trained chemist and collaborated with her husband in a number of his researches. They had one son, who predeceased his father, and one daughter. 
In 1912 Baker accepted the chief professorship of chemistry at the Imperial College of Science and Technology, South Kensington, in succession to Sir T. E. Thorpe; he held this post until his retirement in 1932. In April 1915 he was called upon by the rector of the Imperial College, Sir Alfred Keogh, then director of medical services at the War Office, to advise on the steps to be taken against German gas attacks. For his valuable services in this and other scientific duties undertaken for the war departments he was appointed CBE in 1917. 
Baker's claim to fame rests on his achievements as an experimentalist rather than as a theoretical chemist. A competent glass-worker, his exceptional skill in the preparation and manipulation of intensively dried substances enabled him to achieve results which others, with less mastery of the technique, were sometimes at first unable to repeat. Perhaps his most outstanding achievements in this field were the demonstration that dried ammonium chloride does not dissociate when volatilized by heat; that hydrogen and oxygen prepared by the electrolysis of pure barium hydroxide do not combine on heating when carefully dried; and that while very dry nitrogen trioxide does not break up on vaporization, the slightest trace of moisture causes the gas to dissociate completely into nitric oxide and nitrogen peroxide. He demonstrated the slowing down or complete stoppage of chemical action in numerous other instances and his remarkable success in demonstrating this effect led chemists to refer to the relative dryness of things as dry, very dry, or 'Baker dry'. 
In 1923 Baker was awarded the Davy medal of the Royal Society, and in 1912 the Longstaff medal of the Chemical Society, of which he was elected president in 1926. In 1926 the University of Aberdeen conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD. Active in the laboratory until his final days, Baker died at his home, Latchmoor House, Gerrards Cross, on 27 April 1935. His wife survived him. 
B. M. Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30549


Baker, Shirley Waldemar (1836-1903), missionary and prime minister of Tonga, was born in Camden Town, London. He was the son of George Baker and his wife, Jane Woolmer, daughter of a Methodist minister, who married 'below her station'. He grew up in drab circumstances and in 1852 stowed away to Australia, where he acquired a knowledge of pharmacy and some experience as a schoolteacher, and studied for the Wesleyan ministry. He married Elizabeth Powell in 1859; they had one son and four daughters. In 1860 Baker was sent as a missionary to the island of Tonga in the south Pacific where, despite his lack of formal training, he soon acquired a reputation as a skilled medical practitioner. Combined with his personal ambition and evident sympathy for indigenous interests, this soon earned him considerable influence, especially with the king, Siaosi Taufa'ahau Tupou I (known to the British as King George), whose wife he regularly attended. 
For some time before the cession of Fiji to Britain in 1874 the Tongans, wary of colonial encroachments, had been concerned for the preservation of their own independence. To this end Baker, at the request of King George, negotiated treaties with Germany and Britain recognizing Tonga as an autonomous kingdom, and drew up a new constitution and legal code which were promulgated in 1875. The policy of remaining Tongan by appearing Western was successful, but the changes wrought by Baker and the personal power he had acquired antagonized his rivals for influence in Tonga. He was suspected of disloyalty to both Wesleyan and British interests. In 1879, therefore, the Wesleyan conference in Sydney, at the request of Sir Arthur Gordon (afterwards Lord Stanmore), British high commissioner for the Western Pacific, appointed a commission to inquire into charges made against Baker by the British vice-consul in connection with his aggressively competitive method of collecting money from the Tongans, even though it was for church purposes. Baker was recalled to Australia, but he returned independently to Tonga in 1880, whereupon the king appointed him prime minister. In 1881 he resigned from the Wesleyan ministry. 
Under Baker's guidance the Tongan constitution was revised, giving the little kingdom of 20,000 people a cabinet, a privy council, and a parliament. Also its land laws were simplified, a state education system was introduced, and Tongan law was applied to European settlers. In 1885 the Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga was set up independently of the conference in Sydney. These changes aroused much opposition among traders, traditional Wesleyans, and various Tongan title-holders whose position as king's advisers Baker had usurped. In January 1887 their discontent, encouraged by a visiting British official, Basil Thomson, culminated in an attempt on Baker's life, in which his son and daughter were injured. Six Tongans were executed and others given lesser sentences for this assault. None the less, opposition remained strong and further disorder likely. Besides, Sir John Thurston, high commissioner for the Western Pacific, was resentful that Baker did not do more to promote British interests yet had accepted an award from the German government, so in 1890 he exiled him to New Zealand. 
Although Baker had secured Tonga's political and ecclesiastical independence, when he returned to Tonga in 1897 his influence was at an end, King George having died in 1893. Disappointed in his hope of preferment among Free Wesleyan adherents, he introduced the Church of England to Tonga. He died at Ha'apai on 30 November 1903. Baker had many faults of character but he deserved to be more sympathetically memorialized than he came to be in the well-known writings of his opponent Basil Thomson, who ridiculed him as an uncouth upstart. He was self-seeking but he was also the king's loyal and capable servant. 'Tonga for the Tongans' was not just his slogan; it became his enduring achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 30550


Baldwin, Stanley, first Earl Baldwin of Bewdley (1867-1947), prime minister, was born at Lower Park House, Bewdley, Worcestershire, on 3 August 1867, the only child of Alfred Baldwin (1841-1908) and his wife, Louisa Macdonald (1845-1925) ['see 'Baldwin, Louisa, 'under' Macdonald sisters]. 
The Baldwin family had been yeomen and tenant farmers in Corvedale, Shropshire, since at least the early sixteenth century. They made no mark beyond local affairs, apart from one ancestor implicated in a plot to free Mary, queen of Scots, in 1585 and imprisoned in the Tower until he escaped four years later. In the second half of the seventeenth century a branch of the family developed iron forges, and in 1788 the descendant of one of these moved from Shrewsbury down the River Severn to Stourport in Worcestershire, a more promising location on the emerging canal system. This was Thomas Baldwin (1751-1823), Stanley's great-grandfather, and the successful iron foundry which he established there was expanded by his sons George Pearce Baldwin (1789-1840) and Enoch Baldwin (1793-1857). The former had a large family; his second wife was Sarah, daughter of the Revd Jacob Stanley, a Methodist minister in Northumberland, and president of the Methodist conference in 1845, and their youngest son, born after his death, was Alfred Baldwin. 
After George Pearce's death his brother Enoch formed E. P. and W. Baldwin in partnership with his two eldest nephews, Pearce (1813-1851) and William (1817-1863). The business came to concentrate on the wrought iron and tin plate works at nearby Wilden, which they acquired in 1854. Following the founders' deaths the company passed to the control of Alfred Baldwin and his two surviving older brothers, George (1826-1881) and Stanley (1828-1907). However, the latter's bad management and drinking, combined with a trade depression, brought the firm close to bankruptcy in the late 1860s. Matters improved only after 1870, when Alfred Baldwin raised $20,000 and bought out his brothers to take sole control of the business. He moved into Wilden House, opposite the works, with his wife and young son, who had been born at the family's previous residence. The child was baptized Stanley, probably after his grandmother's maiden name; within the family this was always shortened to Stan. 
Baldwin's mother's family was originally from Skye but settled in Ulster at Enniskillen after the Jacobite rising of 1745, and later converted to Methodism. The Revd James Macdonald (1761-1833) was ordained by John Wesley, and moved to England to preach. His son the Revd George Browne Macdonald (1805-1868) was Methodist minister in Wolverhampton, where he became friendly with Alfred Baldwin's elder brothers. His five daughters were a remarkable group of engaging and artistically gifted women who moved in the high-minded circles of William Morris and Rossetti; one was the mother of Rudyard Kipling, and two others married the artists Edward Burne-Jones and Edward Poynter. The latter occasion was a double wedding with Louisa's marriage to Alfred Baldwin, in Wolverhampton on 9 August 1866. Their relationship was close and loving: so much so that the parents feared that their son might feel excluded. Stanley was their only child. Not long after his birth Louisa developed a recurrent illness which made walking difficult and required long periods of rest in darkened rooms, and which lasted until a sudden recovery when Stanley was aged sixteen. She published poetry, children's books, and four novels, and encouraged Stanley's love of English language and literature. 
Stanley's childhood was not lonely as there were nearby relatives and frequent visits to and from his cousins. However, he had to entertain himself for much of the time at Wilden, and so developed his two lifelong recreations of country walks and reading. He spent much time in his father's library and became absorbed in history and literature, his favourite authors being Scott and Dickens. The ironworks at Wilden were in a rural setting, and as the young Stanley roamed the surrounding district he acquired an abiding love of the English countryside. These two activities came together in his vision of England, its history and the virtues of its people: fairness, moderation, civility, and common sense. 
At ten Baldwin went in May 1878 to Hawtrey's Preparatory School at Slough, where he was active in sports and won eighteen prizes, coming top of the school. However, he tended not to do himself justice in examinations, and when thirteen he failed to win a scholarship to Harrow. He went there instead as an ordinary pupil in September 1881, and during his first four years won form prizes for history and mathematics, and competed in football, cricket, and squash. In June 1883 his father was summoned by a telegram from the headmaster, Dr Montagu Butler, owing to an item of juvenile pornography which Stanley had written and -- compounding the offence -- sent to his cousin Ambrose Poynter at Eton. Alfred Baldwin told his wife that the affair was 'much exaggerated and far more folly than anything else' (A. W. Baldwin, 44), but the incident soured Stanley's relationship with the headmaster. He felt that it was held against him when he was not made a prefect, and in the sixth form his work deteriorated as he assumed an attitude of detachment and laziness. In the autumn of 1885 he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read for the historical tripos and graduated with a third class in 1888. Baldwin later felt that he had not made the most of his opportunities at Cambridge. However, he does not seem to have disappointed his parents, and his father's letter a few weeks later on his twenty-first birthday was one of loving encouragement and confidence. One sentence in it, 'You ought to be a first-class man, and it is entirely in your own hands' (ibid., 53), may have been mistakenly recalled in Baldwin's comment of 1935 that his father had written, 'I hope you won't have a 'Third' in life' (Jones, 'Diary with Letters', 155). 
At Cambridge, Stanley was influenced by the works of J. R. Seeley and Sir Henry Maine -- although in later life he humorously suggested otherwise -- and was in close contact with the economic historian and college chaplain William Cunningham. He spent one Easter holiday at the Trinity College mission in the London slums and considered entering the Anglican ministry, but after graduating he returned home and joined his father's business in July 1888. Alfred Baldwin's ability and effort had not only saved the firm but led to substantial growth despite the economic difficulties of the period, and he played an increasingly prominent role in the London trade from the 1880s. Responsive to new techniques, he expanded his activities to south Wales, founding Alfred Baldwin & Co. as sheet metal manufacturers in Monmouthshire in 1886. The various companies were amalgamated into Baldwins Ltd in 1902, together with other steelworks and collieries in south Wales. This created an efficient and integrated business with assets of $1 million, employing about 4000 workers in several regions, and quoted on the London stock exchange. Stanley spent a quarter of a century in these concerns, and made his own contribution to their progress. After the first few months he adapted to the demands of business life; it engaged his interest, and he worked both hard and effectively. He took a metallurgy course, and was aware of technical developments. He made business tours of the United States and Canada in 1890, and of Germany and Austria-Hungary in 1897-8. After 1892 his father lived mainly in London and Stanley managed the several works; he had become a partner in 1890 and in 1902 became a managing director of Baldwins Ltd. He had sole responsibility for its midland division, which accounted for about a quarter of the company. The patriarchal relationship which his father had established with the Wilden workforce shaped his views and style of management. Stanley knew his workers and was at ease with them; his record of good labour relations was a source of pride and a model on which he later drew. 
By 1906 Stanley had established himself as an experienced and capable businessman. On his father's death in 1908 he was invited to succeed him on the boards of the Great Western Railway and Metropolitan Bank, and he became vice-chairman of Baldwins Ltd. He remained engaged in business until appointed to ministerial office in 1917, and continued into the mid-1920s to talk of returning to commerce. The years in business had several important effects. They gave him self-confidence, the patience to wait for the timely moment, breadth of outlook, and experience of the wider world; he was never restricted to a narrow party view. Baldwin did not regard himself as a professional politician, but rather as a practical businessman 'called to special work' at a time when his experience of industry and labour was providentially valuable (S. Baldwin, 'On England', 1926, 19). Nor did he see himself as rich, although he inherited nearly $200,000 from his father and became wealthier before and during the First World War. His repeated assertions that he was an 'ordinary' or 'plain' man were sincere, and derived from his unostentatious upbringing across the road from the Wilden forges. After 1920 the economic problems of the iron and steel industries dramatically reduced his income; in common with similar businesses the value of Baldwins Ltd's shares collapsed and for many years they paid no dividend. Baldwin had to run down his capital and sell his London house, becoming more reliant on his ministerial salary and official residences. 
This was in the future, and it was as a young businessman rising in the family firm that Baldwin married and began a family in the 1890s. While he was staying with his Burne-Jones cousins at Rottingdean, near Brighton, his eye was caught by Lucy Ridsdale ['see below']. Previously rather shy with young women, Baldwin was attracted by her 'absolute innocence and unworldliness' (Baldwin to his mother, April 1892, Hyde, 27). They were married on 12 September 1892 in Rottingdean parish church, and had seven children. Their first was a still-born son in January 1894; the six surviving children were Diana (1895-1982), Leonora, known as Lorna (1896-1989), (Pamela) Margaret, known as Margot (1897-1976), Oliver (1899-1958), Esther, known as Betty (1902-1981), and (Arthur) Windham (1904-1976). Baldwin's chosen biographer, G. M. Young, later gave deep offence to the family by asserting that 'there was not much passion in their mating' (G. M. Young, 23). He misread their comfortable partnership, for as well as the many children there was enduring love, mutual confidence, and almost uncritical support, despite some differences in their temperaments and interests. Their elder son, Oliver, was affected by his experiences when serving in Armenia after the end of the First World War and became estranged from his parents in the 1920s, although there was some reconciliation after his election as a Labour MP in 1929. The family lived at Dunley Hall, 2 miles from Stourport, from 1892 to 1902, when Baldwin rented Astley Hall, which was more suitable for his growing family and status, but still not far from the Wilden works. He bought Astley in 1912 and it remained his home thereafter, although between 1923 and 1937 he was there only briefly at Christmas and in the summer. His London address was 27 Queen's Gate, South Kensington, from 1908 to 1912, when he acquired the lease of 93 Eaton Square. This was sold in 1925, and when out of office in 1929-31 it was only through the generosity of the duke of Westminster that Baldwin found an affordable London residence, at 10 Upper Brook Street, and so was able to remain in politics. 
Baldwin's involvement in public life began in support of his father, who sat as Conservative MP for Bewdley (West Worcestershire) from 1892 to 1908. Although it was a safe seat, regular speaking and canvassing were expected, and Stanley became known throughout the division; he also took part in local government and societies, and became a magistrate in 1897. Like his father and many other Conservative industrialists, he supported Joseph Chamberlain's 'tariff reform' policy after 1903. He began to seek a constituency in the area, and in 1906 stood unsuccessfully at Kidderminster. He was more disheartened not to be selected as candidate for the Worcester City by-election in 1907, and considered that his chance had passed. However, the sudden death of his father from a heart attack on 13 February 1908 created a vacancy at Bewdley. He was unanimously invited to stand as Conservative candidate for his late father's seat, and after an unopposed return was introduced into the House of Commons on 3 March 1908. His maiden speech was delivered on 22 June 1908 in opposition to a Liberal measure for an eight-hour day in the coal industry. Quietly delivered to a largely empty House, and making little impact at the time, it demonstrates that key features of Baldwin's approach were present from the start. It was already well judged in tone, with self-deprecatory touches of humour which enhanced rather than obscured his message. It exposed his opponents' inconsistencies in a gently reproving manner, but was strikingly non-partisan and ascribed honesty of purpose to those on both sides of the issue. Most of all, it was related directly to his own expertise and model of good industrial relations. 
After this Baldwin kept a low profile, but the handful of similar short speeches which he made before 1914 were well received for their moderation and sincerity. He was one of twelve Conservative MPs who voted for the second reading of the 'Old Age Pensions Act' in 1908, and he approved the principle of the 'National Insurance Act'. He played a minor part in the Unionist Social Reform Committee, an unofficial body devising a more active social agenda. He said little during the bitter struggle over Irish home rule, and favoured a moderate compromise. When war broke out he found little that he could do, although from June 1915 he worked many hours on a judicial committee reviewing the cases of internees. He was a member of the Unionist Business Committee, a back-bench 'ginger group', and hosted meetings of Conservative MPs concerned over Lloyd George's move to the War Office in July 1916. By the end of 1916 he had lost confidence in Asquith and became convinced that a change was needed, a conclusion which he found shared by his cousin Rudyard Kipling. Frustrated that he was contributing little to the war effort at Westminster, he considered giving up his seat to concentrate on local work but was persuaded by Lucy to remain. By December 1916 he was an inconspicuous but respected back-bencher who would have been on nobody's list of possible future prime ministers, least of all his own. 
The First World War had a crucial impact on Baldwin's outlook and political career. Too old to fight himself, his feelings of duty and service were powerfully engaged. He felt humble in comparison to those risking their lives, and convinced that political leadership after the war must live up to the sacrifice of the dead. The wartime atmosphere of national unity and class co-operation reinforced his values and beliefs, and his focus moved from business to government and politics. At the same time the absence of many Conservative MPs on war service opened the way to his advance. 
In December 1916 the leader of the Conservative Party, Andrew Bonar Law, who had joined Lloyd George's coalition as chancellor of the exchequer, needed a parliamentary private secretary. The post was at the most junior level, but discretion and reliability were vital. Baldwin's name was suggested by the chief whip, Lord Edmund Talbot, and endorsed by Law's youthful private secretary, J. C. C. Davidson, and he was offered the unpaid position. Its lowly status appealed to Baldwin, and his appointment was announced on 22 December 1916. Baldwin would also answer questions in the Commons on behalf of the new financial secretary to the treasury, (Samuel) Hardman Lever, who was not an MP and would be working in the United States. On 29 January 1917 Baldwin was appointed a junior lord of the Treasury; as this was normally a whip's position, it was stated that he was assisting the chancellor of the exchequer. His success in this role led to a close working relationship and friendship with Law, and on 18 June 1917 the position was regularized when he became financial secretary jointly with Lever; when the latter retired in May 1919, the post reverted to Baldwin alone. 
This was the most prominent of all of the junior ministerships; in prestige it was equalled by the under-secretary at the Foreign Office, but the responsibilities of the Treasury were wider and involved more work in the House. In addition, Law's position as second figure in the government and a member of the five-man war cabinet meant that Baldwin's responsibilities were much greater than normal. There was a heavy workload, particularly in answering questions and speaking in the Commons, where he sometimes also deputized for Law as leader of the House. Baldwin continued to work well with Austen Chamberlain when the latter became chancellor after the general election of 1918, although the personal relationship was not as close. As financial secretary, Baldwin acquired a wide range of administrative experience and made many contacts among the junior ministers and back-benchers. His competent handling of the post enhanced his reputation, without marking him out as a rising star. In May 1920 Law offered him the governor-generalships of South Africa or Australia, which were customarily drawn from solid and dependable middle-rank figures, but was not surprised when he declined. Baldwin's courteous manner in the House and the high regard in which he was widely held also led to his being mentioned as a possible speaker at this time, but he remained where he was and in June 1920 was made a privy councillor. 
In March 1921 Law retired owing to illness, and Austen Chamberlain became Conservative leader. In the ensuing reshuffle Baldwin was promoted to Lloyd George's cabinet as president of the Board of Trade on 1 April. He was recommended for the post by Law, and his appointment was intended to reassure opinion on the Conservative benches, where doubts about the coalition were beginning to emerge. It was also important to retain an orthodox Conservative in this key economic post, especially as it had charge of the most controversial measure of the session. The 'Safeguarding of Industries Bill' gave tariff protection to specific industries, but there were many pitfalls and sensitivities along the way. Baldwin handled them effectively, although he was exhausted by the time of its third reading on 12 August 1921. In the following session he was responsible for another significant measure with protectionist aspects, the 'Merchandise Marks Act', which required a product to show its country of origin. His steady reputation with back-bench Conservative MPs led Austen Chamberlain to ask him to take a leading part in securing the passage of the Anglo-Irish treaty in December 1921. 
Throughout this period Baldwin was a mainly silent observer in Lloyd George's cabinet, becoming increasingly alienated by the combination of expediency and manoeuvre with which matters were tackled. Invited by the prime minister to comment on a financial issue at one meeting, he responded that he felt like 'the director of a fraudulent company engaged in cooking the balance sheet' (G. M. Young, 29). He was in sympathy with Conservative Party opposition to the possibility of an early and rushed renewal of the coalition's mandate in the general election scare of January 1922, and commented privately on the atmosphere of intrigue that pervaded the government. His unhappiness was crystallized by the Chanak crisis in September 1922, which led to a breach with Lloyd George and the senior Conservative ministers who supported him. Holidaying at Aix-les-Bains in the French Alps, Baldwin became aware from the newspapers that the government was risking a war in Turkey. On returning on 1 October, he found that the crisis was being used to precipitate an election and continue the coalition in its present form. He was almost alone in the cabinet in objecting to this, and decided that he would resign. With all the party's senior figures ranged against him, he expected to be on the losing side and that it would be the end of his political career. Instead, and unexpectedly, the political convulsion of October 1922 swept away the existing Conservative leadership and catapulted Baldwin to the political heights. 
Although supported by only one even less prominent cabinet minister (Sir Arthur Griffith-Boscawen), Baldwin's hostility to the coalition was shared by key figures among Conservative Party managers, many of the junior ministers, and a large majority of back-benchers, and constituency opinion. He also played a part in persuading Law to come out of retirement and provide the vital element of a credible alternative leader. This was the crucial factor in the fall of the coalition, but Baldwin also spoke to telling effect in the decisive meeting of Conservative MPs at the Carlton Club on 19 October. He articulated the fear that Lloyd George would divide and destroy the Conservative Party as he had the Liberals, and underlined the danger of his methods: 'A dynamic force is a very terrible thing; it may crush you, but it is not necessarily right' (Carlton Club speech, Middlemas and Barnes, 123). Deep hostility to Lloyd George and rumours that his allies among the Conservative leadership were plotting to restore the coalition particularly influenced Baldwin and his inner circle during the next ten years. There were several instances of this antagonism, including Baldwin's invented 'Afghan' proverb, alluding to Lloyd George's nickname: 'He who lives in the bosom of the goat spends his remaining years plucking out the fleas.' However, the defaced picture of Lloyd George which Thomas Jones found at Astley Hall has been given exaggerated significance; it was in a scrapbook prepared some years earlier by Baldwin's mother for his children, and was most likely the result of some juvenile scribbling by one of them from before 1914. 
After the Carlton Club vote overwhelmingly rejected the coalition, Law became Conservative Party leader and prime minister. He offered the Treasury to Baldwin, the most senior and experienced anti-coalitionist in the Commons. At first Baldwin demurred and suggested Reginald McKenna, the former Liberal chancellor, but when the latter declined Baldwin accepted the post on 24 October 1922. In January 1923 Baldwin visited the United States and negotiated terms for the repayment of Britain's war debt which were stiff but in his view the best available. This opinion became public when he spoke unguardedly to reporters on his return on 29 January, precipitating a cabinet crisis. Law was vehemently opposed to the terms and almost resigned, but was persuaded by the cabinet to accept them; after this his relations with Baldwin were strained. On 16 February 1923 Baldwin's speech on the address displayed a power of language, sincerity, and idealism which made a deep impression on both the Commons and the country, closing with the affirmation that 'salvation for this country and the whole world' was to be found in four simple words: 'Faith, Hope, Love, and Work.' He presented only one budget as chancellor, and on 16 April 1923 in a comparatively short and lively speech used the unexpected revenue surplus of $100 million mainly to redeem debt, and also reduced income tax by 6died and beer duty by a penny. 
In May 1923 Law's illness forced his retirement, and a new prime minister had to be found from within the present cabinet. The choice lay between Baldwin, the novice chancellor, and Lord Curzon, who was an experienced foreign secretary but a difficult colleague. Law declined to advise the king, who chose Baldwin for several reasons: he had the support of key figures in the cabinet, and was thought more likely to be able to reunite the Conservative Party and thereby strengthen the government. Above all, a prime minister in the House of Lords, where the Labour Party -- now the official opposition -- had no official representation, would have been a constitutional problem and have emphasized divisive issues of class privilege. Baldwin seemed more suited to the new democratic age, and so these twists of fortune brought him unexpectedly to the premiership on 22 May 1923. He was elected leader of the Conservative Party on 28 May, and also continued as chancellor until 27 August 1923, when -- McKenna having again declined -- he appointed Neville Chamberlain. The new prime minister felt the office had come too soon and that he lacked experience; naivety certainly appeared to many to be the hallmark of his brief first government. He mishandled an approach to Austen Chamberlain, and the leading Conservative former coalitionists remained aloof and critical. On 19 September Baldwin met Poincare in Paris and assumed too readily that he had resolved the Ruhr crisis, although the meeting began the process which led to the Dawes plan of 1924. 
Defects of judgement seemed even more evident during the following weeks, as Baldwin propelled his party into an unnecessary general election. In fact, although the parliament still had four and a half years to run, the problems facing the government were mounting. Unemployment was rising and the Labour Party advancing, but the government seemed to be drifting. Agriculture was in crisis and, still disunited, Conservative morale was slipping. However, Baldwin's attempt to break this downward spiral led to disarray and defeat, and nearly ended his career. Like most Conservatives he believed that protectionist tariffs would revive industry and employment; this was his primary motive, rather than tactical concerns of reuniting his party or pre-empting Lloyd George. After mulling over the problem while holidaying at Aix and then hosting the Imperial Economic Conference on his return in October, he resolved to declare his belief in protection. However, Law had pledged in 1922 that there would be no move to tariffs in the present parliament. For this reason, as soon as Baldwin declared his hand at the Conservative conference at Plymouth on 25 October 1923, a pre-election atmosphere was created. Baldwin succeeded in keeping his cabinet together and in avoiding the resignation of its anti-tariff minority, even though he decided that the election could not be delayed and secured a dissolution from the king on 12 November. 
The election campaign raised Baldwin's standing, and he was recognized as his party's best electoral asset, but the Conservatives were unprepared, and their proposals were vague and contradictory. Although Central Office projected victory, the outcome in December 1923 was a net loss of eighty-eight seats; the Conservatives had lost their majority, although they remained the largest single party in the House of Commons. Baldwin's first reaction was that he should resign as prime minister immediately, but after reflecting at Chequers over the weekend of 8-9 December he decided to stay in office and meet parliament. Resignation would open the way to revived coalitionism and efforts to deny Labour the chance of office, while there were tactical advantages in making the Liberals side openly with Labour. After the Christmas recess the government was defeated on 21 January 1924; Baldwin resigned the next day and the first Labour government was formed. Despite the election defeat Baldwin survived as Conservative leader because the alternative was a humiliating return to coalitionism, which most of the party disliked even more. After a period of fruitless intrigue during the recess, the Conservative former coalitionists accepted that no alternative leader would win sufficient support. The outcome was the reunion of the party under Baldwin's continued leadership, which was confirmed by a party meeting on 11 February 1924. The recovery of unity was welcome, but it was not the motive for Baldwin's misguided tariff venture; there had been no hidden plan, and certainly no riding for a fall. 
By 1924 Baldwin had established his position as a national figure with a distinctive message shaped by his character and beliefs. Among Conservative leaders only Disraeli and Margaret Thatcher have conveyed their own personal vision with similar impact and influence. Baldwin often attributed his imagination and gift with words to his mother's Celtic background, although his personality and mannerisms had many similarities with his father's temperament. According to one of his ministers, Baldwin was 'emotional, impulsive, secretive, and intensely personal in [his] likes, dislikes, and moral judgements' (Amery, 'My Political Life', 505). Baldwin's outwardly stolid manner concealed a nervous disposition. One of his daughters recalled that he 'abhorred noise and shouting' and 'had a horror of being asked questions'. He was uncomfortable at larger social events 'and always tried to keep near the wall in case the floor gave way!' (Margaret Huntington-Whiteley, in Hyde, 43). He had a number of distracting nervous mannerisms and facial twitches, was prone to fidgeting, and had a habit when sitting in the Commons of sniffing or licking at the edges of his order papers. In times of stress he would compulsively pace up and down the room, pouring out a flow of conversation as he rehearsed events or debated a decision. He often felt sick with tension before delivering a speech and drained afterwards, although once under way was steadier and at times uplifted. 
Baldwin was of medium height, and his fairly slim figure of 1923 became considerably more rounded during the 1930s. He had blue eyes and his bushy eyebrows and hair, which was parted in the centre and smoothed back, were originally a sandy colour. He was a regular smoker, and the pipe which he used from the First World War onwards became a public hallmark; it gave him something to occupy his hands, and he would spend much time on the rituals of cleaning and lighting it. Baldwin had a robust sense of humour and could both charm and fascinate, but there were also times when he seemed self-absorbed and unappreciative. He was sometimes awkward in personal relations with colleagues, but managed his cabinets in a relaxed style. He sought consensus, and was proud of the fact that only one, relatively minor, figure had resigned from his 1924-9 cabinet because of disagreement on policy. Baldwin was not an interventionist by nature: 'he never moves of his own motion' was the jaundiced view of Austen Chamberlain (Austen Chamberlain to Ida Chamberlain, 2 July 1931, Birmingham University Library, Austen Chamberlain MSS, AC/5/1/545). He had learned the merits of delegation during his business career, and this was his customary style of management. In his view the prime minister should give advice and support, rather than meddle or dictate. He preferred to trust his chosen colleagues to tackle the problems in their domains, with inter-departmental frictions resolved in informal meetings and difficult decisions debated in cabinet under his adjudicatory chairmanship. However, the willingness to wait for consensus could give the impression that Baldwin had no clear agenda and tended to drift, following opinion rather than leading it. He could take some time before reaching a decision, a process which he called 'rumination'. This could appear to be procrastination, but once he had formed a conclusion he usually adhered to it and acted with firmness, and he could be dogged and stubborn once convinced that his course was right. He did not always reveal his inner thoughts or explain his actions fully to his colleagues, and the result could be incomprehension and the assumption that he was acting impulsively. Baldwin's concerns and timing were not primarily shaped by considerations of parliamentary tactics or partisan opportunities, and this further tended to confuse his colleagues and disappoint his supporters. 
Baldwin was sometimes criticized for focusing too much on generalities, and detail had no fascination for him. While there was a suggestion of intellectual laziness, he was not -- despite some self-deprecatory remarks -- an indolent man. His periods of nervous and physical exhaustion were the product of responsibility combined with consistent hard work. When parliament was sitting he regularly worked up to fourteen hours on weekdays, and felt himself to be 'at the beck and call of everyone' (letter to his mother, 1923, in Hyde, 163). He spent much of this time in the Palace of Westminster, sitting on the front bench or working in his room near the chamber. He was not very fond of 10 Downing Street, but loved the country estate of Chequers and stayed there every available weekend during his periods of office. Here he could quietly read and walk, relaxing in the company of the family and a few friends. Baldwin had a lifelong enjoyment of reading, and often turned a conversation towards books. He loved music and played the piano, visited the theatre, and regularly attended cricket matches; in May 1938 he was elected president of the MCC. His main form of exercise and physical relaxation was walking in the countryside, rambling for miles. This was also his restorative during his summer holiday, which usually lasted for at least a month; from 1921 this was taken at Aix-les-Bains. The countryside was a haven, a source of peace and tranquillity: 'life in the country makes you see things whole', Baldwin remarked in 1935 (Butler, 'Art of the Possible', 30). 
Baldwin greatly preferred oral to written communication: 'my tongue, not my pen, is my instrument' (Jones, 'Diary with Letters', 540). His private correspondence was mainly personal, and he was the master of the short friendly note of congratulations or condolence. To spread the burden of crafting the many speeches which he gave, Baldwin innovated in using his aides and advisers as speech-writers. He drew on several people, but most of all on Thomas Jones, who served Baldwin as deputy secretary of the cabinet in his first two ministries and continued to assist after retiring from the civil service in 1930. Even so, their drafts reflected Baldwin's guidance and views, and many of the most important passages or entire speeches were entirely his own. Baldwin relied for support and an audience on an inner circle in which the most important figures were the Davidsons, Jones, and Geoffrey Dawson, the editor of 'The Times'. The close bond with J. C. C. Davidson was forged when Baldwin first assisted Law at the Treasury, and continued when Davidson transferred to work for Baldwin during Law's first retirement. Baldwin appointed him chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in 1923-4 and in the 1930s (a non-departmental post in which he effectively acted as chief of staff) and -- with less success -- as Conservative Party chairman in 1926-30. Equally important was Baldwin's avuncular relationship with Davidson's wife, Joan (known as Mimi), a friend of one of Baldwin's daughters. She was both bracing and supportive to him, and his favourite companion on long country walks. 
Baldwin's sincere religious faith was based on the certainty of divine judgment and providence, and belief in a purpose in life. The concepts of service and duty were central to his personality and conduct: Thomas Jones considered that 'he felt things deeply, and his conscience was more active than his intellect' (Jones, 'Diary with Letters', xxx). Baldwin's religion was practical, concerned with good works and Christian conduct, and derived from the 'King James Bible' and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. His outlook was a simple and implicitly democratic protestantism, believing 'from my heart the words of Browning, 'All service ranks the same with God'' (S. Baldwin, 'On England', 1926, 19). He was comfortable with a low-church and evangelical frame of mind, and proud of the nonconformist elements in his ancestry. As prime minister, he was invited to address the most important nonconformist bodies, and spoke in a moral language which resonated with them. Baldwin and his wife began each day by kneeling together in prayer, a routine which did not change when he was prime minister. They believed that they were working 'for the country and for God's sake' (Jones, 'Diary with Letters', xxxiv). 
Baldwin considered that 'the political career properly viewed is really a kind of ministry' (S. Baldwin, 'On England', 1926, 197), and spoke with sincere conviction of offering the 'service of our lives' (S. Baldwin, 'Service of our Lives', 1937, 144). He wrote privately after the defeat of 1923 that his motive for continuing in politics was 'the longing to help the bewildered multitude of common folk' which 'only comes from love and pity' (Baldwin to Joan Davidson, 24 Dec 1923, 'Memoirs of a Conservative', 193). He put much emphasis on the responsibility of those in more fortunate positions to raise not only the standard of living but also the 'standard of ideals' (speech to the Primrose League, 'The Times', 3 May 1924). Duties rather than rights were the path to progress; betterment could not be imposed by law but grew from the moral sense of society. This in turn was shaped by the conduct of leading men, a belief which sustained Baldwin's antipathy towards Lloyd George and the press barons. He saw his mission as cleaning up public life after it had been tainted during the coalition, which had come to represent every negative force. When under pressure Baldwin would raise these moral boundaries, and tended to portray himself as a lone crusader -- 'every crook in the country is out for my scalp', he wrote at the height of the party crisis in 1930 (Baldwin to Irwin, 16 Oct 1930, BL OIOC, Halifax MSS, Eur. C.152/19/1/147). 
The sacrifice of the First World War deepened Baldwin's sense of duty and obligation, and he tried to set an example by anonymously giving up much of his fortune to reduce the national debt. His conscience was troubled by the large profits which Baldwins Ltd had made, and he sought to return these. Calculating his wealth at $580,000, he realized one-fifth of this and presented $120,000 of war loan stock to the Treasury for cancellation. In the hope that others would follow, he explained his action in an anonymous letter in 'The Times' on 24 June 1919 (this was signed 'F. S. T.', which stood for 'financial secretary to the Treasury'). The story became known after he became prime minister, further adding to his reputation for integrity and modesty. It was important to him that the service he gave required sacrifices, and hence his comments about the unpleasantness of political life and his desire to retire to country life and obscurity. He discerned the working of providence in his unexpected elevation: 'I knew that I had been chosen as God's instrument for the work of the healing of the nation' (A. W. Baldwin, 328). 
The early years at Wilden shaped Baldwin's outlook; the local roots, framework of stability and tradition, and communal feeling between employer and worker were the inspirations and examples on which he later drew, although he was aware that it was a world which was passing. He recognized the disruptions which had taken place because of the war, and considered the post-war world to be unstable and in need of careful handling. Baldwin shared the general Conservative apprehension about the vast new electorate created in 1918, and saw it as a race against time to educate 'democracy', which 'can rise to great heights [but] can also sink to great depths' (S. Baldwin, 'On England', 1926, 71). Baldwin refused to believe that there was anything to fear as far as the British working class was concerned, provided it was treated fairly and with respect. His focus on industrial relations directly addressed the social and economic concerns of the day, and placed responsibilities on owners and managers as much as unions and workers. Baldwin wanted a stable capitalist system with a human heart, economic freedom with social duty. He believed in individual responsibility and moral choice, and opposed the soulless uniformity of state control or dictatorship. For these reasons Baldwin was always more concerned with the general atmosphere than with the details of policy and legislation. His concern was with public attitudes, and it was these which he sought to reach and shape. 
Baldwin's principal means of doing so was through his speeches. He paid particular attention to non-political bodies and neutral audiences, and these provided the venues for many of his most influential speeches. Together with their content, this elevated Baldwin to a unique position of appearing to be almost 'above politics'. His hallmarks were a positive message and an emphasis on honesty rather than party dogma. He was noted for his generous treatment of opponents and avoided making personal attacks. Baldwin evoked simple images which interlocked with the values and traditions of British political culture: the rural heritage, the Christian virtues of charity and patience, tolerance based upon mutual respect, a generosity of spirit which accepted elements of merit in other points of view, an appeal to co-operation based upon goodwill, and a desire to seek common ground. Baldwin used the rhetoric of the missionary rather than the politician, talking of 'preaching' a 'gospel' and evoking prayer in phrases such as 'give peace in our time, O Lord'. His language transcended party boundaries, and he could convincingly claim that 'the twin ideals of social justice and individual freedom' were Conservative aims (S. Baldwin, 'An Interpreter of England', 1939, 111-12). His style of Conservatism was inclusive, moderate, and based on a moral agenda -- a positive creed of civic values and virtue. Delivered in this way, it had a powerful appeal to three key electoral groups of the inter-war era: former Liberals (contributing further to that party's disintegration), women (who were often repelled by tones of harshness and confrontation), and the uncommitted new generation of voters (who were frequently impatient with pre-war controversies). 
Baldwin was convinced that the Labour Party's idealistic appeal could be countered only from the moral high ground. He presented an open attitude and generous tone, acknowledging the sincerity and idealism of Labour's 'best elements'. He feared that more dangerous forces lay beneath the Labour Party: direct-action syndicalism, Bolshevism, confiscatory socialism, class hatred, and envy. To contain these, he sought to encourage Labour towards constitutionalism. He treated Labour as a conventional political party; he was not frightened by its aspirations to government, but welcomed them as a move towards responsibility. He was determined to show 'fair play' to Labour after his defeats in the general elections of 1923 and 1929, and he encouraged Conservative MPs and ministers to avoid provocative styles or shows of superiority. Baldwin's strategy combined encouraging the moderate and parliamentary sides of the labour movement with firm resistance to extremism and unconstitutional pressure. At the same time Conservative electoral success was partly based on arousing fear of socialism. In election campaigns Baldwin would raise concerns that Labour's moderates were not really in control, thus mobilizing support to contain Labour without having to condemn or alienate it. He suggested that a gulf existed between the common sense of the British worker and the foreign influences of 'German Socialism and Russian Communism and French Syndicalism' (S. Baldwin, 'On England', 1926, 153), to which Italian Fascism was added later. Baldwin disliked arrogance and dogma, remarking that 'intelligentsia' was 'a very ugly word for a very ugly thing' (S. Baldwin, 'Our Inheritance', 1928, 123-4). As dictatorships challenged democracy in the 1930s, Baldwin saw Britain as a beacon to other countries, keeping alive the 'torch of freedom'. 
The image of Baldwin as a 'countryman' was an important part of his appeal, especially in establishing his identity in 1923-4. His appearance reinforced this: the baggy suits and pipe-smoking which were fixed upon by cartoonists were not contrived, but they synchronized with the popular view of an ordinary and trustworthy man. Although rural England was not a constant theme, it was the subject of some of Baldwin's most vivid and affecting passages. Later criticism of this as inappropriate to the problems of an urban and industrial society misses the point that these images were the means and not the ends. Baldwin was not trying to turn the clock back, but to graft the rootless modern experience on to the solid oak of the past: 'the country represents the eternal values and the eternal traditions from which we must never allow ourselves to be separated' (S. Baldwin, 'This Torch of Freedom', 1935, 120). His language resonated with the urban masses and suburban classes, many of whom shared the view that 'England is the country, and the country is England' (S. Baldwin, 'On England', 1926, 6). Even so, perhaps the most central of Baldwin's speeches was not the 'On England' speech of 1924 but those on 'Service' in March 1925 and his Glasgow University rectorial address 'Freedom and discipline' in January 1930. 
Baldwin's rapport with the public was founded on his personality and message, which sprang from the heart. His religious faith and gift of language -- his cousin Kipling described him as the true poet in the family -- enabled him to put his finger on the national pulse. Baldwin made a powerful appeal to the public mood of inter-war Britain, crossing class and party boundaries, and his sincerity and goodwill earned the respect of many opponents. The time and attention that he gave to the House of Commons established a fund of benevolence that enabled him to surmount some blunders with little damage. His experience and sensitivity to the mood of the House were the basis for his most effective speeches, and he was acknowledged even by his critics to possess the power to raise a debate to a higher level. However, there were also uninspired orations which fell flat and periods when he did not speak much in the House or seem to offer the lead that his colleagues and party were looking for. These partly coincided with periods of uncertainty and the absence of a theme of principle and importance -- in 1928 and 1936 -- or periods in opposition, when he did not want to commit himself too soon or specifically. The pressure of work, the need to keep some distance, and the changed and greatly increased parliamentary Conservative Party made him a more remote figure to many MPs after 1931. 
Baldwin was not technically skilled as an orator, and it was sincerity and clarity which made his best speeches effective. His usual stance was to hold his jacket lapels or thrust his hands deep into the pockets, from which they emerged at intervals to smooth back his hair. A member of his first cabinet described his speaking as 'not in the least oratorical, but intensely human', with a delivery that was 'slow, steady, uneloquent but convincing' ('Real Old Tory Politics', 18 March 1925). He had a sense of timing, catching the moment and the mood. The tone was low-key, taking the audience into his confidence and going to the heart of the issue. There were no distracting rhetorical flourishes, as the use of plain language was his great skill. There was concern, not confrontation; responsiveness, not dismissal; reasonableness, not prejudice; explanation, not invective; and humour, without humiliation or sarcasm. Through it all ran the 'human touch' and an empathy with the 'ordinary man': middle-class, middle-aged, middle-brow in culture, middle of the road in politics. Baldwin reached a mass audience far beyond any previous politician. His speeches were collected in books which sold thousands of copies, and the only figure to have exceeded him in this was Winston Churchill. He exploited the cinema newsreels and made masterly use of the new medium of radio, employing a conversational style as if addressing each listener individually. His public image of the pipe-smoking Englishman, honest but not clever, was both reassuring and popular. He became a trusted figure, familiar to the public at large in a way in which no previous prime minister had ever been. 
Baldwin's public identity became firmly established between 1924 and 1926, as his influence and authority grew. In February 1924, at the Conservative Party meeting which confirmed his leadership and the dropping of the tariff policy, he spoke of the 'perfectly genuine and altruistic feeling' of wanting to improve society which inspired Labour's supporters, and declared, 'it is a spirit which can only be beaten by a similar spirit in our Party' ('The Times', 12 Feb 1924, 17). In a series of major public speeches during the following months Baldwin set out what came to be termed the 'new conservatism'. This did not change the party's fundamental principles, but expressed them through an ethos and language which was Baldwin's own. Principled, distinctive, moderate, and unprovocative, it helped the Conservative Party to capture the inter-war middle ground. The period in opposition also saw improvements in party organization and work on future policy. Baldwin established a series of parliamentary policy committees, each chaired by the relevant former minister, and their conclusions were published in the pamphlet 'Looking Ahead' on 20 June 1924. Another innovation was a secretariat to support these committees and the shadow cabinet; although this lapsed when the party returned to office, the parliamentary committees continued under back-bench chairmanship and became a permanent and important feature of the Conservative parliamentary party. 
Baldwin made two other striking public statements during these months. He gave one of his most admired non-political addresses, 'On England', to the Royal Society of St George on 6 May. The other was typical in a different way, and more controversial. An interview published in 'The People' on 18 May 1924 concluded with unexpectedly sharp attacks on some of his critics, including Churchill and Birkenhead, while Rothermere and Beaverbrook were dismissed as 'men I would not have in my house' (Hyde, 211). Whether Baldwin expected this part of the conversation to be published is unclear, but in embarrassment he had to retreat behind denials and apologies. This incident, and the problems caused by Churchill's candidature in the Westminster Abbey by-election, revealed that tensions over coalitionism were still strong. However, these were echoes of the past rather than portents of the future. During the period of the first Labour government, the Conservative Party united behind Baldwin's political strategy. This looked to a realignment around the main parties of Conservative and Labour, and the disappearance of the Liberal Party, which would no longer have a role. With the minority Labour government getting into difficulties and the Liberals in disarray, Conservative confidence increased and the party looked forward to an election. 
When the MacDonald ministry was defeated on 8 October 1924, Baldwin ruled out any arrangement with the Liberals and supported Labour's claim for a dissolution. The Conservatives were strongly placed for the election, and their mobilization of an anti-socialist vote was helped by Liberal disorganization and financial weakness. Baldwin maintained a restrained and moderate tone which was particularly effective in his radio broadcast, a new feature in this election. Aware that the radio audience listened at home, he spoke as if he was chatting by the fireside; this was far more effective than the speeches at mass meetings which the other party leaders used. Speaking of the left-wing dogma of class hostility, he affirmed that 'no gospel founded on hate will ever be the gospel of our people' (Middlemas and Barnes, 275). The 'Zinoviev letter', which appeared in confused circumstances near the end of the campaign, was not the cause of Conservative victory but reinforced some of their themes. Baldwin's moral tone and message of harmony made a particular appeal to former Liberal voters, and thus the Liberal collapse resulted in unexpectedly large Conservative gains. The 412 MPs returned were more than the totals of the Liberals in 1906 or Labour in 1945, and gave Baldwin a huge overall majority. 
Now truly prime minister in his own right, Baldwin began his second term on 4 November 1924. He was fifty-seven, at the height of his powers, acknowledged to possess a unique rapport with the public, and securely in control of his party. Baldwin used the strength of his position to reunite the Conservative leadership with appointments which were generous, but clearly of his own making. Curzon was displaced from the Foreign Office to make way for Austen Chamberlain and Birkenhead was given the India Office, but Baldwin adroitly excluded Horne, whom he disliked. The boldest and most unexpected move was the offer of the Treasury to Winston Churchill, who had recently been making his way back to the Conservative Party. These appointments put the most influential and effective former coalitionists in prestigious posts, but ones where they would be fully occupied by their departmental responsibilities. The choice of Churchill as chancellor took everyone by surprise, but his presence there underlined Baldwin's pledge not to move to protectionism, while the need for economies in public spending would give full scope to his ingenuity. Neville Chamberlain, who had the strongest claim on the exchequer, preferred instead to go to the Ministry of Health, where he embarked on a major programme of reform in local government, factory legislation, housing, and the poor law. With other posts filled by the most successful ministers of the 1922-4 government, the result was a powerful and balanced cabinet team. Baldwin allowed wide-ranging discussion and chaired the cabinet in a relaxed and adjudicatory style, but where his views were definite his interventions were decisive. Although there was some friction at the start, it became a cohesive team. The cabinet was notable for the continuity of its membership; even in its later period, when several ministers were ill or ineffectual, Baldwin decided against reshuffling his pack. 
Baldwin avoided any appearance of triumphalism after his victory, which he presented as an opportunity for service, with much hard work ahead. His aim was to restore stability and good government, which would lead to the recovery of confidence, revival of trade, and reduction of unemployment. The return to the gold standard in Churchill's first budget of April 1925 was part of this; most financial and economic opinion endorsed it, but the pound was over-valued and it compounded Britain's trade problems. Baldwin's government had solid achievements on several fronts, although most of these were in its first eighteen months in office. At home there was the granting of pensions to widows and orphans, local government and poor-law reform, measures for transport and education, and the creation of a national electricity generating authority, something which Baldwin particularly supported. The vexed issue of the Northern Ireland boundary was laid to rest in December 1925, with Baldwin's relaxed personal style during a weekend meeting at Chequers playing an important part. In foreign affairs the Locarno treaty seemed to herald a new era of peace and the government sought further disarmament, although by the end of its life this had led to friction with the United States over the differing needs of their navies. The government encouraged rationalization in the cotton and steel industries, but gave only limited extensions of the safeguarding duties and refused to include major sectors of the economy. 
Industrial peace was Baldwin's key theme from 1923 to 1927, as he sought to bring both employers and workers to embrace a spirit of 'partnership in industry'. He wished to discourage reliance on the state to solve industrial problems, which he regarded as a dangerous legacy of the Lloyd George era. He wanted a more self-reliant approach in which industries worked out their own problems, with the government aiding as adjudicator. Baldwin personally shaped and controlled his government's policy in this key area, and imposed a moderate course on the more hardline and anti-trade union elements in the cabinet and party. The first instance arose over a bill introduced by a Conservative back-bencher, F. A. Macquisten, on the contentious issue of the trade union political levy. Union members had to take the awkward step of 'contracting out' of the levy, and changing the law to make those who wished to pay 'contract in' had widespread Conservative support. However, Baldwin considered that this would be seen as a provocative and partisan use of the government's majority, and told a stunned cabinet that he would intervene against passing the bill. Baldwin's speech on 6 March 1925 established him as the most powerful parliamentary speaker of the era, and was perhaps his greatest triumph. He acknowledged that the principle of the bill was right, but asked his party to hold their hand as a gesture towards creating 'a new atmosphere in a new parliament for a new age, in which people can come together'. Speaking with quiet sincerity in a packed and hushed chamber, he evoked a spirit of goodwill and closed with the moving affirmation that 'there are many in all ranks and all parties who will re-echo my prayer, 'Give peace in our time, O Lord'' ('Hansard 5C', 181, 6 March 1925, 840-41). The speech elevated the debate to a different moral plane, and had a tremendous impact. The bill was dropped, and Baldwin's authority over his cabinet and party was complete. He also touched a chord with many of the public; when the speech was printed in the booklet 'Peace and Goodwill in Industry', half a million copies were sold in three months. 
Baldwin's second conciliatory gesture averted a potential general strike by granting a subsidy to the troubled coal industry on 30 July 1925. The trade unions celebrated 'Red Friday' as a victory and many Conservatives were uneasy, but Baldwin was aware that both the government's emergency organization and public opinion were not ready to face a general strike. He appointed a royal commission under Sir Herbert Samuel to produce a plan acceptable to both owners and miners, but stubbornness on both sides of the coal dispute thwarted this hope and the government's many other attempts to find a negotiated solution. No common ground had been found when the nine-month subsidy expired on 30 April 1926, and the owners sought to impose their terms with a lock-out from 1 May. The government's negotiations with the TUC failed to avert a national stoppage in support of the miners, which began on 3 May. Baldwin showed his greatest strengths in handling the unprecedented dangers of the general strike, and the combination of calmness and firmness which he displayed created a reassuring atmosphere and avoided reactions of provocation or panic. The government was now prepared and able to keep essential supplies moving; this was important at the outset, as the TUC leadership had no desire for a long struggle. Baldwin's most important move was to shift the issue from an industrial dispute to a threat to the constitution, in which the TUC were the anti-democratic force seeking to dictate to the legitimate government. This was the line which he took in his first speech in the Commons on 3 May, in the message to the public printed in the 'British Gazette' on 6 May, and in the crucial broadcasts which he made on 8 and 12 May (the day the strike was called off). His tone throughout was one of sorrow not anger, and the strikers were depicted as misled rather than dangerous. Baldwin appealed for calm and fortitude, for support for the elected government, and for trust in himself. When the strike was abandoned he maintained the same conciliatory tone, calling for no reprisals and offering further government negotiations and help in the coal dispute. However, despite many hours of wearisome effort, the latter dragged on for another nine months. 
Baldwin's public standing was at its height in the wake of the general strike, but he did not use this for any immediate purpose. Long hours of work and stress had left him physically and mentally drained, and he was also suffering from lumbago in the summer of 1926. He recovered during his holiday at Aix in September, but returned to a heavy workload and by April 1927 was again exhausted. His illness and tiredness, and the tiredness of some of his ministers, contributed to the sense that the government was drifting and lacked a strong lead. The middle and later phases of the ministry were preoccupied with a range of problems, for most of which there were no clear or immediate solutions. The hope for a new atmosphere in industry bore little fruit owing to the continuing economic stagnation and the bitterness of the coal strike. Legislation on trade union matters was inevitable in the wake of the general strike, and the 'Trade Disputes and Trade Union Act' of 1927 was a generally moderate response. However, it included 'contracting in' for the political levy and aroused bitter opposition from the labour movement in parliament and the country, further souring the mood and denting Baldwin's conciliatory image. In August 1927 he became the first serving prime minister to visit an overseas dominion when he accompanied the prince of Wales on a nineteen-day tour across Canada, during which he delivered twenty-six speeches. 
Baldwin maintained a moderate course to the end of the government. In keeping with the spirit of confidence in the good sense of democracy, in 1928 the franchise was equalized for both sexes at the age of twenty-one, and proposals to strengthen the powers of the House of Lords were dropped. In these and other areas Baldwin disappointed not only the right wing of the Conservative Party but also much of its mainstream. There were mutterings on the back benches and in the constituencies that the government was 'semi-socialist', and a spread of apathy and discontent. With unemployment stuck around the 1 million mark, there was strong pressure for the extension of safeguarding duties, especially to the depressed iron and steel industry. However, in 1928 Baldwin ruled this out owing to the pledge against protection which had been made at the 1924 election. Agriculture was in an even worse condition, and here again the government could offer little assistance without reopening the dangerous tariff issue. The House of Commons had a steady diet of worthy but dull measures, and it is this which explains the gap between the solid record of legislation on the one hand and the widespread impression of drift and lack of inspiration on the other. The government's last major measure, the 'Derating Bill', was too late to affect employment and too complex to be an effective election platform. After its passage Baldwin decided to hold the election in the spring and polling was fixed for 30 May 1929. The Conservatives entered the campaign with few positive cards other than the appeal of Baldwin himself, and their strategy was founded upon this. The slogans of 'Safety first' and 'Trust in Baldwin' were intended to contrast with the poor reputation of Lloyd George, whose effort to revitalize the Liberal Party posed the greatest danger to the seats that the Conservatives had won in 1924. Baldwin toured the country and was considered to have performed well, but his and Central Office's expectations of victory were dashed. Almost all the gains of 1924 were swept away, and only 260 Conservative MPs remained. Labour was for the first time the largest party in the Commons, although still lacking an overall majority. To show that he accepted the electoral verdict with good grace and preclude any coalitionist intrigues with Lloyd George, who held the parliamentary balance, Baldwin decided against meeting parliament and resigned as prime minister on 4 June. 
The period in opposition during the second Labour government of 1929-31 was difficult for Baldwin. His moderate line had failed to keep the Conservatives in office, and the results had shifted the balance in the parliamentary party towards the safer and southern constituencies. Soon after the defeat pressures began to build for a change in policy -- at least a major extension of the safeguarding duties, and preferably a full tariff programme, including duties on food imports. This left Baldwin in a difficult position, attempting to straddle the divide as party and public opinion diverged. His strategy during 1929-30 was based on the need to recover the lost seats in the urban midlands and north, which were essential if the Conservatives were to regain a majority. Any suggestion of 'food taxes' was still an electoral liability in these areas, and so Baldwin resisted the pressure for tariffs. This ran counter to the mood in the party's strongholds, and led to the internal crisis which seriously threatened his position in the summer and autumn of 1930. The balancing act on which Baldwin was engaged made it difficult to sound a strong lead, and this further disappointed his followers. Labour still seemed to be popular during 1929-30, and Baldwin did not want to precipitate an election too soon. This dictated a mild and cautious approach in parliament which combined with some lacklustre Commons performances to erode confidence in his leadership. 
The main danger which Baldwin faced was the rising discontent of his followers, but extra pressure was added by the campaign of the press lords, led by Beaverbrook with Rothermere's support. The 'empire crusade' sought to push the Conservative Party towards a full tariff reform programme, including food taxes, and was dangerous because its vigour and policy had a powerful appeal in the tory heartlands. It was this which enabled it to apply pressure to back-bench MPs and to secure a worrying share of Conservative votes when it ran candidates in by-elections. Baldwin intensely disliked the idea of compromise with the press lords, but the support which they were mobilizing could not be ignored. From November 1929 to March 1931 there were periods of negotiation and uneasy co-operation, as well as open conflict. Baldwin was pushed into advances in party policy, but these seemed reluctant and minimal. Tensions rose in the summer of 1930, and Baldwin had to accept the departure of the unpopular Davidson from the party chairmanship. He was replaced by Neville Chamberlain, and tactical mistakes by the press lords enabled Baldwin to counter-attack. He summoned a party meeting at Caxton Hall on 24 June 1930, and swung the audience behind him in outrage at dictatorial demands made by Rothermere. Changing the issue from policy to the constitutional threat of dictation by the press was Baldwin's trump card throughout the crisis, and was played again in October 1930 and March 1931. The most serious phase of the party crisis came in September 1930, and Baldwin's colleagues began to consider his position hopeless. However, the impact of the slump and rising unemployment was changing the mood in the industrial regions, and on 9 October Baldwin announced that he would ask for a 'free hand' to introduce tariffs at the next election. Almost all of the party now rallied behind him, and his leadership was endorsed by a large margin at a second party meeting on 30 October 1930. 
Renewed attacks by Beaverbrook in February and March 1931 were less dangerous, but they coincided with unease over Baldwin's moderate policy on India and a decline in confidence among his front-bench colleagues. Neville Chamberlain presented him with a critical memo written by the senior official at Central Office, Robert Topping, on 1 March 1931, and Baldwin decided to retire. This low mood lasted for only a few hours and, rallied by his friends and wife, he decided to fight back. His position was actually much stronger than in the previous year, and a powerful and effective speech in the House on India on 12 March and a frank discussion with the shadow cabinet restored his authority. Beaverbrook gave up after his last throw in the Westminster St George's by-election was defeated, during which Baldwin made his most famous denunciation of the press lords as seeking 'power without responsibility -- the prerogative of the harlot throughout the ages' (Middlemas and Barnes, 600) in a speech at Queen's Hall on 17 March. 
From the spring of 1931 the Conservative Party was united behind Baldwin, and by-elections pointed to them winning a large majority at the next election. As the depression worsened, Baldwin concentrated on attacking the tottering Labour government. The costs of unemployment payments had unbalanced the budget, and Conservatives were determined that this must be dealt with by reductions in spending and not increases in taxation. The need for 'economy' and preserving the 'free hand' on tariffs were Baldwin's priorities in the financial crisis which overwhelmed the Labour government in August 1931. He wanted Labour to meet its responsibilities and produce effective proposals to balance the budget or, failing that, to leave office having exposed its unfitness for government. Baldwin sought to avoid saving Labour from unpopularity or becoming entangled in a coalition, and tried to preserve a distance and continue his holiday in France. However, the collapse of the pound and the paralysis of the government forced him to return to London on 22 August, and two days later he reluctantly agreed to join an all-party 'national' emergency cabinet. The severity of the crisis and pressure of time left no better option, and at least this outcome avoided the greater danger of a purely Conservative government implementing spending and welfare cuts that might be very unpopular. Neville Chamberlain had represented the Conservatives in meetings with the other parties' leaders during Baldwin's absence, and also had some influence in pressing this solution on him. Even so, when Baldwin went to Buckingham Palace for the crucial meeting on 24 August he expected to become the prime minister of a mainly Conservative ministry with some Liberal support. Instead, the king pressed him that it was his patriotic duty to sacrifice personal and party claims and serve under MacDonald, who had agreed to remain as prime minister until the crisis was resolved. Baldwin could hardly refuse, but he insisted that it was a temporary and emergency arrangement, and that once the currency had been stabilized there would be an election in which the Conservatives would seek a mandate for the 'free hand'. In fact, the temporary National Government went on to win two elections and hold power from 1931 to 1940. Having made his name in the downfall of one coalition, Baldwin spent the rest of his political career as the central figure in another. 
Although it was forced to abandon the gold standard on 21 September 1931, the National Government's very existence became a key factor in restoring stability and maintaining foreign confidence. The need to secure a mandate became imperative, and Baldwin and his party were willing to support a national appeal under MacDonald, provided that this did not restrict them from seeking the 'free hand' on tariffs. After a struggle with the free-traders in the cabinet, Baldwin secured the best position for the Conservatives under the circumstances: each party would campaign under its own manifesto, and the government as a whole would simply ask for 'a doctor's mandate' to implement whatever remedies it felt necessary. In fact, as the Conservatives provided most of its parliamentary support, this effectively meant the introduction of tariffs. The election which swiftly followed at the end of October was an unprecedented landslide; the government won 554 seats, of which 470 were Conservative. With the unity of the government preserved by an agreement that ministers could vote as they wished on this issue, the 'Import Duties Bill' was passed in January 1932. Baldwin led the British delegation to the Imperial Conference at Ottawa in July and August, and successfully negotiated preferential arrangements with the dominions. While implementing these caused Snowden and the Samuelite Liberals to leave the government in September 1932, sufficient Labour and Liberal elements remained for its national status to be credible and there was greater harmony in the cabinet. Baldwin had reversed his defeat of 1923, and secured the abandonment of free trade which the bulk of his party had been seeking for nearly three decades. This was a significant achievement, although in the circumstances there was no triumphalism and it was not to bring the hoped-for prosperity or closer unity of the empire. 
From 25 August 1931 to 7 June 1935 Baldwin was the second figure in the National Government, occupying the prestigious non-departmental post of lord president of the council (he was also lord privy seal from 29 September 1932 to 31 December 1933). This was symbolized by his move into 11 Downing Street after the general election of 1931, which helped his strained personal finances. He chaired the cabinet in MacDonald's absences and deputized for him in the Commons, acting effectively as leader of the House. Baldwin was kept very busy and worked long hours, having a heavy load of committee work and giving much time and attention to the House of Commons. The position suited his strengths of co-ordination and communication, and the lesser responsibility meant that he did not suffer nervous exhaustion similar to that of 1926-7 and 1936. Baldwin had a good personal relationship with MacDonald and saw the value in retaining him as prime minister. He did much to hold the government together, supporting MacDonald and assuaging his fears of being seen as a Conservative puppet. Baldwin had the trust of the other non-Conservative ministers, and his non-partisan image made it easier for them to serve without loss of dignity; he was willing to allow them a generous share of cabinet posts and to follow policies that had clearly bipartisan aspects, as in agriculture, housing, education, and India. He was the guarantee that the right-wing Conservatives would not call the tune, while at the same time soothing his followers' fears that too many concessions were being made. 
It is hard to assess Baldwin's contribution, other than in the National Government's overall performance. Its cohesion was good, with friendly co-operation in cabinet and little faction or dissent in parliament, apart from on the issue of India. It achieved consensus on domestic and overseas policy, surmounted the crises which it faced, and saw a slow recovery in the economy and employment. There were periods of anxiety, but it was never seriously in danger. Baldwin worked in effective partnership with the other key Conservative figure of Neville Chamberlain, the chancellor of the exchequer, and provided the atmosphere and public appeal which complemented Chamberlain's administrative drive and command of policy. There were two key areas where Baldwin had a particularly significant role. The first of these was India, over which he had been in conflict with the 'die-hards' of the Conservative right since his endorsement of the Irwin declaration's promise of eventual dominion status in October 1929. Baldwin wanted to maintain Britain's role in India, but accepted that a partnership with elements of Indian opinion would be required. He recognized the commitments which previous governments had given, and -- in similar vein to his view of democracy at home -- concluded that the only stable way forward was constructive progress in a generous spirit, which would encourage moderation. He was strongly influenced by the precedent of the Irish question, and was determined to maintain a bipartisan line and prevent India from becoming a party issue. Although placing emphasis on the safeguards to reassure Conservative opinion, he regarded Churchill's vehement opposition as dangerously negative. Baldwin risked his leadership over India late in 1929 and early in 1931, and had to exert his authority at key moments during Churchill's campaign to capture the Conservative rank and file in 1933-4. India took up much of Baldwin's time at the House of Commons; it was the subject of some of his most impressive speeches, and the 'Government of India Act' was passed successfully in 1935. 
The second and most controversial area was rearmament, and especially the key aspect of air policy. With the air minister in the Lords, Baldwin made the significant statements in the Commons, including the pledge of 8 March 1934 that Britain would not be inferior to any country within striking distance. Baldwin did not lack experience in foreign and defence matters, having been prime minister and chairman of the committee of imperial defence, and he chaired the cabinet disarmament committee during the Geneva conference of 1932-4. He understood the impact of new technology, and his warning in the Commons on 10 November 1932 that 'the bomber will always get through' ('Hansard 5C', 270, 10 Nov 1932, 632) was strategically correct at the time. Another striking speech on 30 July 1934 warned that Britain's defensive frontier was no longer the white cliffs of Dover, but lay on the Rhine (ibid., 292, 30 July 1934, 2339). This led to the problem of how to gauge and respond to the threat from Germany, as Hitler's new regime offered a kaleidoscope of promises and threats after 1933. There were some more helpful developments, principally the conclusion of the Anglo-German naval agreement in June 1935, which severely limited the size of the German fleet and avoided the fear of another naval race. Baldwin bore much of the blame after 1939 for supposed failures of judgement on appeasement and rearmament, especially in the early stages of 1933-6. He was certainly concerned about the economic strain and aware of public hopes for disarmament and fear of another war, but German moves led him to press for increased spending on air defence in 1933-4. On 19 July 1934 he announced a substantial expansion of the RAF, which was followed by further increases to keep pace with Germany in May 1935, February 1936, and, in one of Baldwin's last acts, February 1937. However, German propaganda boasts of having reached air parity misled Baldwin into apologizing to the House on 22 May 1935 for having failed to maintain the margin promised in March 1934. This damaged Baldwin's reputation, and contributed to the later view that he and the government had been negligent and dilatory. In fact, between 1933 and 1935 the international dangers were less apparent than the benefit of hindsight later made them, and the government's measures seemed to be prudent and sufficient. During this time Baldwin's speeches contributed to the development of public opinion from the negative atmosphere of 1933 to a general acceptance of the need for more substantial rearmament. 
On 7 June 1935 Baldwin exchanged posts with MacDonald, and at sixty-seven began his third and final term as prime minister. There was a cabinet reshuffle, including the promotion of Samuel Hoare as foreign secretary, but the character of the National Government was unchanged. Baldwin was now comfortable with the arrangement, considering that it provided valuable stability in troubled times. He was conscious of problems in Europe and the spread of totalitarian regimes, and sought to strengthen Britain morally as well as militarily, so that it would continue to uphold the 'torch of freedom' and the heritage of toleration and constitutional government. Baldwin was not a mirror simply reflecting public opinion; he sought to shape it, but by working with the grain rather than sounding sudden alarms. He used the general election to secure a mandate for increased rearmament, presenting this as doing 'what is necessary to repair the gaps in our defences' (Middlemas and Barnes, 866). Although this and the promise that 'there will be no great armaments' (Hyde, 398) were designed to underline the defensive nature of the government's intentions, Baldwin was firm about the need for action. In his first election broadcast, on 25 October 1935, he stated, 'I will not be responsible for the conduct of any Government in this country at the present time, if I am not given power to remedy the deficiencies which have accrued in our defences since the War' ('The Times', 26 Oct 1935, 17), having used almost identical words in the House of Commons two days earlier ('Hansard 5C', 305, 24 Oct 1935, 152). Given the fall in unemployment, the recent problems of the Labour leadership, and the unsettled international situation, it was unlikely that this would cause the rejection of the National Government. However, even if Baldwin was not risking everything, it was certainly far from the 'putting party before country' of the later crude Churchillian condemnation of his conduct in 1933-5. The economic picture had continued to improve, and the general election which Baldwin called in November 1935 returned the National Government with a comfortable majority, having 429 MPs (of whom 387 were Conservatives) to Labour's 154. 
Baldwin's final ministry had achievements in domestic reform, including raising the school-leaving age to fifteen in 1936 and major programmes of slum clearance, but this has been overshadowed by criticism of its foreign and defence policies. The first international crisis was Italy's attack on Abyssinia in 1935, to which Baldwin's response was constrained by awareness that British public opinion and the French government were unwilling to risk war. A plan to buy off Italy was devised by Hoare in conjunction with the French foreign minister, Laval, but it was leaked to the press before it could be put to either the cabinet or Mussolini. The generous reward which it offered to the aggressor aroused a storm of criticism in Britain, shaking the National Government and damaging Baldwin's reputation. In particular, the plan seemed a cynical betrayal of the commitment to the League of Nations which the government had strongly emphasized in the election campaign only a few weeks before. Hoare was forced to resign, and Baldwin's speech in the debate on 10 December 1935 was unconvincing, taking refuge behind the suggestion that he could not disclose the full facts -- 'my lips are not yet unsealed' ('Hansard 5C', 307, 10 Dec 1935, 856) -- and appealing for trust. The government's supporters did not want it to founder, and rallied behind Baldwin after a misjudged attack on his honour by the Labour leader, Clement Attlee. This traumatic experience damaged confidence in Baldwin, although his moving broadcast tribute on the death of the king on 20 January 1936 partly restored his public position. Baldwin appointed the untarnished and youthful Anthony Eden as foreign secretary, but was aware that Hoare had been treated poorly and felt an obligation to bring him back to the cabinet as soon as possible. 
The next crisis was caused by Hitler's remilitarization of the Rhineland in March 1936. Baldwin recognized that this aspect of the discredited Versailles treaty no longer enjoyed public support, and told the cabinet that a military response would be out of proportion. When the new French foreign minister, Flandin, came to London and proposed full sanctions against Germany, Baldwin was concerned that the crisis would escalate and rejected the plan on the ground that Britain was militarily unready for war. The government had been considering remilitarization as part of a general arms limitation agreement, and although Hitler had acted unilaterally in the reoccupation, he also now offered to enter such negotiations. Baldwin chaired the cabinet foreign policy committee, but left the execution of policy to Eden. He gave only general guidance, urging the improvement of relations with Germany and expressing concern over the French alliance with Russia, which could drag the Western powers into a Nazi-Communist struggle. The strains of the foreign situation and the responsibilities and workload of the premiership overcame Baldwin in the middle of 1936, and he suffered his most severe period of nervous exhaustion. He was required to rest, and during these months the government seemed to lose direction. In the uncertain period following the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War Baldwin decided against holidaying at Aix and stayed at a series of English country houses, before returning reinvigorated to Downing Street on 12 October 1936. On 12 November, replying to Churchill's criticism of the pace of air rearmament, Baldwin declared with 'appalling frankness' ('Hansard 5C', 317, 12 Nov 1936, 1144) that no public mandate for rearmament could have been secured in 1933. This was misunderstood or misrepresented by his critics, especially in Churchill's war memoirs, to refer to the general election of 1935, and was taken as an admission that Baldwin had put party concerns before national security. 
The major event of Baldwin's final months as prime minister was the crisis over the new king's wish to marry Mrs Simpson, an American whose second divorce was impending. The problem was not the monarch's private morality but his public role, for a divorcee would not be acceptable as queen. Controversy over this divided the nation in a dangerous international period and potentially threatened the unity of the empire, for since the 'Statute of Westminster' the monarch was the symbolic link with the dominions. At first Baldwin was reluctant to broach the subject, but in a strained conversation on 20 October 1936 he warned the king that the public reaction would be hostile. Baldwin tried to dissuade Edward, but the monarch was determined upon the marriage and at their next meeting on 16 November raised the possibility of abdication. The king's proposal of a morganatic marriage was rejected by the dominions and the cabinet, and Australia and Canada warned that they would not recognize Mrs Simpson as queen. When the British press broke their silence on 2 December, Baldwin informed the king that the only options remaining were renunciation of Mrs Simpson or abdication, still hoping that he would choose the former. The crisis assumed a political dimension when Beaverbrook and Churchill tried to rally support for the king, but the mood in the Commons was strongly against them and the Labour opposition indicated that they would refuse to form a ministry if Baldwin had to resign. Once again Baldwin successfully neutralized a political crisis by presenting it as a constitutional issue, thus discounting any party implications. 
Although sometimes stilted, Baldwin's meetings with the king were conducted politely, showing goodwill and a fatherly concern. However, he was firm in rejecting on 4 December the king's wish to put his case before the public in a radio broadcast; the nation would be divided into opposing camps, and it would be unconstitutional if the monarch acted independently of the advice of his ministers. Baldwin sought to appeal to Edward's sense of duty, but was appalled at the king's lack of responsibility or moral struggle. On the final visit to Fort Belvedere on the evening of 7 December Baldwin was prepared to strive all night with the king's conscience but found that Edward had resolved to abdicate, and the instrument was signed on 10 December. Baldwin conducted the abdication crisis with discretion, informing only a few close colleagues and consulting the full cabinet only when necessary. He was praised on all sides for the tact, patience, and sympathy with which he had resolved a potentially corrosive situation, and was restored to the height of public esteem. His success was capped by masterly performances in his broadcast to the nation and speech in the Commons after the abdication; the latter was a moment of great theatre in a packed House, in which Baldwin's plain statement was all the more effective. In the lobby afterwards he confided to a back-bench MP: 'I had a success, my dear Nicolson, at the moment I most needed it. Now is the time to go' ('Harold Nicolson: Diaries and Letters', 107-8). 
In fact, Baldwin had decided during his period of breakdown earlier in 1936 that he would retire at the time of the coronation in May 1937. The premiership was passed to Neville Chamberlain, who had been waiting with some impatience. Baldwin's last ministerial action was to announce the first increase in MPs' salaries since their introduction in 1912 and the establishment of a salary for the leader of the opposition. This was a typical gesture, for the changes were of most value to Labour MPs, and 'was done with Baldwin's usual consummate good taste. No man has ever left in such a blaze of affection' ('Harold Nicolson: Diaries and Letters', 113). He resigned the next day, 28 May 1937, and was created a knight of the Garter. 
Baldwin underlined his withdrawal from active politics by leaving the House of Commons, but he accepted a peerage and on 8 June was created Earl Baldwin of Bewdley. He was much interested in his family's pedigree and their roots in Corvedale in Shropshire, and chose Viscount Corvedale as accompanying junior title. During his political career he had received many honours: fourteen universities conferred honorary doctorates upon him; he was lord rector of the universities of Edinburgh (1923-6) and Glasgow (1928-31) and was chancellor of the universities of St Andrews, from 1929, and Cambridge, from 1930, until his death. 
Retirement was followed by a nervous collapse in July 1937, and arthritis prevented Baldwin's usual walks at Aix. In 1937 he founded the Imperial Relations Trust to improve contacts among the dominions. He was also chairman of the Rhodes Trust and, from 1930, the Pilgrim Trust. Baldwin was concerned by the resignation of Eden in February 1938 and had reservations about Chamberlain's conduct of affairs but, on 4 October 1938, in his only speech in the House of Lords, gave general support to the Munich settlement. He was also concerned about the victims of oppression, and in December 1938 an appeal broadcast in Britain and North America raised $500,000 for the Lord Baldwin Fund for Refugees. He delivered a series of lectures on his familiar themes of the English character and democracy in Canada in April 1939, and in August 1939 he spoke in New York; these events attracted much attention and were broadcast across the continent. However, the outbreak of war reduced his activities, and the Baldwins retired to live quietly at Astley. 
Baldwin's last years were saddened by his own and his wife's declining strength, by financial worries which left them with almost no staff to assist them, and by the cold blast of public disapproval after Dunkirk. He was condemned as principal among the 'guilty men' responsible for the misjudgments of appeasement and the inadequacies of rearmament, and even local tradesmen showed hostility. There were hurtful attacks in the press, particularly when the wrought-iron gates at Astley, which had been presented on his retirement, were requisitioned for salvage. He visited London regularly in 1941-3 and was cheered by a friendly lunch with Churchill in February 1943, but his physical decline continued in the later years of the war. After the shock of Lucy's sudden death in 1945, he was often depressed and suffered increasing lameness and deafness. He died quietly in his sleep at Astley Hall on 13 December 1947; his remains were cremated in Birmingham on 17 December, and he and Lucy were interred together in Worcester Cathedral. His son Oliver succeeded him as second Earl Baldwin; on Oliver's death in 1958 the title passed to his younger brother, Windham. 
Baldwin was one of the few prime ministers to retire at the time of his own choosing, and almost unique in departing at the height of his popularity and prestige. However, the outbreak and problems of the war led to a rapid reversal, and his reputation slumped to the lowest depths within his own lifetime. Baldwin refused to write his memoirs, but agreed that the Oxford historian G. M. Young be commissioned to write a biography. Unfortunately Young was influenced by the hostile view of Baldwin which was pervasive by the late 1940s, and became so disenchanted with his subject that he sought to be excused from his contract. When the publishers insisted, the slim volume which appeared in 1952 further damaged Baldwin's reputation, giving authority to the charges against him and explaining them in relation to weaknesses in his character and capacity. It confirmed the prevailing view of Baldwin as lazy and indecisive, a second-rate figure who took the line of least resistance. Young's tone and methods upset the family and moved Baldwin's younger son Windham to publish a reply, 'My Father: the True Story', in 1955. This drew on family papers for Baldwin's early years, and made effective use of 'Hansard' and published official sources to counter the criticism of his conduct in the 1930s. This was the first step in restoring Baldwin's reputation, although the hostile Churchillian view was dominant until the 1970s and remained influential thereafter. 
The opening of state and private archives produced the first historical assessment, a lengthy biography by Keith Middlemas and John Barnes, in 1969. This was a revisionist work which sought to rehabilitate Baldwin, and particularly tackle the question of rearmament. During the remainder of the century a fuller and more sophisticated understanding was developed by a range of works from H. M. Hyde's narrative life in 1973 to the analytical study by Philip Williamson in 1999. The latter took a distinctive approach, focusing on Baldwin's background, purposes, and methods, and in particular his public speeches. From this Baldwin emerged as a more complex and subtle figure in character and political conduct, with concerns and methods which reflected his era. Since the 1970s there has been greater emphasis on Baldwin's domestic statecraft, and in particular his role in the dominance of the Conservatives between the wars and the related aspects of his public image and use of new media. The pendulum has swung almost completely towards a positive view, although the problems which Britain faced in economic strength and military readiness in the 1930s still leave some awkwardness. Baldwin is now seen as having done more than most and perhaps as much as was possible in the context, but the fact remains that it was not enough to deter the aggressors or ensure their defeat. Less equivocal was his rediscovery as a moderate and inclusive Conservative for the modern age, part of a 'one nation' tradition. Baldwin was little mentioned by the Conservative Party in the early post-war decades, when he was still an embarrassment. During the Thatcher years his brand of Conservatism was derided as 'wet' and based on weakness and concession. However, by the early 1990s it had become acceptable to cite Baldwin as an inspiration or model, and John Major deliberately echoed him when seeking to project a unifying style of Conservatism. 
Whether critical or favourable, assessments of Baldwin have agreed on his importance and influence in the inter-war years, and he is often seen as the defining figure of the age. He was its outstanding public speaker, and his radio broadcasts and parliamentary speeches frequently combined to great effect his command of language, sensitivity to atmosphere and unifying moral purpose. His political role was that of a mediator and his aim was to create a spirit of harmony and unity, not just in the government but in the nation as a whole. Baldwin's effectiveness and his legacy need to be judged in this light, rather than by legislative achievements. His priorities were restoring standards in public life, educating democracy, encouraging moderation within the labour movement, promoting national unity across class divisions, and maintaining the constitution as the guarantor of both liberty and property. Baldwin's major battles related to these themes, from rejecting the cynicism of the Lloyd George coalition to the abdication crisis. 'Safety first' is the least appropriate slogan for his career: Baldwin did not play safe over the coalition in 1922, tariffs in 1923, the political levy and coal subsidy in 1925, the general strike threat in 1926, the press lords in 1929-30, India from 1929 to 1935, or in joining the National Government in 1931. He combined goodwill and firmness in preserving a popular constitutional monarchy in 1936 and in seeking a stable and developing India at the heart of the empire. 
Baldwin's promotion of social harmony and industrial reconciliation played a significant role in soothing tensions in the 1920s. In 1926 the challenge of direct action was defeated in an atmosphere of calmness and confidence, and fears of social upheaval faded. Other possible Conservative leaders would not have been able to match Baldwin's remarkable ability to project an idealistic appeal to the new democracy, suffused with 'a breadth of outlook, a tolerance and a warm humanity' (Amery, 'My Political Life', 398). His relations with the Labour Party were cordial and constructive, and he refused to consider manoeuvres to prevent them from taking office in 1924 or 1929. The tone set by Baldwin in the 1920s enabled leading figures from the three parties to work together in the national governments of the 1930s with remarkably little friction. Baldwin's co-ordinating role in 1931-5 contributed much to the cohesion and stability of the National Government. With the tariff secured, most Conservatives were comfortable with this cautiously reformist ministry, especially as its cross-party appeal brought public support and large electoral majorities. By the time of his retirement in 1937 prosperity had returned to much of the country, and new initiatives were being developed in the areas still gripped by depression. 
Baldwin's leadership was an essential factor in the electoral success which the Conservative Party won between the wars. He enjoyed widespread popularity with uncommitted, Liberal and even Labour voters, and was acknowledged to be the Conservatives' greatest electoral asset. However, his most significant achievement was to ensure the security and confidence of the Conservative elements in British society as they adjusted to the coming of democracy. In 1922-4 Baldwin preserved the independence of the Conservative Party and provided it with a distinct and attractive identity at a time of political confusion and uncertainty. At the same time, he left no fertile opening to the right and was principally responsible for confining fascism to the margins of British politics. Apart from the miscalculation of the general election in 1923 he successfully aligned his party with the outlook and aspirations of much of the British people. Rather than allowing it to be seen as a class-defined, reactionary, and divisive force, Baldwin projected a democratic and inclusive Conservatism which combined preservation of continuity with the past with acceptance of modern economic and imperial realities. The openness and adaptability of his approach contributed to Conservative resilience and recovery after the defeat of 1945, even if its originator was too unpopular to acknowledge. By the time of his retirement he had recast the party in his own image and shaped the outlook of the next generation of Conservative leaders, in particular Eden, Butler, and Macmillan. 
Against these achievements can be set Baldwin's weaknesses and failures. He was not absorbed or engaged in some areas, and could delegate too much or hold back from intervening when more direction and urgency was needed. At the same time the stress of work and responsibility built up to periods of nervous exhaustion, during which there was a lack of control. His parliamentary performances could sometimes be poor, and he tended to personalize political issues -- particularly in his hostility to Lloyd George and the press lords. He made a number of less than successful cabinet appointments, such as Steel-Maitland and Joynson-Hicks in 1924 and Inskip in 1936. It can be argued that he accepted too readily the limitations imposed by public opinion, particularly over tariffs in the 1920s and foreign policy in the 1930s. Criticism of Baldwin's record focuses most on the area which he left mainly to others: foreign affairs. The failure to check the ambitions of the dictators is a complex matter, but without the support of other powers Britain was over-stretched in meeting challenges from Japan, Italy, and Germany. In the aftermath of the horrors of the western front and with fear of destruction from the air, it was commonly accepted that a new basis of peace and understanding was required. The Anglo-German naval agreement of 1935 was intended as a first step and can be claimed as a partial success, for during the Second World War the German surface fleet was never a serious danger. Baldwin's approach was more limited and sceptical than that of his successor; rightly or wrongly, he would not have flown to Munich. Rearmament was certainly constrained by financial and political anxieties, but a programme was initiated in 1934 -- when the threat was far from definite -- and had grown massively by the time Baldwin retired in 1937. The initial expansion of the RAF in 1934-5 was concentrated upon a deterrent bomber force, and much of the military equipment had to be abandoned in France in 1940. The state of the country's defences as it faced invasion after Dunkirk did not fully reflect the National Government's rearmament efforts, but this was the image which sank into popular mythology. Even so, in unexpectedly adverse and isolated circumstances, Britain had sufficient naval and air resources -- in particular through the development of radar and modern fighter aircraft -- to make invasion too hazardous to risk. 
It can never be known if another approach or another prime minister would have achieved more in deterring the aggressive powers or carrying the country for earlier and larger rearmament. In the political and economic circumstances of 1930s Britain it is likely that they would not, and they might have left a divided country no more able to withstand adversity than was France in 1940. It would take time for Britain to match the rearmament of Nazi Germany, and Baldwin can be criticized for the vulnerabilities and deficiencies that were exposed from the Rhineland crisis to Dunkirk. At the same time, his constructive legacy must also be acknowledged: the consensus built around the non-provocative defence and foreign policy of the 1930s was what sustained public unity and the will to victory after 1940. Churchill may have provided the words and been an unsullied symbol, but all that he built rested on the strong and enduring foundations laid down by Baldwin. 
Baldwin's wife, 
Lucy enjoyed entertaining, preferred London to the country, and did not share her husband's love of walking. One of her daughters commented, 'two people could not have been more unlike', but that 'should they ever differ, it was always done quietly and politely' (Margaret Huntington-Whiteley, in Hyde, 43). She was a little below average in height and of homely appearance, and normally wore her hair in a bun. She had little concern for fashionable clothes or colours, which made her seem a slightly drab figure, and she retained a fondness for large hats. Her humour was 'of a magisterial kind', and 'her outspokenness sometimes blunt and direct' ('The Times', 26 June 1945). Lucy accompanied her husband on his journeys and on the public platform, and was herself an 'excellent speaker' (ibid., 19 June 1945). She behaved conventionally in the role of a statesman's wife and was not caught up in the world of politics, but their shared moral outlook meant that her support and encouragement gave him vital sustenance. This was particularly important at two key moments: the decision to break with the coalition in October 1922 and not to resign the leadership in March 1931. Lucy's private name for Stanley was Tiger Baldwin, and she was the more ambitious of the two; it was said that 'she had more influence upon him than he on her' (ibid., 26 June 1945). 
Lucy Baldwin's other significant public role was in the campaign for improved maternity care. In 1928 she became vice-chair of a new body, the National Birthday Trust Fund. She was concerned generally to reduce the dangers and mortality level of childbirth, but differed from some of her fellow campaigners in placing special emphasis on the need for proper pain relief during labour. The cost limited its use to the wealthy few, and in 1929 Lucy Baldwin established the Anaesthetics Fund as a subsidiary body to campaign for provision for all women who needed it. She raised funds which were used to develop cheaper forms of analgesia which could be safely administered by midwives at the mother's home. She also sought to educate public opinion and her work contributed to the passage of the 'Midwives Act' of 1936, which created the system of a national salaried service. During the Second World War she lived quietly in retirement with her husband at their home, Astley Hall, near Stourport, where conditions were difficult because of concern over money and lack of staff. She died at Astley, quite suddenly, from a heart attack on 17 June 1945, and was later interred with her husband in Worcester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 30551


Balfour, Sir Andrew (1873-1931), expert in tropical medicine and novelist, was born in Edinburgh on 21 March 1873, the eldest son of Thomas Alexander Goldie Balfour MD, of Edinburgh, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Peter Christall, of Elgin. He was educated at George Watson's College and at the University of Edinburgh, graduating MB CM in 1894, and MD in 1898 with a thesis on the toxicity of dyestuffs and river pollution, for which he received a gold medal. After a short period of private practice with his father he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as an advanced student, in 1895. He graduated DPH there in 1897, and BSc in public health at Edinburgh in 1900. 
During the South African War, Balfour served in 1900-01 as a civil surgeon and gained the queen's medal with three clasps. In 1901 the advice and friendship of Patrick Manson awakened in him an interest in tropical medicine, which was to make his reputation. The following year he became director of the Wellcome Tropical Research Laboratories at Khartoum and local medical officer of health. His knowledge of Arabic, his popularity with the Sudanese, and his untiring energy resulted in the eradication of malaria in Khartoum. His work there earned the support and approval of the three British administrators, Lord Cromer, Lord Kitchener, and Sir Reginald Wingate, to whom he strongly advocated the care and health of the indigenous population as essential features of modern imperial rule. Also in 1902 Balfour married Grace, third daughter of George Nutter, of Sidcup, Kent; they had two sons. 
In addition to the duties of organization Balfour made several important discoveries in protozoology. These resulted from his work on spirochaetosis in birds and in man, the study of the life history of spirochaete bacteria in the tick, and the identification of a leishmanoid disease of the skin. In order to study protozoa he explored the upper reaches of the White Nile in a floating laboratory. All his scientific work was published in four reports of the Wellcome Research Laboratories between 1904 and 1911. In 1913 he returned to England and became the founder of the Wellcome Bureau of Scientific Research. 
During the First World War Balfour was given the rank of lieutenant-colonel and rendered conspicuous service in the army medical corps. First as president of the medical advisory committee of the Mediterranean expeditionary force in Mudros, Salonika, Egypt, and Mesopotamia, and then as scientific adviser in east Africa, he organized sanitary reforms throughout these theatres of war. Subsequently he was asked to reorganize the health service of Egypt, and later, in 1918, at the request of General Sir Edmund Allenby, he reported on anti-malarial measures in Palestine. 
When the war ended Balfour resumed his scientific research at the Wellcome Bureau, but he was soon called away from his laboratory. In 1921 and 1923 he visited Mauritius and Bermuda to advise the Colonial Office on health reform in these islands. In 1923 he was appointed director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and for seven years worked with boundless energy towards the perfecting of the school. The predominant place which the school achieved in the teaching of and research into preventive medicine owed much to Balfour's initial administration. In the course of his work Balfour contributed extensively to medical literature, writing on the prevention of tropical diseases and sanitary reform. His writings include 'Public Health and Preventive Medicine' (with C. J. Lewis, 1902); 'Memoranda on Medical Diseases in Tropical and Sub-Tropical Areas' (1916); 'War Against Tropical Disease' (1920); 'Reports to the Health Committee of the League of Nations on Tuberculosis and Sleeping Sickness in Equatorial Africa' (1923); and 'Health Problems of the Empire' (with H. H. Scott, 1924). 
Early in his career Balfour also achieved fame as a novelist. His novels of historical adventure, 'wild tales' as he called them, show the influence of R. L. Stevenson and G. A. Henty, but he had a distinctive and vigorous style of his own. He wrote 'By Stroke of Sword' (1897), 'To Arms' (1898), 'Vengeance is Mine' (1899), 'Cashiered and other War Stories' (1902), and 'The Golden Kingdom' (1903). 
Balfour was appointed CMG in 1912, CB in 1918, and KCMG in 1930. Honorary degrees were conferred on him by the University of Edinburgh and by the universities of Johns Hopkins and Rochester, USA. He was elected FRCP (London and Edinburgh). In 1920 he was awarded the Mary Kingsley medal of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and from 1925 to 1927 he was president of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 
Balfour was endowed with qualities which brought him distinction in various paths of life. He was a fine athlete, and played rugby for both Edinburgh and Cambridge, obtaining his 'blue' at the latter university; he was also capped twice for Scotland. He was a noted boxer, a keen fisherman, and a big-game shot. He was of a kindly and modest disposition, and his conversation and speeches were adorned with wit and humour. His work in tropical medicine and public health was of outstanding merit. Balfour's health broke down in 1929 under the strain of overwork and he died by self-strangulation at Penshurst, near Tonbridge, Kent, on 30 January 1931. He was buried at Grange cemetery, Edinburgh, on 5 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 30552


Balfour, Arthur, first Baron Riverdale (1873-1957), steel maker and industrialist, was, by his own account, born in London on 9 January 1873. For some years his parentage was a mystery. He went to Sheffield in 1882 as an 'orphan' with Mary Fraser (1847-1906), the daughter of a Scottish banker. Only in 1906 did he discover that she was in fact his mother. However, he never discovered the identity of his father. In later years, he stated that his father was Herbert Balfour, but this was a fiction concocted to ease the formalities of his peerage. He finished his education in 1887-9 at Ashville College, Harrogate, and was afterwards employed in the office of Seebohm and Dieckstahl, a Sheffield crucible steel firm founded by German interests. His mother married Robert Schott, the head of the business, at about the same time. 
Balfour went to the United States for a few years to enlarge his experience, and did well at a foundry in Buffalo, New York, where he rose from the shop floor to be manager. He thus began early the interest in overseas trade for which he and his firm became famous. (By the end of his career he had made seventy-three journeys by sea to America.) He returned to Sheffield in 1897, and in 1899, when the firm became a limited company with a capital of $150,000, he was appointed Schott's successor as managing director, taking over also the post of local vice-consul for Denmark. In the same year Balfour married Frances Josephine (died 1960), daughter of Charles Henry Bingham, a partner in the local silver and electroplate firm of Walker and Hall. He chose a world tour for his honeymoon, opening new branches for his firm. The couple had two sons and three daughters. 
Seebohm and Dieckstahl was a typical Sheffield small-scale tool steel maker, with a mainly European and American trade, and with a product-line that included rifle steels, and engineering steels and tools. Largely because of Balfour's awareness of American developments, his firm was one of the first two in Sheffield to develop high-speed steel in 1901. The company prospered, establishing a research laboratory in 1905 and selling in the United States considerable quantities of tool steels. The engineers' tool department established in 1910 became the most considerable of the company's activities. The name of the firm was changed in 1915 to Arthur Balfour & Co. Ltd, reflecting Balfour's place at its head and also his sensitivity to its old German name. 
From 1911 when he was the master cutler (one of the youngest holders of the office), honours and interests came to Balfour yearly. He chaired a committee to deal with the new national insurance in Sheffield in 1912; he was a member of the royal commission on railways in 1913, and in 1914 became a member of the advisory committee on war munitions and of the industry advisory committee to the Treasury, on which he served until 1918. While his company stepped up its output of tool steels for the war effort, Balfour played a leading part in 1915 in establishing High Speed Steel Alloys Ltd in Widnes, a consortium which aimed to make the Sheffield steel industry independent of Germany for its supplies of tungsten powder. In 1915 he was also made consul for Belgium, and undertook much work for the 9000 Belgians who were given asylum in his district. He was a member of the manpower committee, the Advisory Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (of which he was chairman in 1937-46), the engineering industries committee, and the committee on commercial and industrial policy after the war under Lord Balfour of Burleigh. On a visit to Italy he had a long talk on the prospect of her entry into the war with the prime minister, Salandra, who thought his country unable to stand a long war. 
The era of steadily rising profits and expansion for Arthur Balfour & Co. came to an end in the inter-war period. The US market became too competitive and was restricted by the Fordney McCumber Tariff of 1921. Arthur Balfour and leading representatives of the Sheffield high-speed steel trade travelled to Washington to protest, Balfour himself testifying before the US senate in 1921, but this proved unavailing. New initiatives were needed and Balfour reacted to the increasing self-sufficiency of the USA and Europe by opening new accounts in China, Japan, India, and South America, and the firm's business in the important Australian market was further extended. Although the early 1930s slump proved to be a difficult time for the company -- its losses between 1930 and 1932 totalled nearly $50,000 and the company was heavily overdrawn at the bank -- it had broadly maintained its place as one of the leading producers of high-quality steel and tools. The recovery of the export position at Balfours represented a considerable achievement for such a family firm, and the indefatigable travels and salesmanship of Arthur Balfour (alongside the efforts of his brother Bertram, and Bertram's son, Gerald) played a large part. 
During the period of reconstruction after the war Balfour served on the coal industry commission (1919) and the therm charges committee (1922-3), and on the advisory councils of the Post Office, the Board of Trade, and the department of overseas trade, as well as on the safeguarding of industries permanent panel. In 1923 he was British delegate to the international conference on customs and other formalities, and also a member of the government committee appointed to draw up the agenda for the Imperial Conference. 
Perhaps Balfour's most important industrial appointment was as chairman of the committee on industry and trade between 1924 and 1928. The final report, which appeared in 1929 in six volumes, contained a searching examination of the country's industrial competitiveness and made recommendations concerning the UK's future ability to compete in overseas markets. It was one of the ironies of Balfour's career that his own company (and other Sheffield tool steel firms, some of which were called to give evidence) epitomized many of the problems that the committee had so extensively documented -- particularly in its small-scale structure, wide product range, and lack of selling organization overseas. 
Balfour was a British delegate at the League of Nations economic conference of 1927; and in October 1930, as a member of the Economic Advisory Council, he wrote to the prime minister prophesying the severity of the approaching slump. A shrewd, if orthodox, economist, he had a staunch faith in retrenchment and a wholesome hatred of inflation. He continued to serve, often as chairman, on committees and advisory bodies right up to the threshold of war, and he led the commission which went to Canada in 1939 to negotiate the scheme for training Royal Air Force pilots there. Knighted in 1923, he was raised to the baronetcy in 1929, and became Baron Riverdale of Sheffield in 1935, the first Sheffield industrialist to receive this honour. He took the title from his home, Riverdale Grange, on the wooded slopes of western Sheffield. Besides his leadership of Arthur Balfour & Co. and its subsidiaries, Balfour was a director of six other companies. He also served on several Sheffield trade bodies, as a JP, and, for a short time, on the city council. The University of Sheffield conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD in 1934. 
Riverdale was an influential figure, who successfully promoted overseas trade, both in his own business and as a national policy. Yet the reason for his great reputation is not readily apparent. He left few papers and is rarely mentioned in reminiscences. In his prime, a tall, robust man of 15 stone, he seemed to thrive on being ever busy and active. Riverdale's son Robin ['see below'], in a candid portrayal of his father, stated: 'If my father had any failings, they were that all his interests were in the same field, related to business; and, like so many Sheffield steelmasters, he carried on working too long... [and]... towards the end of the [Second World War], by which time he was in his early seventies, the pressures of a lifetime's constant labour of body and mind caught up with him. ('Lord Riverdale remembers', 'Quality', Sept-Oct 1984, 33)' Riverdale had a serious breakdown and was never the same again, though he remained chairman of the company until his death. After a period of steady physical and mental decline, he died at his home in Sheffield on 7 July 1957, and was cremated. 
Riverdale was succeeded by his elder son, 
Riverdale was a director of numerous companies, including Yorkshire Television and the National Provincial Bank. Active in many committees and organizations both locally and nationally, he was master cutler in 1946, president of the Sheffield chamber of commerce in 1950 (and a member of the executive council of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce thereafter), and for more than fifty years Belgian consul for the Sheffield area. A keen yachtsman, he was known as 'Twin Keel Balfour' for his design of a twin-keeled yacht. He was also a motoring enthusiast, and lovingly restored a Sheffield Simplex car (built at Tinsley, though discovered in Australia), which he drove from Land's End to John o' Groats. In his 'Who's Who' entry he described himself as 'a Churchman and a Conservative'. He married on 1 September 1926 Nancy Marguerite Rundle (died 1928), daughter of Rear-Admiral Mark Rundle. They had one son, Mark (1927-1995), who succeeded his father as managing director of Balfour Darwins and was chairman of Sheffield Rolling Mills Ltd. Following his first wife's death Robin Balfour married, on 9 February 1933, Christian Mary (died 1991), daughter of Major Rowland Hill, an army officer. They had a son, David ('b'. 1938), and a daughter, Frances ('b'. 1946). In retirement Riverdale wrote three books, 'Squeeze the Trigger Gently' (1990), about deer-stalking, 'A Life, a Sail, a Changing Sea' (1996), about yachting, and his autobiography, published posthumously in 1998, 'Nine Lives in One'. He died on 26 June 1998, and was succeeded as third baron by his grandson Anthony Robert Balfour ('b'. 1960). By this time the steel firm had passed out of family control, having gone through several further mergers. 


@@@@@


doc= 30553


Balfour, Arthur James, first earl of Balfour (1848-1930), prime minister and philosopher, was born on 25 July 1848 at Whittingehame House, East Lothian, the third of eight children and eldest son of James Maitland Balfour (1820-1856), landowner (and MP, 1841-7), and his wife, Lady Blanche Mary Harriet (died 1872, aged forty-seven), second daughter of the second marquess of Salisbury and sister of Robert Cecil, later third marquess of Salisbury and prime minister. Arthur had four brothers and three sisters. The intellectual vigour of Lady Blanche was markedly imparted not only to Arthur but also to her eldest child, Eleanor Mildred 
(Nora; 1845-1936)
['see 'Sidgwick, Eleanor Mildred], who became a leader in women's education; also to her sixth child, Francis Maitland (Frank) Balfour (1851-1882), who was already, at thirty, professor of animal morphology at Cambridge and a fellow of the Royal Society when he died in a mountaineering accident; and to her seventh child, Gerald William Balfour (1853-1945), fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1878, and a cabinet minister from 1895 to 1905. Arthur Balfour was deeply but not simplistically influenced by his mother's religious certainties; she was the chief influence in his upbringing after his father's death from tuberculosis when he was eight. 
In 1859, aged ten, Balfour went to the Revd C. G. Chittenden's Hoddesdon Grange preparatory school in Hertfordshire, where his short-sightedness and apparently delicate health proved a handicap. However, like his brothers, he would grow to stand 6 feet tall, and as an adult he acquired an enduring love of tennis and golf, and gave proof of considerable physical stamina. Yet his first headmaster noted enduring characteristics when he found the boy lacking in 'vital energy' and 'always pondering' (Dugdale, 1.21). 
From 1861 until 1866 Balfour coasted imperturbably through Eton College, where he was in Mr Birch's house (succeeded in 1864 by Mr Thackeray). There he was, in the name of manliness, denied the spectacles that could have corrected his myopia. He made no great impact at Eton, but impressed William Johnson Cory. At Trinity College, Cambridge (1866-9), he soon adopted spectacles and became addicted to court tennis. Otherwise his intense interest in the philosophical basis of scientific knowledge led him to Henry Sidgwick (1838-1900) as his tutor. In view of his later reputation as a philosopher it occasions surprise to find that Balfour achieved only a second class in his final moral sciences tripos. However, a Cambridge friend later explained to his youngest sister, Alice (1850-1936), that her brother 'was considered in those days very indolent, as indolent in fact as clever'. He was not thought 'to be a great reader, but to have a wonderful capacity for picking the brains of other people' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 6). According to Sidgwick, at the time, his examination answers were somewhat lacking in weight. For this the likely explanation is Balfour's lifelong antipathy to the physical process of handwriting. He may also have spent too much time cogitating about his projected philosophical book. He had, his friend and contemporary John Strutt recalled, 'a mind which could ill submit to the bondage of following a prescribed course of study' (Rayleigh, 11). 
Balfour's aversion to driving a pen led him to develop a remarkable ability to dictate lucid memoranda on complicated subjects. These required little subsequent amendment. Once the typewriter came into use, he would read over the double-spaced product and use a pen to insert or substitute an occasional word. 
Balfour left Cambridge in the year in which he came of age and inherited a comfortable fortune, together with Whittingehame and the Strathconan estate in Ross-shire; in 1870 he acquired a house in London at 4 Carlton Gardens -- conveniently close, as it transpired, to the houses of parliament and close to the Gladstones at no. 11, of which family he became almost a member in the 1870s. He entertained Gladstone (then prime minister) at Strathconan, who found him 'a person of great charm' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 7 Oct 1872); Gladstone's chaotic departure provided a story on which Balfour dined out for the rest of his life (see A. J. Balfour, 'Chapters of Autobiography', ed. B. E. C. Dugdale, 1930, chap. 6). 
Balfour's intellectualism owed less to his formal education than to the habit of rationalistic discussion and debate that prevailed within his family circle. His mother, until her death in 1872, and his eldest sister, Nora, accustomed him to female participation in these activities. Music and games such as croquet and, by the late 1870s, lawn tennis also prevailed at Whittingehame; and by the mid-1880s Balfour was devoting every September to golf, a game he continued to play competently well into the 1920s. He built a small private course at Whittingehame and was one of those who made golf a society sport. Balfour, who had a handicap of eight when he was prime minister, won the Parliamentary Handicap in 1894, 1897, and 1910 (aged sixty-two). He was captain of the Royal and Ancient Club at St Andrews in 1894 and of the new Rye Club in 1895. He especially enjoyed playing in the many courses in East Lothian near Whittingehame, and when he was prime minister the London-Edinburgh express made a special stop to allow him and his guests to alight near his house. 
In 1876 Nora married Henry Sidgwick, who remained an important influence on Balfour (all three, over many years, played a leading role in the Society for Psychical Research, Balfour giving the society's presidential address in 1894). Whether at Whittingehame or in Cambridge, the family discussions would be invigorated by the atheism of Sidgwick and the scepticism of Frank and Gerald, while Arthur would argue from a theistic standpoint. Meanwhile in 1871 the family had been extended to the benefit of Balfour's scientific interests by the marriage of his second sister, Evelyn, to his Cambridge friend John Strutt, who, as Lord Rayleigh, won a Nobel prize for physics in 1904. While presiding over Balfourian familial debates as undisputed chief, Balfour would encourage every participant to have his or her say. It was the family group, self-sufficient but ramifying by degrees into other like-minded coteries, that was the proving ground both of Balfour's philosophical ideas and of his capacity for political debate. But until 1873 Balfour's interest in politics remained academic. 
Indeed, until as late as 1879 when his first book was published, Balfour's chief preoccupation was with philosophy. While sharing the interest of his uncle, the third marquess of Salisbury, and of his brother Frank in science -- and becoming a fellow of the Royal Society in 1888 -- he was mainly concerned to show that theism could remain intellectually respectable despite the Darwinian challenge. Towards the end of his life Balfour told his niece and future biographer Mrs Blanche Dugdale (the eldest daughter of his youngest brother, Eustace): 'I took 'Defence of Philosophical Doubt' very seriously. I thought I was making a contribution to religious thought of an original kind, and whatever may be its merits it 'was' the solid background of twenty years of my life. In my youth it was my great safeguard against the 'feeling' of frivolity. This is much more important now -- biographically -- than the book itself. (Dugdale, 1.49)' Neither in 'A Defence of Philosophic Doubt' (1879; republished, 1920), instalments of which had appeared in 1878 in 'Mind' and in John Morley's 'Fortnightly Review', nor in his 'Foundations of Belief' did Balfour carry the theory of knowledge beyond that offered by David Hume. Originally, he preferred 'scepticism' to 'doubt' in the title, but Salisbury persuaded him otherwise. However 'The Foundations', published in 1895, developed in a more positive and popular form the findings of the first book and received much more attention and praise, reaching an eighth edition in 1901. Essentially his argument was always that only in a theistic system can life be held to possess meaning. The intellectual foundations of science were, he argued, as much open to doubt as were those of theology; yet there were reasonable grounds for believing in both kinds of system. In 'Theism and Humanism' (1915) he concluded that God was 'the condition of scientific knowledge'. Balfour's 'Essays and Addresses' was published in 1893. 
While the Balfours took much pleasure in their own company, they also developed strong social links and attachments. In the summer of 1870 Spencer Lyttelton, a Cambridge contemporary, took Balfour to his home at Hagley Hall in Worcestershire. Balfour thus penetrated the cousinhood of twelve Lytteltons, the children of the fourth Baron Lyttelton, and seven Gladstones, the progeny of William Ewart Gladstone, who was linked with Lord Lyttelton by marriage. Balfour visited the Gladstones at Hawarden several times in the 1870s and the former prime minister stayed at Whittingehame for a week in November 1874. Something of a Gladstone-Balfour attachment developed, though politically it came to nothing. 'Del miglior luto' ('more than common clay') was Gladstone's comment on him (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 20 Nov 1874), and he moved briefly into Balfour's London house when selling his own. Balfour became attracted to May Lyttelton and hoped to marry her. In 1875, however, she died from typhoid fever at the age of twenty-four. Balfour was passionately distressed. His serious intention to marry was not renewed. While there are no indications that Balfour was homosexual, his heterosexual drive was evidently not potent. His household was maintained by his sister Alice, who also remained unmarried. 
Balfour had a talent for friendship with women as much as with men, but always on a highly civilized plane. He was capable of deep emotion, but his manner was cool and detached. Quick of wit, he was endlessly curious. In his younger days, especially, he was impatient of slower intellects, but his ceaseless cogitations could hamper his own ability to reach a decision. 
Based on the country-house coteries was the aesthetically oriented group known as the Souls. Younger members with a political future were George Nathaniel Curzon and George Wyndham, with whose sister Mary (from 1883 the wife of Hugh Elcho) Balfour began about 1880 a platonic friendship maintained from 1886 by regular correspondence (see 'The Letters of Arthur Balfour and Lady Elcho', ed. J. Ridley and C. Percy, 1992). By the mid-1880s, when the group reached its zenith, Balfour, with his graceful charm, was its chief adornment. But the steel underlying his languid demeanour would soon become manifest in the House of Commons. In 1887 the Irish nationalists derided his appointment as Irish secretary; but it was not long before Balfour revealed that it was not with 'Pretty Fanny' (a Cambridge sobriquet) that they had to deal, nor was it with 'Clara', 'Niminy-Pimminy', 'Tiger Lily', 'Daddy Long Legs', or 'Lisping Hawthorn Bird'. Instead they found it more appropriate to settle for 'Bloody Balfour'. 
Balfour found personal contact with his uncle Lord Robert Cecil more than congenial. He long remembered as magical a visit which his uncle paid to him at Eton. At the time Balfour was aged seventeen and Salisbury thirty-five. They were instantly at one on the miseries of life at the college. Salisbury's five sons -- born between 1861 and 1869 -- were, like their Balfour cousins, brought up in a highly intellectual, self-sufficient family group. Balfour's political career would stem from Salisbury's, and Salisbury's eldest son, Lord James Cecil, later the fourth marquess, would serve usefully in Balfour's cabinet from 1903 to 1905. The third son, Lord Robert Cecil, would be Balfour's deputy at the Foreign Office in 1918-19. From an early stage, Balfour was a manager of his coterie of ministerial relatives that became known as the Hotel Cecil. 
Since his time at Cambridge, Balfour had considered going into politics, but Scottish seats seemed usually to go to radicals. In 1873 Salisbury happened to suggest that the borough of Hertford, being subject to his influence, might provide Balfour with useful occupation. The prospect of debating in the House of Commons appealed to Balfour. 
Balfour was elected unopposed in February 1874 as Conservative member for Hertford and held the seat in 1880, attending the congress of Berlin as his uncle's secretary. However, he took some years to make an impression in the house. His association with the Gladstones and the Salisburys made quick preferment from Disraeli unlikely. In 1877 he tentatively proposed the award of university degrees to women -- an objective dear to the Sidgwicks -- but it was not until 1879 that he made a fleeting impact by arguing for a liberal solution to the problem of burials in Anglican churchyards. Balfour was, from his schooldays onwards, a communicant member of both the Church of England and the Church of Scotland, and religious subjects were always likely to rouse him. But until the early 1880s he presented the Commons with little but a spectacle of picturesque repose. 
In 1882 Balfour came briefly to the fore by attributing 'infamy' to Gladstone's 'Kilmainham treaty' with Charles Stuart Parnell. In retrospect his stinging attack on an old family friend, who was astonished by 'the almost raving licence of an unbridled tongue' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 17 May 1882), emphasizes his identity of view with his uncle on the Irish question and its potential advantages to the Conservative Party -- and thus his potential for becoming a Conservative and Unionist leader. The episode marked the end of close contacts with the Gladstones. 
Meanwhile it was characteristic of Balfour, as a back-bencher, to associate himself with the self-styled Fourth Party. Sir Henry Drummond Wolff, Lord Randolph Churchill, and John Eldon Gorst staged in 1880 a series of protests against the freethinking Charles Bradlaugh's being allowed to take the parliamentary oath. This was just the kind of issue likely to catch Balfour's interest. Moreover, apart from the religious aspect, it allowed him to develop his debating skills at a time when the Conservative opposition to Gladstone in the Commons was lacking in bite and inspiration. As Henry Lucy remarked in his parliamentary diary for 20 August 1880: 'He is not without desire to say hard things of the adversary opposite, and sometimes yields to the temptation. But it is ever done with such sweet and gentle grace, and is smoothed over by such earnest protestations of innocent intention, that the adversary rather likes it than otherwise. (Lucy, 'Diary of Two Parliaments', 2.85)' However, in so far as Churchill could be seen as a rival to Lord Salisbury for the leadership of the Conservative Party, there was no doubt where Balfour's ultimate loyalty lay; and by 1884 his adherence to the Fourth Party had much diminished. Salisbury appreciated the help which he received from Balfour in establishing control of the Conservative Party machine, and when in June 1885 he was asked by the queen to form a caretaker government, he consulted his nephew on its composition. Balfour does not seem to have proposed himself for a post, but his closeness to his uncle is strikingly evident in the following note of 26 June: 'My dear Arthur, I entirely forgot to ask you tonight, who I was to make Scotch Law Officers. Is Macdonald to be Lord Advocate -- & who is to be Solicitor General? Yours ever affly, Salisbury' ('Salisbury-Balfour Correspondence', 122). 
From June 1885 to January 1886 Balfour was president of the Local Government Board (being sworn of the privy council on 24 June 1885). Although he displayed little overt enthusiasm for this post, which was outside the cabinet, he contributed to the preparation of what became the 'County Councils Act' of 1888. In November 1885 Balfour moved to the new seat of Manchester East, where he was comfortably elected; he held the seat until 1906. In December 1886 Gladstone approached Balfour while the latter was staying at Eaton Hall asking him to contact Lord Salisbury about a bipartisan solution to Irish home rule, with the Conservatives staying in government to propose a bill; Balfour treated the initiative as a mere tactical gambit and the moment passed. He later commented: 'I did not at the time realise the full significance of the episode' (A. J. Balfour, 'Chapters of Autobiography', ed. B. E. C. Dugdale, 1930, 212). On returning to power in July 1886 Salisbury, thoroughly assured of Balfour's hostility to the Land League in Ireland, appointed him, from 4 August, as secretary of state for Scotland to deal energetically with the Land League in Scotland. This he duly did, and in November Salisbury was able to promote him to cabinet rank without discernible murmurings of nepotism. While Balfour would never show much positive enthusiasm for the actual work of administration, he was, at the age of thirty-eight, reaching a stage where a major issue, such as the Irish question, could enlist his serious involvement. 
In October 1887 the war of attrition between Irish tenants and their landlords took the new form of the Plan of Campaign, a demand for the abatement of rent within the constitutional campaign for home rule. When a landlord demurred, he was paid the rent minus the abatement. The abatement was paid into a tenants' trust fund, thus giving the campaign some appearance of legality. 
At Westminster in January 1887 the Irish home-rulers returned in jubilant mood. Churchill had resigned from the exchequer and the Irish scented government weakness. They mounted seventeen nights of obstruction against the proposals of Sir Michael Hicks Beach, the Irish secretary, for strengthening the law against the Plan of Campaign. When the usually formidable Hicks Beach, afflicted with eye troubles, resigned from the Irish Office, there was a sense of crisis. Salisbury reiterated his belief that the future of the British empire was at stake in the Irish struggle. To ride the political whirlwind, he chose a man for long seen by parliamentarians as (according to Lucy) 'a sort of fragile ornamentation', namely his nephew Arthur Balfour. On 5 March 1887 Balfour was examined by the physician Sir William Jenner and pronounced 'a sound man' and 'a first-class life'; he became secretary of state on 8 March. His secretaryship was to prove one of the most controversial of all the periods of controversial office in that island. 
Despite 'occasional lapses due to physical lassitude and exhausted patience', Balfour proceeded to quell the Irish members at Westminster and restore respect for the law in Ireland. He introduced a new sense that unionism could consist of more than opposition to home rule. He offered a policy of energetic coercion, in the form of the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' 1887, combined with a variety of forms of constructive social relief -- ironically, in effect a return to Gladstone's policy in his pre-home-rule years, though Balfour made much more of the moral and political importance of coercion. He took on, and faced down, Irish opposition in the Commons: the Parnellites 'cannot make much of Balfour who foils them by his skill and coolness and indeed leaves no just opening for their rancour', Cranbrook told Salisbury (1 Sept 1887, Curtis, 215). Balfour was deliberately antagonistic to the constitutional Parnellites, for he regarded them as worse than Fenians. He turned their tactics against them and had considerable success in breaking up the National League. He treated with cool contempt the outcry which followed the violence which occurred at Mitchelstown on 9 September 1887 -- it was from this incident that he became known as Bloody Balfour. His approach gave heart to the Unionists, though it had little long-term effect in diminishing support for home rule in Ireland, Balfour's ultimate objective. 
In 1888 Balfour was a party to the decision to prosecute Parnell and other Irish nationalists before a special commission of English judges: 'few governments have ever committed an error of such magnitude' (Curtis, 277). What was, at its root, an attempt to discredit home rule boomeranged when it became clear that the case was based on forgeries and when Richard Pigott killed himself in melodramatic circumstances; Balfour became cautious about the commission, but too late. 'The Times' was certainly discredited and the government seemed a party to the newspaper's folly. Balfour needed all his now considerable debating skills in the censure debate in February 1890, the twelfth vote of censure during his secretaryship. In October 1890 he toured co. Mayo and co. Galway with his sister Alice. 
While Balfour's coercive measures blended well with his uncle's ideas, he made skilful use in his constructive programme of ideas offered by the great anti-home-rule radical Joseph Chamberlain. He thus contributed to the gradual emergence of a composite Conservative and Unionist Party. When W. H. Smith died in 1891, there was little doubt that Balfour would replace him as leader of the House of Commons. Looking back on his career, Balfour would see Edward Carson, who served him in Ireland as chief prosecutor, as of special significance for his own rise towards the Conservative leadership -- something to which he never enthusiastically aspired. In the late 1920s he told Mrs Dugdale: 'I made Carson, and Carson made me.' But this was to understate his own Irish record. It was Balfour with his tenacious, wide-ranging, and receptive mind who implemented a variety of intelligent palliatives to leaven coercion with hope. He passed two 'Land Purchase Acts' (1887, 1891) and a 'Light Railway Act' (1889), and established a congested districts board (1891), which incorporated ideas offered in 1888 by Chamberlain. Salisbury agreed that even a Conservative government should, in such critical circumstances, gamble on these radical constructive policies despite their cost to the taxpayer. 
Balfour was at one with Salisbury in believing that home rule could not solve the Irish problem. It would, they thought, merely stoke the fires of a distinctive Catholic nationalism in Ireland. In persisting for years to come with his policies of reconciliation within the Union, Balfour was, however, sustained by a touch of optimism. This stood in contrast to his uncle's deep underlying pessimism. 
In October 1891 Balfour became first lord of the Treasury and leader of the House of Commons. Apart from the intervening Liberal governments of Gladstone and Lord Rosebery, in 1892-5, Balfour continued in this role until 1902, when he became prime minister. Having made an extraordinary effort as Irish secretary, he did not easily come to terms with the routine of patient attendance required of the leader of the Commons. After the Liberal victory at the elections of July 1892, he was noticed at Westminster 'beaming like a boy about to have a long-deferred holiday' (G. P. Gooch, 'The Life of Lord Courtney', 1920, 296). 
However, once installed in the Commons as opposition leader in 1892, Balfour blossomed. He presented an attractive contrast to his likely future parliamentary rival on the Liberal front bench, H. H. Asquith, the home secretary. Although Asquith was some four years younger, he seemed prosaic compared with Balfour, whose 'sunny nature' and 'light-hearted humour' were, in Lucy's opinion, of 'inestimable value' to a party leader in the Commons. 
In 1893 Balfour duly fought Gladstone's second 'Home Rule Bill' clause by clause, as did Chamberlain. The rejection of the bill by the House of Lords in September 1893 would provide Balfour with a contentious precedent when, as Unionist leader, he again found himself in opposition after his electoral defeat of 1906. 
When, in June 1895, Salisbury returned to office, Balfour again became first lord of the Treasury and leader of the House of Commons. Chamberlain and the Liberal Unionists, seventy-one in number, now sat on the government benches with the 340 Conservatives as members of a Unionist coalition. Chamberlain became colonial secretary and, by dint of his more forceful personality and more powerful platform oratory, could be mistaken as a serious rival to Balfour for the succession to Salisbury. Balfour also tended to muff set speeches through lack of preparation, but after Gladstone's retirement there was no one in the Commons to match him for finesse and resourcefulness in debate. Moreover, Conservatives continued to value the aristocratic and Anglican Balfour precisely because they saw him as an irremovable obstacle to the Unitarian manufacturer's hopes of becoming Unionist leader. 
The main areas of Balfour's constructive work before succeeding to the premiership in 1902 were to do with Ireland, education, and Britain's imperial position. 
Balfour was fully aware of the importance of open markets for British industry and thus of national prosperity, but, despite his work in Ireland, shared his uncle's deep distrust of government enterprise. They both believed that this meant waste and higher taxation, thus handing an electoral advantage to the Liberals, who also stood for government economy. But they agreed on persistence with constructive work in Ireland to save the Union. In November 1895 Balfour wrote to Chamberlain: 'Though I was the Minister principally responsible for the great expenditure in Ireland, I yet confess to have looked in alarm at any great extension of the system. It has led abroad to some of the worst kinds of parliamentary corruption, and has cast upon foreign exchequers some of the heaviest burdens by which they are overweighted. (Mackay, 'Balfour', 58-9)' From 1895 to 1900 Gerald Balfour (an MP since 1885) was chief secretary for Ireland. In 1896, with parliamentary help from his elder brother, he was able to pass a 'Land Law Bill' which further eased the purchase of land by Irish tenants; and in 1898 he followed this with an important 'Irish Local Government Act'. 
Meanwhile, Balfour's interest in foreign affairs and, increasingly, in defence policy is readily traceable back to 1878. In that year, as Salisbury's private secretary, he went to the congress of Berlin, and he also contributed to debates on relations with Turkey and Afghanistan. He showed that he was already concerned about the Russian advance towards India. British naval supremacy also, which Balfour consistently saw as fundamental, was increasingly challenged by the emergence of various industrializing states as naval powers. By the early 1890s it was the military combination of France and Russia which seemed the principal threat to the British empire. Moreover, Britain's small volunteer army seemed almost insignificant compared with the large conscript armies maintained by the leading continental states. 
Soon after the Unionist coalition took office in June 1895, Balfour made a serious effort to innovate a much needed scheme for the co-ordination of defence policy. But Salisbury's marked incapacity in this sphere was inextricably linked with his inborn horror of warfare. Consequently Balfour tolerated the appointment of an ineffective cabinet committee which, contrary to his own recommendation, did not provide for the attendance of the professional service chiefs. 
Taking a long view, the question of state education was doubtless of even greater importance for British economic and defensive strength than was the long overdue reform of the War Office or the co-ordination of defence policy. Yet, even if Balfour is deservedly remembered for the 'Education Act' of 1902 above any of his other constructive achievements, it cannot be said that it arose from a wholehearted enthusiasm for such a reform. He was not an eager reformer, especially where an increased burden of central taxation might be entailed. As far as the elementary schools were concerned, Conservatives and Liberals alike preferred to place the burden on the rates. However, since 1870 only the patchwork of locally elected school boards, fiercely undenominational for the most part, had been entitled to do this. The Liberal Party backed the school boards which sought to raise standards -- and therefore the rates. The denominational schools, with their Conservative links, had no rate support. To compete with the board schools they had to raise subscriptions or plead for government grants. 
When the Unionist coalition came to power in 1895 some of its formerly Liberal component, led by Chamberlain, continued to back the school boards. However, the Anglican majority of Unionists wished to save the denominational (otherwise called voluntary) schools. Balfour certainly agreed, not least because of the strong support given by Anglican voters to the Conservatives in the recent elections. 
Sir John Gorst, of Fourth Party antecedents, was the minister (without cabinet rank) in charge of the bill of 1896. This resembled the 'Education Bill' eventually passed by Balfour, but it was largely restricted to primary education. It proposed a national system of education committees for all of England and Wales, appointed by the county and borough councils, to replace the existing patchwork. Balfour intimated: 'I shall be content if we succeed in saving the Voluntary Schools: I shall 'not' be content if we fail in this object' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 73). He wanted no complications, yet such were the resentments aroused by the bill that Balfour's parliamentary skills were overborne. The bill was swamped at the committee stage with hundreds of amendments regarding the arrangements for religious instruction. 
Balfour consequently harboured no desire to be further involved in the question of state schools. However, in 1901 the attempts of the school boards to provide some education beyond the elementary level were shown to be illegal. A major bill to provide for a national system of primary and secondary education could no longer be easily avoided, whatever the political pitfalls entailed. The duke of Devonshire, as lord president of the council, had the chief ministerial responsibility, but it was clear that only the reluctant Balfour was capable of piloting it through the House of Commons. (In 1899 he had demonstrated his outstanding parliamentary and drafting skills in getting the 'London Government Act' passed.) While preparing the 'Education Bill' finally presented in March 1902, both Devonshire and Balfour derived invaluable assistance from R. L. Morant, a civil servant who had been Gorst's private secretary. 
By February 1902 Balfour was reminding cabinet ministers of their fundamental predicament, namely their 'great reluctance to compel the local authority to support the denominational schools' despite their 'great anxiety to prevent these schools from being squeezed out of existence' through lack of rate aid (Mackay, 'Balfour', 100). Devonshire supplied a tactically successful, but administratively deplorable, solution in the form of an adoptive clause. This allowed the local authorities to opt out of the system if they so wished. However, on 7 July, at the committee stage of the bill, Chamberlain happened to have a disabling cab accident; and on the 9th Henry Hobhouse, a Liberal Unionist squire, duly moved deletion of the adoptive clause. Balfour promptly allowed a free vote. The chaos threatened by the option had become sufficiently manifest. Crucially for the effectiveness of the bill, the amendment was passed by a large majority. 
However, Balfour knew that there would be an electoral price to pay. According to the diary of his sister Evelyn, he said on 10 July at a family dinner at 10 Downing Street 'that owing to the debate on the education bill he was beginning to hate both education and religion'. His mood was not lightened by Chamberlain's subsequent congratulations on his 'surprising patience and resource' in handling the bill, even if the Hobhouse amendment had 'brought all the fighting Nonconformists into the field' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 102). 
During the autumn Balfour (prime minister since 12 July) fended off Chamberlain's pleas for concessions to the nonconformists, and in October at Manchester he appealed to the country at large. Why, people had asked, had the government chosen to disturb 'the social peace' with this measure? 'The answer is this, that the existing educational system of this country is chaotic, is ineffectual, is utterly behind the age, makes us the laughing stock of every advanced nation in Europe and America'; and it was 'not consistent with the duty of an English government -- of a British government -- to allow that state of things longer to continue' ('The Times', 15 Oct 1902, 5). 
In December 1902 the bill became law and provided the basis of a badly needed improvement. However, apart from overcoming some of the more immediate difficulties, such as those orchestrated among Welsh nonconformists by David Lloyd George, it has to be said that Balfour showed little subsequent interest in the development of state schools. On the other hand, it was remarkable that a minister of his supra-departmental status took personal charge of an educational reform of such difficulty and magnitude. 
Continuous interest in university education combined with political prominence to make Balfour chancellor of Edinburgh University in 1891, an office he held until his death (on his eightieth birthday the university sent a special letter of thanks for his active chancellorship, during which the size and scope of university activities greatly expanded). As with defence problems, he rose above party in dealing with the fragmentation of London University. As early as 1887 he discussed the matter with the Liberal lawyer and educationist Richard Burdon Haldane. By an act of 1898, London University became a unified teaching entity; and in May 1902, despite his heavy involvement with the 'Education Bill', Balfour accepted Haldane's invitation to serve on a committee to set up the Imperial College of Science and Technology. Having become prime minister in July, he set up and served on a privy council committee which granted charters to the universities at Manchester and Liverpool in 1903 and subsequently to those at Leeds (1904), Sheffield (1905), and Bristol (1909). However, government provision in the scientific and technological fields continued to lag behind that given in Germany. 
In the later 1890s foreign affairs and defence received increasing attention from Balfour. Germany's advance in industrial power was by then causing some alarm in Britain, and the German navy law of 1898 was received with misgiving. However Balfour did not for some years regard the German navy as a primary threat. Until 1908 he continued to see Russia -- the military ally of France -- as the main threat to the British empire. Deputizing for his ailing uncle at the Foreign Office in the spring of 1898, Balfour was inclined to support Chamberlain's optimistic bid for a German alliance, despite the latter's failure to secure prior cabinet assent. Later in the same year, when again acting as foreign secretary, Balfour signed an agreement with Germany about a German loan to Portugal on the security of the Portuguese colonies in Africa. He thereby went further to conciliate Germany than Chamberlain, or indeed Salisbury, would probably have done. Balfour continued to hope for an acceptable alliance with Germany until the Anglo-Japanese alliance was signed in January 1902. 
In March 1901 George Curzon, now viceroy of India, informed Balfour: 'As long as we rule India we are the greatest power in the world.' In December, Balfour wrote to Lord Lansdowne, the foreign secretary, in less sanguine terms: 'The weakest spot in the Empire is probably the Indian frontier... A quarrel with Russia anywhere, about anything, means the invasion of India and, if England were with allies, I doubt whether it would be possible for the French to resist joining in the fray. (Mackay, 'Balfour', 124)' Balfour preferred, if possible, to join the triple alliance rather than to seek an ally in Japan -- a less civilized alternative, he thought. 
Meanwhile in October 1899 the government had drifted into the South African War, where Balfour's scepticism did not extend to significant criticism of the enthusiastic ambitions of Joseph Chamberlain and Alfred Milner. Staggered by reports of a series of early defeats, the public tended to complain of a lack of patriotic ginger in some of Balfour's speeches. But J. S. Sandars, his long-serving private secretary, noted his 'nerve and promptitude' in getting Lord Roberts appointed in place of the discredited General Buller; and Almeric FitzRoy, secretary to the privy council, wrote in December 1899: 'Certainly anything that brings me into contact with [Balfour] is a matter of congratulation. There is a freshness, a serenity, almost a buoyancy about him which is as attractive as it is inspiring' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 81-2). Cabinets of varied complexion would, especially in stressful times, find Balfour's presence a reassuring source of unconfused enlightenment for many years yet to come. At the general election in the autumn of 1900 Balfour was returned for Manchester East with a comfortable majority. Balfour was by now often tired -- 'fagged out' in Lord Balcarres's view (J. Vincent, ed., 'The Crawford Papers', 1984, 64), and his uncle's lassitude left him carrying much of the work of co-ordinating the government as the victories of 1900 turned to the concentration camp scandals of 1901-2 and the war proved, in proportion to the size of the enemy, one of the most expensive ever fought. By 1902 it was clear that Salisbury's health would not long delay Balfour's succession to the premiership. 
On 11 July 1902 Lord Salisbury, with what Julian Amery called 'characteristic insouciance', surrendered his seals of office to the king, without telling his colleagues (J. L. Garvin and J. Amery, 4.452). That afternoon the king sent for Balfour, who accepted his invitation to form a government, having first taken care to consult Joseph Chamberlain (in bed after his serious cab accident) and the duke of Devonshire. Though neither Joe nor the duke seriously expected the premiership for himself, Salisbury's handling of his resignation did not ease Balfour's start. He kissed hands on 12 July. As he was already first lord of the Treasury, there was no change of office and consequently no by-election. Balfour recognized the oddity of the situation by arranging that his successor as prime minister should be officially recognized as such. 
Balfour's inheritance from his uncle was inauspicious. The large parliamentary majority achieved by the 'khaki election' of 1900 was felt to have been based on a cheat, as jingoism turned to frustration. The Unionists faced major difficulties of finance, imperial organization, and a host of domestic social questions. Salisbury and the 'Hotel Cecil' were increasingly felt to exemplify the problem of archaic aristocratic power which prevented Britain from adequately confronting the new century; and Arthur Balfour was a chief inmate of that hotel. As far as the new prime minister was concerned, this view was in part misleading. Balfour was interested in modernization -- 'national efficiency' as the contemporary term had it -- and he had a wide range of contacts which included many Liberal Imperialists and the Webbs; in some respects, it is not fanciful to see him as a likely leader of coalition government. But his pessimism and his debts to his aristocratic Conservative associates prevented him from moving much beyond their camp. 
Balfour formed his government with no programme of constructive reform, but in view of his continuing involvement with the 'Education Bill' and his post-war quest for retrenchment, this is unsurprising. His large majority was to be used defensively. His search for economies is implied by his asking Hicks Beach to remain at the exchequer. Hicks Beach stipulated that his stay should be brief and that Chamberlain's proposals for a scheme of colonial preference should be left in abeyance. Balfour then appointed C. T. Ritchie, a resolute free-trader, as chancellor, an appointment which did not square with Balfour's subsequent actions. 
Balfour had for long studied the question of tariffs. In a world which, with the single exception of Britain, had been protectionist since the 1880s, he thought it obvious that Britain should be able to retaliate in kind against countries imposing tariffs on goods imported from her. Therefore he felt some sympathy with Chamberlain's contentious nostrum of an array of tariffs on British imports which could be lowered on goods coming from the colonies. But until May 1903, when Chamberlain publicly broached the idea of tariff reform, Balfour was left with something of a breathing space. 
In August 1902 Balfour was surprised by a question in the Commons as to when action on the co-ordination of defence policy might be expected. However, because he had given much previous thought to the subject, he was able at once to reply at some length. In view of the exceptionally complex problems involved in defending so great a colonial empire, he agreed that they could not 'leave this matter to one Department, or to two Departments acting separately' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 116). But despite long consideration, he had not yet settled on a remedy. In October H. O. Arnold-Forster, financial secretary of the Admiralty, made detailed suggestions. A month later, two of the several personal friends included in Balfour's cabinet, namely Lord Selborne, the first lord of the Admiralty, and St John Brodrick, the war secretary, urgently pressed Balfour for a decision. In the wake of the South African War, Brodrick envisaged a striking force of 120,000 men for use abroad and a like number of auxiliary troops for home defence; but he felt threatened by the prevalent 'blue water' philosophy. Balfour wanted a body which would assess the various strategic needs of Britain and her empire. He sought to contain defence expenditure while providing for the defence of India and taking account of Selborne's naval concerns. 
In December 1902 Balfour inaugurated the committee of imperial defence. At the first meeting on the 18th, the two service ministers and, crucially, their chief professional advisers were confirmed as permanent members. Initially, Balfour was content to let the duke of Devonshire (of the Hartington commission of 1890) take the chair, but, as this was a recipe for inaction, he was himself from the outset assiduous in his attendance. Whenever in office -- and sometimes when out of it -- he would, from 1903 until as late as 1928, contribute a series of unfailingly lucid, balanced, and knowledgeable memoranda on strategic and policy matters, and he would much enhance the value of the meetings by his active participation. As prime minister, Balfour lent crucial support to the radical naval reforms initiated by Admiral Sir John Fisher. These reforms increased fighting efficiency at a lower cost to the taxpayer. Fisher also had aggressive views on reform of the War Office. 
In August 1902 Balfour had added his old acquaintance Lord Esher to the royal commission on the earlier conduct of the South African War (a commission which Balfour had required his reluctant uncle, Lord Salisbury, to appoint). When it reported in July 1903, an illuminating note was appended by Esher. Clearly the reform of the War Office could no longer be delayed. Esher, however, declined to be the secretary of state for war, so Balfour turned to Arnold-Forster. But to tackle the problem of the War Office itself Balfour set up a special committee consisting of Esher, Fisher, and Sir George Clarke. When the Esher committee issued its reports in February and March 1904, Balfour gave it his indispensable backing. The dual system of secretary of state and commander-in-chief was at last abolished; an army council was established; a general staff was initiated; and the committee of imperial defence was provided with a secretariat. From December 1916 this body served Lloyd George's war cabinet, and from 1919 it provided a secretariat for the peacetime cabinet. 
During the Russo-Japanese War (1904-5) Balfour, by now formally presiding at the committee, was mainly concerned to avoid being drawn into war with Russia and her military ally, France. He saw the Anglo-French entente of April 1904 as a welcome diplomatic development, but nothing more. The defence of India and the maintenance of naval supremacy remained the chief objectives of his defence policy. 
Meanwhile, in March 1903, George Wyndham, who had been Balfour's private secretary in 1887-9, was presenting to the cabinet a major land purchase measure. Although the 'Irish Land Act' of 1903 crowned Balfour's efforts to establish a class of peasant proprietors in Ireland and helped to produce a more stable society, it could not eradicate Irish nationalism: home rule was no more 'killed by kindness' than it had ever been. Moreover, Chamberlain disliked the compensation given to landlords; and, now that he was convinced of German enmity to Britain, he was ready to embark on a crusade for a system of imperial preference. On 15 May 1903 his campaign was launched at Birmingham. 
For Balfour, Chamberlain's move proved disastrous. Because tariff reform entailed the imposition of food taxes, it antagonized the working classes. It made headway only among Unionists, while failing to convert many of the Unionist free-traders. At Westminster, Balfour faced defeat by either the more extreme tariff reformers or the most uncompromising free-traders finding common ground with the opposition. His party was as comprehensively split as any party has been, short of actual defeat. This Balfour avoided by skilfully preventing a vote being taken in the Commons on the tariff question. Balfour worked consistently to unite the party on his own policy of retaliation. This, he argued, would tend to promote worldwide free trade to Britain's advantage while avoiding deliberate protection of British industries. On this precarious footing, he contrived to hold on to power for another two and a half years. As Henry Lucy commented in August 1905: 'The most striking thing about the session is that it should have closed today. There are few members among the crowd who met in February who would have put their money on the duration of the session to such a date... That what is deemed impossible should have happened is due directly and solely to the stubborn will of one man. None but Mr Arthur Balfour would have carried the Government through.... He has answered at question time, made speeches in successive debates, and never committed himself by an embarrassing admission. That may not be the highest form of statesmanship. As an intellectual feat it is unparalleled. (Lucy, 'Balfourian Parliament', 408-11)' Even so, the government had thoroughly alienated the nonconformist middle class and encouraged it into vigorous political action.Balfour's cabinet was never harmonious, its political differences being accentuated by cliques which Balfour's handling of his colleagues encouraged. Lord George Hamilton later told Beatrice Webb that, whereas Lord Salisbury in cabinet addressed colleagues by their offices, 'when Balfour took his place, cabinets degenerated into cliquey conversations between 'Arthur' and 'Bob' and 'George' -- sometimes almost unintelligible in their intimate allusions, to the outer circle of the Cabinet' (Egremont, 167). In a cabinet memorandum of 1 August 1903 Balfour had carefully spelt out his views on the fiscal issue, published on 16 September 1903 as a booklet entitled 'Economic Notes on Insular Free Trade'. He asserted Britain's right to impose retaliatory tariffs against countries erecting protective barriers against British exports. Chamberlain on 9 September sent what was in effect an offer of resignation, and Balfour -- unbeknown to his colleagues -- had it in his pocket at the critical cabinet on 14 September 1903. At the start of this cabinet, however, Ritchie, the chancellor, who had written a counter-memorandum supporting free trade, and Lord Balfour of Burleigh were dismissed by Balfour. Chamberlain then also indicated his intention to resign so as to be free to crusade in the country for imperial preference. Following the cabinet the free-traders in it -- Ritchie, Lord George Hamilton, the duke of Devonshire, and Lord Balfour of Burleigh -- met and, without realizing that Chamberlain's resignation was being accepted (for they thought Balfour was favourable to Chamberlain), all decided on resignation save Devonshire. By the end of next day the resignations of all save Devonshire, and including Chamberlain, were accepted. Devonshire resigned a few weeks later. This was by any standards a spectacular debacle, and it remains hard to identify Balfour's game. Gollin has seen it as a crafty negotiation to purge the government and establish a Balfour-Devonshire axis. Balfour certainly baffled his colleagues, most of whom thought they had been in some way cheated by the premier, as did the king, who complained bitterly that resignations had been accepted and made public without his having been consulted. The resignations weakened the reputation of an already semi-discredited government; the ministry lost all the twenty-two by-elections held during Balfour's premiership except one (three months after he became prime minister). When even Oswestry was lost in July 1904 it was clear that a general election defeat of some magnitude was in the offing. 
Balfour hoped to play the patriotic and the Irish cards. As late as August 1905 he believed that his government's record could impress the electorate, but he needed to rally the dissident semi-faithful at the Conservative Party conference to be held in November. He put it to Sandars that success could be claimed in 'Ireland, Foreign Affairs, Colonial Policy, Education, National Defence', and even 'Social Reform'. Moreover, he could attach importance to the recent renewal of the Japanese alliance. Fisher had followed redistribution of the fleets with construction of the revolutionary 'Dreadnought' -- thus pre-empting the Germans. By way of social reform, Balfour had personally addressed the shortcomings of the licensing laws. Here again he had demonstrated his outstanding ability to overcome drafting difficulties, and the 'Licensing Act' of 1904 worked well over many years. He looked seriously at the problem of unemployment, but the increasingly fashionable view that philanthropy and self-help were no longer sufficient safeguards held little appeal for him. However, by June 1905 the cabinet was selecting prospective members of the royal commission on the poor laws (1905-9), including Beatrice Webb. But, lacking in common touch and in flair for party organization, Balfour had lost the centrist position which the 'national efficiency' campaign of the early 1900s had given him, and the ground of social reform had been increasingly captured, though not systematically occupied, by the Liberals, who in turn looked over their shoulders at the Labour Representation Committee. 
Balfour was, in fact, heading for a crushing electoral defeat. The tories offered less to their working-class voters than at almost any election in their history, and working-class voters probably felt less attracted to the tories than at almost any time in their history. Balfour was unable or unwilling to offer the trade unionists any recompense for the confusion caused by the Taff Vale judgment of 1901. Chamberlain, the former 'tribune of the people', was deemed to have promised pensions and given war. His proffered food taxes combined with a general reaction against imperialism to mark him out as a leader of the plutocrats rather than the common people. Balfour, though aristocratic, had avoided commitment to food taxes, but his 'Licensing Act' could make him seem to be the brewers' friend. The importation of Chinese labour into South Africa confirmed working-class resentment of the Unionists. In November 1903 Balfour had accepted the arguments deployed in favour of the policy by Lord Milner; but by September 1905 he thought that Milner's 'inexplicable illegality' in permitting corporal punishment of the Chinese had made the issue the 'worst rock ahead from a purely electioneering point of view' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 216-17). 
Even so, Balfour, like many others, had little appreciation of the full strength of the factors which, in remarkable combination, were about to overwhelm him and his party. He and Chamberlain tried to focus attention on the home-rule issue at a time when Ulstermen were bickering and the Union was not under immediate threat. The party organizations of the Liberals and the incipient Labour groups were lively and cohesive compared with those led respectively by Balfour and Chamberlain. Further immediate difficulties occurred in 1905; on 2 March George Wyndham resigned the Irish secretaryship after a prolonged public row about the terms of appointment of Sir Antony MacDonnell, a keen devolutionist, to Dublin Castle. Wyndham's nerves finally gave way and Balfour paid the penalty of having close family friends and relatives in his cabinet, for his explanations were inevitably circumscribed, and it was felt that Balfour had allowed, as his first biographer put it, 'the principle of Unionism to be tampered with' (Dugdale, 1.420). After an equally prolonged dispute over the partition of Bengal and the role of the commander-in-chief of the Indian army, Lord Curzon resigned on 28 August 1905 as viceroy of India, the only viceroy to resign on a question of policy. The Souls proved difficult to retain in office. In November 1905, at the Conservative conference, Balfour's own amendment to a Chamberlainite resolution was overwhelmingly rejected. Even the bulk of Conservatives had run out of patience with Balfour and his endless mastery of the parliamentary game. Balfour hoped that political disputes would resolve themselves by delay; in his case, delay compounded rather than solved his difficulties. 
On 1 December 1905 Edward VII accepted Balfour's resignation as prime minister. He was the last premier to cede power to the leader of the opposition without having first been defeated in a general election, and, indeed, his government had never suffered a serious defeat in the House of Commons (the usual reason for such a resignation). Balfour later explained that his party had come to lack the 'unanimous vigour' (Dugdale, 1.424) needed to pass a redistribution bill. In fact, Balfour hoped that Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's attempt to form a Liberal cabinet would founder on the reef of Ireland. Instead, Balfour handed over to his opponents the initiative of deciding on the dates and dictating the circumstances of the general election. As in September 1903, he baffled his party and the electorate by his over-scheming. 
As a result of the electoral landslide of January 1906 the Liberals, with 377 seats, found themselves in command of the House of Commons without depending on either the Irish nationalists (83) or Labour (53); the Unionists had 157 seats, as opposed to 334 in 1900. Balfour, having at the outset of the polling heavily lost the seat at Manchester East which he had held since 1885, was quick to draw a long-term consolation from the early results. On 17 January he suggested to Austen Chamberlain that 'the new Labour issue' marked the beginning of a new era in British politics which would, he thought, end 'in the break-up of the Liberal party' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 227). 
By 27 February 1906 a safe seat had been found for Balfour in the City of London, where A. G. H. Gibbs rather reluctantly made way, but his fortunes seemed at a low ebb. After a bout of influenza he reappeared in the Commons on 12 March. When he resumed his subtle evasions on the tariff question, he was derided in a house of dramatically new complexion. In the diminished Unionist Party the tariff reformers were now in the majority. Joseph Chamberlain's position seemed strong. By the 'Valentine letters' of February 1906 Balfour accepted Chamberlain's case for imperial preference; fiscal reform, Balfour agreed against his better judgement, 'is, and must remain, the first constructive work of the Unionist Party' (Ramsden, 25). However, in July Chamberlain was abruptly removed by a paralytic stroke from all prospect of the Unionist leadership. 
Meanwhile Balfour, with characteristic resilience, was already preparing a strategy to defend the established order against what he portrayed as incipient social revolution and a radical government untrustworthy on imperial and constitutional questions. In a notorious statement shortly after his party had been routed in the election, he declared: 'The great Unionist Party should still control, whether in power or in opposition, the destinies of this great Empire' (speech of 15 Jan 1906, Zebel, 151). In April 1906 he had taken up and refined a suggestion emanating from Lord Lansdowne. Selected Liberal measures would be stiffly opposed in the Commons and subsequently amended or rejected by the solid Unionist majority in the House of Lords. 
In the Commons it did not take long for Balfour to restore much of his former eminence as a debater; and by May 1908 his recognized expertise in defence matters was such that, notwithstanding his obduracy as leader of the opposition, he was invited to attend a meeting of the committee of imperial defence on the question of a possible invasion of the British Isles. Esher, whom Balfour had made a permanent member of the committee in December 1905, reported to the king that the Liberal ministers (now headed by Asquith) had been astonished by Balfour's 'statement, lasting about an hour, quite perfect in form and language, and most closely reasoned' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 172). Yet, as his anachronistic use of the House of Lords had already shown, Balfour remained above all a party leader and a party man. 
In 1907 five out of nine government measures had been blocked, and in the previous year an 'Education Bill' of nonconformist stamp had been abandoned, while a 'Plural Voting Bill' had been rejected outright by the Lords. It was on 28 June 1907 that Lloyd George quipped during a debate on the Lords' veto powers that the upper house was not so much a 'trusty mastiff' defending the public interest but 'Mr Balfour's poodle'. But Balfour and Lansdowne knew that electoral prospects would be harmed if the Lords blocked government bills enjoying widespread popular support. Therefore the 'Trades Disputes Bill' of 1906, which sheltered the funds of the unions from law suits, had been allowed to pass; and in 1908 the 'Old Age Pensions Bill' promoted by Lloyd George, who was now chancellor, was likewise enacted. In that year six other government measures passed while five failed. In 1907 Balfour opposed a move by Unionist peers to reform the composition of their house: he did so on the grounds -- described as 'disingenuous' in the official history of the Conservative Party (Ramsden, 32) -- that this would weaken the Commons. This was a difficult position to sustain, when Balfour's policy was to use the unelected chamber to decide which items of government legislation should reach the statute book. He met the objection -- though not very energetically -- by supporting in 1907 the idea of life peers. Balfour, as David Nicholls has shown, emphasized functionality rather than legalism in analysing institutions: 'from the point of view of politics, Function is more important than Structure' (BL, Add. MS 49962, fol. 40, Nicholls, 34), and the Lords, he believed, represented a functionally useful aspect of the constitution: 'it is only bad theory that asks for anything more' (Dugdale, 2.34). 
Meanwhile, with Joseph Chamberlain out of the active running Balfour remained fairly secure, if not popular, in the Unionist leadership. He was felt to be remote, supercilious, and vacillating. Balfour, for his part, disdained his critics: 'I am certainly not going to condescend to go about the country explaining that I am 'honest and industrious' like a second coachman out of place!' he told Lord Dalkeith in July 1907 (Egremont, 213). He had little to contribute to the restructuring of party organization in the wake of defeat. At the level of policy, in the interests of party unity he moved closer to the tariff reformers and they moved closer to him, though Balfour felt personally embarrassed by the distance this placed between him and his Cecil relatives, several of whom were prominent 'free fooders'. Appreciating that social reforms must be offered to the electorate, he sought to finance them by indirect rather than by direct taxation. In the face of some growth of support in the country for confiscatory socialism, Balfour was at last able to reunite the Unionists on a strategy not so much of imperial preference as of defending private property at home. 
By June 1908, however, the mounting strength of the German naval challenge was causing Balfour 'profound anxiety' and he encouraged the government, despite its programme of social reform, to build more ships. But the outcome was disconcerting. By the spring of 1909, the government found that it needed to find extra revenue not only to build more battleships but also to cover the true cost of old-age pensions. Thus was set in motion a sequence of events that proved dire for Balfour. 
In 1908 Balfour's tactics, aided by economic depression, seemed to be achieving something of a Unionist electoral recovery, the government losing all its by-elections, but Lloyd George's revolutionary budget of 1909 transformed the situation. Balfour and Lansdowne were initially, if reluctantly, inclined to let it pass; but on 30 July Lloyd George assailed the upper classes in the Limehouse speech. He ridiculed the rich, and especially the dukes, for demanding more warships and then expecting ordinary working people to pay for them. However, Balfour was now ready to offer a fiscal alternative to Lloyd George's redistributory proposals. If the Lords rejected the budget and a general election followed, the united Unionists could offer tariff reform, including some protection for British manufacturers and thus jobs. Balfour made it clear that he would resign the party leadership if the Lords did not reject the budget; Lloyd George's rather Balfourian tactic of attaching to the budget several items which, Balfour argued, were not strictly financial genuinely angered the Unionist leader. Balfour had launched the Lords on a course ultimately fatal to his own leadership of the party. 
The budget was duly rejected by the House of Lords on 30 November 1909 and parliament was dissolved on 3 December. At the general election in January 1910 the Unionists drew nearly level with the Liberals. However, with support from the Irish nationalists and the Labour Party, Asquith could continue to govern. The Lords now permitted the budget to pass but the Irish, with home rule now clearly in view, demanded removal of the Lords' powers of veto. From June to November Balfour was engaged in fruitless inter-party negotiations on the House of Lords and also on Lloyd George's imaginative proposal of a coalition. The election campaign of November and December 1910 saw Balfour trying to divert attention away from class cleavage to the enhanced danger of home rule. Only a few days before polling began on 3 December, he accepted advice from the Unionist press and Lansdowne to offer a referendum on tariff reform if the Unionists returned to power, hoping thus to allay working-class fears of food taxes. However the results of December 1910 gave the Unionists only 271 seats to the Liberals' 272, and the latter could also draw on the Irish home-rulers and the Labour Party. The prospects of the 'Parliament Bill', and therefore of home rule, were greatly improved. At the same time the resentment of many tariff reformers at Balfour's referendum offer weakened his hold on the party. 
From February to May 1911 the 'Parliament Bill' progressed through the Commons, thanks to rigorous use of the closure, and by early July it lay radically amended in the House of Lords. Balfour took the erroneous view that the king could be won over to the Unionist position and he had 'intrigues with the palace to give him [Edward VII] unconstitutional advice' (Ramsden, 38). There was, however, never much doubt that the Lords would not be allowed total intransigence, and that the direction in which Balfour had encouraged them could not, in fact, be sustained. On 7 July Balfour was informed that Asquith had, in the previous November, obtained from George V a pledge to create peers in sufficient number to secure the passage of the bill. On 21 July 1911 the shadow cabinet voted narrowly for compromise, and on 25 July Balfour announced that the Lords would be advised to pass the 'Parliament Bill'. He regarded the 'policy which its advocates call 'fighting to the last' as essentially theatrical, though not on that account necessarily wrong' (Dugdale, 2.70), a view whose fuller and earlier transmission might have saved some time in British politics. Lord Halsbury's last-ditch stand, supported by many peers and by several in the shadow cabinet including Austen Chamberlain, was thus a significant snub to Balfour, who left for Germany before the vital vote in the Lords on 10 August. Balfour's position as party leader was clearly becoming untenable. While in Germany he decided to resign, telling the chief whip and the party chairman in September, and his leading colleagues and the king in early November, and making his resignation public on 8 November 1911. From his party's point of view, Balfour had been as disastrous an opposition leader as he had been a prime minister. He left, moreover, no obvious successor. 
Balfour was sixty-three years old when he resigned as Unionist leader. Though he remained a member of the shadow cabinet it might have been expected that his political career was over. His first inclination was to turn back to philosophy. During his years as opposition leader he had served on the council of the Royal Society, in 1907-8, and was again on it in 1912-14. An invitation to give the Gifford lectures at Glasgow University allowed him to develop further his intellectual justification of a theistic philosophy. Despite some major distractions he was able to deliver, by the winter of 1914, ten closely reasoned lectures from his customary brief list of headings. The content was published in 1915 in 'Theism and Humanism'; from its fees attractive iron gates at Whittingehame were erected. 
Balfour's extended family, in which he took great pleasure, now included three nephews and eight nieces -- the children of his brothers Gerald and Eustace -- most of whom had grown up. Much as in the past, Balfour aired his lines of philosophical thought and discussed them with these young people who often stayed at Whittingehame. In her biography (published in 1936) Blanche Dugdale describes this as a particularly happy time in Balfour's life. The usual activities, especially lawn tennis, continued, as did the family's devotion to him. 
But meanwhile intimations of war were soon attracting Balfour's attention. From 1912 he was involved at the committee of imperial defence, where Maurice Hankey had begun his long career as secretary. Balfour tried without success to get Winston Churchill, the first lord of the Admiralty, to appreciate that submarines were essentially the weapon of the weaker naval power; and in correspondence with Admiral Lord Fisher it was Balfour who pointed out that, if war should come, U-boats would probably sink British and other merchant shipping without restraint -- 'for a submarine could not capture' (20 May 1913). 
Balfour did not attempt to guide the proceedings of Andrew Bonar Law, his successor as Unionist leader, but he became involved as the home-rule issue moved into its final and most dangerous pre-war phase. For Roman Catholic Ireland Balfour continued, as a last resort, to prefer a grant of independence rather than home rule. At the same time, he strongly supported the Ulster protestants in their demand for independence of Dublin. In 1913, when Asquith invited Bonar Law to secret talks at Cherkley on the question of Ulster exclusion, Balfour was alarmed that Asquith might find a solution and thereby spoil the chances of a Unionist victory at a general election; his speech at Aberdeen on 3 November 1913 was a strong waving of the Orange flag. Balfour's policy at this time recalled the policy of himself and Salisbury in 1885-6, when they had seen the especial advantages to the Conservatives of Liberal difficulties over Ireland. As Horace Plunkett noted, 'sometimes he plays the game when he ought not' (C. B. Shannon, 286). Balfour perhaps underestimated the political will of the Ulster Unionists and their willingness to take up arms, and he perhaps overplayed the party card. Even so, some, such as Hankey, saw him as a possible means of achieving an agreed settlement. This was an unrealistic reading of his mood. Asquith, for his part (and more accurately), in mid-July 1914 told the king that he would not have Balfour at the all-party conference because, on the home-rule question, he was 'a real wrecker' (R. Jenkins, 'Asquith', 1964, 320). 
After the outbreak of war with Germany in August 1914, the 'Government of Ireland Act' was set aside for the duration. Balfour did not question the rightness of the British decision to defend Belgium. Asquith appointed him a full member of the committee of imperial defence and in November he became a member of Asquith's war council. He was the only member of the shadow cabinet thus appointed, and he soon showed qualities of imagination and foresight. Balfour proved as shrewd a policy maker under others as he had been a disappointing party leader. He advised on home defence and wrote an important paper on the effect of high army recruitment on the economy ('Limits of enlistment', 1 January 1915, proposing non-enlistment for certain categories of key workers); and soon he became the leading spokesman, at the top political level, for the view that wastage of lives in France endangered Britain's long-term strength. In the new year he argued persuasively in favour of Churchill's proposal to attack the Dardanelles with ships alone. At the decisive meeting of the war council on 28 January 1915, it seemed that troops would not be available. However, it also appeared that the ships could be easily withdrawn if the bombardment failed, and in Balfour's view the alluring strategic possibilities made the venture well worth the likely cost. 
In May Churchill, at the time of his break with Fisher at the Admiralty, suggested that Balfour should replace Lord Kitchener at the War Office. Bonar Law, for his part, went to Lloyd George, who was still chancellor, to demand a new prime minister: Balfour, Grey, or Lloyd George himself. In the ensuing coalition Balfour, on 25 May 1915, became first lord of the Admiralty, the most important of the six cabinet posts offered to the Unionists. His status in the new cabinet was second only to that of Asquith himself. 
Fisher declined to serve under Balfour, blaming him even more than Churchill for the Dardanelles disaster. But with the scientifically inclined but undynamic Admiral Sir Henry Jackson -- a fellow of the Royal Society, like Balfour himself -- as first sea lord, Balfour restored professional opinion to pre-Churchillian shares of responsibility. In the North Sea the sound, unadventurous policy followed by Admiral Jellicoe in the early days of the war was maintained. Balfour remained, perhaps, unduly optimistic about the Dardanelles campaign, despite the military set-backs. Meanwhile, having for long admired Lloyd George as a political opponent, he was much impressed by his work, from May 1915, at the Ministry of Munitions. Balfour, however, differed from Lloyd George by opposing conscription; and in December and January he argued against further great offensives being mounted on the western front before the British forces had reached their peak. But he could not prevail against the military policies which culminated in July at the battle of the Somme. 
A little earlier, on 2 June 1916, Balfour took it on himself to draft a public communique based on Jellicoe's report of ships known to have been lost on either side at Jutland. After discussion, Balfour characteristically decided to publish the disappointing tally without reassuring comment, for example on Britain's unshaken command of the North Sea. This was, his niece wrote, 'a supreme example of Balfour's faulty understanding of the psychology of the common man' (Dugdale, 2.113-14). 
Towards the end of 1916, the U-boat problem was assuming very serious proportions. Already convoys were used for the protection of troop ships and cross-channel traffic, but Jackson and his advisers believed that a general system of convoys was obviated by a number of considerations. Of these one carried special weight, the lack of a sufficient number of escorts. On this, as on all naval matters, Balfour remained open to suggestion and plied his professional advisers with searching questions. 
In the summer of 1916 Balfour supported the solution proposed by Lloyd George, on Asquith's prompting, of immediate home rule for the south of Ireland, with Ulster deferred for the duration. He was, however, unable to persuade his Unionist colleagues and the proposed settlement collapsed, leaving the way clear for Sinn Fein. Balfour was ready enough to accept the Free State, for he always favoured independence for Ireland rather than home rule as long as Ulster was exempt. 'What was the Ireland the Free State took over? It was the Ireland that we made', he told his prospective biographer in 1928 (C. B. Shannon, 281). 
Balfour always opposed proposals for a negotiated peace in Europe, notably when Lord Lansdowne, his erstwhile colleague, presented his 'peace memorandum' to Asquith in November 1916, an initiative partly responsible for triggering the political crisis of the coalition. By December 1916 Balfour agreed with those who thought that a more quickly decisive prime minister was required, despite the fact that Asquith was determined to keep him as first lord. Realizing that Lloyd George, as part of his move to take over the running of the war, wanted a change at the Admiralty, and rather than see Lloyd George resign, Balfour pressed, from his sickbed, his own resignation on Asquith on 5 December. Asquith asked him to reconsider. When Asquith declined to serve in a cabinet led by Bonar Law, Balfour, in turn, asked Asquith to reconsider. On 6 December Balfour attended a meeting at Buckingham Palace and was unsuccessful in requesting Asquith to serve under Bonar Law. The upshot was the Lloyd George coalition. Many high-ranking sailors were sorry to see Balfour leave the Admiralty, admirals Jellicoe and Beatty included. Carson, Balfour's replacement, proved himself in major respects less capable, though he supplied a Balfourian deficiency by making regular visits to the naval bases and the Grand Fleet. 
Outstanding among Balfour's wartime services was his part -- rated by Bonar Law 'the biggest' -- in the resolution of the cabinet crisis ending with the formation of Lloyd George's coalition in December 1916. Although politics was Balfour's enduring passion and, at the time of the crisis, he remained in the ministerial first rank, he not only accepted Lloyd George's wish that he should leave the Admiralty but also supported the installation of his pre-war political adversary as prime minister. This selfless conduct -- not emulated by Asquith -- was entirely in the interest of a more energetic and decisive running of the war. Lloyd George, for his part, wanted a greater show of energy at the head of the Admiralty, but he deemed Balfour ideally suited to the Foreign Office, and had suggested him as a temporary substitute for Grey as early as March 1915 (Zebel, 202). This not unfamiliar employment Balfour accepted. In his memoirs Lloyd George later paid fitting tribute to the quality of Balfour's whole wartime contribution: 'his unfailing courage' which 'steadied faltering spirits in hours of doubt and dread' (Lloyd George, 2.1014). Indeed, Balfour never swerved from insistence on the military defeat of Germany. 
However, the fact remains that Balfour's role had been somewhat diminished. While, uniquely, he had unrestricted access to Lloyd George's small war cabinet, he was not a member of it. Even so, given the erosion of his political base within his own party, his continuance in one of the great offices of state testifies to Lloyd George's confidence in him, and perhaps to the latter's desire to keep the Foreign Office from the Liberals and from the Bonar Law Unionists. 
The first memorable episode of Balfour's term at the Foreign Office occurred in April 1917 when, at the age of sixty-eight and hating sea voyages, he went at the head of a mission to Washington. Balfour had for long attached much importance to Anglo-American friendship and, now that the American declaration of war on Germany was imminent, the war cabinet decided that 'someone of the highest status' in Britain 'who would have the entree to all circles, should proceed to Washington' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 313). Balfour 'very sportingly' (thought Hankey) agreed to go: he sought to establish a good rapport with President Wilson and smooth the way for American co-operation, especially in resisting the unrestricted onslaught of the U-boats against shipping, now at its height. Balfour did all that was asked of him. He was well received in the house of representatives when he addressed it, even by its Irish Catholic members (ironically, the previous MP to address it was Parnell in 1880). From the USA Balfour went to Canada, where he was also enthusiastically received when he visited Ottawa, Toronto, and Quebec. 
The question of Britain's role in the Middle East as the Ottoman empire disintegrated exercised the government from the start of the war. Balfour was much less enthusiastic about an extension of British responsibilities in the Middle East than some of his colleagues. By the time that he became foreign secretary the de Bunsen committee had reported, recommending a British sphere of influence in Palestine to the exclusion of France, and Mark Sykes had made his notorious agreement with Picot (May 1916) partitioning the area post-war, with Britain getting Palestine. Initially British policy was shaped by traditional strategic concerns, but as the war progressed the support of Jews in the USA and Russia became important. Balfour, like Lloyd George, was sympathetic to Zionism. When prime minister, he had supported Joseph Chamberlain's plans for Jewish resettlement in east Africa, and in the aftermath of those plans he had met Chaim Weizmann on 9 January 1906, in Manchester during the election campaign, who strongly impressed him. In his house in Carlton Gardens, he again met Weizmann in December 1914; Weizmann reported: 'Our talk lasted an hour and a half. Balfour remembered everything we had discussed eight years ago.... He said that, in his opinion, the [Jewish] question would not be solved until either the Jews became completely assimilated here or a normal Jewish society came into existence in Palestine. (Zebel, 241)' Further conversations followed in 1916 and 1917, and while in the USA Balfour also met influential Zionists, impressing Justice L. D. Brandeis with his 'quietly emphatic remark: 'I am a Zionist'' (ibid., 244). In the summer of 1917 strategic and Zionist concerns coincided to encourage the Foreign Office, Balfour, Lloyd George, and, from 3 September 1917, the war cabinet to contemplate a public statement. A delay occurred through the strong opposition from Edwin Montagu, representing an important section of British Jewry, who argued that a Jewish national home would be disadvantageous to the position of Jews in their present countries, and from Curzon, who drew attention to the problems that a 'national home' would cause with and for the existing Islamic population in and around Palestine. On 5 October Balfour consulted the American government on a draft more cautious than the original. He gained the Americans' agreement (on condition that they were not publicly associated with the declaration), and on 2 November 1917 what was at once known as the Balfour declaration was published in the form of a letter from Balfour to Lord Rothschild; it stated that the British government favoured 'the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people' on the clear understanding that there should be no disadvantage to 'the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country' (facsimile in Stein, frontispiece). Of the many initiatives of the British government in the First World War, it perhaps cast the longest shadow. Balfour told the cabinet that it implied a 'British, American, or other protectorate' and not the early establishment of an independent Jewish state (cabinet minutes, Zebel, 247). Balfour pressed for the acceptance and publication of the declaration with unwonted energy and uncharacteristic personal commitment, hard to explain in terms of his background and other beliefs. 
Just after the publication of the Balfour declaration and following the revolution in Russia, Lord Lansdowne published in the 'Daily Telegraph' (29 November 1917) his plan for a negotiated peace; a muddle arising from a discussion in the street led Lansdowne initially to think that the letter had the foreign secretary's approval, a curious misjudgement on the writer's part. Arguing against Churchill and others, Balfour declined to see a priority interest in defeating Bolshevism and he hoped the Bolsheviks could be kept in tow, but the maintenance of an active eastern front was his determining priority; he therefore opposed aid to the White Russians, but also supported British intervention to prop up the war effort in north Russia and Siberia, a position which led to muddle and acrimony (Young, 402). Even after the end of hostilities, and with the need to keep the Russians active against the Germans and Austrians gone, Balfour remained hostile to intervention against Bolshevism: 'If Russia chose to be Bolshevik, we should not gainsay it', he wrote in a memorandum on 29 November 1918 (Tomes, 229). Balfour's efforts were focused on attempting to maintain freedom for the Baltic states from both Russia and Germany. In 1920 Balfour stated that he hoped Britain would never formally recognize the Bolshevik regime, but it was not until the 1924 general election that Balfour, for reasons of domestic political advantage, played the anti-Bolshevik card (ibid., 233-4). 
As the war ended, Balfour and the Foreign Office prepared a British approach to the peace. Balfour had always hoped the German and Austrian empires could survive defeat, and initially stated: 'I don't want to trample her [Germany] in the mud' (Zebel, 255), though he later modified this view. He supported the maintenance of the coalition led by Lloyd George to oversee the peace and the aftermath of war, announcing his views in an exchange with Bonar Law in November 1918. In the 'coupon' election in December 1918, Balfour was again returned for the City of London. At the Paris peace conference of 1919 Balfour inevitably played second fiddle to Lloyd George (they both had apartments at 23 rue Nitot). However, early on, during the temporary absence of the national leaders, Balfour did valuable work in expediting preparations for their return. Hankey, who was now the secretary of the peacetime cabinet, commented on 'Balfour's extraordinary aptitude', despite some recent ill health and his seventy years, 'for rising to the occasion'; and Robert Vansittart, a member of Balfour's diplomatic team in Paris, aptly conveys in his memoirs the respect and affection which Balfour -- as in days gone by -- inspired in his subordinates: 'It was hopeless to avoid devotion to AJB, and I never tried.' Even so, Balfour's reputation during the negotiations was that of a man withdrawn, even somnolent, allowing others to set the pace (Tomes, 163). Balfour may have simply been tired during the exhausting sessions in Paris, but his absence of intervention may also have been conditioned by a recognition that the conference must make rapid progress with its vast agenda if it was to retain legitimacy, and above all that the Europeans must not estrange by prevarication the attachment of the USA to the settlement. 
Balfour remained less hostile to the Germans than some of the British delegation. He accepted the need for reparations but recommended the easing of the blockade. When asked if the German foreign minister had not behaved insultingly when remaining seated on receiving the allies' peace terms, Balfour remarked: 'I did not notice. I do not stare at a gentleman in distress' (Zebel, 260). The German treaty having been signed in June, Balfour remained as leader of the British delegation until the Austrian treaty was concluded in September. Minority treaties were negotiated with the many successor states. Ironically, Balfour negotiated for eastern Europe a settlement based on just the recognition of nationalities which his political career at home had been dedicated -- in the case of the Irish -- to preventing. As Lloyd George's foreign secretary, he had performed his tasks with admirable patience, good humour, and undiminished ability. 
On 23 October 1919 Balfour, exhausted by continuous major office since 1915 and now in his seventy-second year, exchanged offices with George, Earl Curzon, but this did not mean the end of his prominent role in foreign affairs (nor did he, as many expected, take a peerage). While lord president he represented Britain on the council of the League of Nations. He was under no illusions about the likely potential of that body without the United States, but he recognized that it had its uses. Therefore, despite some ill health and disinclination to travel to Geneva, he led the British delegation there each autumn during 1920-22. According to Gilbert Murray, who was a delegate to the league from 1921 to 1923: 'AJB dominates the Assembly, easily and without effort.... It is partly mere charm and unassuming dignity, partly his great prestige, partly a real diplomatic power of making almost anyone do what he wants.... He makes no effort and is irresistible. (Mackay, 'Balfour', 328)' Balfour's flexibility with respect to the league was marked. Its idealism would seem far from Balfourian scepticism of temperament, but he had been honorary president of the League of Nations Union from 1918, and, though equivocal about the league's likely efficacy and though, as foreign secretary, leaving the details of the negotiations about its formation to his cousin, Lord Robert Cecil, Balfour's presence and support were of importance in establishing the status of the league as a body with wider support than that of its enthusiasts. He was sceptical about each of the tenets of the league, but he none the less thought it worth a try. 
In 1920 the committee of imperial defence was revived with Hankey again as its secretary, while remaining also secretary of the cabinet; and soon Balfour, too, was back in a prominent role. By 1921, when an important international conference was in prospect at Washington to deal with naval limitation and related Asiatic questions, Lloyd George, who was preoccupied with Irish matters, had no doubt that Balfour was the man to send. Although the relevant treaty marked the formal end of British naval superiority, American willingness to accept parity with Britain was, in the light of superior American shipbuilding capability, a great boon. On his return to Britain in March 1922, Balfour was acclaimed as a statesman of international renown. The king made him a knight of the Garter and pressed an earldom upon him. On 5 May, with some reluctance, he was created earl of Balfour and Viscount Traprain and ended his long association with the Commons. Curzon was ill for much of the summer of 1922 and Balfour was acting foreign secretary. As such he issued the 'Balfour note' of 1 August 1922 advocating the cancellation of all war debts but, failing that, stating Britain's need to exercise her own claims to the extent needed to pay her own debts to the USA -- a generally poorly received, if forward-looking, initiative. 
Balfour had consistently supported the Lloyd George coalition from its inception, believing that it offered the best available counterweight to socialism in Britain. But when, in March 1921, the Coalition Liberals rejected fusion with the Conservatives, the outlook for national reconstruction under Lloyd George was bleak. Balfour was furious at the hostility of Bonar Law and Curzon to the coalition. At the famous meeting at the Carlton Club on 19 October 1922 he spoke for the continuance of the coalition, an appeal rejected by 188 to 88 votes. Lloyd George and his ministers at once left office. 
Balfour did not go over to the new prime minister, Bonar Law, and indeed was in effect again a party leader, though without a party. He was pessimistic about Conservative chances. However, though unwilling to join the government, he again became British representative at the league in Geneva, resigning in February 1923. In March 1923 he played a part in an extensive inquiry into defence policy, in spite of suffering from a protracted, though not very serious, breakdown of health. 
In May 1923 the king sounded Balfour's opinion as to whether Lord Curzon should succeed Bonar Law as prime minister; Balfour advised against. Balfour felt himself qualified to answer the subsequent enquiry whether 'dear George' would be chosen. His reply was: 'No, dear George will not' (Churchill, 287). 
However, Balfour's high public standing was no longer reflected in his private financial status. He and his brother Gerald had invested heavily, before the war, with what his second biographer describes as manic intensity (Young, 321), in an enterprise aiming to produce a supply of industrial fuel from processed peat. Unfortunately they both persisted with this loss-making venture after the war by financing a company called Peco, which went bankrupt. By 1922 Balfour, who had never had to worry about money, was having overdraft problems; and in 1928 he was working on his 'Chapters of Autobiography' (not completed; published posthumously in 1930, edited by Mrs Dugdale) with an eye to the royalties. But he never freed himself from debt and his family could not, as he had hoped, live at Whittingehame House after him. 
In the 1920s Balfour maintained an energetic level of non-political activities. He had been made a member of the Order of Merit in 1916. In 1919 he became chancellor of the University of Cambridge, an office he held until his death. He was an active chancellor, playing a part in the raising of money from Rockefeller for the new university library in 1928 (on the death of H. M. Butler in 1918, there was some suggestion that he might become master of Trinity College, but nothing came of this). One of the founding fellows of the British Academy, he was its president from 1921 until 1928, the longest tenure of the office in its history -- 'a strangely inactive' period, according to Mortimer Wheeler, during which Balfour 'lent the majesty of his name for no less than seven years without imperilling it by the utterance of an annual address' (M. Wheeler, 'The British Academy', 1970). While president, however, Balfour gave his second series of Gifford lectures, and in 1923 the published version of these appeared as 'Theism and Thought'. It was to the academy that he delivered his final reflections on philosophy, 'Familiar beliefs and transcendent reason', in 1925. He declined the presidency of the Royal Society in 1920, thus turning down what would have been a unique double. He wrote an introduction to 'Science, Religion and Reality', edited by the young Joseph Needham in 1925. 
In May 1923 Bonar Law was succeeded as prime minister by Stanley Baldwin. Although Balfour gave him public support, Baldwin did not at once offer him a cabinet post. However, when Curzon died in April 1925 it was Balfour who filled his place. By then Baldwin was more securely in the saddle and Balfour, as a peer and increasingly deaf at the age of seventy-six, could at last no longer be seen as a possible prime minister. 
But Balfour continued to illuminate the proceedings of the committee of imperial defence as he had done when out of office in 1923. In that year, as a member of the Salisbury committee on co-ordination of defence and chairman of its special subcommittee on relations between the navy and the air force, he decided to back the RAF in its wish to continue to train and administer the Fleet Air Arm. This arrangement was not reversed until 1937, unfortunately. But in 1923 the RAF's existence as an independent service was under threat and Balfour saw its survival as the main priority. 
It was at a meeting of the main Salisbury committee on 10 May 1923 that Balfour, when discussing the outlook for peace, said that he had been gradually driven to conclude 'that nothing, not the League of Nations or anything else' would ensure peace except 'the certainty of every civilized man, woman and child that everybody will be destroyed if there is war' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 346). Research, he believed, might produce this ultimate solution. 
In the opening months of 1925 Balfour toured the Middle East, attending in his robes as chancellor of the University of Cambridge the opening of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and being entertained by Chaim Weizmann. Arab protests required him to cut short his tour. While in Palestine, Balfour was invited by Baldwin to replace the deceased Curzon as lord president; he took office on 29 April. His chief achievement during this last period of office was the chairing (as a result of Baldwin's lumbago) of the inter-imperial relations committee at the Imperial Conference in 1926, from whose unanimous report derived the 'Statute of Westminster' (1931), defining the relations of dominions (of European settlement) within the empire. 
At the committee of imperial defence in 1926 Churchill's proposed Ministry of Defence met with Balfour's usual scepticism on this subject. But despite a severe set-back to his health in March 1928 Balfour, on his final appearance in July, showed good judgement in condemning as 'dangerous' and 'wholly impracticable' Churchill's move, as an economizing chancellor, to place his ten-year rule on a daily forward-moving basis. He also wanted additional spending on naval anti-aircraft weapons ahead of cruisers. 
As lord president Balfour continued to take a close interest in scientific and technological developments, especially within the bodies for which he was responsible, namely the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Medical Research Council; during both his periods as lord president he was an assiduous attender at their meetings. It was said that the 'Lord Presidency used to be considered a general utility office. He [Balfour] converted it into a Ministry of Research' (Sir Frank Heath, quoted in Rayleigh, 46). Always concerned about the future of the British economy, he instituted a committee of civil research which, with the prime minister sometimes in the chair, reported on fourteen important subjects (such as overseas loans, the safeguarding of the iron and steel industry, and unemployment) before ill health in the autumn of 1928 finally removed him from active work. Out of courtesy and respect, Baldwin insisted on his retaining his office until the end of the government in May 1929. 
Meanwhile, on 25 July 1928, his eightieth birthday, Balfour was presented at Westminster with a well-chosen tribute from both houses of parliament -- a Rolls-Royce. He had for long been a motoring enthusiast. Mrs Dugdale noticed how Balfour, in responding, addressed his earlier remarks 'almost personally to Lloyd George' (Dugdale, 2.397). 
Apart from a number of colds and occasional influenza, Balfour had enjoyed good health until the year 1928. He remained until then a regular tennis player. At the end of that year most of his teeth had to be removed and he began to suffer from the unremitting circulatory trouble which ended his life. Late in January 1929 Balfour was conveyed from Whittingehame to Fisher's Hill, his brother Gerald's home near Woking, Surrey. In the past he had suffered from occasional bouts of phlebitis and by the autumn of 1929 he was immobilized by it. Finally, soon after receiving a visit from Weizmann, Balfour died at Fisher's Hill on 19 March 1930. At his own request a public funeral was declined and he was buried on 22 March beside members of his family at Whittingehame. Despite the snowy weather, attenders came from far and wide. By special remainder, the title passed to his brother Gerald. 
Balfour's lack of popular rapport was reflected in rather rapid public discounting of his memory, but he was in his day a fertile source for artists and cartoonists. His features, which seemed both hard and languid, were perhaps best caught in the oil sketch by Sir James Guthrie ('c'.1925, NPG), and his character was brilliantly satirized by Max Beerbohm, for whom Balfour became something of an obsession, and by Francis Carruthers Gould, whose daily cartoons in the 'Westminster Gazette' in the 1900s amicably depicted the disintegration of Balfour's government. 
As an intellectual statesman, Balfour achieved rare distinction, especially during the later years of his long career. Before he became prime minister, his wholehearted identification with the main strands of his uncle's Conservatism provided the political basis of his increasing mastery of the parliamentary game. Less eminent in the Commons after the watershed elections of 1906, his inexhaustible skill as a debater nevertheless remained a feature of life in the house until he retired from the Unionist leadership in 1911. Among his increasingly rare subsequent appearances in the Commons was his memorable rebuttal, on 8 March 1916, of Churchill's attack on his regime at the Admiralty. This brought Churchill to admit that Balfour was 'a master of parliamentary sword-play and of every dialectical art' (Mackay, 'Balfour', 291). 
In addition to his parliamentary roles Balfour undertook a remarkable amount of supra-departmental constructive work. While never an eager reformer, he established over the years a reputation for sagacity which was recognized across the party-political spectrum, initially in the foreign and defence areas of policy and latterly on a broad international plane as well. 
Historical interpretations of Balfour's life have not changed radically. While there has been a journalistic tendency to sense undiscovered mysteries in a man of such intelligence and achievement wrapped in so languid an exterior, this bafflement has not been experienced by his biographers; and the emphasis already placed by Sir Robert Ensor, in 'England' (1936), on Balfour's constructive achievements as prime minister remains valid, despite the many refinements and amplifications flowing from subsequent research. His life was recorded in two volumes (1936) by his niece, Blanche Elizabeth Campbell Dugdale, which while interesting on the personal side was no more than a competent memoir. Balfour's political papers were given to the British Library, though a significant deposit remained at Whittingehame together with several family memoirs. Material from both deposits was used to good effect in Kenneth Young's biography (1963); it, with Sydney H. Zebel's political biography (1973), Max Egremont's life (1980), and Ruddock Mackay's study (1985), are the chief works of research, though many aspects of Balfour's long career have their own studies, notably Perry Curtis's 'Coercion and Conciliation in Ireland, 1880-1892' (1963). 
Balfour was never a nostalgic Conservative, acid though his comments on change often were. The intellectual tone of the twentieth century was more welcome to him than the religiosity of Victorian society in his youth. He adapted well to political change once it had happened. Though he had what his second biographer calls 'a certain touch of almost feminine wilfulness' (Young, 322), he was able to abandon intellectual positions without regret once they had become impracticable. His niece recalled that 'he was never shaken in his belief that the younger generation was better than the one before' (Balfour, 655), and this was reflected in his general approach to life and public affairs. Essentially melancholy at heart and in important respects pessimistic, Balfour was, even so, 'capable at times of a soaring imagination' which allowed him to change a generation as the passing of time required (ibid., 656). Indeed, it was once he had shed the Cecil entanglements of his youth that his most constructive years in public life began. 
Balfour believed that his main constructive achievements were in Ireland and Palestine. In a longer perspective, however, his 'Education Act' can be seen as more substantially beneficial. Although arising from political exigencies rather than reforming zeal, it stands out in tribute to Balfour's tenacity and intellect, and to his ability to produce out of strong parliamentary cross-currents a workable major bill. In the sphere of defence, he amply repaired the lamentable effects of Salisbury's antipathy to the subject. During the First World War he put aside party advantage to an extent which his earlier partisanship would not have suggested, and he played a significant role as an elder statesman -- the only former prime minister involved in the crisis -- in the appointment of Lloyd George to the premiership in December 1916. If he lacked the rapport with the general public possessed by the greatest prime ministers, his counsel proved its special value at the highest political level throughout the exceptional number of twenty-seven years that he served as a member of the cabinet. 


@@@@@


doc= 30554


Balfour, Lady Frances (1858-1931), suffragist leader and churchwoman, was born at Argyll Lodge, Kensington, London, on 22 February 1858, the fifth daughter and tenth of twelve children of George Douglas Campbell, eighth duke of Argyll (1823-1900), and his first wife, Lady Elizabeth Georgiana Leveson-Gower (1824-1878), the eldest daughter of the second duke of Sutherland. Lady Frances's youth was spent at the three Campbell residences: Inveraray Castle, the ancestral home in Argyll; Rosneath Castle in Dunbartonshire; and Argyll Lodge in London. Her formal education was provided by an English governess. However, the main method by which she learned throughout her life was by listening to and participating in the conversations, particularly at the dinner table, of her parents, in-laws, and male acquaintances, especially ministers and politicians, whose company and friendship she preferred. Lady Frances had a congenital hip dislocation, which left her with one leg shorter than the other and necessitated her wearing a built-up shoe on her right foot. Restless and energetic, she attributed her hot temper to the bedrest which she was forced to endure throughout her childhood for the pelvic disability from which she suffered all her life. 
On 12 May 1879 Lady Frances Campbell married Eustace James Anthony Balfour (1854-1911), youngest brother of Arthur James Balfour, later prime minister. Their five children were reared in their home at 32 Addison Road, Kensington. A fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects, Eustace was a partner in the London architectural firm of Balfour and Turner Ltd. He also served as surveyor and architect of the duke of Westminster's London estate from 1890 to his retirement in 1910. In addition, he was active in the London Scottish Volunteers, which he commanded, as lieutenant-colonel from 1894 to 1903. In 1903 he was appointed an aide-de-camp to Edward VII. Since Lady Frances destroyed all Eustace's letters to her, it is difficult to discern much about their marriage. Frances's mercurial temperament, Eustace's alcoholism, his extended holidays on the continent away from his family, and his preference for the military life seem to suggest that the marriage was not particularly congenial to him. While Eustace may not have provided her with the intellectual companionship she sought, Lady Frances had great love and affection for her husband; this love and loyalty motivated her support for Eustace in his disputes with his sister Alice Balfour, concerning his excessive drinking, and explain Lady Frances's refusal to accept alcoholism as acceptable grounds for divorce when she sat as a member of the divorce commission. Frances and Eustace were opposites in temperament and interests, and thus were concerned with different spheres of activity. While Eustace turned to the volunteer movement, Lady Frances found intellectual companionship with politicians and clerics, especially her brothers-in-law Arthur and Gerald Balfour, as well as Sir Robert Finlay, Robert H. Story, Archibald Fleming, Alexander Macrae, and A. J. Milne. 
With one exception, Frances's relations with the Balfour family were close. Her sister-in-law, Lady Betty Balfour, Gerald's wife, was her closest friend, feminist ally, and literary executor; as such, she edited and preserved Lady Frances's papers. However, relations between Lady Frances and Alice Balfour, the unmarried sister who managed Arthur Balfour's households, were often strained, not least because of their competition for Arthur's favour and approval. Lady Frances had little appreciation of the difficulties which Alice encountered in managing Arthur's very active households, and found Alice tedious and petty, while Alice had difficulty accepting Frances's candour and insensitivity to the feelings of others, especially those in her own family. 
Like many of her generation Lady Frances first found opportunities for social service through the 'social purity' campaigns. Thus, in 1885 she became president of the Travellers' Aid Society, which provided temporary lodging to protect young country women seeking work in the cities from the snares of white slavery procurers, and she remained president until her death in 1931. 
In 1889 Lady Frances began her political work when she joined the campaign to secure the enfranchisement of British women. Indeed, she was one of the highest ranking members of the aristocracy to assume a leadership role in the women's suffrage movement. One of the few women of her class to agitate for votes for women from the 1880s onwards, she became a leader of the constitutional suffragists. Her feminism, like much of the rest of her political philosophy, derived from her personal experiences. In her youth and adolescence she heard the arguments against slavery advanced by members of her family (her mother and grandmother, Harriet, duchess of Sutherland, were ardent abolitionists). As a young woman she was thwarted in her desire to become a nurse and frustrated because she could observe, but not aspire to a seat in, parliament. Thus, as a feminist, Lady Frances espoused equal rights for women and was absolutely convinced that women should be permitted to study and train for careers in all the professions on the same terms as men: she eloquently supported her niece Ruth Balfour's decision to study and practise medicine. But Lady Frances wanted no part in the sex war into which the suffragettes led by the Women's Social and Political Union ventured, and deplored the tactics of the militants. While she did not believe women should be exalted on pedestals, she believed that advocates of women's rights were wrong in viewing men as 'enemies' in order to achieve their objective of complete equality for women. Her feminism, as Olive Banks has observed, was 'rooted in nineteenth century concepts of freedom and democracy' (Banks, 12). In a lengthy obituary, the 'New York Times' (26 February 1931, 28) noted that, '[s]ince the attainment of the vote for women [Lady Frances Balfour] had sought to obtain equality of legislation relating to divorce and other matters involving both sexes, in addition to laboring for the liberty of women in various phases of industry and society'. 
Lady Frances was involved in almost every aspect of the suffragists' work. As Norman Maclean, a personal friend, noted, 'She had a personal magnetism and a gift of making friends no less remarkable than her courage and her crusading spirit' ('DNB'). Her contributions to the suffragist movement included marching, speaking, and writing for the cause. She helped lead the 'Mud March' of February 1907 and was a popular speaker, averaging approximately three speeches a week to suffragist meetings from Inverness to Plymouth during 1910-12. Lady Frances was, as Maclean observed, 'A mistress of invective,... [who] wielded the dagger of sarcastic wit with the same zest as her ancestors had wielded the broadsword'. 
Lady Frances served on the executive committee of the National Union for Women's Suffrage Society from its inception in 1897 until 1918, when British women over the age of thirty were accorded the vote. In addition, she was president of the London Society for Women's Suffrage, the largest women's suffrage society in Britain, from 1896 to 1919 and an active member of the editorial board of 'The Englishwoman', launched in 1909. 
However, Lady Frances's most effective work for women was her less publicized personal efforts to influence British politicians and members of parliament on behalf of the 'cause'. She was in many ways the real political heir of her father, the eighth duke of Argyll, a whig-Liberal government minister for more than twenty years and a renowned orator. Through marriage her relatives included the Princess Louise, the fourth daughter of Queen Victoria, who married Frances's eldest brother, John Douglas Sutherland Campbell, later ninth duke of Argyll, and Lord Salisbury, the prime minister, and uncle of the Balfours. While Lady Frances was constrained to observe parliament from behind the grille in the ladies' gallery, at tea time and in the hallways of parliament she lobbied members on behalf of her special cause. Her vast range of contacts in the Liberal, Conservative, and Unionist parties made her one of the most valuable participants in the suffrage fight. After her father broke with Gladstone in 1881, Lady Frances followed the duke into the ranks of the Liberal Unionists, a move which proved a workable compromise for one married into a staunchly Conservative family. 
After the vote had been secured for women, Lady Frances's work for women's rights and equality continued through the National Council of Women. She became a member of the executive committee in 1917 and in 1921 was elevated to the presidency. Following her retirement as president in 1923, she served as one of the organization's vice-presidents until her death in 1931. In recognition of her services to women's rights, Lady Frances was named one of two female members of the royal commission on divorce and matrimonial causes which sat from 1910 to 1912. She was, in addition, the first chairman of the Lyceum Club, and a member of the executive committee of the Women's Municipal Party, which encouraged women of all parties to stand for election to councils. Honorary degrees from the University of Durham (DLitt 1919) and the University of Edinburgh (LLD 1921) provided further recognition of her service and talents. 
Keenly interested in the religious establishment, Lady Frances included among her close acquaintances many prominent clerics. Her major religious endeavours were made on behalf of the interests of the Church of Scotland, where she was a staunch defender of tradition. Although she usually rejected and denounced such innovations as closing hymns with three Amens, she supported all church efforts to provide equal opportunities for women. Her work for women's enfranchisement within the church included serving as the only president of the Scottish Churches' League for Woman's Suffrage, an organization which she helped to establish in 1912. From 1893 until 1930 she was one of the few women who regularly attended the annual meeting of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, becoming a familiar 'fixture' in the Throne Gallery. Frail and infirm, she made one of her last trips to the general assembly in May 1929 to see the Church of Scotland reunited. 
Lady Frances's most significant work on behalf of her church was undertaken from 1905 to 1909, when she effected the rebuilding of Crown Court Church in London's Covent Garden. Besides serving as the only woman on the rebuilding committee, she personally raised almost all the money to finance the project, and secured as its architect her husband Eustace and as its treasurer her brother Lord George Campbell. Lady Frances succeeded to the presidency of the Crown Court Church's Woman's Guild following the death of her sister, Lady Victoria Campbell, in 1910 and served in this capacity until her death. 
Lady Frances published numerous articles and letters in British periodicals and the daily press. After her husband's death in 1911 she wrote her first book-length publications, mainly to supplement her limited income. In addition to a two-volume autobiography in 1930, 'Ne obliviscaris: Dinna Forget' (a reference to the Campbell motto), she wrote five biographies: 'Lady Victoria Campbell' (1911), 'The Life and Letters of the Reverend James MacGregor' (1912), 'Dr Elsie Inglis' (1918), 'The Life of George, Fourth Earl of Aberdeen' (2 vols., 1923), and 'A Memoir of Lord Balfour of Burleigh' (1925). 
Lady Frances Balfour died at her London home, 32 Addison Road, Kensington, on 25 February 1931 from pneumonia and heart failure. She was buried at Whittingehame, the Balfour family home in East Lothian. 


@@@@@


doc= 30555


Balfour, George William (1823-1903), physician and cardiologist, was born at the manse, Sorn, Ayrshire, on 2 June 1823, the eighth of the thirteen children of Lewis Balfour DD and Henrietta Scott Balfour, third daughter of George Smith DD, the minister of Galston who was satirized by Robert Burns in 'The Holy Fair'. Balfour had an academic pedigree: his father was the grandson of James Balfour (1705-1795), professor of moral philosophy and of public law at Edinburgh, and his mother was the granddaughter of Robert Whytt (1714-1766), physiologist, and professor of medicine at Edinburgh from 1747 to 1766. 
After being educated at the local school in his father's Colinton parish on the outskirts of Edinburgh, Balfour decided to emigrate to Australia, and to that end he obtained a diploma in veterinary surgery in 1841. However, after completing his studies he abandoned his emigration plans and decided to join the medical profession. He continued his education in Edinburgh where he was a student of anatomy under Robert Knox of Burke and Hare fame. By using his veterinary studies to gain exemptions he graduated MD at St Andrews in 1845 -- when he also became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. In 1846, after acting as resident medical officer in Edinburgh's maternity hospital, Balfour went to Vienna where he studied the clinical methods of J. Skoda, the pathological researches of C. L. Sigmund, and the homoeopathic treatment of W. Fleischmann. On his return from Austria he started a successful career as a medical author by enterprisingly publishing papers summarizing his Viennese teachers' current work. 
Balfour began his medical work by establishing himself as a general practitioner in the countryside around Edinburgh; he spent a year in Corstorphine before moving to Cramond, where he practised until his return to the capital in 1857. The good reputation he gained in Cramond allowed him to earn a living in Edinburgh's competitive medical market place, and his efforts to build a practice were further helped in 1861 when he became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. In 1866 he was appointed physician to the city's Royal Hospital for Sick Children and he also became a physician at the Royal Public Dispensary. He was elected a physician to the Royal Infirmary in 1867 and was made consulting physician there in 1882 on the expiry of his term of office. Balfour won some recognition at the infirmary as a clinical teacher, though contemporaries were more apt to praise his bedside teaching than his formal lecture-theatre presentations. Nevertheless, Sophia Jex-Blake and other women medical students did praise his teaching; Balfour was an early supporter of women's medical education and at the infirmary he conducted three special ward rounds for women students each week. He continued to support Jex-Blake throughout her career and he was on the executive committee of the School of Medicine for Women. 
During his professional advancement Balfour did not neglect his writing career. A paper on haematophobia published in 1858 questioned the routine use of bloodletting. In 1865 he published 'An Introduction to the Study of Medicine'. In 1868, following a suggestion of his father-in-law, James Craig of Ratho, he wrote two able papers on the treatment of aneurysm by iodide of potassium, and from then on he specialized in cardiology. Balfour's book 'Lectures on Diseases of the Heart and Aorta' (1876) greatly enhanced his reputation (it includes Balfour's test to ascertain whether the heart is still active in cases of apparent death); the work also features in J. M. Norman's 'Morton's Medical Bibliography' (1991). Another book by Balfour, 'The Senile Heart' (1894), was of equal quality and established him as Scotland's premier cardiologist. Indeed with Sir William Tennant Gairdner in Glasgow and Charles Hilton Fagge in London, Balfour made the most important contributions of his generation to the clinical study of disorders of the circulation. 
Balfour, who was interested in bibliography, was librarian to the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh from 1873 to 1882 and from 1887 to 1899. He was president of the college from 1882 to 1884 and was a member of the university court of St Andrews for many years. He received the honorary degree of LLD at Edinburgh in 1884, and at St Andrews in 1896. He was appointed physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria in 1900 and honorary physician to Edward VII in 1901. 
Balfour was married three times: to Agnes (died 1851), daughter of George Thomson, in 1848, with whom he had one son, Lewis; to Margaret Bethune (died 1879), eldest daughter of James Craig, of Ratho, in 1854, with whom he had eight sons and three daughters; and in 1881 to Henrietta, daughter of John Usher, who survived him. His eldest brother, John Balfour (died 1887), was a surgeon to the East India Company and served throughout the Second Anglo-Burmese War and during the Indian mutiny before returning to Britain, where he practised at Leven, Fife. Another brother, Mackintosh, spent his life in India, where he was manager of the Agra Bank. Robert Louis Stevenson (1850-1894) was the son of Balfour's sister, Margaret Isabella. Balfour took a close interest in his nephew's health, and Stevenson called him 'that wise youth my uncle' ('Letters', 140); Balfour was the first to learn (by cable) of Stevenson's death in Samoa. He later wrote a short introduction to Margaret Stevenson's 'From Saranac to Marquesas and Beyond' (1903). It is suggested that although Balfour could appear to be somewhat forbidding, he charmed his friends with his quaint humour and culture. In 1899 Balfour retired from Edinburgh to Colinton, the home of his youth, where he died at his home, Westfield, after a long illness, on 9 August 1903. He was buried in Ratho churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 30556


Balfour, Gerald William, second earl of Balfour (1853-1945), politician and psychical researcher, was born on 9 April 1853, in Edinburgh, the seventh of eight children of James Maitland Balfour (1820-1856), MP, sportsman, and country gentleman, and his wife, Lady Blanche Mary Harriet Gascoyne-Cecil (1825-1872), daughter of the second marquess of Salisbury. Among his three sisters and four brothers were Eleanor Sidgwick and Arthur James Balfour, first earl of Balfour. After their father's early death from tuberculosis, the children were raised by Lady Blanche, whose deep evangelical faith and sense of duty to humanity influenced them profoundly. In due course Balfour became a communicant in both the Church of England and the Church of Scotland. When not attending school, he spent most of his youth at the family estate of Whittingehame in East Lothian. During the Christmas holiday of 1863 he nearly died of diphtheria, but was nursed through the crisis by his mother and Sir James Simpson, summoned from Edinburgh for the purpose. 
Balfour was educated at Eton College, where he came under the influence of Oscar Browning, and in 1871 entered Trinity College, Cambridge. His striking intelligence and attractive personality won him election to the Cambridge Conversazione Society, better known as the Apostles, and in 1875 he came fifth in the classical tripos. In 1872, on his mother's death from heart failure, he had inherited some $21,000, which enabled him to postpone decisions about his future. Initially, an academic career at Cambridge attracted him. In 1878 he became a fellow of Trinity and lecturer in classics. Already, however, he was drawn to philosophical studies, and by autumn 1881, he had abandoned Cambridge for a life of metaphysical speculation in Florence. Settled at the Villa Capponi, Balfour pondered his 'system of ultimate categories of thought', as Walter Leaf recalled (C. M. Leaf, 'Walter Leaf, 1852-1927', 1932, 89). Another visitor, his brother-in-law Henry Sidgwick, reported in 1883 that Balfour's 'system is still in a germinal state', and it never advanced much further. Balfour's Florentine idyll was tragically interrupted in the summer of 1882 when he accompanied to England the body of his brother Francis Maitland Balfour, killed in an alpine accident. 
Back in England permanently by the mid-1880s, Balfour was drawn into the heady London social circle of the Souls and fell under the spell of the flirtatious Laura Tennant, who rejected his marriage proposal in 1884 (Jalland, 106-7). In 1887 he embarked on a long and successful marriage to Lady Elizabeth Lytton ['see 'Balfour, Elizabeth Edith, countess of Balfour (1867-1942)], eldest daughter of Edward Robert Bulwer-Lytton, the first earl of Lytton. By then Balfour had succumbed to the family penchant for politics, having been elected Conservative member for Central Leeds in 1885. He retained his seat through four subsequent general elections, until the Conservative debacle of January 1906, when he was defeated and retired permanently from politics. 
On first entering parliament Balfour briefly served as private secretary to his brother Arthur, president of the Local Government Board. Thereafter, from 1886 to 1895, he played no major part in the Commons, although he was a member of the royal commission on labour, appointed in 1891. In 1895 he was named chief secretary for Ireland in Lord Salisbury's third administration and pursued the goal of rendering Irish nationalism irrelevant: he shepherded through parliament the 'Land Purchase Act' of 1896 and the 'Local Government (Ireland) Act' of 1898, while also promoting progressive policies for Irish economic development. In 1900 he was sworn of the privy council and accepted the presidency of the Board of Trade. In that capacity he endorsed the export tax of 1's'. per ton on coal and bore responsibility for the 'Port of London Bill' as well as the 'Sugar Convention Act'. He cautiously leant towards imperial preference in the great debate over tariff reform that rocked Arthur Balfour's premiership of 1902-5. In March 1905, Gerald Balfour transferred to the presidency of the Local Government Board, where he remained until the Conservatives resigned from office in December. 
Balfour's was a respectable, though hardly distinguished, parliamentary career, and historians have subsequently shown little interest in it. In politics he was always eclipsed by his brother, whose repertory of debating skills included an incisive wit which Gerald altogether lacked. Indeed, the latter's style on the floor of the house inclined to donnishness. His qualities of thoroughness, detachment, accuracy, and discernment made him, however, a valued colleague, and, as prime minister, Arthur Balfour often turned, in confidence, to 'Gerry' for advice. 
After leaving politics Balfour pursued a variety of public and private interests. He was chairman of the royal commission on lighthouse administration in 1906-8 and, in 1919-22, chaired the Cambridge committee of the Asquith royal commission on Oxford and Cambridge universities, for which service he received the honorary LLD. Together with Arthur Balfour he invested heavily in schemes to convert peat into commercial fuel, and by the 1920s had lost substantial sums of money on these unsuccessful ventures. 
The interest that absorbed Balfour most from 1906 until the end of his life was psychical research. Although he had joined the Society for Psychical Research in 1883, shortly after its establishment, and became a council member in 1890, he was inactive until he became the society's president in 1906. Several members of his family were also involved in psychical research, but it was Eleanor Sidgwick who worked most closely with him in exploring the mental phenomena of mediumship. They both became convinced of the possibility of telepathy, and Balfour was eventually persuaded that discarnate intelligences could communicate telepathically with the living. He also suggested that the human organism is polypsychic -- that is, that each self is composed of numerous psychic centres that might be able to communicate with one another telepathically. 
Balfour's main contribution to psychical research was the collation and interpretation of what became known as the 'Palm Sunday' scripts, some 3000 pieces of automatic writing collected primarily from four automatists during the first thirty years of the twentieth century. Sifting through the documents, while comparing their terms of reference and classical allusions as these emerged over the decades, Balfour concluded that they demonstrated a coherent and sustained attempt to communicate with the living by numerous deceased relatives and friends, especially May Lyttelton, whose death on Palm Sunday 1875 had terminated her budding romance with Arthur Balfour. In 'The ear of Dionysius' (1917) and 'A study of the psychological aspects of Mrs Willett's mediumship' (1935) -- Gerald Balfour's major papers in the 'Proceedings' of the Society for Psychical Research -- he focused on the work of one of the automatists, Mrs Winifred Coombe-Tennant, who used the pseudonym Mrs Willett. The long-sustained inquiry into these scripts, which prompted his only significant excursions into print, left Balfour confident that individual consciousness survives bodily death. The conviction afforded him personal reassurance and comfort, although it did not convert many sceptics. 
In private life, Balfour and Lady Betty, an advocate of women's suffrage, enjoyed a close companionship that ended only with her death in 1942. They had six children, one son and five daughters, among them the first president of the Soil Association, Lady Evelyn Barbara Balfour (1898-1990). Balfour's unworldly serenity, devotion to family, and high standards of integrity earned him deep personal esteem and affection from those who knew him well, although those who did not tended to find him aloof and humourless. Beatrice Webb described him as a 'medieval and saintly knight', while Lady Jebb recalled that his fellow Trinity undergraduates had dubbed him 'the BVM' for his 'divinely beautiful face' (M. R. Bobbitt, ed., 'With Dearest Love to All: the Life and Letters of Lady Jebb', 1960, 175). Throughout his life, he retained his classical good looks, and, standing 6 feet tall, he cut a handsome figure even in extreme old age. While his children were young, he and Lady Betty spent half the year at Whittingehame, the site of extended family gatherings. After the First World War, however, their own home at Fisher's Hill, near Woking, Surrey, increasingly became the centre of Balfour reunions. Eleanor Sidgwick had become a permanent resident there during the war, as did Arthur Balfour in 1929, a year before his death. 
In 1930, by special remainder, Gerald Balfour succeeded to the earldom bestowed on his brother in 1922, but the last years of the second earl's life were overshadowed by the family's reduced economic position. The main house at Whittingehame had to be vacated, and Balfour depended on his salary from various company directorships. At his death on 14 January 1945, aged ninety-one, he was living in Lady Eleanor's Cottage on the Whittingehame estate, where he was buried. His son, Robert Arthur Lytton, Viscount Traprain, succeeded him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30557


Balfour, Henry (1863-1939), museum curator, was born at 6 Bedford Villas, Dingwall Road, Croydon, on 11 April 1863, the son of Lewis Balfour (1833-1885), silk broker of Croydon, and Sarah Walker Comber (1836?-1916). Educated at Charterhouse School and Trinity College, Oxford, Balfour obtained a second class in natural science (biology) in 1885. As a result of the influence of H. N. Moseley and E. B. Tylor, Balfour became interested in anthropology: even before he took his degree he and W. B. Spencer were helping Tylor and Moseley to arrange Pitt Rivers's collections, which had been given to the University of Oxford in 1883. After taking his degree Balfour continued working at the Pitt Rivers Museum. In 1887 he married Edith Marie Louise (died 1938), only daughter of Robert Francis Wilkins of Kingswear, south Devon; she shared his many interests, his work, and, until her health began to suffer, his travels. They had one son. He was appointed curator of the museum in 1891, a post which he held until his death. He became a research fellow of Exeter College in 1904 and was re-elected in 1919. 
Balfour taught technology and prehistoric archaeology for the Oxford diploma course in anthropology which began in 1907. Later he also taught for the Sudan, tropical African, Malay, and Burmese civil service courses. Balfour always lectured in the museum using the objects on display as his examples, and he learned many of the techniques employed in their manufacture and use to demonstrate to his students. Teaching gave him contact with undergraduates and with a long succession of colonial civil service probationers and of officers on leave from service overseas. In turn it led to a series of lifelong friendships which considerably enriched the collections both in numbers of objects and in the quality of documentation. 
Throughout his life Balfour enjoyed travelling. In the earliest days his travels were connected with his continuing interest in zoology, as is to be seen in the drawings and observations in his diaries. Five times between 1905 and 1909 Balfour travelled to Norway where he studied the habits of whales and whalers. He also made a collection of artefacts for the museum. Each of his journeys was driven by the quest for knowledge and by the wish to add to the series of objects contained in the Pitt Rivers Museum. His honeymoon was spent in Lapland. In southern Africa he became the first to detect palaeolithic implements in the gravels of the Zambezi rivers and to correlate them to prehistoric European types. His visits to southern Africa were used to help him to direct knowledge of other parts of that continent. In Assam he travelled widely on foot through the Naga Hills. His most wide-ranging journey was to Australia and New Zealand and islands in Indonesia and the Pacific with a return via Japan and the USA. When he was confined to England as a result of arthritis, a voluminous correspondence with scholars worldwide enabled him to enhance the collections beyond the expected colonial heritage typical of most anthropological collections. 
Balfour was a man of great energy and many interests. As an undergraduate he had a great reputation as oarsman and as a talented fencer, and as a lecturer, it is said, his demonstrations of boomerang throwing in the university parks led to a prohibitionary statute after he accidentally hit a nanny pushing a pram. He was a natural draughtsman; his drawings, still to be seen in the Pitt Rivers Museum displays, also enrich his travel diaries, and his command of caricature is seen in the illustrations he provided for the illustrated programmes for the Oxford University fencing club. An active member of many learned societies, Balfour became president of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1904 and of the Museums Association in 1909; he was president of the Folklore Society in 1923-4, of the Royal Geographical Society from 1936 to 1938, and of the Prehistoric Society of East Anglia (later the Prehistoric Society). He was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society in 1924. 
Throughout his life Balfour remained first and foremost a curator. He was renowned for his 'austere dedication' to his work; left in comfortable financial circumstances after the death of his parents, he supplemented the meagre university staff allowance from his own funds. This single-mindedness was tempered by a talent for friendship, his considerable charm, and a lively sense of humour. His energy and determination gave him the strength to battle on behalf of the museum against plagues of rats, leaking roofs, and the threatened takeover by the Royal Flying Corps in the First World War. One anecdote especially serves to illustrate his dedication to the furtherance of knowledge. While cataloguing alone late one night, he accidentally cut himself with an arrow tipped with the poison curare. Knowing that there was no available antidote, and believing that his death was therefore imminent and unavoidable, he resolved to keep notes of the progressive effects of the poison for the elucidation of others. Fortunately it had degraded or otherwise lost its effectiveness, and he lived to tell the tale. 
Balfour's powers of observation were acute, refined by his training as a zoologist, and he became an admirable collector as well as a naturalist. He was perhaps the first to demonstrate that the drumming or bleating of snipe is caused by the vibration of the outer tail-feathers, and this same analytical eye is shown in his observations made in his travel diaries. A trained scientist, he was admirably suited to curate a museum based on a system of classification. The museum owes much of its present plan of displays to Balfour. It owes its tradition of teaching to him also, together with its rich documentation of the objects in the collection. 
The Pitt Rivers Museum absorbed Balfour's energies: collecting and documenting the objects, and then arranging and labelling them (his handwritten labels are still a much-loved feature of the museum). With the exception of 'The Evolution of Decorative Art' (1893) he did not write books, but was a prolific writer of short articles on many topics, notably musical instruments, archery, anthropology, and archaeology. These articles encouraged others to send him information, all of which he added to the documentation which underpins the Pitt Rivers's collection. He was a catalyst, his articles often seminal, and many remain standard works today -- some of his firsthand observations remain the only accounts of practices long since discontinued. For him the museum was an important vehicle for disseminating knowledge, to his own students in the lectures he gave there, to scholars studying the collection or for the school teachers, and to children whose visits he encouraged. He saw his educational philosophy as being more widely applicable, telling the Royal Anthropological Institute in his presidential address of 1904: 'Few people have any idea of the great wealth of human interest there is buried in the data accumulated in the journals of our societies, or illustrated by the specimens locked up in the cases and drawers of our museums. It is this practically unexploited wealth of interest and information that we should endeavour to disseminate.' The Pitt Rivers Museum remains as much a monument to Balfour's scholarship as to its founder's. 
In 1935 the University of Oxford conferred on him the title of professor. In later years Balfour suffered from arthritis, and kept a Rolls-Royce and chauffeur to permit him to stay mobile in a degree of comfort. He died at his home, Langley Lodge, Headington, on 9 February 1939. His bequests made him one of the Pitt Rivers's major donors: he not only gave an important collection of objects but also bequeathed his library of several thousand books, which formed the founding collection of the Balfour Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 30558


Balfour, Sir Isaac Bayley (1853-1922), botanist, was born at 27 Inverleith Row, Edinburgh, on 31 March 1853, the third child and second son of John Hutton Balfour (1808-1884), professor of botany in the University of Edinburgh, and his wife, Marion, daughter of Isaac Bayley, of Edinburgh, an attorney. As though predestined to repeat his father's career, Balfour spent much time in boyhood roaming the Royal Botanic Garden, where he won an early grounding in plantsmanship at the hands of the curator and staff. His formal education was at Edinburgh Academy and Edinburgh University, where he specialized in botany, graduating BSc in 1873. He later studied under Julius von Sachs at Wurzburg and with Anton de Bary at Strasbourg. From 1875 to 1878 he acted as lecturer in botany to the Royal Veterinary College; for this he was required to obtain a medical qualification and so became assistant to Charles Wyville Thomson, professor of natural history at Edinburgh, for two years, working with T. H. Huxley, Thomson's substitute during his absence on the 'Challenger' voyage. He graduated MB in 1877 and MD in 1883. 
In 1874 Balfour had served as botanist-cum-geologist on an expedition sent to Rodriguez Island in the Indian Ocean to observe the transit of Venus. His report on the island's flora, published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1879, established him as a plant taxonomist and gained him a DSc. That same year Balfour spent seven weeks on another Indian Ocean island, Socotra, investigating its flora and geology. Working up the rich collections he made there occupied his spare time over the next eight years and his 'Botany of Socotra' (1888), including descriptions of some three hundred new species, was to be his most substantial published work. 
Balfour crowned that golden year of 1879 by obtaining the regius chair of botany at Glasgow. However, his stay in that post proved short, for in 1884 he secured the Sherardian chair of botany at Oxford, combined with a fellowship of Magdalen College. In that year he married Agnes Boyd, daughter of Robert Balloch, merchant, of Glasgow. They had one son and one daughter. 
During his tenure at Oxford Balfour established relations with the Clarendon Press, inducing it to found, in 1887, the 'Annals of Botany', a quarterly journal intended to publish results from experimental botanical research. Under his editorship, the press also produced a series of translations of continental textbooks. In 1888 Balfour returned to his native Edinburgh on his appointment as professor of botany in the university, queen's botanist in Scotland, and regius keeper of the Royal Botanic Garden, three positions earlier held by his father and which he was to hold for a third of a century, until shortly before his death. 
Balfour's main interest was in rhododendrons and primulas, on which he was recognized as the foremost authority; he also did valuable work on the propagation of plants and the germination of seeds. But his influence was greatest as an administrator, in which role he displayed exceptional ability. In each of the universities which he served he found a department needing reorganization: in Glasgow he saved the herbarium and secured rebuilding of the plant houses, in his few years at Oxford, where he found botany in a sorry state, he did the same, and in both he reorganized the teaching on modern lines. But he did most at Edinburgh: there he reconstituted the botanical garden, rebuilt its plant houses, enlarged the laboratories, and created a new rock-garden, no less renowned than his father's. For a quarter of a century Balfour was the most effective all-round botanist in Britain. 
Balfour was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1884 and created KBE in 1920. The University of Edinburgh conferred on him an honorary LLD in 1921. The next year ill health prevented his assuming the presidency of the British Association and realizing his intention of writing a history of the Edinburgh botanic garden, and his death followed, at Court Hill, Haslemere, on 30 November 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 30559


Balfour, John Blair, first Baron Kinross (1837-1905), advocate and politician, born at Clackmannan on 11 July 1837, was the second son (in a family of two sons and a daughter) of Peter Balfour (1794-1862), parish minister of that place, and his wife, Jane Ramsay (died 1871), daughter of Peter Blair of Perth. Educated at Edinburgh Academy, of which he was 'dux' (leading scholar), he passed to the University of Edinburgh, where he had a distinguished career, but did not graduate. Passing to the Scottish bar on 26 November 1861, he rose with almost unexampled rapidity to be the foremost advocate in Scotland, his only rival being Alexander Asher. On 4 August 1869 he married Lilias Oswald, daughter of Donald Mackenzie, Lord Mackenzie, judge of the supreme court of Scotland. She died on 19 June 1872, having had one son. On 6 April 1877 he married Marianne Elizabeth (died 25 Sept 1913), daughter of James Moncreiff, first Baron Moncreiff, lord justice-clerk of Scotland. They had four sons and one daughter. 
Balfour first engaged prominently in politics at the general election of April 1880, when he contested North Ayrshire, as a Liberal, against Robert William Cochran-Patrick, afterwards permanent under-secretary for Scotland. Balfour was defeated by fifty-five votes, but was returned unopposed for Clackmannan and Kinross on 1 December 1880 on the appointment of W. P. Adam, the sitting member, as governor of Madras. Appointed immediately solicitor-general for Scotland in Gladstone's second ministry, he in 1881 succeeded John McLaren as lord advocate. He was made honorary LLD of the University of Edinburgh in 1882, and became a privy councillor in 1883. He remained in office until the Liberals lost power in 1885. For nearly 150 years before 1885 the lord advocates had been practically ministers for Scotland; but during Lord Salisbury's short-lived administration of 1885-6 the ancient office of secretary of state for Scotland, which had been abolished at the close of the Jacobite rising of 1745-6, was revived. Balfour was thus the last of the old line of lord advocates, and, though he was always stronger as a lawyer than as a politician, managed the affairs of Scotland with ability in the face of considerable difficulties caused by the crofter question and the movement in favour of home rule for Scotland. In 1886 he was again lord advocate, but left office when the Gladstone government was defeated in June that year on the Irish question. In 1885-6 and again in 1889-92 he was dean of the faculty of advocates. From 1892 to 1895 he was once more lord advocate under Gladstone and Lord Rosebery, and, during that period, took a prominent part in carrying through the House of Commons the 'Local Government Act' for Scotland (1894), by which parish councils, framed on the model of the English act, were established. 
The defeat of the Rosebery government in June 1895 was the end of Balfour's official career; but at the ensuing general election he was again returned by his old constituency, and remained in parliament until 1899. In that year the lord president of the Court of Session, James Patrick Bannerman Robertson, became a lord of appeal, on the death of William Watson (Lord Watson), and so high was the estimation in which Balfour was held that the Conservative government bestowed on him the vacant office. 'I have never in my life known an appointment which gave such universal pleasure', Lord Rosebery said at a banquet given by the Scottish Liberal Club in honour of Balfour's appointment. On 15 July 1902 Balfour was raised to the peerage as Baron Kinross of Glasclune. His health, which had begun to fail before he left the bar, broke down rapidly after he became a judge. Balfour died on 22 January 1905 at 6 Rothesay Terrace, Edinburgh, and was buried in the Dean cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 30560


Balfour, Sir (Thomas) Graham (1858-1929), author and educationist, born in Chelsea on 2 December 1858, was the only child of Surgeon-General Thomas Graham Balfour and his wife, Georgina, daughter of George Prentice of Armagh. On his father's side he was closely connected, through the Balfours of Pilrig, with Robert Louis Stevenson. He was educated at Marlborough College and at Worcester College, Oxford. His school life was partly impaired by ill health; at the university he obtained a first class in classical moderations (1880) and a second class in 'literae humaniores' (1882), and won distinction as a rifle shot. 
In 1885 Balfour was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, but he found the practice of advocacy uncongenial, and his chief piece of work was his contribution (the chapter on Battersea) to Charles Booth's 'Life and Labour of the People in London' (1891-1903). For a time he travelled extensively, and in 1891, after the death of his parents, he accepted Stevenson's invitation to make his home at Vailima, Samoa. On Stevenson's death in 1894 Balfour returned to England. In 1896 he married Rhoda, daughter of Leonard Dobbin Brooke of Birkenhead; they had two sons. The Balfours settled at Oxford, where he wrote his two principal works. His 'Educational Systems of Great Britain and Ireland' appeared in 1898 and rapidly became a standard authority; his 'Life of Robert Louis Stevenson', written at the request of Stevenson's family for the Edinburgh edition of his works, followed in 1901, and established Balfour's reputation as a biographer. 
During Balfour's residence in Oxford he served the delegacy of local examinations, first as examiner, then as assistant secretary. In 1902 he was appointed director of technical education, and in 1903 general director of education, to the county of Staffordshire. His appointment came at a critical time following the 'Education Act' of 1902 which had remodelled the educational administration of England. The organization of resources and provision now replaced religion as the central issue in elementary education, and Balfour has been accounted highly successful in dealing with the changed priorities. His task was to build up the local education service serving a population of 600,000 and to co-ordinate the existing authorities which comprised five county boroughs, nine boroughs and urban districts with powers over elementary education, and twenty-nine school boards. His administration of education in Staffordshire became an example to the country at large. In his first ten years forty-nine new council schools were built. Although the product of a classical education, with no experience of industry or commerce, he successfully promoted technical education, extending the pottery school at Stoke, and establishing the technical colleges at Wednesbury and Wolverhampton and the mining college on Cannock Chase. He was a pioneer both of school gardens and of school libraries. In his report, 'Ten Years of Staffordshire Education, 1903-1913' (1913), he described how the new county education committee had sought to administer rather than to control, and had tried to leave as much initiative as possible to school managers and teachers. The addresses on educational administration that he gave to the University of Birmingham in 1921 were considered to be models of their kind. 
In 1907 Balfour received the honorary degree of MA from Cambridge University and in 1924 that of LLD from the University of Birmingham. He was knighted in 1917. He served as chairman of the association of directors and secretaries of education (1908), and as a member of the reconstruction committee on adult education (1917-19), the committee on the position of science in education (1916-18), and the consultative committee of the Board of Education (1926-9). During the last year of the European war (1918-19) he served as director of education in France (lines of communication) for the YMCA. 
Balfour retired in 1926 and returned to Oxford, where he became a member of the city education committee, the delegacy for extramural studies, and the council of Barnett House. He died at 4 Blackhall Road, Oxford, on 26 October 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 30561


Browne, (William Alexander) Francis Balfour- (1874-1967), entomologist, was born on 27 December 1874 at 16 Ebury Street, London, the eldest of the two sons and two daughters of John Hatton Balfour-Browne KC, later of Goldielea, Dumfries, and his wife, Caroline, daughter of Sir Robert Lush, lord justice of appeal. He showed an early interest in natural history, but received little encouragement other than prizes for collections of birds' eggs and beetles while at St Paul's School, London. At Magdalen College, Oxford, he found that the first part of the botany course had been covered at school, so he obtained permission to spend a term at Edinburgh University, where the field botanical excursions left their mark. He represented Oxford against Cambridge at hockey in 1894 and 1895, and in the former year was also awarded a half-blue for cycling. In 1896 he gained a second-class honours degree in natural science (botany). 
To satisfy his father, Balfour-Browne went on to study law at Middle Temple, London, being called to the bar in 1898. His briefs were by his reckoning largely awarded in order to ensure that his father, as a very busy leading counsel, would give extra attention to them. His first publications concerned railway law and the law of compensation, his father's specialities. After six months' experience and much to his father's regret, he returned to Oxford to take a course in zoology. His first post was at the Plymouth marine laboratory and his first scientific publication concerned the immature stages of bony fishes. In 1902 he became director of the Sutton Broad laboratory, the first freshwater research station in Britain. In the same year Balfour-Browne married Elizabeth Lochhead (died 1947), daughter of the Revd William Henderson Carslaw, of Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire. They had one son (John, a water beetle enthusiast), and two daughters. 
From 1906 Balfour-Browne taught biology at Queen's College, Belfast (from 1908 the Queen's University); in 1913 he went to Cambridge to teach entomology. During the First World War he served twice in France, initially as lieutenant in the sanitary company of the Royal Army Medical Corps, later as captain and staff lecturer in entomology. His first period of active service was terminated in 1916 by a shell-burst, which buried and deafened him. He recuperated by surveying many remote Galloway lochs, thus generating a database of great value following concern over the effects of acidification ('acid rain'). He continued to teach at Cambridge, being greatly pleased with his ability to place students in work as economic entomologists in the Colonial Office. His teaching notes were later published as 'A Text-Book of Practical Entomology' (1932), which became a standard text for many university courses in entomology. When in 1925 he tried to retire, he was persuaded instead to take the chair of entomology at Imperial College, London University, working on a part-time basis. He finally retired in 1930 in order to devote the rest of his life to the study of water beetles and their distribution. 
Inspired by the works of A. R. Wallace, and encouraged by David Sharp, the most eminent British coleopterist, Balfour-Browne's Norfolk broads studies produced arguably the first intensive, community-based, survey of an insect group. In these studies he used the recording methods of his former Ulster colleague R. Lloyd Praeger -- methods Balfour-Browne subsequently promoted for use in the British Isles as a whole. Balfour-Browne methodically amassed and critically appraised earlier records of water beetles, and thus became involved in taxonomy. Here his legal knowledge -- in particular his adversarial skill -- was brought to bear on the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature, particularly with regard to implementation of the law of priority. Thus many of his 120 papers, written under the single forename Frank, contain extreme comments which perhaps failed to take into account the need for a common international language in naming the fauna, and also the need for diplomacy in dealing with some entomologists who were more used to being held in scientific regard than to being subjected to severe, though often justifiable, criticism. 
Balfour-Browne's database was greatly extended, first by his own collecting across much of the British Isles, and second by his willingness to identify mundane material for others. Thus he was able to bring solid fact into a field where speculation had taken over. Theoreticians had assumed that water beetle distributions had not changed since the ice age, and had claimed the existence of land bridges not corroborated by geological knowledge. Balfour-Browne's data clearly indicated the dynamic nature of many distributions. Had he been aware of the postglacial climate pattern, with the early temperature optimum, Balfour-Browne might have been among the first to recognize that some of this dynamism resulted not from new invasions but from decline to relic status. However, his work did much to dispose of the land-bridging myth. 
Balfour-Browne's spruce appearance, forthright comments, and genial personality wholly offset his small stature, and were familiar in many scientific societies. Widely known by the nickname B-B, he was a fellow of several learned societies, including the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and was a keen supporter of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He was a life governor of the Freshwater Biological Association, and was associated with the Nature Conservancy at its inception. His generosity extended to not only his time but also financial support for many ventures. 
Balfour-Browne's 'magnum opus' was 'British Water Beetles' (1940, 1950, 1958), written as three Ray Society monographs. These have spawned and enthused two generations of 'water beetlers'. This expansion in interest has led to an even more complete knowledge of the British fauna and also to the Balfour-Browne Club, an international group named in his honour, and founded in 1976. Balfour-Browne's last book, 'Water Beetles and other Things' (1962), was partly autobiographical, and demonstrated his wit, clarity of thought, and pugnacity almost into his ninetieth year. After an illness in the winter of 1961-2, he gave his collections, notebooks, and card indexes to the Royal Museum of Scotland. Balfour-Browne died suddenly on 28 September 1967 while visiting Edinburgh from his home, Brocklehirst, Collin, Dumfries, and was cremated at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 30 September 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 30562


Ball, Albert (1896-1917), airman, was born at 301 Lenton Boulevard, Nottingham, on 14 August 1896, the elder son and second of three surviving children of Sir Albert Ball (1863-1946), master plumber, land agent, and sometime mayor of Nottingham, and his first wife, Harriet Mary Page (died 1931) of Derby. He was educated at Lenton church school, Grantham grammar school, Nottingham high school, and from January 1911 at Trent College, Long Eaton, Derbyshire, where he was regarded as a conscientious if shy boy with a natural aptitude for anything mechanical. On leaving school in December 1913 he bought an interest in an electrical engineering and brass-founding firm in Nottingham, but at the outbreak of war enlisted in the Nottinghamshire and Derby regiment. 
Swiftly promoted sergeant, Ball was commissioned on 29 October 1914, and spent the winter in training but, anxious to get to France, transferred to the north midland divisional cyclist company. Again frustrated in his desire to see active service, in June 1915 he began training privately as a pilot, and gained his Royal Aero Club certificate on 15 October. After applying to transfer to the Royal Flying Corps (RFC), he underwent further flying instruction and was awarded his pilot's brevet on 22 January 1916, before being officially transferred to the RFC on 29 January. 
Briefly with 22 squadron at Gosport before being posted to France, Ball joined 13 squadron at Marieux on 18 February 1916, flying BE 2c aircraft on artillery reconnaissance and bombing raids. He performed his duties conscientiously but felt the burden of responsibility for his observer's life. Hence he was pleased to be allowed occasionally to fly one of two Bristol Scouts attached to the squadron. His skill and enthusiasm as a single-seat pilot attracted attention, and on 7 May he was posted to 11 squadron at Savy Aubigny, one flight of which was equipped with the Nieuport 16, then the best single-seat scout in RFC service. Ball became an enthusiastic proponent of the French fighter, and was to score the majority of his victories while flying Nieuports. 
Ball's first success with 11 squadron, a German reconnaissance aircraft forced down, came on 16 May. Two further successes came on 29 May, and the single-mindedness with which he was approaching the task of engaging the enemy was shown on 1 June, when he circled over an enemy aerodrome at Douai, inviting combat and driving down two enemy aircraft which took off to engage him. His dedication showed also in the arrangements he made at Savy, where he built a small wooden shed close to the hangar in which his aircraft was housed. There he lived and sometimes ate, the better to tend his personal Nieuport and the quicker to take off should an opportunity for combat present itself. His dedication was recognized by the award, on 25 June, of the Military Cross. 
When the bloody and unsuccessful battle of the Somme began on 1 July 1916, Ball was unknown outside 11 squadron. By its end, in November, he was the top-scoring RFC pilot, and famous. Yet his rise to pre-eminence was not straightforward. On 2 July he destroyed two enemy aircraft, but did not score again before, on 18 July, he was posted to 8 squadron, flying BE 2cs. The transfer, which Ball strongly resented, resulted from a request for a few days' rest. His reaction was to fly additional sorties whenever possible, including a difficult night flight to land a spy behind enemy lines. His passionate commitment to his duties brought the desired result: on 15 August, promoted to lieutenant, he returned to 11 squadron. 
In the next eleven days Ball destroyed four enemy aircraft, three of them on 22 August 1916: the first time that such a feat had been accomplished in the RFC. That day he had attacked single-handed four enemy formations, one seven strong and another five, before returning with his aircraft riddled with bullets. The award of the DSO, gazetted on 26 September, at the same time as a bar to the DSO, acknowledged his achievements. A second bar was to be gazetted on 25 November, following the award in September of the Russian order of St George, fourth class. 
On 23 August 1916 Ball was transferred to 60 squadron, a scout unit, in which he fully came into his own. The commanding officer, Major R. R. Smith-Barry, recognized his talent and gave him a roving commission. This paid handsome dividends for 60 squadron and for Ball, who by the end of August had seventeen confirmed victories. A month later this had risen to thirty-one and the intensity with which he flew his mainly solo sorties can be seen from the fact that on four more occasions he had brought down three enemy aircraft in a day. 
Promoted captain on 13 September 1916, Ball was, at his own request, posted to home establishment on 4 October. Yet it was not long before he was agitating, unsuccessfully, to return to France. After a period with 34 reserve squadron at Orfordness, he was sent on a course at the school of aerial gunnery, Hythe. Gunnery instruction he found particularly irksome, and it was with relief that on 2 January 1917 he was transferred to 7 wing at King's Lynn, Norfolk, as a fighting instructor. 
Ball's frustration was exacerbated by the adulation to which he found himself continually subjected, adulation which his father tended to foster. Around Nottingham he took to wearing an old trench coat in order to avoid drawing attention to himself and to his medal ribbons, and his speech on 19 February 1917 accepting the freedom of the city of Nottingham was brief and modest in the extreme. As an antidote to his frustration Ball put a great deal of energy into promoting a single-seat fighter whose design he had instigated the previous year, and which the Austin Motor Company built. He persuaded the government to order two prototypes, but they were not completed until after Ball's death and attracted no production order. 
On 25 February 1917 Ball was posted to the newly formed 56 squadron, with which he crossed to France on 7 April. From the first no. 56 was an elite unit, despite major teething problems with the engines and guns of the SE 5, which the squadron was the first to take into action. Ball himself took an immediate dislike to the type, and was permitted to retain a Nieuport for his use when on solo patrol, and it was on a Nieuport that he achieved his (and the squadron's) first victory, on 23 April, and his last, on 5 May. 
Between these dates, flying the SE 5 (to which he gradually became reconciled), Ball scored another eleven victories, seven of them between 1 and 5 May. Two days later, on 7 May 1917, he made his last flight. Eleven machines went out in bad weather that evening and engaged a large German force. Ball was seen pursuing an opponent into thundercloud, and then, by German observers on the ground, emerging from the cloud base in a shallow inverted dive, with the propeller stationary, to crash near Annoeullin. His aircraft had sustained no battle damage and Ball's only injuries were sustained in the crash. Various explanations have been suggested, but the most likely is that advanced by Revell: that Ball became disoriented in the cloud, and the engine cut out when the aircraft was inverted. What is certain is that the German authorities erred in crediting Lothar von Richthofen, younger brother of the Red Baron, with Ball's death. 
Ball, who died unmarried, was buried at Annoeullin by the Germans with full military honours on 9 May 1917. Just under one month later, on 8 June, the award of the Victoria Cross was gazetted; later the French government made him a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. The Victoria Cross citation spoke of Ball's 'exceptional courage, determination, and skill'. These qualities he certainly possessed. But any assessment of Ball must take account also of aspects of his personality and fighting style which made him a legend in his lifetime. 
Of medium height and build, Ball had a penetrating gaze and a shock of black hair, which he wore longer than was customary in the RFC. He was high-spirited and acquired a reputation for mild eccentricity, partly through such idiosyncrasies as flying without a helmet or goggles. By living in his hut and spending his spare time gardening, Ball also set himself somewhat (and literally) apart from his fellows. He was not a naturally gifted pilot but became highly skilled, and his fast reflexes, outstanding eyesight, and accuracy of shooting made him a formidable opponent. Devoutly religious, he trusted firmly in divine providence, yet there is no doubt that in attacking whatever the odds he was at times foolhardy, and that he was lucky to survive as long as he did. Nor is there any doubt that in the last weeks of his life he was exhausted. After his last successful combat, on 5 May, he wrote home: 'It is all trouble and it is getting on my mind. Am feeling very old just now' (Kiernan, 141). 
Like James McCudden, who was awarded the Victoria Cross in 1918, Ball lavished a great deal of care on his aircraft, and like McCudden he felt no personal animosity towards his opponents. To his father he wrote in July 1916: 'I only scrap because it is my duty, but I do not think anything bad about the Hun. Nothing makes me feel more rotten than to see them go down, but you see it is either them or me, so I must do my duty best to make it a case of 'them'. (Bowyer, 63)' And in his last letter to his father he wrote: 'I do get tired of always living to kill, and am really beginning to feel like a murderer' (ibid., 138). 
Ball's victory tally of forty-four was soon surpassed, but his place in the pantheon of British military aviators is assured. More than any other individual he provided the inspiration which, after the appalling losses of 'Bloody April' 1916, raised and sustained the morale of the RFC and later the Royal Air Force. 


@@@@@


doc= 30563


Ball, Francis Elrington (1863-1928), author and historian, born on 18 July 1863 at Portmarnock, co. Dublin, was the third son of John Thomas Ball (1815-1898), lord chancellor of Ireland from 1875 to 1880, and his wife, Catherine (died 1887), daughter of the Revd Charles Richard Elrington (1787-1850), regius professor of divinity in the University of Dublin. For health reasons, he was educated by a private tutor, and was not sent to Trinity College, Dublin, although his father was vice-chancellor of the university. 
Ball began his career working for the Unionist cause in Ireland. His distaste for speaking on the platform kept him in the background; but it became generally recognized that the organization of the Unionist Party in Ireland and many of its successes at the polls were largely due to his efforts. In 1897 he married Florence Eglantine (died 1913), daughter of the Revd William Arthur Hamilton DD, rector of Taney, Dundrum, and canon of Christ Church, Dublin. After his marriage his house became a leading Dublin social centre. The couple had no children. 
At the general election of 1900 Ball stood for South County Dublin as an independent Unionist, in opposition to Sir Horace Plunkett, the official Unionist candidate. Ball polled a respectable number of votes, but the result of the split was that the seat was gained by the nationalists. 
Ball then decided to abandon politics for letters, and it is as a writer, and scholar, rather than as a politician, that he is remembered. In 1902 he collaborated on 'The Calendar of the Manuscripts of the Marquess of Ormonde' for the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, and later that year published the first part of his 'A History of the County Dublin' (six parts, 1902-20). At the time it was the authoritative local history, and was republished in 1979 and 1993. In 1909 he edited C. Litton Falkiner's 'Essays Relating to Ireland', and wrote a memoir. 
Ball had begun some preliminary work on Swift's letters with Falkiner before his death in 1908, and in 1910 he published volume one of 'The Correspondence of Jonathan Swift, D.D.', the sixth and last volume of which appeared in 1914. It was the first scholarly edition, painstakingly annotated, and it established his reputation as the greatest authority on Swift of his time, while also winning him respect as a historian. A new edition was published in 1971. As J. H. Bernard commented in his introduction to the first volume, 'a study of [the Correspondence] is indispensable to anyone who wishes to understand the intrigues of political parties during the first half of the eighteenth century' (Bernard, 'Introduction', xix). In recognition of Ball's achievement, the University of Dublin conferred upon him the honorary degree of LittD in 1911. 
Ball's wife Florence died in 1913, and five years later, troubled by the advent of home rule, he left Dublin for London, where he divided his time between the British Museum and the Carlton Club. He became a member of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, and turned from Swift to an entirely different subject, 'The Judges in Ireland, 1221-1921'. His historiography reflected his political convictions: for Ball, Irish history was the history of the 'civilising influence' of the English on Ireland's native culture. He explains his Unionist project in his preface: his history of the Irish judges deals solely with 'the seven centuries during which the authority of England was absolute in their appointment' ('DNB'). Since much of Ball's information was gathered from documents which perished in the burning of the Irish Records Office in 1922, his work has become the primary authority. It was issued in the 'Lawbooks Recommended for Libraries' series in 1927, and reprinted in 1993. 
In the last two years of his life, Ball was working on a commentary on Swift's poetry. He returned to Dublin, where he died at the Fitzwilliam Nursing Home, Pembroke Street, on 7 January 1928. His work on Swift was in its final stages, and was published posthumously as 'Swift's Verse: an Essay' in 1929, and reissued in 1977. 'Notes and Queries' praised it as a 'solid and important work in the elucidation of Swift', adding that 'students of the period will know precisely what services Dr Ball's researches have rendered' (p. 125). 


@@@@@


doc= 30564


Ball, Sir (George) Joseph (1885-1961), intelligence officer and political administrator, was born at 24 Inkerman Street, Luton, Bedfordshire, on 21 September 1885, the son of George Ball, bookstall clerk, of Salisbury, and his wife, Sarah Ann Headey. He was educated at King's College School, Strand, and at King's College, London. After leaving college he worked as a civilian official in Scotland Yard, and he was called to the bar with first-class honours by Gray's Inn in 1913. He was a keen footballer, and played centre-half for the Casuals until prevented by injury. He was a good shot and an expert fly-fisher. On 16 April 1914 he married Gladys Emily, a school teacher, daughter of John Burch Penhorwood, with whom he had a daughter; after her death in 1918 he married, on 6 October 1919, her half-sister Mary Caroline Penhorwood (died 1957), with whom he had two sons and one daughter. 
On the outbreak of the First World War Ball joined MI5, and in 1919 he was appointed OBE. He remained in the service until 1927, when he was persuaded by J. C. C. Davidson, chairman of the Conservative Party, to join the party organization as director of publicity. Major Joseph Ball, as he then was, proved to be a notable asset, along with Sir Patrick Gower, also diverted by Davidson from government employment. Years later, in 1955, Davidson said of Ball: 'he is undoubtedly tough and has looked after his own interests... On the other hand he is steeped in the Service tradition, and has had as much experience as anyone I know in the seamy side of life and the handling of crooks. ('Memoirs of a Conservative', 272)' One of Ball's successful clandestine efforts was to insert agents in the Labour Party headquarters and in Odham's Press, which did most of the party's printing. In this way he managed to secure both Labour reports of political feeling in the country and also advance 'pulls' of their leaflets and pamphlets; it was thus possible for the Conservatives to reply suspiciously instantaneously to their opponents' propaganda. Not surprisingly, Ball was closely involved in assisting Stanley Baldwin to deal with the parliamentary debate in 1928 on the affair of the Zinoviev letter, which had occurred four years earlier. Baldwin was able to emerge triumphantly. It is not known whether Ball played any part in the original episode. 
In 1930, in the aftermath of the loss of the general election, Davidson created the Conservative Research Department and made Ball its director, under the chairmanship first (briefly) of Lord Eustace Percy and then of Neville Chamberlain, to whom Ball is said to have taught the art of fly-fishing. Chamberlain respected Ball's knowledge, discretion, and reliability, and later used him in 1938 as an intermediary with Count Grandi, Italian ambassador in London, in order to bypass the foreign secretary, Anthony Eden. Ball was appointed KBE in 1936. 
Ball was a very able director. He did much to lay the foundations for the success of the Conservative Party's research department after the Second World War, and recruited for it many young people of high calibre, among others Henry Brooke and Frank Pakenham; the latter, however, later moved to the Labour Party. Ball retired in 1939. From 1940 to 1942, having reverted to his earlier profession as an intelligence officer, he served as deputy chairman of the security executive. 
After the end of the war Ball entered the world of business, and became chairman of Henderson's Transvaal Estates and five subsidiary companies, and also of Lake View and Star. He was a director of Consolidated Goldfields of South Africa and of the Beaumont property trust. He was chairman of the Hampshire rivers catchment board (1947-53). He died at St Thomas's Home, Lambeth, London, on 10 July 1961. 
Ball moved for most of his life in the shadow of events and was deeply averse to publicity of any sort. He gave very little away, and the formal accounts of his career, whether written by himself or others, are curt and uninformative. He was, however, a quintessential 'eminence grise', and his influence on affairs cannot be measured by the brevity of the printed references to him. 
Robert Blake', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30565


Ball, John (1861-1940), golfer, was born on 24 December 1861 at Hoylake, Cheshire, the second son of John Ball (died 1905) and his wife, Margaret Parry. The father was of yeoman farmer stock and the owner of the Royal Hotel at Hoylake, which became the headquarters of the Royal Liverpool Golf Club when the course was laid out in 1869. The boy was therefore brought up with golf on his doorstep, and his early promise was such that at the age of sixteen he entered for the open championship in 1878 and finished sixth. 
Ball's career in big matches began in 1883, and he became widely known when the amateur championship was founded in 1885; but it was not until 1888 that he came into his own by beating J. E. Laidlay at Prestwick by five and four in the final of the amateur championship. He won the championship again at Hoylake in 1890, and in that same year -- on what Dr Laidlaw Purves called 'a great day for golf' -- he won the open championship at Prestwick with a score of 164; he beat all the professionals, a feat hitherto deemed impossible for an amateur. In 1892 he tied for second place in the open championship at Muirfield, which was won by another Hoylake amateur, Harold Hilton, and he also won the amateur championship for the third time at Sandwich. In 1894 he won it for the fourth time at Hoylake, and in 1899 won again at Prestwick. 
After the South African War, when he served with the Denbighshire yeomanry, Ball's play showed no perceptible falling off; but it was not until 1907 that he won the amateur championship again, this time at St Andrews. In 1910 at Hoylake he won it for the seventh time, and in 1912 at Westward Ho! won for the eighth time, a record wholly without parallel. Of these matches the most memorable were that of 1894 at Hoylake with S. Mure Fergusson, in which Ball played a famous brassy shot over the cross bunkers to the Dun (then the seventeenth) hole and won by a hole, and the Prestwick final of 1899 against his great Scottish competitor F. G. Tait, when Ball won at the thirty-seventh hole. Having been at one time five down, Ball retrieved himself and stood one up with two to play: at the thirty-fifth hole both played historic recovery shots, Tait from a watery bunker and Ball from hard wet sand close to the boarded edge of the same hazard. Tait saved the match with a three at the home hole, but at the thirty-seventh Ball laid an iron shot about 8 feet from the hole and holed the putt for a winning three. In 1912 he beat Abe Mitchell, later a famous professional, at the thirty-eighth hole, but perhaps the finest golf he ever played in his later years was in the final of 1910, when he beat Collinson Charleton Aylmer by ten and nine. 
Ball's lesser successes were innumerable: he was three times Irish open amateur champion (1893, 1894, and 1899); he won the St George's cup at Sandwich, then considered the amateur stroke play championship, four years running (1888-91); and he regularly played for England against Scotland from the first international match in 1902 until 1911. 
Ball's style was eminently characteristic, with a peculiar underhand grip of the right hand, but the swing was a perfect model of grace and rhythm. He was a magnificent iron player and he set a new standard of accuracy in long iron shots right up to the flag. If he had a comparatively weak spot, it was on the green: he was inclined to miss short putts. As a match player he had the most indomitable spirit and seemed to revel in a close finish. No golfer has ever come close to his record of eight amateur championships plus an open championship, nor is ever likely to do so. 
A quiet, reserved man, and always something of a puritan in golfing matters, Ball had a great dislike of publicity, but none the less a remarkable power for inspiring hero worship, especially at Hoylake. In his later years he parted with his interest in the Royal Hotel there, and went to live at Lygan-y-wern, near Holywell, Flintshire, with his unmarried sister Elizabeth and their housekeeper Nellie Williams, whom he married in July 1932, a development which severed Ball's remaining family ties. From Flintshire he made very occasional forays back to Hoylake, not least to witness the amateur championship of 1939, where the beautiful condition of the fairways ('damned croquet lawns') earned his particular scorn. One of the greatest and most romantic figures in the history of English golf, John Ball died at Lygan-y-wern on 2 December 1940. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30566


Ball, Sir Robert Stawell (1840-1913), astronomer, was born on 1 July 1840 at 3 Granby Row, Dublin, the second of the seven children of Robert Ball (1802-1857), a civil servant who was honorary secretary of the Dublin Royal Zoological Society, and his wife, Amelia Gresley Ball, 'nee' Hellicar (died 1895). He received his early education at Dr John Lardner Burke's School in Dublin and then at Dr Brindley's school in Tarvin, near Chester, where he excelled in mathematics and science. Following the death of his father in 1857, he attended, first as a sizar and then as a scholar, Trinity College, Dublin, where physical concepts were being treated by methods of mathematical analysis that, owing their origin to the work of mathematicians in continental Europe, were relatively new to Britain and Ireland. As a young man Ball briefly met Sir William Rowan Hamilton (1805-1865), his famous predecessor as royal astronomer, who had spent the greater part of his life working in isolation in Dunsink Observatory. 
Although a promising undergraduate student, Ball failed to gain a fellowship in Trinity College, Dublin. When the third earl of Rosse (1800-1867), at Birr Castle, sought a qualified tutor for his children (one of them, Charles A. Parsons, was later the inventor of the steam turbine), Ball, nominated by Johnstone Stoney, was accepted on the basis that he would also use the giant telescopes built there in the 1840s. He noted: 'I sometimes followed Herschel's example and remained observing from dusk to dawn' ('Reminiscences', 68). After only two years at Birr, in 1867 Ball was appointed professor of applied mathematics and mechanics in the newly founded Royal College of Science in Dublin. He developed vivid physical demonstrations and laid the foundation of a successful style of lecturing that was to earn him fame in later years. 
Seven years later, in 1874, Franz F. E. Brunnow resigned as royal astronomer of Ireland and Andrews' professor of astronomy in the University of Dublin (Trinity College), and Ball submitted an elaborate and successful seven-page printed application for the vacant post. After his appointment he was able, with the benefit of a succession of gifted assistants -- R. Copeland, C. E. Burton, J. L. E. Dreyer, and A. A. Rambaut -- to build successfully on the work of his predecessor and, over a period of eighteen years, to achieve a high standard of work at Dunsink Observatory. He used the visual micrometer on the 12 inch Grubb refractor for determining the annual parallax of stars, with limited success; he used the Pistor and Martin transit circle for meridian observations, including the setting-up of a time service for Dublin in conjunction with the Dublin Port and Docks Board; and he continued his own speciality in mathematics -- 'The Theory of Screws' -- dealing with the kinematics of solid bodies and their general motion in three dimensions. This last work earned him the Cunningham medal of the Royal Irish Academy in 1879. Towards the end of his time at Dunsink he negotiated the installation of Isaac Roberts's gift of a 15 inch reflector, an instrument that was eventually used successfully by E. T. Whittaker and H. C. Plummer. He was friend and adviser to the Dublin telescope maker Sir Howard Grubb, his near contemporary, and was on the committee that supervised the construction of Grubb's 27 inch Vienna refractor of 1882. Besides these varied activities, Ball gradually established himself as a first-class popular lecturer and, in due course, as a widely known author of popular books on astronomy. He travelled extensively to fulfil lecture commissions in Britain and Ireland, and secured busy lecture tour engagements in the United States in 1884, 1887, and 1901-2. Between 28 October and 28 November 1901, at the age of sixty-one, he gave twenty-four lectures in the Boston area before going on to other cities. Wherever he travelled he benefited from his experiences, enhancing the attractive diversions he employed in his lectures. His most popular books went through many editions; in particular, 'The Story of the Heavens' (1885) had a new edition as late as 1950 and continued to provide inspiration to keen enquirers into astronomy. From 1883 Ball suffered increasingly from defects in his right eye, which was eventually removed in 1897. He contributed several times to the Christmas lectures of the Royal Institution, and he was scientific adviser to the board of Irish lights (lighthouses and so on) from 1882 until his death in 1913. 
In 1892 Ball was appointed Lowndean professor of astronomy at Cambridge and director of the university observatory, where, under his initiative, Grubb was employed in the construction of an unconventional 'coude' refractor -- the Sheepshanks telescope. It was successfully used for determining the parallaxes of stars photographically, including work by H. N. Russell in his epochal discovery of the 'Hertzsprung-Russell diagram'. At Cambridge, as well as continuing his mathematical work and his popularization of astronomy, it is related that Ball was among those who warmly welcomed Ernest Rutherford when he first arrived from New Zealand. 
As a mathematician Ball was competent, prolific, and capable of utilizing new ideas, but he might not quite qualify as 'one of the two or three greatest British mathematicians of his generation', so attributed by E. T. Whittaker ('Reminiscences', 396). His many papers and his books on 'The Theory of Screws' (1876, 1900, and a German account of 1889) were highly regarded as a contribution to a branch of mathematics that seems almost to have been peculiarly his own, since he never had a co-author in this prolific work. As a practical astronomer, Ball well understood physical principles, but his opinion sometimes betrayed lack of long-term vision. With astronomy becoming based on astrophysical notions, his intuition was good but limited by the concepts of the nineteenth century. As the source of the sun's heat, and recognizing the limitations of chemical fuels, he accepted contraction due to gravity, now plainly seen to be inadequate. On the other hand, for the origin of the ice ages he favoured an explanation in terms of the variation of the orbital elements of the earth, the Milankovich hypothesis. This variation has been recognized, since the 1980s, by examination of deep ice cores, to have a definite partial influence on periodic ice ages. 
In his later years, requiring substantial fees for his lectures, which made him relatively wealthy, and working generally from a prepared script, Ball was able to combine effectively his Irish gifts as raconteur and his sound physical insight and mathematical competence. On reading his popular writings of today, such as 'The Story of the Heavens', and judging them by hindsight, his belief in scientific progress becomes evident, and he shows concern for possible exhaustion of the earth's resources. However, his writings were not prophetic: he limited himself to conventional mechanical and chemical concepts; he refers to chemical elements, but not to atoms. Also, in a penetrating discussion of the formation of the tails of comets, foreshadowing modern ideas quite well, he invokes the possibility of electrical repulsion, but he does not mention radiation pressure, which was already understood from Maxwell's theories of electromagnetism, and was indeed mentioned by Ball himself in a letter to G. F. Fitzgerald in October 1881. 
Ball combined kindness and geniality with authority as a scientist in a wide range of subjects to a most unusual degree. With his wife, Frances Elizabeth Steele, whom he married in 1868, he had a family of four sons and two daughters. His many popular books, more than fifteen titles, have been enjoyed by several generations of enthusiastic readers and his fame in Ireland remains considerable more than 100 years after he left Dublin for Cambridge. 
Ball was made a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1873, served as royal astronomer of Ireland from 1874 to 1892, and was knighted in 1886. He was president of the Zoological Society of Ireland (1890-92), the Royal Astronomical Society (1897-9), the Mathematical Association of London (1899-1900), and Section A (Mathematics) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1886-7). He died at his home by the observatory on 25 November 1913 and was buried on 29 November in St Giles's churchyard in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 30567


Ballance, Sir Charles Alfred (1856-1936), surgeon, was born at Taunton on 30 August 1856, the eldest son and second child of Charles Alfred Ballance, silk throwster, and his wife, Caroline Hendebourck, daughter of Samuel Hendebourck Pollard, of Taunton. He was educated first at Taunton College, then in Germany, and finally at St Thomas's Hospital, where he graduated MB (London) with first-class honours. He became aural surgeon at St Thomas's in 1885, and assistant surgeon to the West London Hospital. He was among the first to succeed in radical mastoid surgery. In 1882 he proceeded MS with a gold medal. In 1883 Ballance married Sophie Annie (died 1926), only daughter of Alfred Smart, of Blackheath; they had one son and five daughters. 
Ballance was elected assistant surgeon at St Thomas's in 1891, surgeon in 1900, and consulting surgeon in 1919; he was also surgeon with Victor Horsley at the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic, in Queen Square (1891-1908). During the First World War he was a consultant with the rank of colonel in the Army Medical Service in Malta, and he was appointed CB in 1916 and KCMG in 1918. He was president of the Medical Society of London in 1906, a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1910 and its vice-president from 1920 to 1921, and the first president of the Society of British Neurological Surgeons in 1927. He was chief surgeon to the Metropolitan Police from 1912 to 1926. 
Ballance approached surgical problems through physiological experiments on living animals, in the tradition of John Hunter. Some of his methods were superseded in his lifetime -- for instance, his technique for ligation of large arteries. His work with Charles Sherrington, published in 1889 in the 'Journal of Physiology', on the formation of scar tissue, added significantly to contemporary knowledge. Ballance was a general surgeon who favoured aural and neurological surgery. In 'Some Points in the Surgery of the Brain and its Membranes' (1907), he surveyed a field in which he had been an early practitioner, and his scholarly 'Essays on the Surgery of the Temporal Bone' (2 vols., 1919) recorded his valuable contributions over thirty years. The repair of nerves was his chief interest. With James Purves-Stewart he wrote 'The Healing of Nerves' (1901), and he applied their findings in the treatment of facial palsy. In 1919 he gave the Bradshaw lecture, on the surgery of the heart, to the Royal College of Surgeons. In the United States of America, in 1932, he studied the development of nerve grafts, and finally in London he developed a complicated cross-suture of divided nerves. In 1933 he gave the Lister memorial lecture and was awarded the Lister memorial medal. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow and Malta. 
Ballance was a large and imposing figure. A slow, deliberate manner hid his cultivation and charm. He died a widower, at his home, 34 St John's Wood Court, London, on 8 February 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 30568


Banbury, Frederick George, first Baron Banbury of Southam (1850-1936), politician and stockbroker, was born in London on 2 December 1850, the eldest son of Frederick Banbury of Shirley House, Surrey, and his wife, Cecilia Laura, daughter of William Cox of Woodford Hall, Essex. He was educated at Winchester College and afterwards abroad. In 1872 he was elected a member of the stock exchange and from 1879 until his retirement in 1906 was head of the firm of Frederick Banbury & Sons, stockbrokers; the firm was known for arranging foreign loans. At the general election of 1892 he was elected as a Conservative for the Peckham division of Camberwell, and he retained that seat until heavily defeated in 1906. In June 1906 he was returned unopposed at a by-election for the City of London and retained his seat until he entered the House of Lords in January 1924 as Baron Banbury of Southam in Warwickshire. In 1903 he was created a baronet and he was sworn of the privy council in 1916. 
Although Banbury never held ministerial office, he made for himself a unique position as an opponent of legislation which appeared to him unnecessary and of change which he did not regard as progress. This was facilitated by his ability to talk at any length at any moment on any subject; unembarrassed by other MPs' complaints, he talked out many a clause and many a bill. He declared that in his opinion there was too much legislation and he generally opposed bills proposed by private members. His opposition prevented trams being allowed to cross London's bridges. His long experience in the City made him an able critic of finance bills, on which he was an undoubted authority, and a ferociously effective member of the public accounts committee, of which he was for a time chairman, and during the 1905-15 Liberal government he energetically exposed corruption. He was a member of the select committee on the Marconi scandal (1912-13) and of that on national expenditure (1919-20). He earned esteem by his technical knowledge, and his criticism of his own party was seldom resented. A master of House of Commons procedure, he was dextrous in raising points of order. 'Punctual in his attendance, he came to be regarded in his corner of a back bench as the uncompromising champion of the old order... He was always most carefully dressed, and with his formal frock-coat and tall hat, and his slow dignified carriage he would walk to his seat and look round at the increasingly slipshod attire of his colleagues with sad disapproval. The advent of women members into the house he regarded as nothing short of an outrage. Banbury, in fact, became an institution. ('The Times')' A. G. Gardiner thought him 'the sort of person that our public-school system turns out in troops' (Gardiner, 336). 
Banbury was for many years a member, and in 1927-8 chairman, of the council of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and was prominent in Our Dumb Friends League. He was a director of the Great Northern Railway from 1903 and its chairman from 1917, and he was a director of the London and Provincial Bank. He married in 1873 Elizabeth Rosa (died 1930), daughter and coheir of Thomas Barbot Beale of Brettenham Park, Suffolk; they had one son, who was killed in action in 1914, and one daughter. Banbury died at Warneford Place, Highworth, Wiltshire, on 13 August 1936, and was succeeded as baron by his grandson, Charles William (1915-1981). 


@@@@@


doc= 30569


Bancroft, Marie Effie, Lady Bancroft (1839-1921), actress and theatre manager, was born on 12 January 1839, probably in Doncaster, the eldest of the six daughters of Robert Pleydell Wilton (1800-1873), a provincial actor, and his wife, Georgina Jane (1818-1866), the daughter of Samuel Faulkner, proprietor of the London 'Morning Chronicle'. 
Marie Wilton was taught elocution by her mother and began performing at the age of six, playing the emperor of Lilliput in a pantomime, 'Gulliver's Travels' (Manchester, 1846), followed by Fleance in 'Macbeth' and Prince Arthur in 'King John'. She won praise from both Macready and Charles Kemble for these Shakespearian roles. In 1856 Charles Dillon cast her in the important part of his son Henri in the long-running melodrama 'Belphegor' by Charles Webb at the London Lyceum. By 1858 she was playing both boys and young girls in the burlesques of H. J. Byron at the Strand Theatre. Although modern commentators suggest that sexual titillation was the main appeal of cross-dressing in the Victorian theatre, there was a long tradition of actresses playing adolescent boys in serious drama, and, according to Charles Dickens, Wilton as Pippo in Byron's 'The Maid and the Magpie' was 'so stupendously like a boy, and unlike a woman, that it is perfectly free from offence'. The training in both technique and characterization gained from playing 'en travestie' stood Wilton in good stead throughout her career. Tom Robertson's description of the 'burlesque actress' in the 'Illustrated Times' (1860) indicates the range of talents expected of such a performer: 'She can waltz, polk, dance a 'pas seul' or a sailor's hornpipe, La Sylphide, or Genu-ine Transatlantic Cape Cod Skedaddle, with equal grace and spirit; and as for acting she can declaim a la Phelps or Fechter; is serious, droll; and must play farce, tragedy, opera, comedy, melodrama, pantomime, ballet, change her costume, fight a combat, make love, poison herself, die, and take one encore for a song and another for a dance, in the short space of ten minutes.' Clement Scott, a lifelong devotee, claimed that Wilton's 'genius' was matched only by that of the legendary burlesque actor Frederick Robson. 
However, for both professional and social reasons, Wilton did not want to remain typecast in burlesque. In 1864 she planned a management partnership with Byron, performing some burlesques, but extending the repertory beyond that of the Strand Theatre. On 15 April 1865 she opened the refurbished Queen's Theatre, Tottenham Street, as the Prince of Wales's, to which she hoped to attract a 'respectable' audience from the residential districts of Bloomsbury, Regent's Park, and St John's Wood. She introduced upholstered stalls into the pit, which was carpeted, and flower vases into the boxes, giving it a 'bright and bonnie appearance' (Bancroft and Bancroft, 'Recollections'). The first season relied on the light comedies and burlesques in which she had made her reputation, but the production of Tom Robertson's 'Society' (11 November 1865) was such a success that it 'was destined to expel burlesque from the Prince of Wales's stage and to establish a new method in authorship, decoration and acting' (Archer, 5.25). For this play she hired two actors she had worked with in Liverpool the previous summer, neither of whom had been born into the profession. The first was John Hare, a clever mimic who specialized in playing old men. The other, whose professional attraction was his manner of confident sociability, was 
In search of a career, Bancroft went in 1860 to New York, where he saw E. A. Sothern create his famous caricature aristocrat, Lord Dundreary, in 'Our American Cousin'. Sothern was not of a theatrical family, and his success may have inspired Bancroft to break with his own family to become an actor, starting in January 1861 at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham, under the name of Squire Bancroft. He played at several provincial theatres, notably at Liverpool with Mr and Mrs Alfred Wigan, exponents of restrained 'naturalistic' acting, where he first performed with Marie Wilton. Archer described him as 'an actor of limited range, but, within that range, of remarkable intelligence, refinement and power... Quiet humour, subdued feeling and unflagging intelligence are his distinguishing qualities -- what he lacks in grace he makes up for in manliness'. He also identified him as a 'sound practical businessman' (Archer, 5.31-2). He and Marie Wilton were married on 28 December 1867, at St Stephen's, Avenue Road, Primrose Hill. She had performed her last burlesque, 'Little Don Giovanni', earlier that year, and Bancroft replaced Byron as joint manager of the theatre. They had one son, George Pleydell Bancroft, born in 1868. 
Although Wilton had initiated the policies and set the tone at the Prince of Wales's, once she and Bancroft had married he took control of the commercial business, and increasingly the artistic policy as well. He later complimented his wife that she 'placed perfect confidence in my choice of plays, and accepted my opinion in all important matters, even when it chanced to be at variance with her own... She never once allowed her faith in me to be shaken by an occasional mistake. (Bancroft and Bancroft, 'Recollections', 125-6)' They were certainly a formidable team, combining her theatrical charm with his business acumen. 
The success of Robertson's 'social drama' was confirmed by 'Caste' (6 April 1867), the main attraction of which was the 'naturalism' of both staging and acting -- solid doors with locks and handles, tea that came steaming out of the pot, and characters who 'looked and talked so like beings of everyday life that they were mistaken for such, and the audience had a curiosity to know how they were getting on after the fall of the curtain' (Bancroft and Bancroft, 'Recollections', 96). In fact the plots and sentiments of Robertson's 'cup-and-saucer' plays remained melodramatic, but they ideally suited the intimate size of the Prince of Wales's and the restrained playing of the company. However, the vivacious comic roles which Robertson provided for Wilton provided scope for her burlesque talents. William Archer wrote that the 'practical-humorous heroines -- Mary Netley, Polly Eccles, Naomi Tighe -- always fell to the lot of Mrs Bancroft, whose alert and expressive face, humid sparkling eyes, and small compact figure seemed to have been expressly designed for these characters. She possessed, too, the faculty of approaching the borderline of vulgarity without overstepping it -- an essential gift for the actress who has to deal with Robertsonian pertness. (Archer, 5.31)' In 1871 Robertson died. He had directed his last new play for the Bancrofts -- 'MP' (23 April 1870), which ran for 150 performances -- from his sickbed, and had attended the first night of their revival of 'Ours' (26 November 1870), which ran for 230. These long runs enabled the Bancrofts to introduce several managerial innovations which were to become general in most London theatres. They abandoned the practice of performing several plays, with entr'acte entertainments, each night, relying instead on a single play for as long as it would sell. This shorter evening suited the 'carriage-trade' who wished to dine out as well as visit the theatre. In 1878, with the success of 'Diplomacy' (from Sardou's 'Dora'), they began to present afternoon matinees. Long runs and a relatively small company enabled the managers to improve actors' salaries -- George Honey received $18 a week playing in 'Caste' in 1867, but collected $60 for its revival in 1871 -- and Squire Bancroft was proud of their 'respectable' practice of delivering pay packets to the actors rather than have them queuing at the office. 
With no more new plays from Robertson, the Bancrofts embarked on a policy of revivals -- Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money' (6 May 1872), Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' (4 April 1874), 'The Merchant of Venice' (17 April 1875) -- but the same production methods developed by Robertson were applied, providing settings of meticulous accuracy and acting of understated restraint. This suited the witty dialogue of Bulwer-Lytton and Sheridan, with Marie Bancroft creating 'a lady Teazle who is the fresh, genuine, impulsive maiden wedded to an old bachelor, and not the practiced actress, with all her airs and graces' (Scott, 1.580), but the Shakespeare production, although designed with advice from the artist and architect E. W. Godwin, was ill-served by the conversational tone of Charles Coghlan's Shylock. Ellen Terry's Portia, however, was highly praised -- and inspired Henry Irving to recruit her for his Lyceum company. 
It was only in later years, shortly before the couple acquired the Haymarket, that Squire Bancroft's own acting received genuine critical praise. After his performance of Triplet, the impoverished poet in Charles Reade's 'Masks and Faces', a critic remarked: 'it can no longer be said that this excellent actor is merely a 'haw haw' swell' ('Dramatic Review', 7 March 1875). Irving, a close social acquaintance, wanted him to act in Boucicault's 'The Corsican Brothers' in 1880, and eventually persuaded him to play the Abbe Latour in the French Revolutionary melodrama 'The Dead Heart' (28 September 1889). This was so successful, particularly the spectacular sabre duel (fought by two myopic actors without their glasses!) that Irving remarked to Bancroft, 'What a big name you might have made for yourself had you never come across those Robertson plays -- what a pity -- for your sake -- for no actor can be remembered long who does not appear in classical drama' (Bancroft and Bancroft, 'Recollections', 333). 
The Prince of Wales's lease had expired in 1880, and the Bancrofts took over the much bigger Haymarket Theatre, where they introduced similar policies aimed at 'improving the tone' of the audiences. They replaced all the 3's'. 6died pit seats with 10's'. orchestra stalls, thus banishing the poorer spectators to the upper gallery. On the opening night there was a vociferous protest of 'Where's the pit?', but the days of theatre riots were past and the embourgeoisement of this once rowdy patent theatre soon prevailed. Symptomatic of their theatrical aesthetic was the new design for the Haymarket proscenium arch. It was 'set all around in an immense gilded frame, like that of some magnificent picture' (H. James, 'The Scenic Art', 1949, 148). The naturalistic convention of the invisible 'fourth wall', behind which the actors performed apparently oblivious of their audience, was a logical development of the Bancroft style, and foreshadowed in the live theatre the circumscribed illusion of the cinema screen. 
The financial acumen with which the Bancrofts exploited their theatres was such that, even having spent $10,000 renovating the Prince of Wales's and $20,000 refurbishing the Haymarket, they were able to retire in 1885, having made a personal profit over twenty years of management of $180,000. According to Arthur Pinero it was Bancroft's rule 'that expenses should not exceed one-third of the holding capacity of the theatre. If it held $1200 a week, he would not spend more than $400 on salaries and so on. He could well afford to play to houses which were not full every night. (Fyfe, 268)' 

However, neither Marie Wilton's popularity nor her skill had diminished with her retirement, and she returned to the stage, with her husband, under the management of their old colleague John Hare, in revivals of 'Diplomacy' (1893) and 'Money' (1894). She also appeared in Sardou's 'Fedora', with Mrs Patrick Campbell, under Herbert Beerbohm Tree at the Haymarket in 1895. Her final performance was for a charity benefit, featuring act II of Robertson's 'Ours' (1896). 
Squire Bancroft was certainly respected by his fellow actors, and, when no longer in the invidious position of manager, he was often asked to arbitrate theatrical disputes and to preside at gatherings such as the celebration of Irving's knighthood in 1895. When Bancroft was himself knighted in the 1897 diamond jubilee honours it was more for his professional pre-eminence than his artistic merits. He had always been socially influential as a member of the Athenaeum and the Garrick, at a time when few actors were accepted as members, and of the more informal Lambs, Kinsmen, and Irving's own Beefsteak dining clubs. After their retirement he and Marie regularly entertained members of 'polite society' at their home, 18 Berkeley Square, London. In 1882 Bancroft, Irving, and J. L. Toole had founded the Actors' Benevolent Fund, financed by West End managements, and in 1891 Bancroft supported the Actors' Association founded by Robert Courtneige and Frank Benson. In 1906 he became its president, but was opposed by several members who felt the association was dominated by actor-managers whose interests were incompatible with the association's increasingly trade union-like activities. 
Indeed Bancroft, born into a family of entrepreneurs, had brought to the theatre a strong sense of capitalist professionalism. His own companies had been run as tight businesses, and many late Victorian and Edwardian West End managers had received their tutelage under the Bancrofts. In 1900 Beerbohm Tree invited him to join the council of his Academy of Dramatic Art (later RADA), where he endowed the Bancroft gold medal for the most outstanding student of the year. 
Marie Wilton's career epitomized the general change in the London theatrical scene during the last thirty years of the nineteenth century. Brought up in the brash popular traditions of burlesque and melodrama, she contributed both as an actress and as a manager in partnership with her husband to a social transformation. They gave theatre-going a middle-class respectability, as the materialistic literalism of their productions appealed to middle-class audiences more than the raw emotions of mid-Victorian spectacular melodrama. They were not the only innovators, indeed several other husband and wife teams -- the Wigans, the Kendals, and the Vezins -- had championed domestic dramas set in respectable society, but the Bancrofts, having Tom Robertson as their house playwright and stage director and adopting commercial strategies appropriate to the changing market, won the acclaim of Clement Scott: 'The Bancrofts and the Bancrofts alone, must have the full credit for what has been justly called the renaissance of English dramatic art...'. Less extravagantly he recorded that 'their unselfishness is beyond question... she who could make a play, and has never marred one, again and again effaced herself when it was deemed necessary, and, with a rare generosity extended a helping hand to a younger generation... Apart from the nobility of it all, it proved a most remunerative plan... The Bancrofts [were] pioneers of what is now known as 'natural acting'... and earned the confidence of the learned and liberal professions. (Scott, 2.362-4)' Lady Bancroft remained a respected member of her profession, though in retirement she channelled her irrepressible energy into 'good works' -- she was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1885 -- and into writing three plays and a novel, 'The Shadow of Neeme' (1912). She died at the Burlington Hotel, Folkestone, on 22 May 1921. Sir Squire Bancroft survived her for five years, and died at his flat, A1, The Albany, Piccadilly, London, on 19 April 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 30570


Squire Bancroft (1841-1926). He had been born Squire White Butterfield on 14 May 1841 in Rotherhithe, the son of Secundus Bancroft White Butterfield (died 1846/7), an oil merchant, and his wife, Julia, the daughter of Thomas Anthony Wright. The death of his father when Squire was only five meant that he was not sent to public school, but was educated in private schools in London and France. 


@@@@@


doc= 30571


Bandaranaike, Solomon West Ridgeway Dias (1899-1959), prime minister of Ceylon, was born on 8 January 1899 at the family home in Horagolla, Veyangoda, the only son of Sir Solomon Dias Bandaranaike (1862-1946) and his wife, Daisy Ezline, daughter of Sir Solomon Christoffel Obeyesekere. He was born into a family of wealth and influence in a society where those with high social status were expected to lead. His father had been an adviser to several British colonial governors and enjoyed easy access to the policy makers of the colonial administration. Unusually, the British governor was his godfather. As a child he had extensive contact with the British colonial leaders and their culture, which smoothed his transition to the environment at the prestigious St Thomas College in Colombo. The school prepared him for Christ Church, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in the classical honours moderations in 1921, and a third in jurisprudence in 1923. At first he felt uncomfortable in his Oxford surroundings and described his first year of university as a 'nightmare struggle'. However, in 1921 he joined the university debating society, the Oxford Union, and won great praise for his debating ability. In 1924 he ran for the presidency of the union and finished a poor third. He attributed his loss to prejudice among his fellow students and suffered a great hurt that probably affected his attitude towards the British throughout his public life. 
Bandaranaike returned to Colombo to practise law in 1925, and ran for a seat on the Colombo municipal council in a by-election in 1927. By defeating A. E. Goonesinghe, the most influential trade union leader in the colony, Bandaranaike won recognition as an important leader of the anti-British forces, and later that year was elected secretary of the Ceylon National Congress (CNC). The CNC was at the forefront of Ceylonese agitation against the British for self-government and included all the influential political leaders of the period. In 1931 the Donoughmore constitution introduced a self-governing legislative council to the crown colony and adult suffrage. Bandaranaike was elected to it unopposed and remained a member of every legislature thereafter, until his death in 1959. 
Throughout his life Bandaranaike, the privileged son of the Ceylonese elite, rebelled against authority: first against his father, and later, at Oxford, he challenged the authority of those who set the rules. After returning to Ceylon from England, his rebelliousness led him into new directions. He began to rebel against the British, initially by renouncing the Anglican religion of his parents, and later by challenging the colonial authority of the British. In 1937 he formed the Sinhala Maha Sangha (SMS) to represent Sinhalese Buddhist interests. His experiences at Oxford and while living under British rule had made him concerned about the impact of Europeans on the indigenous culture of Ceylon. The SMS was his attempt to protect his country's culture not only from the British, but also from the British-oriented Ceylonese elite. Although still a member of Don Stephen Senanayake's CNC, he was beginning the process of renouncing the Christian and British values espoused by the CNC leadership. The CNC was founded by members of the English-speaking Ceylonese elite. Many of its members were more comfortable in London than in Colombo, and had little in common with the vast majority of the population, who lived in rural areas and did not speak English. The SMS was the personal movement of its founder, Bandaranaike, and, unlike the CNC, it appealed to the Ceylonese peasants by championing their needs and culture. 
Bandaranaike's rebelliousness did not extend to his marital relations. He accepted the traditional guidance of his family and allowed his father to arrange a marriage in 1940 to the much younger Sirimavo Ratwatte (1916-2000), the daughter of one of the most powerful families in the Kandyan hills of central Ceylon. The marriage, on 3 October 1940, united two of the most influential families in the country. Sirimavo was a dutiful wife, bearing him two daughters, Sunethra and Chandrika, and a son, Anura. Although she had been educated at St Bridget's Convent, neither she nor her husband could have envisaged that she would become the world's first female prime minister in 1960. 
British rule in Ceylon ended in 1948. Their departure unleashed a series of forces on which Bandaranaike would capitalize in his rise to power. As long as the British ruled, ethnic differences were kept in check; as soon as they left, the struggle for power began. Despite Ceylon's small size, it was an ethnically diverse society: two major languages were spoken, the Indo-Aryan Sinhala (the majority group, to which Bandaranaike belonged) and the Dravidian Tamil. The two groups also followed different religions, the Sinhalese being Buddhist, the Tamils Hindu. The Sinhalese believed that during British rule their culture and religion had been repressed, and that speakers of English had been given preferential treatment for colonial jobs and benefits. Bandaranaike based his political movement on their claims; his policies to promote Sinhalese Buddhism adversely affected the Tamil minority, who from the 1970s were driven to rebel against the government. 
Bandaranaike's allegiance to the leadership of D. S. Senanayake and his United National Party (UNP), which had been formed by a merger between the CNC and his own SMS in 1947, began to weaken after the British withdrawal. Although he was the heir apparent to Senanayake as leader of the UNP, there were those within the party who wanted either Senanayake's cousin Sir John Kotelawala or his son Dudley to succeed him. Bandaranaike, who had served as minister of health and local government since 1947, finally led a revolt against Senanayake's leadership and crossed the floor of parliament to the opposition on 12 July 1951. He had hoped to lead a mass rebellion against Senanayake and his allies, but only five other members of parliament followed him to form the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP). This was not even enough for him to become leader of the opposition. His defection was precipitated by the UNP's rejection of his proposals to make Sinhala the sole national language and to promote Buddhism and the traditional ayurvedic system of medicine. English, spoken by a tiny minority of the population, was thus still to be used as a 'link language', uniting the two linguistic communities on the island. In his speech on that occasion he declared that 'I go, in the words of Abraham Lincoln 'with malice towards none and with charity to all', not only in regard to those who have honoured me with their friendship, but even in regard to those who honoured me with their enmity.' In the elections the next year the SLFP won only nine seats out the fifty that they contested, and Bandaranaike became the leader of the opposition. 
One of Bandaranaike's strongest qualities was his pragmatic ability as a compromiser and coalition builder. After his death he was quoted as once saying that 'the whole truth lies neither on one side, nor on the other. It is very often a rather puzzling compound of many things'. His defeat in the 1952 elections did not deter him. He immediately began to expand his political base by making alliances with others. By 1956 he had assembled an unlikely coalition of leftists, communists, and Sinhalese Buddhist nationalists into an electoral alliance that would transform Ceylonese politics. The SLFP would sweep the 1956 elections, propelling Bandaranaike into power. His own personality, coupled with the ideology of rural populism, held the coalition together for as long as Bandaranaike led it. Although the coalition constituents were united in their dislike of the conservative UNP, Bandaranaike offered them a complex populism that appealed to the leftist parties through its economic egalitarianism, and to the more conservative nationalist groups through its offer of empowerment for the rural Sinhalese peasant. Intense disagreements between conservatives, who sought to maintain the traditional hierarchical social and caste relations, and the leftists, who sought to replace hierarchy and deference with a meritocratic order, would destroy the coalition after Bandaranaike's death: they had little in common except his leadership. Because of Bandaranaike's efforts Ceylon would finally have a two-party system, but more importantly he opened the political system up to the poor and the lower classes, who were mobilized by his promises of change. He had found a wellspring of electoral support among the vast majority of the population, who did not speak English and lacked the educational and employment opportunities of those living in Colombo and the larger cities. The UNP had lost touch with the population, and Bandaranaike had forged a Sinhalese nationalist alliance which had appealed to the rural peasantry with his promise of 'Sinhala only'. 
Bandaranaike saw himself as the leader of a new social order. He once described his role as 'both a nurse and a midwife. I am a nurse at a deathbed... I would like to see, as should be the case at every deathbed, that the death is reasonably peaceful and dignified... I am also, I feel, a midwife at a birth. I would like that birth to be auspicious and painless as far as possible.' He stressed the concept of fair play in his actions and political statements; his government would enact a series of policies which would redirect the political system of Ceylon. He created a welfare state that provided a minimum standard of living for all Ceylonese. He also began to restore the Sinhalese Buddhist culture to what Sinhalese nationalists believed was its rightful place in the society. The Sinhala language was made the national language, replacing English, and Buddhism was given more rights. Both of these actions angered non-Buddhist and non-Sinhala-speaking people, and led to severe rioting by Tamils in 1958. 
Bandaranaike's three-year term of office (1956-9) was marked by many new legislative initiatives, but also by a delicate manoeuvring to keep the political forces he had unleashed under control. On one side were the leftists, who wanted more land reform and welfare policies. On the other were the Sinhalese Buddhist nationalists, who sought increased rights for their culture and religion while maintaining the economic and social 'status quo'. The great compromiser had to keep his coalition together and also to make concessions to the angry Tamil minority, which was most severely affected by the pro-Sinhalese policies. In the end he would fail, not on broad political grounds, but on the petty personal issues that had crept into the political debate. 
On 25 September 1959 the forces that Bandaranaike had worked so hard to keep under control destroyed him and his coalition. After an early-morning meeting with the new American ambassador at his home in Cinnamon Gardens, Colombo, Bandaranaike paused to greet some well-wishers and clients who had gathered on his verandah to greet him or to seek his help. He first turned to a Buddhist 'bhikkhu' (monk) and gave the traditional greeting with a short bow and his hands clasped in front of him. The monk blessed him and left. A second monk stepped forward and Bandaranaike began to greet him in a similar manner. As Bandaranaike bowed, the monk pulled a gun from his robes and began shooting. Bandaranaike fell back into a chair, at first unaware of the severity of his wounds. He died twenty-four hours later. His assassin was wounded and arrested while trying to escape. 
A Buddhist monk, the Venerable Mapitigama Buddharakkitha, had conspired with the assassin and several other former Bandaranaike supporters to kill the prime minister. The precipitating factor appears to have been an anonymous pamphlet which alleged that Buddharakkitha had been sexually involved with a female member of Bandaranaike's cabinet. When Bandaranaike refused to take action against the possible authors of the pamphlet, Buddharakkitha conspired to kill him. Although it was alleged that some members of Bandaranaike's cabinet, including Wijayananda Dahanayake, who became prime minister after Bandaranaike's death, may also have been involved in the plot, they were never charged with the conspiracy. 
Bandaranaike, the man of wealthy origins who had turned his compassion to the poor of the country, displayed the same compassion in a statement made from his deathbed to a journalist. 'A foolish man dressed in the robes of a 'bhikkhu' fired some shots at me in my bungalow this morning. I appeal to all concerned to show compassion to this man and not try to wreak vengeance on him... I appeal to all to be calm, patient and to do nothing that might cause trouble to the people.' A few hours later he died. His death shocked the nation. The mourning population stood in two 6 mile-long queues, with an average wait of seven hours, to file past his body as it lay in state. When the mourning was over, more than half a million people had paid him their respects. 
Few leaders of any country have had such a profound effect on their country as Bandaranaike did on Ceylon (which only in 1972 officially adopted the name Sri Lanka by which the Sinhalese had always known it). His welfare policies raised the quality of life for the average Ceylonese so much that by the end of the twentieth century his country had health provisions and life expectancy comparable with Western countries, despite its poverty. Although later governments changed his policies, they left the basic elements of the welfare state in place. 
The nationalist forces Bandaranaike unleashed spread into a civil war in the 1980s and forced a continuing debate about the role of Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism. However, his admirers point to his unfinished efforts to achieve a compromise with the leadership of the main Tamil party, the Federal Party. The legacy he left had a profound effect on Ceylonese politics. So too did his family's influence. His widow, Sirimavo, became the first elected female head of government in the world, serving from 1960 to 1965. She was re-elected as prime minister from 1970 to 1977 and again from 1994 until two months before her death, on 10 October 2000. Also in 1994 Bandaranaike's younger daughter, Chandrika Kumaratunga, was elected president of Sri Lanka. Kumaratunga charmed the nation with charisma similar to her father's. She rebelled against her mother's leadership of the SLFP and left the party for most of the 1980s before returning to lead it to electoral victory in the parliamentary and presidential elections of 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 30572


Bankes, Sir John Eldon (1854-1946), judge, was born on 17 April 1854 in London, the eldest son of John Scott Bankes (1826-1896) of Soughton Hall, Flintshire, and his first wife, Annie (1829-1876), daughter of Sir John Jervis, chief justice of the common pleas. He was directly descended from Sir John Bankes, chief justice of the common pleas in 1641. His father's mother was the daughter of the lord chancellor, John Scott, first earl of Eldon. 
Bankes was educated at Eton College, where he was president of the rowing club, and rowed for the school at Henley in 1872. From Eton he went on to University College, Oxford (1872), where he was secretary of the Oxford University boat club and president of Vincent's Club, having rowed for Oxford in 1875 when, after five successive defeats, they won the boat race by 10 lengths. After graduating with a second class in jurisprudence in 1876, he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1878 and was a pupil of Richard Webster (later Viscount Alverstone). On 10 August 1882 he married Edith (1856-1931), daughter of Robert Peel Ethelston of Hinton Hall, Shropshire; they had two sons and two daughters. 
Modest, unassuming, and courteous, good-looking and with a dry sense of humour, Bankes had a good practice on the common-law side and took silk in 1901, having become a bencher of his inn in 1899. He was unsuccessful as Unionist candidate for Flint in 1906, although a profile in 'Vanity Fair' stated that had the women and children of the constituency enjoyed the suffrage, he would have won easily. In 1910 Lord Chancellor Loreburn appointed him a puisne judge and he was knighted; in 1915 he was promoted to the Court of Appeal and became a privy councillor. 
As judge and lord justice, Bankes won a high reputation as a careful, clear-headed, and able lawyer. During his latter years in the Court of Appeal, he acted as chairman of one of its branches, and in this capacity, often sitting with Sir T. E. Scrutton and Sir J. R. Atkin, he gave the first judgment in many important cases that illustrated his grasp of common-law principles. The prestige of this branch of the Court of Appeal under his chairmanship is evidenced by the small number of appeals made to the House of Lords from its unanimous decisions. Bankes retired in 1927 and was made a GCB in 1928. 
Throughout his long life Bankes was a devoted churchman. He was at one time treasurer and later chairman of the London Diocesan Fund, served as chancellor of St Asaph diocese (1908-10), and with John Sankey and Atkin drafted the constitution of the disestablished Church in Wales. He was chairman of the representative body of the Church in Wales (1928-43). At the age of eighty-one he was appointed chairman of the royal commission on traffic in arms. He was chairman of Flintshire quarter sessions for thirty-three years, and was an alderman and chairman of Flintshire county council. 
Treasurer of the Inner Temple in 1923, Bankes was an honorary LLD of Wales (1921) and Manchester (1923), an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, and a fellow of Eton. A countryman at heart, he enjoyed managing the home farm and family estate of Soughton Hall, Northop, Flintshire, which he inherited from his father in 1894. Tall and athletic, he walked daily from his home in Eaton Square to the Temple, and at weekends during term was wont to take a train into the home counties and walk his preferred distance of 21 miles, carefully measured on a pedometer. 
Bankes died aged ninety-two on 31 December 1946 at Soughton Hall. He was cremated on 4 January 1947, and his ashes were interred in the family vault at St Peter and St Eurgain, Northop, on the 7th. His son, Robert Wynne Bankes, was private secretary to successive lord chancellors (1919-29) and before his retirement in 1950 successively assistant secretary and secretary to the Institute of Chartered Accountants. The younger daughter, Margaret Annie, married Sir W. H. P. Lewis, her father's former pupil. 


@@@@@


doc= 30573


Banks, Sir John Thomas (1816-1908), physician, was born on 14 October 1816 in London, the second son of Percival Banks (1764-1848), surgeon, of Ennis, co. Clare, Ireland, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Captain Thomas Ramsay. Percival Banks studied medicine at Rheims and Paris and he served in the navy and army before returning to Ennis where his father, also named Percival, was a doctor. Percival junior became surgeon to the county infirmary and physician to the fever hospital. John Banks was educated at Erasmus Smith's Grammar School in Ennis. He began his medical studies in the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland as a pupil of Sir Henry Marsh, professor of the practice of medicine. He obtained the licence of the college in 1836. He also studied arts and medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, where he began his studies in 1833. Four years later he graduated BA and MB and in 1843 he proceeded MD. His older brother Percival Weldon Banks also studied at Trinity College before going on to become a barrister and writer. He was best-known for his contributions to 'Fraser's Magazine' which were written under the pseudonym Morgan Rattler. 
In 1840 Banks was appointed lecturer on materia medica at the Park Street school of medicine, Dublin. Two years later he was appointed lecturer on the practice of medicine at the Carmichael school of medicine and the following year he was appointed physician to the Richmond, Whitworth, and Hardwicke hospitals, where he was a colleague of Sir Dominic Corrigan and Robert Adams. He held this last position until his death. He was an excellent teacher and he was greatly admired as an accomplished physician. He became a fellow of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland in 1844. Banks was appointed king's professor of the practice of medicine in the school of physic at Trinity College in 1849 and this post was linked to an appointment as physician to Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital. He resigned these appointments in 1868 but he was subsequently appointed consulting physician to the hospital. In 1851 he became assistant physician and in 1854 physician to the Richmond Lunatic Asylum. In his later years he was also consulting physician to the Royal City of Dublin Hospital. In 1880 he was elected regius professor of medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, and he held the post for eighteen years. Banks was president of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland between 1869 and 1871 and he was president of the Dublin Pathological Society in 1861. When the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland was founded in 1882 he was unanimously chosen to be its first president. He was president of the British Medical Association when it met in Dublin in 1887. 
Banks had a major interest in medical education and he represented at first the Queen's University and then the Royal University (as it became) on the General Medical Council from 1880 to 1898. He pleaded for a high standard of education before entry to medical school and he stressed the importance of psychological and psychiatric studies for medical students. At that time psychiatric disorders, although commonly encountered in general practice, were largely excluded from undergraduate medical studies and Banks played a role in bringing about the inclusion of mental illness as a subject in the medical curriculum. He also urged the lengthening of the medical curriculum from four to five years. Banks was a handsome and dignified man whose ethical behaviour and professional conduct were always above reproach. These attributes made him the natural leader of his profession and a dominant figure in the social life of Dublin for many years. He was a noted conversationalist and he was admired for his princely hospitality. His busy social life was almost certainly an explanation for his comparatively modest research output. He was not a prolific writer on medical subjects. One of his more interesting contributions was his note on the writ 'De lunatico inquirendo' in relation to the mental stability of the ageing Jonathan Swift which was published in the 'Dublin Journal of Medical Science' in 1868. 
Banks married Alice (died 1899), daughter of Captain Wood Wright of Golagh, co. Monaghan, in 1848. They had one daughter, Mary. In 1891 he served as high sheriff in Monaghan. He received an honorary LLD from the University of Glasgow and a DSc from the Royal University. He was physician-in-ordinary in Ireland to Queen Victoria and to Edward VII and in 1889 he was made KCB in recognition of his distinguished services to medicine. In 1906 he endowed a postgraduate scholarship in medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, which is still awarded by the university. A John Banks medal in bronze is also given to the successful candidate. Banks died on 16 July 1908 at his home, 45 Merrion Square, Dublin, and he was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery after a service in the chapel of Trinity College, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 30574


Banks, Leslie James (1890-1952), actor, was born on 9 June 1890 in West Derby, Liverpool, Lancashire, son of George Banks, general merchant, and his wife, Emily Dalby. He won a classical scholarship at Trinity College, Glenalmond, and then went on to Keble College, Oxford, again as a classical scholar. He made his first professional appearance on the stage in 1911 at the town hall, Brechin, as Old Gobbo in 'The Merchant of Venice' with the company of Frank Benson. He remained with Benson until the following year, when he went on tour with George Dance's company in 'The Hope' by Cecil Raleigh and Henry Hamilton, a racing melodrama from Drury Lane. He then joined H. V. Esmond and Eva Moore in a tour of the United States and Canada, making his first New York appearance in a small part in Esmond's comedy 'Eliza Comes to Stay'. Returning to London he made his West End debut at the Vaudeville in May 1914, in Esmond's 'The Dangerous Age'. 
The First World War cut short Banks's career just as it was beginning to show promise. He served in the Essex regiment, receiving a disfiguring wound in the face that might have driven a weaker character to seek some less public profession. Banks never allowed it to deter him and when he started acting again after the war he found that it did not handicap him. In 1915 Banks married Gwendoline Haldane, daughter of Edwin Thomas Unwin; they had three daughters. A month after the armistice he made a fresh start under Nigel Playfair at the Lyric, Hammersmith; from there he went to the Birmingham repertory theatre under Barry Jackson, and in 1919-20 he played leads in the repertory company of Lena Ashwell. A Shaw season at the Everyman, Hampstead, followed early in 1921, and in May of the same year he had his first important part in a successful West End play, as Archie Beal in 'If' by Lord Dunsany at the Ambassadors. 
In little more than two years Banks had established himself in the good opinion of most of the managements in London at a time when the disillusion consequent on the war had forced down the standard of public taste to a depressingly low level. Because he was so much in demand he was free to pick the plays in which he wanted to act, and to study the long list of parts he played is to realize what care he took to avoid claptrap or rubbish. To see Leslie Banks's name on a playbill or in a theatre programme was to be given a virtual guarantee that the play had merit. He was an actor of very wide range and as his services were constantly in demand in films as well as on the stage he was able to avoid being stereotyped. No better evidence of this need be asked for than the fact that in a season of repertory with John Gielgud's company at the Haymarket, from October 1944 to June 1945, he played Lord Porteous in W. Somerset Maugham's 'The Circle', Tattle in Congreve's 'Love for Love', Claudius in 'Hamlet', Bottom in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', and Antonio Bologna in Webster's 'The Duchess of Malfi'; he also played such disparate leading roles as those in 'Goodbye Mr Chips' (1938) and 'Life with Father' (1947). Among the many films in which he appeared were the Hitchcock productions 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1934) and 'Jamaica Inn' (1939). Banks belonged to that stalwart type of actor which, ranking as leading man rather than popular star, is able for that very reason to reach a pitch of distinction in his career that many stars miss. 
One of the most variously talented and deeply respected figures on the British stage of his time, no man in private life ever looked or behaved less like the popular conception of an actor. Banks showed no trace of that exhibitionism, that desire to be noticed, which is the motivating force with many actors of every degree of distinction. 'He remained through all his success', said A. A. Milne, 'the man next door, a good neighbour and a good friend'. Yet the serene integrity of his nature did not interfere with his versatility as an artist. He was able to understand and play with sympathy a character with whom it seemed he could have nothing at all in common: as Gerald Coates in 'Grand National Night' at the Apollo in 1946 the character's besetting fault, which brought him to ruin, was a streak of wild recklessness -- it was unthinkable that Leslie Banks in his own person could ever yield to such weakness. He was also a successful producer, among his productions being Galsworthy's 'The Eldest Son' (Everyman, 1928) and Norman MacOwan's 'The Infinite Shoeblack' (1929). Banks was appointed CBE in 1950 and he died at his home, 27 South Terrace, Kensington, London, on 21 April 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 30575


Banks, Sir (William) Mitchell (1842-1904), surgeon, was born in Edinburgh on 1 November 1842, the son of Peter Spalding Banks, solicitor, and his wife, Ann Williamson. He received his early education at the Edinburgh Academy and then entered Edinburgh University, where in 1864 he graduated MD with honours and won the gold medal for his thesis on the Wolffian bodies. At the university he acted as prosector to Professor John Goodsir and at the local infirmary he acted as dresser and as house surgeon to James Syme. After graduating he was demonstrator of anatomy for a short time to Professor Allen Thomson, at the University of Glasgow. Afterwards he went to Paraguay, where he acted as surgeon for the republican government. 
In 1864 Banks settled at Liverpool, and in 1874 he married Elizabeth Rathbone, daughter of John Elliott, a merchant of Liverpool; they had two sons. He began his career at Liverpool by joining the staff of the school of medicine at the infirmary, where he was first first demonstrator and then lecturer on anatomy. This latter post he retained -- and he later became professor -- when the infirmary school was merged with University College, Liverpool. He resigned his chair in 1894, when he became emeritus professor of anatomy. In addition Banks was pathologist and curator of the museum, and he succeeded Reginald Harrison as assistant surgeon to the Royal Infirmary at Liverpool in 1875. He was full surgeon there from 1877 until November 1902, when he was appointed consulting surgeon. 
Banks was admitted FRCS (England) on 9 December 1869 without having taken the membership examinations. He served as a member of the college council from 1890 to 1896, and he was also the first representative of Victoria University, Manchester, on the General Medical Council. In 1885 he was one of the founders of the Liverpool Biological Association and was elected its first president; in 1890 he was president of the Medical Institution. In 1892 he was made JP of Liverpool, and in 1899 he was knighted and awarded an honorary LLD from the University of Edinburgh. 
Banks deserves recognition both as a surgeon and as a great organizer. As a surgeon he was an early advocate of radical mastectomy in cases of breast cancer, and in the face of strenuous opposition he carried out extensive operations involving the removal of the axillary glands when most surgeons were content with the older practice of partial removal. He made this latter treatment the topic of his Lettsomian lectures at the Medical Society of London in 1900. As an organizer Banks was one of the team who built up the fortunes of the medical school at Liverpool. Having found it at a very low ebb he and his associates worked hard to raise its quality first to that of a top medical college and finally to that of a well-equipped medical faculty at a modern university. The plan involved the rebuilding of the infirmary, and Banks was a member of the medical deputation which visited many continental hospitals to study their design and equipment before the foundation stone of the Liverpool building was laid in 1887. 
Banks died suddenly at the Karlsbad Hotel, Aachen, Germany, on 9 August 1904, while on his way home from Homburg, and was buried in the Smithdown Road cemetery, Liverpool. His wife survived him. The William Mitchell Banks lectureship at Liverpool University was founded and endowed by his fellow citizens in his memory in 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 30576


Banting, Sir Frederick Grant (1891-1941), physician and medical researcher, was born near the town of Alliston, Ontario, Canada, on 14 November 1891, the fourth son and fifth and youngest child of William Thompson Banting (1849-1929), a farmer of Irish descent, and his wife, Margaret (1854-1940), daughter of Alexander Grant, a miller of Scottish ancestry in Alliston. 
Banting was educated in local schools and in 1910 entered Victoria College at the University of Toronto. After having to repeat the first year of the arts programme, he decided to switch to medicine. On graduation in 1916 (officially the class of 1917), he was immediately granted a commission in the Royal Canadian Army Medical Corps. He served in England and France as a battalion medical officer, and was awarded the Military Cross for valour during an engagement at Cambrai in September 1918, during which he was seriously wounded by shrapnel. After the war Banting trained for a year in surgery at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, and when his staff appointment was not renewed, opened a practice in London, Ontario, as a physician and surgeon. With time on his hands, he accepted a post as a part-time demonstrator at the local University of Western Ontario. 
After doing some preparatory reading one night for a talk on the pancreas, Banting speculated that researchers' failure to isolate the long-sought internal secretion of the pancreas might have been due to the destructive action of enzymes in the pancreas's external secretion. He jotted down an idea he hoped would eliminate that problem: '
Diabetus ['sic'] 

Ligate pancreatic ducts of dog. Keep dogs alive till acini degenerate leaving Islets. 

Try to isolate the internal secretion of these to relieve glycosurea ['sic'] 

' Banting presented his idea to the professor of physiology at the University of Toronto, J. J. R. Macleod, who, with surplus resources at hand, agreed to allow him to test his hypothesis. Banting began work in May 1921, assisted by a graduating student, Charles H. Best, and under the supervision of Macleod. Preliminary results in the summer of 1921 convinced Banting and Best that an active diabetic principle could be prepared from extracts of degenerated pancreas. The research was intensified that autumn and a trained biochemist, James Bertram Collip, was added to the team in December at Banting's request. 
The first paper about the Toronto research, delivered by Banting, Best, and Macleod to the American Physiological Society in New Haven, Connecticut, in late December 1921, met with a cautious response. A clinical trial of extract of fresh beef pancreas, made by Banting and Best, on a fourteen-year old diabetic boy, Leonard Thompson, in Toronto General Hospital on 11 January 1922, was deemed a failure. But on 23 January 1922 injections of pancreatic extract, purified by a process developed by Collip, began working splendidly, eliminating the symptoms of Thompson's diabetes. Within a few months the medical world celebrated the Toronto group's breakthrough in isolating 'insulin' as a spectacularly effective replacement therapy in the treatment of diabetes. 
Banting, who never understood the extent to which the emergence of insulin relied on a well-supported collaborative effort begun with his faulty idea, fought for and received acclaim as the primary discoverer. In 1923 the Ontario legislature created for him the first research professorship in a Canadian university. In the same year the parliament of Canada granted him a lifetime annuity of $7500. In 1923 the Nobel prize in medicine or physiology was awarded to Banting and Macleod. Banting immediately divided his share of the Nobel money with Best, as did Macleod with Collip. Banting's later honours included the Cameron prize (Edinburgh, 1927), the Flavelle medal of the Royal Society of Canada (1931), the Apothecaries' medal (London, 1936), and the F. N. G. Starr medal of the Canadian Medical Association (1936). He was elected to the Royal Society, London, in 1935, and became an honorary fellow or member of many British and foreign scientific societies. He was appointed KBE in 1934 in the last round of honours granted to Canadians. 
Banting's later research on the adrenal cortex, cancer, and other problems was unproductive, and he gradually became aware of the considerable limits of his scientific expertise. But his prominence meant that the outbreak of war in 1939 found him occupying the leading place in Canadian medical science. As head of the Medical Research Committee of the National Research Council of Canada, he worked enthusiastically to stimulate research, including investigation of chemical-biological warfare. His department of medical research at the University of Toronto became a centre for research in aviation medicine. 
Banting was twice married: in 1924 to Marion ('c'.1900- 'c'.1945), daughter of William Robertson, physician, of Elora, Ontario; they were divorced in 1932. In 1939 he married Henrietta (1912- 'c'.1976), daughter of Henry Tenny Ball, a customs officer, of Stanstead, Quebec. One son, William, came from the first marriage. Attempting to visit Britain for liaison and personal reasons, Banting died in a plane crash on 21 February 1941, south-west of Musgrave Harbour, Newfoundland. He was buried in Mount Pleasant cemetery, Toronto, on 3 March 1941. 
Banting was a rough-hewn, hard-drinking, obstinate, intelligent, and democratic Canadian. In his later years he was the 'good old boy' and popular figurehead of Canadian medical research. In leisure hours he became one of Canada's most accomplished amateur painters, adopting the techniques and style of friends in the Group of Seven, Canada's national art movement. 
Memorials to Banting and the discovery of insulin abound at the University of Toronto and in medals and lectureships sponsored by diabetes associations around the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 30577


Bantock, Sir Granville Ransome (1868-1946), composer, was born on 7 August 1868 at 44 Cornwall Road, Notting Hill, London, the eldest son of an eminent surgeon and gynaecologist, George Granville Bantock (1837-1913), and his wife, Sophia Elizabeth (Bessie) Ransome (1843-1909). George Bantock had been born in Sutherland, where his father became gamekeeper for the infamous second duke on his Dunrobin estate. Granville Bantock's mother, from an East Anglian entrepreneurial Quaker family, was a munificent and vivacious theatre-loving woman. 
Bantock was educated privately in London. It was not until his mid-teens that he acquired the all-abiding musical intent that led him to clash with his father over a career in the Indian Civil Service. He was then sent to the London City and Guilds Institute to study chemical engineering, but was eventually permitted private lessons in harmony and counterpoint at Trinity College of Music and on 22 September 1888 entered the Royal Academy of Music, where his primary subjects were composition and harmony under Frederick Corder. Notwithstanding a flagrant musical naivety, he was the first recipient of the Macfarren scholarship, and was eventually appointed sub-professor in harmony. On leaving, he was given the unprecedented privilege of a complete concert of his music. 
On leaving the Royal Academy in 1893 Bantock founded the periodical 'New Quarterly Musical Review', which ran for three years. In 1893 he conducted a burlesque, 'Bonnie Boy Blue', around the country. He then began a more lasting association with the Gaiety Company, run by George Edwardes: first on two provincial tours with 'A Gaiety Girl' by O. Hall and 'In Town' by A. Russell and J. T. Tanner in 1894; then abroad, with dates in the USA and Australia into 1894-5 -- characteristically, he returned with multifarious mementos, including a monkey. Over the next few years he continued to work in musical comedy, and even produced a couple of 'hit' music hall songs. The following year he toured with Stanford's 'Shamus O'Brien' around north-west England and Ireland. 
Still unsuccessful at obtaining an academic appointment, Bantock organized two London concerts of works by himself and other young British composers -- the first on 15 December 1896 to some furore. There followed a stint conducting incidental music for French plays at the Royalty Theatre, London, during May and into June 1897. Then at the beginning of June he took up an appointment as musical director at the Tower Gardens, New Brighton, Cheshire. This period proved to be a turning point in his life. First, on 9 March 1898, he married Helen Francesca Maude (1868-1961), daughter of Carl Adolph Herman Schweitzer. Bantock's wife was a poet and artist and was to provide numerous texts for songs and vocal works. The couple set up home at Liscard: two sons, Angus and Raymond, were born during their stay on the Wirral. Second, Bantock quickly transformed the military band at New Brighton into an orchestra of national reputation with programmes to rival those of Dan Godfrey in Bournemouth and August Manns at the Crystal Palace. He not only performed major orchestral works, but also devoted whole concerts to contemporary, often British, composers (invariably with them as guest conductors). He formed his own local choral society and took up an appointment with the Runcorn Choral Society in September 1897. He now too began to mature as a composer, escaping the dominating influence of Wagner in particular. The first of six sets of 'Songs of the East' was begun just weeks after his meeting with Helen in March 1896, and 'Elegiac Poem' (1898) and 'Helena Variations' (1899) were highlights amid continuing, more sprawling conceptions like 'Christus' (1900). 
In 1900, backed with prestigious recommendations, Bantock became principal of the Birmingham and Midland Institute School of Music. The midlands were to become his musical home for most of his remaining career: another son, Hamilton, and a daughter, Myrrha, were born soon after the family's move south. (There was also to be another son from a later love affair with the singer Denne Parker, and it is thought there were other extra-marital liaisons.) He soon transformed the school into a vibrant musical centre, and also took up appointments with orchestral and choral societies in Liverpool, Wolverhampton, Birmingham, and Worcester. In 1908 Bantock replaced Elgar as Peyton professor of music at Birmingham University and began intertwining the teaching of the two establishments into one enterprising, broad-based system of education, with many prominent figures becoming associated with their work. Conspicuously active in the musical life of his adopted city, he was instrumental in the early establishment of a city orchestra. His involvement in the competitive festivals movement as a composer and arranger of test pieces and as a much travelled judge now also became a major aspect of his work. Though Bantock's personality possessed a strong streak of conservatism (he loathed jazz), this, like his later concern with brass bands, partly reflected his evolved political inclinations and commitment to the labour movement, which included work for the Workers' Educational Association and writing, at Keir Hardie's request, 'Labour March' and other compositions for the Trades Union Congress. 
Despite all his academic responsibilities, it was during his years in Birmingham that Bantock composed the body of work that constitutes the core of his reputation, including his best-known pieces, the tone-poem 'Fifine at the Fair' (1911) and the overture 'The Pierrot of the Minute' (1908). His music revealed an abiding fascination with world literature. This was manifest in orchestral works like 'The Witch of Atlas' (1902) and 'Dante and Beatrice' (1910), as well as in his many settings of poetry, of the Romantics in particular. From student days he had been drawn to the culture and philosophy of the East: 'Omar Khayyam', a setting of Edward FitzGerald's poem, is often regarded as his finest work. Its three parts were at first performed separately: the first at Birmingham (1906), the second at Cardiff (1907), and the final part at Birmingham again (1909). There were subsequently complete performances, notably at the Queen's Hall, London, and in Vienna. 
Bantock also made fruitful use of oriental and Near Eastern literature, as in the charming if less ambitious string quartet 'In a Chinese Mirror' (1933), and in his many settings of Chinese poets. Classical antiquity was the inspiration of some of his other excellent works, notably the 'Pagan Symphony' (1923-8) and 'Sappho' (1906). Though fascinated by more arcane spiritualities, he turned to biblical material for his 'Song of Songs' and the second of his three innovative choral 'symphonies', 'Vanity of Vanities' (1913). He involved himself with English, Welsh, and Irish song, but his Scottish ancestral connection especially engendered a number of major scores. The most important of these were the enchanting 'Hebridean Symphony' (1915) and the folk opera 'The Seal-Woman' (1924), with a libretto by Marjory Kennedy-Fraser. 
Although Bantock's works had long been out of favour, he was knighted in 1930. He retired from Birmingham in 1934 and moved to London to continue work and touring for Trinity College. He recorded a set of 'mood' pieces plus a couple of more weighty works such as 'Four Chinese Landscapes' (1936); the glory of his last years, the twenty-minute 'Celtic Symphony' (1940), was also recorded on disc. 
'GB', as he was known, was bearded and of broad bearing; a charismatic and much loved figure, genial and kindly, open-minded and full-hearted, energetic and enthusiastic, and known for his engaging sense of humour, eccentricities, and all-consuming fads. Cultured and linguistic, he corresponded with and befriended many of the most significant artistic figures of the period. He was conspicuously generous in his support of fellow composers at home and abroad. He was one of the first advocates of Sibelius, to whom he played host on his visits to England; and in gratitude, Sibelius dedicated his third symphony to Bantock and happily accepted the first presidency of the Bantock Society. 
A prolific composer, noted for his commanding orchestration, Bantock left behind a wide-ranging 'oeuvre', essentially Romantic, sometimes of grand conception, often expressly programmatic and inspired by poetic, heroic, and exotic themes. For some, his work was composed with an all-too-easy facility, lacking both self-critical restraint and an individual voice, and was too much steeped in late Victorian and Edwardian Romanticism to survive beyond its time. For others, he left behind a fascinating range of music, including works to rival even the best of his more illustrious compatriots. He arguably remains one of the most unfairly neglected figures in twentieth-century British music. 
Bantock died in All Saints' Hospital in London on 16 October 1946, after a fall following a minor operation. His ashes were later scattered on Moelwyn above Coed-y-bleiddiau, where the family had spent so many happy holidays. In 1972 his daughter Myrrha published 'Granville Bantock: a Personal Portrait'. 


@@@@@


doc= 30578


Barbirolli, Sir John (1899-1970), conductor and cellist, was born Giovanni Battista at 12 Southampton Row, London, on 2 December 1899, the elder son and second of the three children of an emigre Italian violinist, Lorenzo Barbirolli (1864-1928), and his Parisian wife, Louise Marie Ribeyrol (1870-1962). He began to play the violin when he was four, but a year later changed to the cello. He was educated at St Clement Danes Grammar School and, at the same time, from 1910, was a scholar at Trinity College of Music. He made his public debut in a cello concerto in the Queen's Hall in 1911. The following year he won a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music, which he attended from 1912 to 1916. He was elected an associate of the academy at the age of thirteen. From 1916 to 1918 he was a freelance cellist in London, playing in the Queen's Hall Orchestra, in opera under Sir Thomas Beecham, and in theatre and cinema orchestras. 
Barbirolli served in the Suffolk regiment (1918-19), and on demobilization resumed his orchestral career, although he was gifted enough to be soloist in Sir Edward Elgar's cello concerto at Bournemouth in 1921. In 1924 he became the cellist in both the Music Society and Samuel Kutcher string quartets. However, his ambition since childhood had been to conduct, and later that year he formed his own string orchestra. He gradually attracted attention and in 1925 was invited to conduct for the British National Opera Company (BNOC); he made his debut in Gounod's 'Romeo and Juliet' in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1926. 
When the BNOC foundered financially in 1929 Barbirolli was appointed conductor of the Covent Garden touring company and also conducted regularly at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in the grand opera season. In 1933 he became conductor of the Scottish Orchestra, rejuvenating the playing and programmes and winning most favourable opinions. Even so, no one was prepared for the sensation in 1936 when the Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York, having been forced by public protests to withdraw their invitation to Wilhelm Furtwangler to succeed Arturo Toscanini as its conductor, asked Barbirolli for the first ten weeks of the 1936-7 season. He conducted in Carnegie Hall for the first time on 5 November 1936 and a month later was offered a three-year contract. 
The years in New York were both rewarding and scarring for Barbirolli. Working with a great orchestra, with whom he was always on excellent terms, and with the most talented of the world's soloists, matured him musically; but the handicap imposed upon him by having succeeded Toscanini, who was idolized in New York and for whom a rival orchestra was created, was almost insurmountable. The critics, whose power and influence in New York at that time were notorious, were savage in their attacks on Barbirolli's interpretations. Nevertheless, in 1940 his contract was renewed for a further two years. The issue by the Barbirolli Society since his death of transfers to CD of recordings he made in New York proves that the orchestra played superbly for him and that the criticism of him was largely unjustified. 
When in April 1943 Barbirolli was invited to become permanent conductor of the Halle Orchestra at a time of crisis in its history, he accepted without hesitation. He arrived in Manchester to find that he had a month in which to recruit forty players to add to the thirty-five under contract. He scoured the country for talent -- no easy task in 1943 -- and launched a virtually new orchestra, which was soon acclaimed as the best in the country. This period, when he re-created the orchestra, bound him emotionally and indissolubly to the Halle, so that despite lucrative offers from elsewhere, and despite his own exasperation with its post-war financial problems, he could not be lured away. He was knighted in 1949 and was awarded the Royal Philharmonic Society's gold medal in 1950. In 1959 he accepted engagements in America and returned to a rapturous welcome from public and critics in New York. He was a regular guest conductor of most of the leading European orchestras, including the Vienna Philharmonic, with whom he recorded the Brahms symphonies. In 1961 he began a decade of association with the Berlin Philharmonic, by which he was much admired, and from 1961 to 1967 was conductor-in-chief of the Houston Symphony Orchestra. But the Halle was still his principal concern and, after twenty-five years with it, in 1968 he was appointed conductor laureate for life. He was made a Companion of Honour in 1969. 
On 18 June 1932 Barbirolli married Marjorie Parry, a soprano. The marriage was not a success and they were divorced in 1939, when Barbirolli married (5 July) a celebrated oboist, Evelyn Alice Rothwell (1911-2008), the daughter of R. H. Rothwell, a tea dealer, of Wallingford, Berkshire. There were no children of either marriage. Barbirolli was a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music (1928) and an honorary freeman of Manchester, King's Lynn, and Houston, Texas. Honorary degrees were conferred on him by the universities of Manchester (1950), Dublin (1952), Sheffield (1957), London (1961), Leicester (1964), and Keele (1969). He received the Bruckner (1959) and Mahler (1965) medals and was decorated by the governments of Italy, Finland, and France. For some years Barbirolli suffered from heart disease, and he died at Huntsworth Mews, London, on 29 July 1970 after a day of rehearsal in preparation for concerts with the New Philharmonia Orchestra in Japan. His ashes were buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Barbirolli was a complete musician. His magnetism as a conductor was exemplified by his ability to obtain quickly the special quality of sound which he liked from an orchestra. His aim was to lead players and listeners into the composer's world: this power of commitment was his strength, as his recordings testify. If concentration on broad lines and expressive phrasing meant some loss of rhythmical impulse, that was a weakness which was usually outweighed. In the music of Mahler, Elgar, Sibelius, Brahms, and Vaughan Williams he was at his greatest, combining power and poetry, but his excellent Haydn was underrated and it was most unfortunate that after 1936 he conducted comparatively little opera, although he returned to Covent Garden in the 1950s and was offered (but refused) the post of music director. He had a natural flair for opera, especially the works of Puccini and Verdi, and in the last years of his life recorded 'Madama Butterfly' and 'Otello' and conducted 'Aida' in Rome to great acclaim. No one who saw him -- dynamic, with a touch of arrogance in his demeanour on the rostrum, small of stature but big in every other way -- would have guessed that after a concert he would often lapse into deep depression. He was prey to an insecurity which stemmed partly from experiences during his rise to fame, was partly the result of his years in New York, and was also due to his own genuine humility in the face of great music. But with his sardonic humour, his courage, and his gift for friendship he concealed these human failings from all but his intimates. His capacity for work was prodigious and he demanded most from himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 30579


Barbour, Sir David Miller (1841-1928), administrator in India and writer on monetary issues, was born at Omagh, co. Tyrone, Ireland, on 29 December 1841, the fifth child of Miller Barbour and his wife, Margaret Denny, into an established family of farmers and small landowners at Calkill, near Omagh. He was educated at Omagh Academy and Queen's College, Belfast, graduating in 1862 with a BA from the Queen's University of Ireland. 
Barbour passed sixth in order of merit into the Indian Civil Service in 1862, taking first place in the examination in mathematics ['see 'competition wallahs]. He arrived in India in December 1863, and was posted to Bengal. He became under-secretary to the government of India in the finance department in 1872 and subsequently held the posts of accountant-general in the Punjab, Madras, and Bengal, then acted as secretary to the government of Bengal in the finance department and later in the revenue and general department. In 1880, following the Second Anglo-Afghan War and the British occupation of Kabul and Kandahar, he published a pamphlet under the initials D. B. entitled 'Our Afghan Policy and the Occupation of Candahar' calling for a prompt withdrawal from Afghanistan. In 1882 Barbour was awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the Royal University of Ireland, which superseded the Queen's University in that year, and in 1883 he married Katherine Constance, daughter of Thomas Gribble, who had been connected with the wine trade in Portugal. 
In 1882 Barbour also returned to the government of India as secretary in the department of finance and commerce. For the next decade the financial and currency problems of India were the subject of intense international discussion and debate, as her economic history was dominated by the decline in the price of silver bullion against that of gold. This change in the relative prices of the two precious metals on which the world's currency systems depended had been precipitated by the abandonment of the silver standard by Germany and the United States, which led to a fall in the price of silver relative to gold, unseating the apparently stable ratio of 151/2 to 1 that had been effective for most of the previous century. The result of these changes in India, where the silver rupee remained tied to the gold price of its silver-bullion content, was to devalue the currency sharply against sterling and to increase the exchange costs of the transfers that the government of India had to make to meet its considerable expenditure in Britain. This also increased the transfer costs of servicing private investment, which, coupled to the uncertainty of the exchange rate, may have deterred British capital from investing in India. While devaluation also had some small impact on the international prices of India's main exports of agricultural produce and imports of manufactured goods, the effect of this was masked by the global price fall in the period brought about by increased productivity, reduced shipping costs, and fluctuations in the world supply of monetary gold and other instruments of international liquidity. 
Barbour feared that a continued fall in the price of silver against gold would lead to a depression in the Indian domestic economy, limiting the spread of commercialization and the use of money. Thus he argued consistently in favour of a return to bimetallism -- the use of both precious metals at a stable exchange rate in international monetary transactions -- and was one of the substantial minority (five out of twelve) of the royal commission on gold and silver in 1886 that argued in favour of such a system. However, he knew that bimetallism could only be re-established by virtually unanimous international agreement, and that it was very unlikely that such an agreement could ever be secured. The gold and silver commission reported in 1888 and on 22 November of that year Barbour became finance member of the governor-general's council. He was made KCSI on 1 January 1889. 
The continued fall in the gold price of silver, and the failure of any international agreement to remedy the situation, made the financial position of the government of India extremely precarious in the early 1890s. As Barbour himself recognized, and pointed out in introducing the Indian budget for 1891-2, India was being forced onto the gold standard for lack of any alternative. To achieve this meant closing the Indian mints to the free coinage of silver, so that the token value of the rupee could rise above its bullion value, and this step was taken on 26 June 1893, when the mints were closed following the report of a special Indian currency committee chaired by Lord Herschell. Barbour resigned from the Indian Civil Service and left India in November 1893, but in 1898 he was appointed to the committee on Indian currency chaired by Sir Henry Fowler, which reported in 1899 with a recommendation that the exchange value of the rupee be formally stabilized at the rate of 15 rupees to the pound, with gold sovereigns being free to circulate in India at that rate, and that action be taken to build up the sterling and gold reserves of the government of India to establish international confidence in the currency. The effect of these measures was to establish a gold exchange system in India, by which silver rupees circulated as a token currency, supported in a fixed exchange rate with sterling by currency reserves in London, and an alliance between British financial institutions and the colonial authorities to manage the market in foreign exchange. Subsequently, Barbour acted as chairman of committees set up to consider the currency problems of the west African colonies and protectorates and the Straits Settlements, and recommended that a similar system to the one operating in India be introduced into these territories. 
In the 1890s and 1900s Barbour served on a wide variety of committees and commissions of imperial importance, for which he was made KCMG in 1899. In 1894 he was a member of the royal commission on the financial relations between Great Britain and Ireland and wrote a minute of dissent distinguishing himself, as a keen Ulsterman, from the home-rule sentiments of the majority. In 1896 he was a member of the royal commission that reported on the economic condition and prospects of the British West Indies; in 1899 he reviewed the financial problems of Jamaica, urging much greater prudence in the colony's affairs; and in 1900 he reported on the financial situation of the newly conquered South African Boer republics of the Orange River and the Transvaal. In 1903-5 he served as chairman of the royal commission on London traffic; in 1906-9 he was a member of the royal commission on shipping rings, for which he wrote a minority report demanding action to ensure greater competition; and in 1907-8 he was a member of the committee on Indian finance and administration chaired by Lord Inchcape. Barbour also pursued a successful career in business, joining the board of the East Indian Railway Company in 1895, becoming deputy chairman in 1917, and chairman from 1919 to 1924. He was also a director of the Standard Bank of South Africa from 1901 until 1927. 
Barbour's last intervention in the making of imperial financial and monetary policy came with the evidence he gave to the committee on Indian exchange and currency in 1919 (the Babbington-Smith committee), in which he was one of those who argued strongly that the fixed exchange rate system for the rupee, which had lapsed owing to the strains of wartime finance, and the rise in world silver prices coupled to the fall in the gold value of the pound sterling after 1918, should not be reimposed at a new rate until the disturbed and difficult conditions of the post-war world had become stabilized. This case was weakened, however, by the absence of any strong recommendation as to what a suitable future exchange rate or standard might be, and was ignored in the committee's final proposals for a gold-standard rupee at a new rate of 10 rupees to the gold pound. The subsequent failure of the Indian monetary authorities to implement this policy, and the dramatic decline of the rupee exchange rate to well below its pre-war parity, showed just how disturbed international conditions had become, and the rupee was not finally stabilized on a fixed exchange rate with sterling until 1927. 
Barbour's lifelong interest in international monetary issues was demonstrated by the three books he published on the subject of bimetallism: 'The Theory of Bimetallism' (1885), 'The Standard of Value' (1912), which was an account of his tenure as finance member in India, and 'The Influence of the Gold Supply on Profits and Prices' (1913). He died on 12 February 1928 at his home, Tiltwood, Crawley Down, Sussex, and was survived by his wife, three sons, and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 30580


Barcroft, Sir Joseph (1872-1947), physiologist, was born on 26 July 1872 at The Glen, Newry, co. Down, Ireland, the second of the five children of Henry Barcroft (died 1905), linen merchant and inventor, and his wife, Anna Richardson Malcolmson (1840-1924), daughter of David Malcolmson of Melview, Clonnel, co. Tipperary, and his wife, Sarah Nicholson. Barcroft, or J. B., as he was widely known, received his early schooling at home until the age of twelve, and then went to the Friends' school at Bootham, York. He then attended the Leys School in Cambridge. Several of his contemporaries at the school distinguished themselves in later life; among them was H. H. Dale. In his last year at school (1891), Barcroft astonished his friends by passing the BSc degree of London University; however, the effort apparently affected his health to such an extent that he then took a year off. 
In 1893 Barcroft went up to King's College, Cambridge, and read for the natural sciences tripos, obtaining first-class honours in part one in 1896, and part two (physiology) in 1897. Among his contemporaries were E. Rutherford and H. H. Dale, both of whom became fellows, and later presidents, of the Royal Society. At a meeting of the Natural Sciences Club, Barcroft demonstrated what may have been the first X-ray photograph produced in England. 
Barcroft began a research programme in the Cambridge Physiological Laboratory in 1897 and continued this, with occasional interruptions, throughout his entire life. His first project was on the effect of stimulation of the nerves to the submaxillary gland, and particularly the resulting oxygen uptake and carbon dioxide output in the gland. This work sparked his interest in blood gases and led to his development of a differential blood-gas manometer. Over the next few years he collaborated with J. S. Haldane on blood-gas analysis, with T. G. Brodie on the kidney, with E. H. Starling on the pancreas, and with W. E. Dixon on the heart. The focus of all these projects was the gaseous metabolism of these organs. Barcroft gained the Walsingham medal in 1899 and was awarded a prize fellowship and appointed lecturer at King's College. In 1904 he was made junior demonstrator in the physiological laboratory, and three years later he was promoted to senior demonstrator. 
In 1903 Barcroft married Mary Agnetta (Minnie) Ball (1875-1961), daughter of the astronomer Sir Robert Ball, who was a professorial fellow at King's College. They lived at 13 Grange Road, which became a popular meeting place for friends and visiting scientists from all over the world. They had two sons: Henry Barcroft (1904-1998), who became a fellow of the Royal Society and professor of physiology at St Thomas's Hospital, London, and Robert Ball Barcroft, who became an army officer. 
Barcroft's early work on blood gases was the beginning of a lifelong interest in haemoglobin, and particularly its combination with oxygen. Aspects which he studied included the effects of temperature, carbon dioxide pressure, acidity, salts, dialysis, diet, exercise, and high altitude. The last prompted him to participate in two high-altitude expeditions, one to Tenerife in 1910 and another to Monte Rosa in 1911. His studies on haemoglobin culminated in his classic book 'The Respiratory Function of the Blood', which was published in 1914. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1910. During the same year he became assistant tutor at King's and also proctor of the university. 
The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 posed a dilemma for Barcroft, as his family had been members of the Society of Friends since the seventeenth century. He resolved the issue by working on medical and physiological effects of gas poisoning, both at Cambridge and at the government's experimental station at Porton Down, Wiltshire. He claimed that as a civilian he could be much more assertive to the military top brass. C. G. Douglas, who was in the RAMC, recounts an anecdote concerning Barcroft's visit to an advanced dressing station near the French lines, which was within the range of the German guns. Barcroft insisted on standing prominently on a crossroads but no shells were fired, possibly because he was wearing his bowler hat, and this may have unsettled the gunners. During his time at Porton Barcroft took part in an enterprising experiment, when he exposed himself and a dog to hydrocyanic acid in a closed chamber. The animal nearly died, but Barcroft was unaffected, a dramatic demonstration of how different species vary in their response to toxic gases. He was appointed CBE in 1918 for his services during the war. 
In 1919 Barcroft returned to Cambridge as reader, and developed his interest in high-altitude physiology, in particular the issue of whether the lungs actively secreted oxygen, as claimed by J. S. Haldane in Oxford, and earlier by Christian Bohr in Copenhagen. In 1911 Haldane had led an expedition to Pike's peak, Colorado, where strong evidence for oxygen secretion was apparently obtained. Barcroft tested this in a famous experiment in 1920, when he placed himself in a glass box for six days, while the oxygen concentration was gradually reduced until it was equivalent to the oxygen pressure at an altitude substantially above Pike's peak. Blood was drawn from his radial artery using the newly developed technique of arterial cannulation, and there was a dramatic moment when the first blood came out blue rather than red, indicating that oxygen secretion by the lungs was not occurring. Subsequent careful measurements confirmed this. 
In 1921-2 Barcroft led a high-altitude expedition to Cerro de Pasco in Peru, in order to study pulmonary gas exchange, blood biochemistry, and several other topics. In the report of this, he commented on the extraordinary athletic ability of the permanent residents of Cerro, but added that they had 'impaired physical and mental powers' compared to sea-level dwellers. This remark incensed the Peruvian physician Carlos Monge, who subsequently embarked on an extensive study of the high-altitude dwellers. It could be argued that this influential Peruvian school owed its origin to Barcroft's report and possibly to this single unguarded statement. These high-altitude interests culminated in 'Lessons from high altitudes', the first part of the second edition of 'The Respiratory Function of the Blood', which was published in 1925 and became a classic. Barcroft became professor of physiology at Cambridge in the same year. 
Another period in Barcroft's research began when he worked on the storage organs of the blood, particularly the spleen. Much of this research was done on dogs in which the organ had been exteriorized by operation, so that it could be directly inspected through a window. This was also a period when Barcroft organized a substantial extension of the Cambridge Physiological Laboratory, with the result that it became one of the most impressive physiological institutions in the country. He also paid several visits to the United States, and a series of lectures to the Harvard medical school was published in 1934 in his famous book, 'Features in the Architecture of Physiological Functions', which is remarkable for the breadth of its scholarship. 
A final period of research, which included a short spell at Porton at the outbreak of the Second World War, occupied Barcroft's time between 1932 and 1947. His primary focus was now on foetal physiology, and he left an indelible impression on this field. The topics he investigated included blood volume, placental blood flow, the physiology of the foetal heart, both foetal and maternal haemoglobin, and metabolism and growth 'in utero'. This work was brought together in Barcroft's last book, 'Researches in Pre-Natal Life', the first volume of which was published only a few weeks before his death. 
Barcroft was knighted in 1935. He delivered the Croonian lecture on 'Foetal respiration' to the Royal Society in the same year, and the Linacre lecture at Cambridge in 1941 on 'Respiratory patterns at birth'. By this time he was head of the Agricultural Research Council unit in animal physiology at Cambridge. In 1943 he was awarded the Copley medal of the Royal Society; he had already won its royal medal in 1922. Barcroft, who loved sailing, riding, and golf, died suddenly in Barton Road, Cambridge, on 21 March 1947. He was cremated, following a service at King's College chapel, on 25 March. In 1952 Mount Barcroft, a peak in the White Mountains, California, was named in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 30581


Bardsley, John Wareing (1835-1904), bishop of Carlisle, was born at Keighley, Yorkshire, on 29 March 1835, the eldest son of the Revd James Bardsley (1805-1886) and Sarah Wareing. He had six brothers, all of whom were ordained. He was educated at Burnley and Manchester grammar schools, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1859 and MA in 1865. He was awarded a Lambeth DD in 1887. On 24 April 1862 he married Elizabeth ('b'. 1833), daughter of the Revd Benjamin Powell of Wigan; they had a family of two sons and three daughters. 
Bardsley was ordained deacon in 1859 and priest in 1860. He was curate successively of St Anne's, Sale (1859-60), and of St Luke's, Liverpool (1860-61), before becoming the perpetual curate of St John's, Bootle (1864-71). Between 1861 and 1864 he was secretary of the Islington Protestant Institute, where he gained popularity as a lecturer and preacher. From 1871 to 1887 he was the perpetual curate of St Saviour's, Faulkner Square, Liverpool, and on J. C. Ryle's appointment as bishop of Liverpool, Bardsley became his domestic chaplain and archdeacon of Warrington. In 1886 he was offered, but refused, the living of Islington parish church, and became instead archdeacon of Liverpool. A popular archdeacon, he became known as an industrious organizer and a fluent preacher. 
In 1887 Bardsley became bishop of Sodor and Man, where he developed the theological college. It had been re-established by his predecessor in 1878, and in 1889 Bardsley transferred it to Bishopscourt as Bishop Wilson's Theological School (closed in 1943). In 1892 he was translated to Carlisle, and in his enthronement sermon made clear his intention of not being the bishop of a party, and of being interested in mission rather than controversy. In the following year he formed a sustentation fund for the poor incumbents of the diocese and a retirement pension fund for older clergy. As a bishop he won a reputation as 'a firm administrator, a wise counsellor and above all, a faithful friend' ('Church and People', 16, 1904-5, 151) and was much respected by his clergy. Bardsley was a lifelong total abstainer and his simplicity was shown in his use of 'Carlisle' and not 'Carliol' in his episcopal signature. Although a moderate evangelical himself, he was tolerant of Anglo-Catholic practice. He travelled in the Middle East, particularly to the Holy Land, and when in Egypt in 1898 had an attack of food poisoning from which he never fully recovered. He died of heart failure at his episcopal residence, Rose Castle, outside Carlisle, on 14 September 1904, and was buried at Raughton Head. From a memorial fund a monument was placed in Carlisle Cathedral and $1300 given to the Bishop Bardsley Memorial Clergy Pension Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 30582


Barger, George (1878-1939), chemist, was born in Manchester on 4 April 1878, the elder son of Gerrit Barger, a Dutch engineer, and his wife, Eleanor Higginbotham. He received his school education at Utrecht, and at the age of sixteen obtained a scholarship to University College, London, which he entered in 1896. After two years' study in London he proceeded in 1898 to King's College, Cambridge, with an entrance scholarship, and in 1901 gained a first class in part two of the natural sciences tripos in both chemistry and botany. On leaving Cambridge, where he had become friends with E. M. Forster, he was appointed demonstrator in botany under Leo Errera, of Brussels; and in 1903 he returned to England, to join the staff of the Wellcome Physiological Research Laboratories. In 1904 he married Florence Emily, the daughter of Alfred William Thomas, and they had two sons and one daughter. In that same year Henry Dale, whom Barger had known at Cambridge, joined the Wellcome laboratories, and the two men began a productive scientific partnership. 
In 1909 Barger was appointed head of the department of chemistry at Goldsmiths' College, New Cross, London, and in 1913 became professor of chemistry at Royal Holloway College, Englefield Green, but retained a part-time, consulting connection with the Wellcome laboratories. In 1914 he joined the staff of the Medical Research Committee (later Medical Research Council); and in 1919 was appointed the first professor of chemistry in relation to medicine in the University of Edinburgh, where he remained until, in 1937, he accepted the regius chair of chemistry in the University of Glasgow, an appointment which he held for the rest of his life. 
Barger's scientific work followed two main lines, namely, studies of alkaloids, and investigations of simpler nitrogenous compounds of biological importance: both arose from his studies of ergot initiated in the Wellcome laboratories. His main achievements in alkaloid chemistry were the isolation of ergotoxine from ergot; the elucidation of the constitutions of carpaine and physostigmine, and of a group of aporphine alkaloids; and an important contribution to the chemistry of yohimbine. 
Barger's identification of tyramine as one of the compounds responsible for the biological activity of ergot extracts led to a series of studies of bases similarly derived from naturally occurring amino acids; among such bases isolated both from ergot and from mammalian tissues was histamine, a compound which later proved to be of the greatest physiological significance. In this field Barger's chemical expertise complemented the physiological skills of Dale. Together, the two men worked on a wide range of amines that mimicked the natural activity of the sympathetic nervous system. This led them to develop the significant concept of sympathomimetic amines, important for basic physiology and pharmacology, and for the later development of therapeutic compounds. 
In the early part of work by others leading to the synthesis of thyroxine (by C. R. Harington), and of vitamin B1 (by A. R. Todd), Barger's contribution and continuing interest were considerable. His lifelong interest in ergot was expressed in 'Ergot and Ergotism' (1931), a scholarly monograph covering all aspects of the subject; this was based on his Dohme lectures delivered in 1928 at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore. In addition to many scientific papers, he published three other books on aspects of organic chemistry and its relationship to medicine. 
Barger was an enthusiastic traveller, and his linguistic expertise enabled him to develop close scientific contacts in many countries, which he used to promote his ideal of free exchange between scientists of different nations. In his own work he was essentially an experimentalist and his scientific outlook was mechanistic. He was uncompromisingly honest and outspoken, not over-patient, but generous of himself to his friends and pupils. 
Barger was a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, from 1904 to 1910 and was elected FRS in 1919, serving on its council from 1930 to 1932, and receiving the society's Davy medal in 1938. He was an active member of the Chemical Society for many years, serving on its council from 1913 to 1917, and becoming vice-president in the year in which he died, having been Longstaff medallist in 1936. He was Hanbury medallist of the Pharmaceutical Society (1934) in recognition of the importance of his work to pharmaceutical chemistry, and president of section B (Chemistry) of the British Association (1929). He received honorary degrees from the universities of Liverpool, Padua, Heidelberg, Utrecht, Michigan, and Lausanne. Barger died suddenly at Aeschi, Switzerland, on 6 January 1939, while on a lecture tour. 


@@@@@


doc= 30583


Baring, Evelyn, first earl of Cromer (1841-1917), diplomatist and proconsul, was born on 26 February 1841 at Cromer Hall, Norfolk, the ninth son of Henry Baring (1776-1848), banker, and his second wife, Cecilia Anne, 'nee' Windham (died 1874). He was a grandson of Sir Francis Baring (1740-1810), who, with his brother John, had established Barings Bank in London. The families of both of Henry Baring's elder brothers, Thomas and Alexander, were established in the peerage under the titles of Northbrook and Ashburton. Evelyn Baring was thus born into a large, successful, and well-connected cousinhood. His elder brother Edward Charles Baring (1828-1897), who became head of Barings Bank, entered the House of Lords as Lord Revelstoke in 1885. But as the youngest son of a father who died when he was seven, Evelyn was not marked out for a public career and it is interesting that he was not directed towards the family bank. Instead he was sent at the age of eleven to the Ordnance School at Carshalton, in preparation for a military career. At fourteen he entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, but only after his mother had used her influence with Lord Raglan, the commander-in-chief, to overcome his rejection on grounds of poor eyesight. In 1858, at the age of seventeen, he was posted to Corfu, then a British protectorate, began learning Greek and Italian, and opened his long acquaintance with the eastern Mediterranean. After a short interval he returned to the island as an aide to the governor, Sir Henry Storks. Baring followed Storks to Malta and then to Jamaica for the inquiry into the insurrection there in 1865. 
Without the financial independence required for a sideways move towards a parliamentary or diplomatic career, Baring sought advancement in the army. He entered the Staff College in 1868 and passed out first in 1870. In the War Office topographical department (the forerunner of military intelligence) he studied the military capability of the Prussian, Russian, and Turkish armies. But perhaps the crucial influence on the direction of his subsequent official career was his role in supplying a brief for the abolition of the purchase system to which the Liberal government of 1868-74 was committed. The junior minister at the War Office whom Baring served so loyally, at some risk to his professional prospects, was his cousin Lord Northbrook. When the viceroy of India, Lord Mayo, was murdered in 1872, and Northbrook was rushed out to succeed him, Baring went with him as private secretary. 
Baring's four years in India before Northbrook resigned in protest against Disraeli's Afghan policy were an important apprenticeship. As Northbrook's confidant, he saw at first hand the workings of an administrative system notoriously centralized and half drowned in paper. He was exposed to the powerful Anglo-Indian ideology of guardianship towards the rural cultivator, then at a vital stage in its formulation. And, with Northbrook's resignation, he had good reason to reflect upon the cross purposes of British and Indian interests in Asia and the difficulties of dealing with far-away ministers with very different political preoccupations. At the same time 'the Vice-Viceroy' (as he was revealingly nicknamed) had begun to display the brusque self-confidence and certainty in opinion which became his trademarks in later life. Professional laurels, close proximity to viceregal power, and a sense of embattled rectitude first in London, then in Simla, had transformed the easy-going youth posted out to Corfu nearly twenty years earlier. 
Returning to Britain, Baring married, on 28 June 1876, Ethel Stanley (died 16 Oct 1898), daughter and coheir of Sir Rowland Stanley Errington, eleventh baronet; they had two sons, Rowland Thomas Baring (1877-1953) and Windham. Baring resumed work at the War Office and perhaps intended to settle in London. However, the financial crisis in Egypt brought an unexpected opportunity. In 1876 the ruler of Egypt (known as the khedive or viceroy) had set up a debt commission to reassure the largest foreign lenders, who were mainly British or French, and restore confidence in Egypt's public finances. He had sought the advice of G. J. Goschen, a former Liberal cabinet minister and a recognized expert on international finance. Goschen was asked to recommend a British member to the debt commission. At the suggestion of Sir Louis Mallet, a senior official at the India Office, he recommended Baring -- though it is not unlikely that Baring's name added to his appeal from the khedive's point of view. Despite some private reservations Baring accepted the appointment. Once in Cairo he quickly discovered the ambiguous status of the commission's authority and the difficulties of co-operating with the Egyptian government. 
The heart of the problem lay in the commission's determination to rein in the extravagance of the khedival court and to reduce public expenditure drastically to help meet the soaring debt charges already incurred. The commission proposed to take half the khedive's vast estates into public ownership, and to halve the army. A policy of savage deflation in 1878-9 aggravated the social effects of a rural famine. Isma'il, the khedive, with a throne to lose, pursued the dangerous tactic of encouraging local opposition to the commission while simultaneously posing as its champion abroad. When in April 1879 he dismissed his ministers and effectively repudiated the commission, Baring resigned and went home. But he was back almost immediately. Isma'il's erratic policy had finally united the great powers against him, and his nominal sovereign, the Ottoman sultan, formally dethroned him in June. Baring returned to Cairo as one of two controllers-general in the second phase of Egypt's financial crisis, the Anglo-French 'dual control' of 1879-82. 
But not for long. The 'Midlothian election' of 1880 had swept the Conservatives from office, and a Liberal ministry appointed a Liberal viceroy to India: Lord Ripon. Baring's Indian experience, his Egyptian credentials as a zealous champion of sound finance, and his political connections with the Liberal Party -- he had briefly thought of standing as a Liberal in East Norfolk -- made him an obvious appointment to the post of finance member of the government of India. Like the viceroyalty itself, this post (the equivalent of the chancellorship of the exchequer) was usually filled by a nominee from home rather than by a British career administrator in the Indian Civil Service. The reasoning was plain enough. Indian financial policy was an imperial question: the cost of the 60,000 British troops in India and the interest payable on India's sterling loans were the first charges on Indian revenues. Moreover, the recurrent threat of a revenue tariff to prop up India's rickety finances was anathema to the British commercial interests (especially in cotton manufacture) vociferously represented in the House of Commons. 
Baring's three-year term as finance member was not, however, an unqualified success. He maintained a regular correspondence with Sir Louis Mallet, the India Office financial expert and one of his patrons. As an outsider in the Anglo-Indian official hierarchy, Baring was contemptuous of its self-interested conservatism. An Indian reform bill was needed, he told Mallet on 19 February 1881: 'The natives must be admitted to a larger share in their own affairs... we cannot go on for long governing this huge country through the agency of seven men meeting twice a week around a green baize table and doing practically what they choose. (Mowat, 63)' Baring's preferred solution was to reinforce the influence of home opinion against the vested interest of local British officialdom, whom he dismissed as a 'clique of third-rate Englishmen', and to widen Indian participation in government beyond what he called the 'Baboos'. 
Baring combined these traces of radical Liberalism with devotion to Gladstonian precepts in public finance. In his third budget he swept away the duties on imported cotton goods which offended free trade sentiment in Britain. But when he proposed to replace them by increased direct taxation, including an income tax, the viceroy grew restive. Baring, he complained, was a 'doctrinaire' with little sense of how to prepare the ground for his ideas. Faced with Ripon's opposition, Baring performed a rapid volte-face, abandoned the income tax, and now declared himself in favour of gradualist reform in local government. 'We shall not subvert the British Empire', he told Mallet with only a trace of irony, 'by allowing the Bengali Baboo to discuss his own schools and drains. Rather shall we afford a safety-valve if we turn his attention to these innocuous subjects' (Mowat, 83). 
These three years in India might be seen as a watershed in Baring's public career and political attitudes. For all his energy, self-confidence, and moral rectitude in the face of Anglo-Indian mediocrity and inertia (as he doubtless saw it), he had made little impression on the system of Indian government. Instead he had earned the reputation of an arrogant doctrinaire. Not for the last time, he had avoided defeat by a timely U-turn. But perhaps the experience left its mark. The great characteristic of Baring's later career in Egypt was his flexibility in dealing with his superiors in London, and his careful avoidance of irretrievable positions. From being a doctrinaire, he became a 'politique', whose firmness of language rarely closed the door to compromise or retreat. His bruising encounter with the Anglo-Indian official machine may have persuaded him that wide discretion on a smaller stage was preferable to the niggling constraints and perpetual intrigue inseparable from grander authority. Finally, although the transition was gradual, and Baring himself, consciously or otherwise, veiled the change, his second tour in India marked a shift away from an enthusiastic radicalism in imperial attitudes towards a world-weary cynicism about the capacity of 'Eastern peoples' to attain the moral and intellectual qualities needed for self-government. It is ironic that for all his declared antipathy to the Anglo-Indian ethos, Baring gradually came to embody, certainly by the last years of his life, all the characteristic prejudices invoked to justify the indefinite prolongation of imperial rule. He was made KCSI in August 1883. 
In these circumstances the offer of the consulship-general in Cairo to Baring early in 1883 may have come as a relief to him, to the viceroy, and to his colleagues. The post was an oddity. Its humble designation reflected Egypt's formal international status as a viceroyalty of the Ottoman empire and not a sovereign state. In substance, however, the consul-general occupied a diplomatic post of acute political sensitivity and importance. Since 1880, when Baring had left for India, Egypt had passed through a double revolution. The attempt by Britain and France to maintain the so-called dual control over Egyptian finance, to restore Egyptian solvency and to ward off intervention by other powers, had finally collapsed in the nationalist revolt led by Arabi Pasha against the discredited authority of the khedive Tawfiq. In a confused situation that appeared to threaten the lives and property of the large (mainly Greek) foreign community, the financial interests of British, French, and other European bondholders, and Britain's strategic interest in the Suez Canal, the Gladstone government had decided on military intervention. In September 1882 a British force under Wolseley dispersed Arabi's army, revived the khedive's authority, and established Britain's 'temporary occupation' in Egypt. But when it came to deciding how British supremacy should be used and how long it should last, the Gladstone government was at sixes and sevens. Most ministers, including Gladstone himself, were determined not to be trapped into a permanent occupation, let alone annexation, fearing the financial, military, and diplomatic liabilities this would impose. On the other hand, they could hardly withdraw without making some provision for stable government in Egypt and for a financial recovery programme with better prospects than those which had repeatedly broken down between 1876 and 1882. 
The initial reaction of the cabinet was to dispatch an envoy (Lord Dufferin) to draw up a comprehensive scheme of political reform which, once instituted, would permit early British withdrawal. Not surprisingly, a solution conceived in cabinet compromise had little relevance to local conditions, since Egyptian willingness to enact a 'British' scheme was unlikely to survive British departure. This was the circle which it was Baring's task to square: to uphold the commitment to an early withdrawal while simultaneously imposing on the Egyptian government the drastic administrative reforms required to reduce the public debt and pay off the foreign bondholders. All this had to be done without recourse to overt political control by annexation or by the creation of a protectorate, and without infringing the diplomatic interests and extra-territorial privileges of other European powers and communities in the country. 
Even for an official of Baring's skill and experience, this was an exceptionally difficult hand to play, especially given the inconstancy of cabinet policy in London. His main advantage lay, perhaps, not in previous knowledge of Egypt and the financial expertise recently tested in India, but in the facility with which he adopted the ambivalent attitude required by London's policy. While he became increasingly convinced that reform in Egypt would be a long and arduous process, Baring was careful to speak the language of early and eager withdrawal. At the same time he grasped that while London would reject any commitment to an extended stay, it would accept the logic of forcefully supporting his own influence on the Egyptian government -- the prerequisite, Baring insisted, for the very reforms that would liberate the Liberal cabinet from its 'bondage in Egypt'. 'I am really beginning to think', he told Northbrook on 23 December 1883, 'that the more power we assume temporarily, the better the chance of getting away in the end' (Mowat, 124). Thus the foreign secretary, Lord Granville, authorized the doctrine in 1884 that no Egyptian minister opposed to Baring's reforms could be allowed to stay in office. With infinite subtlety and reassuring rhetoric, Baring, with his unimpeachable Liberal credentials, drew his political masters steadily deeper into an effective political guarantee that there would be no withdrawal before the reform policy was complete. Precisely when, in Baring's own mind, the ides of March became the Greek calends is uncertain and perhaps unknowable. Perhaps it was only the arrival of Lord Salisbury in office in 1886 that encouraged him to resolve the ambiguities he had carefully cherished. 
But before this more settled policy in London took shape Baring had passed through the political ordeal of the Sudan crisis, which culminated in the death of Gordon at Khartoum and Egypt's humiliating expulsion from its colony on the upper Nile. Egypt's own political upheavals after 1875 coincided with and contributed to the upsurge of Sudanese opposition to Egyptian control, which had been fastened on the region since the early nineteenth century. By 1883, the year of Baring's arrival as consul-general, the Mahdist revolt was in full spate. Baring, like the two governments he sought to guide, had to decide whether the Sudan should be retained and if so, how. There can be no doubt that this episode was the most painful and embarrassing of Baring's entire career. In later life he liked to stress that his own preference had been to concentrate on Egypt's financial recovery, which futile expenditure on the Sudanese struggle could only delay and perhaps wreck. But he also knew that to lose the Sudan would be a staggering blow to the khedival regime and threaten its partnership with Britain. Hence his advice to London, and even his attitude to the controversial matter of Gordon's appointment as governor-general with a mandate to save the Sudan, were marked by the vacillation and uncertainty which he liked to condemn in others. Having recommended the evacuation of the Sudan and opposed Gordon's dispatch, he changed his mind and enthusiastically endorsed Gordon's mission. When Gordon was besieged, Baring pressed the Gladstone government to send a relief expedition. Perhaps in reaction to his own involvement in an affair of such public horror and shame, Baring became deeply disillusioned (in a way later echoed in his protege Milner) with the defects of party government and especially with Gladstone personally. He came to loathe what he saw as Gladstone's confident omniscience and the facility of speech which gave it full rein. There was scarcely a subject, he remarked later, which did not attract Gladstone's attention and on which he did not seem impelled 'to form decided opinions... and to let the world know what those opinions were', regardless of whether they were built on a foundation of knowledge (Zetland, 123). By contrast, the realism, irony, wit, and cynicism which were the trademarks of Salisbury's correspondence would have been welcome to Baring's own declared preference (if not invariable practice) for calling a spade a spade. 
Indeed, between 1886 and 1892, with the assurance of firmer political support at home, Baring was able to dig the foundations of British control in Egypt rather more deeply. By 1889 the vacillation and uncertainty which had made the duration of the British presence so unpredictable began to clear away with the rise of the new doctrine of British predominance in the Nile valley. Baring's success in restoring Egyptian solvency contributed to the easing of the diplomatic pressure on London; simultaneously it reduced the necessity to negotiate with the other powers for a relaxation of the extra-territorial taxation privileges enjoyed by their subjects -- long a source of rankling irritation among British officials. Baring could now set about turning the emergency regime of 1883-6 into something more robust. From the debris of successive experiments in foreign supervision, financial intervention, and dual control since 1875, he fashioned a system in which the form of an autonomous Egyptian government was carefully preserved. But its operations at every important level (including sub-provincial administration) were carefully shadowed by a phalanx of British inspectors and advisers who reported to the Egyptian ministers but also (no doubt in different terms) to him. In certain key departments, such as finance, officials were seconded from Britain to provide bureaucratic 'stiffening'; Milner served as under-secretary for finance between 1889 and 1892. The police and legal system were closely watched through the interior adviser, the judicial adviser, and the inspector-general of police. But the ultimate guarantee of British influence, apart from the British garrison of some 6000 men, was firm control of the Egyptian army. The old army which had revolted under Arabi's leadership was dispersed. The new army was organized along Indian lines with (some) British officers and a British 'sirdar' or commander-in-chief. Here, it might be thought, was the best evidence that the 'temporary occupation' was indeed a 'veiled protectorate'. 
But the keystone of this elaborate political edifice was the role of Baring himself. In keeping with the fundamental ambivalence running through his imperial thinking, Baring played two parts. On the one hand, as the diplomatic representative of the dominant European power in the eastern Mediterranean and on the Nile, his progresses through Cairo were of almost viceregal splendour: an elegant carriage accompanied by running grooms with white wands and flying sleeves. Baring himself was a large man of somewhat intimidating mien, and with a notoriously brusque manner: 'Well, is there anything else?' signalled the end of an interview. In Egypt, the Vice-Viceroy became 'the Lord' or 'al-Lurd'. On the other hand, he was at pains to conceal as far as possible the brutal fact of British control over the Egyptian government by insisting that he remain the 'whisper behind the throne', playing no public part in the conduct of Egypt's internal affairs. In reality, of course, Baring intended that the khedive and his ministers should know that he enjoyed the full confidence of the British government and that, in the last resort, he, and they, would not hesitate to remove ministers, or even a ruler, who defied their wishes. To sustain this conjuring trick of interventionist non-intervention required not only close surveillance of every move by the khedive or his ministers, but also a very firm grip upon the British officials in Egypt whose arrogance or exuberance periodically threatened an awkward political breakdown and perhaps even embarrassed disavowal in London. 
From this can be seen, in the highly unusual political and diplomatic conditions prevailing in Egypt, the extent to which the successful functioning of the British occupation rested upon Baring's unique assemblage of personal talents and expertise. He had been by turns private secretary, staff officer, diplomat, and finance minister. He had excellent political contacts in London. He was a radical Liberal on the turn with a language to match. He had a forceful temperament and wide administrative experience. Above all, he had a shrewd sense of diplomatic and political realities and a commanding manner essential to his dealings not only with the Egyptian court but also with his own 'subordinates' -- the British officials in Egypt. Perhaps it was the fact that he had built the occupation regime around himself, and exercised such full control over it, that explains both Baring's indispensability and his reluctance to accept more glamorous appointments with less real power. 
Even so, the system that Baring had constructed by 1892 was far from invulnerable. In 1893-4 it was plunged into crisis. The circumstances are revealing of the strengths and weaknesses of his regime. Two events signalled the onset of political turbulence. The first was the death in January 1892 of the khedive Tawfiq, placed and re-placed on the throne by the British in 1879 and 1882. Tawfiq was succeeded by Abbas II for whom Baring had initially felt considerable liking. But the change on the Egyptian throne was bound to have an unsettling effect on the triangle of Egyptian politics with its dynastic, landowning, and British components. The long struggle between the ruler and the landowning class for control of land, revenue, and administrative patronage was a political fact of great convenience to the British. But periodically the Egyptian parties sought to readjust the balance, usually by exploiting anti-foreign sentiment. This was Abbas's tactic. The second event may have encouraged him: the replacement of Salisbury by the fourth Gladstone ministry in 1892 and the possibility that Baring's political authority might be undermined by Liberal indecision in London. 
Abbas's initial challenge alarmed Baring (who had been raised to the peerage on 20 June 1892 as Baron Cromer of Cromer), but had little success. He defied the unwritten rule of Anglo-Egyptian relations by appointing a new prime minister without consulting Cromer and chose a notorious Anglophobe. Cromer's reaction was predictably severe. He demanded from London permission if necessary to occupy government buildings in Cairo using the British garrison. As Abbas might have suspected, this request had a mixed reception in the Gladstone cabinet, where some ministers, including Sir William Harcourt, feared that Cromer would drag Britain into complications with the other powers. Rosebery, the foreign secretary, was forced to concede that Cromer's attitude was 'injudicious' (Rosebery to Queen Victoria, 18 Jan 1893, Crewe, 419); nevertheless, he secured authority to veto Abbas's choice and to reinforce the British garrison. Cromer had won the first round. But he was full of foreboding that 'this foolish boy' had smashed the old system whereby British influence was kept from public view and the proprieties of formal autonomy maintained. 
Nor was it long before Abbas made a further attempt to roll back the frontiers of British control. Through a new prime minister, sanctioned by Cromer, he attacked the consul-general's eyes and ears. British advisers were denied information and access to the council of ministers. Resentment at the reforms imposed at British request on the courts and police was turned against the foreign power. 'Nine-tenths' of the official class was thoroughly hostile, Cromer warned Rosebery on 25 December 1893 (Mowat, 204). The legislative council, in which the landowning class was largely represented, took its cue and passed a motion calling for British withdrawal. But the climax of Abbas's campaign was his attempt to neutralize the mainspring of British control: the British garrison and British supervision of the Egyptian army. In January 1894, as a clear hint to the Egyptian officer corps, Abbas publicly criticized Kitchener, who was 'sirdar'. This, however, was precisely the open challenge for which Cromer had been waiting. Kitchener resigned, but it was immediately clear that London would treat Abbas's move as a threat of direct confrontation. Abbas drew back, recanted, and Kitchener was reinstated. The crisis gradually subsided. 
Thereafter Abbas showed no further inclination to subvert Cromer's authority. But Cromer himself was pessimistic about the survival of his system. He pressed Rosebery unsuccessfully to declare a British protectorate for ten to fifteen years. He gradually increased the number of British officials and established in 1902 a system for their regular recruitment into the Egyptian civil service. Gloomily, he forecast that Britain would have to choose between going 'forward' -- annexation -- or going 'back' -- evacuation. His view of Egypt's own potential for political progress became harsher. Not unlike the Anglo-Indians he had despised fifteen years earlier, he came to regard the principal fault of 'oriental' politicians as their lack of moral character -- a failing which could not be remedied by any known curriculum and which was always likely to recur when tested for. As the 'temporary occupation' took on some of the features of a more typical colonial regime, it increasingly drew its legitimacy, at least in the eyes of British opinion, from its claim to accomplish improving public works, especially in irrigation and drainage, and to uphold the interests of rural cultivators against the urban, commercial, and educated classes. 
In large part, Cromer's extreme sensitivity to any symptom of political unrest in Egypt derived from the fear that it would encourage other European powers to reassert their extra-territorial rights and national interests -- rights and interests for which the British claimed to act as a 'de facto' trustee. Serious political unrest would set off not merely a crisis in Anglo-Egyptian relations, but also an international crisis which would test the nerve and resolution of a Liberal ministry at home to their limits. It was this same fear which dictated his often inconsistent approach to the problem of the Sudan, which had been only temporarily shelved by the Mahdist triumph of 1885 and the death of Gordon. Cromer's reluctance to embark on a reconquest is well known: he was fearful of the financial consequences of the effort, and of the political consequences of failure. But he was also acutely concerned with what was to happen when, as was generally expected, the Mahdist regime eventually collapsed. Already by 1889 he had signalled to Salisbury his nervousness that the growing Italian presence in north-east Africa might allow them to reach Khartoum before Britain could react to events on the upper Nile. Salisbury expressed agreement, but it is not clear how seriously he took the warnings of the importunate proconsul. A year later Cromer convinced himself that Mahdist power was about to disintegrate, and gained Salisbury's approval for a limited advance by the Egyptian army. It was a miscalculation, and the advance was halted. But it was the same sequence of pressure from Cromer and grudging agreement in London which led five years later to the establishment of the Anglo-Egyptian condominium in the Sudan. 
On that occasion Cromer exploited Salisbury's willingness, partly for reasons of European diplomacy, to make a small gesture in support of Italian difficulties in Ethiopia. In March 1896 he persuaded Salisbury to enlarge the gesture by letting Kitchener invade the Sudan as far as Dongola. At first the omens were favourable: it seemed that Mahdist resistance would crumble quickly if the impetus of the advance was maintained. But a Mahdist counter-attack belied his optimism. In the autumn of 1897 Cromer lost his nerve. The reconquest of Khartoum, he wrote, was 'beyond the military and financial resources of the Egyptian Government... I tear my hair over the hurried decision of March 1896' (Sanderson, 261). Cromer now wanted to stand pat at Berber and opposed calling for British troops for which Egypt would have to pay and over whose disposition his own control would be limited. Circumstances forced his hand. By December 1897 Kitchener's position at Berber was so alarming that Cromer himself insisted that British reinforcements must be sought. From that moment on the argument for an advance to Khartoum became irresistible, since both strategic and financial reasons dictated the decisive use and swift withdrawal of the imperial contingent. On 2 September 1898, at Omdurman, Kitchener, with a mixed army of British and Egyptian troops, demolished the Mahdist state. The following month, on 16 October, Cromer's wife died. 
For Cromer the British hand in the reconquest of the Sudan was a mixed blessing. It was a fixed point in his thinking that his system of covert supremacy in Egypt depended upon his own complete control over all the agencies of British influence. A British-ruled Sudan, with its own governor-general answerable to the colonial secretary in London, was anathema: not only would it undermine his influence in Cairo, but also it was certain to enrage a wide spectrum of Egyptian opinion. The eccentric regime invented for the Sudan in 1899 bore the marks of Cromer's will. It was not annexed but became a condominium -- the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan -- in which, technically, control was shared between the British and Egyptian governments. Its affairs, like those of Egypt, were supervised in London by the Foreign not the Colonial office. As if to hammer home the peculiar circumstances of its conquest, the British 'sirdar' of the Egyptian army became 'ex officio' the governor-general of Sudan, tying its administration securely into the network of British officials through whom the consul-general exerted his ubiquitous oversight. Thus British rule in the Sudan, like British influence in Egypt, was adapted to the Cromer 'system'. 
Cromer was to spend eight more years as consul-general. Having been made a viscount in January 1899, he was created earl of Cromer on 8 August 1901. In the same year he married on 22 October Lady Katherine Georgiana Louisa (1865-1933), daughter of John Alexander Thynne, fourth marquess of Bath (1831-1896), and his wife, Frances. Their son (Charles) Evelyn Baring (1903-1973) became a well-known colonial governor and in 1960 was created first Baron Howick of Glendale. 
This was the period in which British predominance in the Nile valley was consolidated administratively and diplomatically. The successful negotiation of the Anglo-French entente in 1904, the details of which required constant reference to Cromer, marked the end of France's prolonged diplomatic campaign to evict the British from Egypt and, from Cromer's point of view, served to puncture any surviving illusion in Egypt politics that a foreign power would help restore its independence. But Cromer did not succeed in abolishing the extra-territorial privileges of the European powers -- the great encumbrance which prevented the British from reshaping the political and financial regime in ways that might have widened their choice of local allies. Thus when Cromer retired in 1907 he bequeathed a system of influence which, in its essentials, was still precariously dependent upon the consul-general's ability to exercise a form of personal supremacy over the Egyptian ruler, the leading politicians, the ramifying network of British officialdom, and -- not least -- his superiors in London. Egypt's subsequent history showed how few of his successors could bend the bow of Ulysses. Indeed Cromer's own retirement took place under a cloud. The savage and disproportionate punishment meted out to the peasants involved in the notorious fracas at Dinshawai in July 1906, in the course of which a British officer had died, created a grim and bitter political atmosphere in Egypt and even aroused official misgivings in Britain. Cromer's insensitivity to this reaction suggests that in the last phase of his career in Egypt he drew his advisers and opinions from a narrow and perhaps sycophantic circle. 
Cromer returned home in poor health and a depressed state, though the king had made him a member of the Order of Merit in 1906. Quite soon, however, the literary instincts which he had shown as a young staff officer were revived in a series of books and articles. In 1908 he published his apologia under the magnificent title of 'Modern Egypt', one of the classic works of Victorian imperialist writing. In 'Ancient and Modern Imperialism' (1910) he combined his passions for classical literature and contemporary affairs. In his speeches in the House of Lords, and in the articles eventually collected in his 'Political and Literary Essays' (published in three series in 1913, 1915, and 1916), he revisited the broader themes of imperial rule he had debated energetically with Sir Louis Mallet some thirty years before. Like many of his contemporaries, Cromer was now convinced that the future lay in great political conglomerates of which the British empire must be one: on those grounds he condemned as 'suicidal' any weakening of the Anglo-Irish union (Cromer, 'Speech at Unionist Free Trade Club, 2 June 1908', 'Speeches', 1.275). He was confident that non-Western societies could not withstand the stresses of Western influence and must succumb to Western domination. He rejected what he called 'excessive earth-hunger' but insisted that a 'sound but reasonable imperialist' should embrace Britain's 'manifest destiny' as an imperial power (Cromer, 'The government of subject races', 'Political and Literary Essays', 4-5; first published in January 1908). In what he called the 'government of subject races', Cromer believed that two requirements were paramount. The first was that imperial rule should be conducted according to the code of Christian morality, 'the one sure foundation on which the whole of our vast Imperial fabric can be built if it is to be durable' (ibid., 9). The second was to recognize that the 'self-interest of the subject race is the principal basis of the whole Imperial fabric' (ibid., 46), and that low taxation and careful attention to material conditions were the best means of countering demagogy. The success of this policy in Egypt, he claimed, had reduced Egyptian nationalism to a 'splutter' (Cromer, 'The French in Algeria', 'Political and Literary Essays', 253; first published in May 1913). It was the fusion of these two ideas which lent Cromer's imperialism its distinctive quality, for unlike Lord Salisbury or James Fitzjames Stephen, he resisted the grim conclusion that imperial authority must rest chiefly on force. If British rule avoided subservience to 'special interests' at home, he argued: 'though we can never create a patriotism akin to that based on affinity of race or community of language, we may perhaps foster some sort of cosmopolitan allegiance grounded on the respect always accorded to superior talents and unselfish conduct and on the gratitude derived from favours conferred and those to come. (Cromer, 'The government of subject races', 'Political and Literary Essays', 13)' Cromer's last public service was to assume in August 1916 the chairmanship of the wartime commission to inquire into the Dardanelles expedition. When announced in the House of Commons, his appointment was questioned by a number of members on the grounds of his failing health. Indeed he died before the report was published in February 1917, and the extent of his influence over its conclusions is hard to judge. Cromer died at his home, 36 Wimpole Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 29 January 1917, and was buried at Bounemouth cemetery, Hampshire, beside his first wife. A memorial tablet, designed by Sir W. Goscombe John, was placed in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30584


Baring, Maurice (1874-1945), poet and author, was born at 37 Church Street, Mayfair, London, on 27 April 1874, the fifth son of Edward Charles Baring (1828-1897), who became first Baron Revelstoke, banker, and his wife, Louisa Emily Charlotte (died 1892), daughter of John Crocker Bulteel, of Flete and Lyneham, Devon, and granddaughter of Charles Grey, second Earl Grey. Evelyn Baring, first earl of Cromer, was his uncle. Baring was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, but left the university without taking a degree. A genius for languages led him (1898) into the diplomatic service: he served as attache in Paris, Copenhagen, and Rome, and also worked for a year at the Foreign Office in London. He resigned from the service in 1904. During his years spent 'en poste' he formed several of the friendships which notably enriched his life, and many of the tastes, particularly in music and literature, which later composed the cultural background of his works. He went abroad again in 1904 as war correspondent for the 'Morning Post' in Manchuria, and remained, after the end of the Russo-Japanese War, as special correspondent for the same newspaper in St Petersburg. During these years he learned Russian and developed an abiding sympathy for the Russian people which political changes could not disturb. It was about this time that Baring's lifelong friendship with G. K. Chesterton began, and it has been suggested that Baring was the model for Horne Fisher, the connecting character of the stories that compose 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1922). In 1909 Baring went as correspondent to Constantinople and in 1912 he represented 'The Times' in the Balkans. All this early period of Baring's life is admirably described in 'The Puppet Show of Memory' (1922, repr. 1987) which remains a classic of autobiography. He there described the most important event of that period -- his reception into the Roman Catholic church -- as 'the only action in my life which I am quite certain I have never regretted'. 
Baring had already published a number of books when war broke out in 1914. Two plays, 'The Black Prince' (1902) and 'Gaston de Foix' (1903), showed his double interest in history and the theatre, and also revealed a talent for the more traditional modes of verse. 'Dead Letters' (1910) and 'Diminutive Dramas' (1911) revealed a lightly satiric humour playing on historic themes. Baring had also published his war memoirs, 'With the Russians in Manchuria' (1905), and an excellent short account of Russian literature, 'Landmarks in Russian Literature' (1910). Here he displayed for the first time his remarkable gifts as a translator. In later years he selected the poems included in 'The Oxford Book of Russian Verse' (1948). During the First World War he was attached to the Royal Flying Corps branch of the British expeditionary force, and for four years from August 1915 was 'mentor and guide' to Hugh (later Viscount) Trenchard. He became a staff officer of the Royal Air Force in 1918, and was also appointed OBE in that year. His experiences during the First World War were recorded in 'RFC HQ, 1914-1918' (1920; new edn 1968, repr. 1985). His letters to Lady Juliet Duff, 1915-18, were later published in 'Dear Animated Bust' (1981). In 1925 Baring was given an honorary commission as wing commander in the Reserve of Air Force Officers; and in 1935 he was appointed officer of the Legion d'honneur. He also became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. 
Several of Baring's closest friends were killed during the war: Raymond Asquith, Patrick Houston Shaw-Stewart, Auberon Herbert, eighth Baron Lucas, and the Grenfell brothers, Julian and Gerald William. The death in action of these men inspired him to some moving verse, which he published in 1919. Meanwhile he was preparing his first novel, 'Passing By' (1921). This showed, in miniature, all the characteristics which were to make 'C' (1924, repr. 1986), 'Cat's Cradle' (1925), and 'Daphne Adeane' (1926) representative and popular novels of the same decade. Later, in such books as 'The Lonely Lady of Dulwich' (1934), Baring returned to the shorter form of the 'nouvelle'; and in 'Robert Peckham' (1930) and 'In my End is my Beginning' (1931), in which the story of Mary Stuart is told from the point of view of each of her four ladies-in-waiting, he returned to history for his subject. He also published in 1933 a short biography of Sarah Bernhardt, whom he had known and ardently admired. 
In 1936 Baring was already suffering from paralysis agitans; the last book he was able to write was perhaps his most popular. 'Have you Anything to Declare?' (1936), an anthology of favourite quotations in several languages, with translation and comments, showed his character as well as his culture, and revealed how intimately the two were allied. In 1940 he left his house and carefully tended garden at Rottingdean, and was looked after thenceforward by friends in Scotland. His house was destroyed by enemy action. Baring died, unmarried, at Beaufort Castle, Beauly, Inverness-shire, on 14 December 1945. 
Baring's novels have come to be regarded as: 'minor masterpieces in character study and social depiction. Limited as they are in subject and theme... they can be appreciated for the accuracy with which they reproduce the world of the late Victorian elite, for the purity and simplicity of their style, and for the sensitivity and erudition which they display. (Irvine, 34.8)' 



@@@@@


doc= 30585


Baring, Rowland Thomas, second earl of Cromer (1877-1953), courtier, was born on 29 November 1877 at Cairo. He was the elder son of Evelyn Baring, later first earl of Cromer (1841-1917), diplomat, and his first wife, Ethel Stanley (died 1898), second daughter of Sir Rowland Stanley Errington, eleventh baronet. A bad attack of typhoid contracted in Egypt in his boyhood affected his health all his life. He was educated at Eton College, where he made many friends, but left early by his father's wish, without particular distinction, in order to learn foreign languages. In 1900 he entered the diplomatic service, serving as third and second secretary between 1902 and 1906 at Cairo, Tehran, and St Petersburg. He then transferred to the Foreign Office and acted as private secretary to successive permanent under-secretaries of state between 1907 and 1911, when he resigned the service. On 4 April 1908 he married Lady Ruby Florence Mary Elliot (1886-1961), daughter of the fourth earl of Minto. They had a son and two daughters. His wife was of constant help to him in his career and his family life was ideal. 
In 1913 Lord Errington, as he then was, became a managing director of Baring Brothers and, in a short time, acquired a useful knowledge of finance. In 1914 he joined the Grenadier Guards, serving as a lieutenant in the special reserve until 1920. In 1915-16 he was aide-de-camp to successive viceroys of India (Lord Hardinge of Penshurst and Lord Chelmsford). In 1916 he was appointed assistant private secretary and equerry to King George V. The prince of Wales wanted Cromer (as he had become on the death of his father in 1917) as his private secretary in 1918, but the king refused to release him from his duties. Cromer acted as chief of staff during the duke of Connaught's visit to India (1920-21), and returned there with the prince of Wales in the same capacity (1921-2). His relationship with the prince of Wales was not entirely smooth, as Cromer attempted to act as a restraining influence. 
In 1922 Cromer was appointed lord chamberlain, an office which he held with distinction until 1938; it was under Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government in 1924 that the appointment was changed from a political one, made by the prime minister of the day, to a permanent one, made by the monarch. He continued in office under Edward VIII, although with some reluctance, as he considered that 'war was in effect declared [by the new king] against the old gang' (Ziegler, 258). In 1938 he became a permanent lord-in-waiting, serving both George VI and Elizabeth II. Apprehension about the status of the monarchy during the First World War, despite the devotion to duty of the king and queen, had been expressed in 1918, notably by Cromer himself and by Lord Esher. This disquiet was soon dissipated but Cromer never forgot the need for the monarchy to adjust itself to the post-war social revolution. By his tact and imperturbability and his liberal and shrewd interpretation of his diverse functions, he gave general satisfaction and very little cause for offence, according the same serious but always sympathetic attention to his social as to his political functions. Probably his work as censor of plays (one of the main duties of the lord chamberlain until 1968) interested him most. Cromer came to know a great deal about the theatre, and in this contentious field his tact and sympathy earned the respect and gratitude of dramatists and actors. In his administration and reformation of royal household affairs his business experience stood him in good stead. A sense of humour lightened the burden of his responsibilities, if on social occasions his determination to keep inviolable the confidences of his office sometimes kept it in check. 
Cromer was of middle height and slim build. Never robust, he enjoyed shooting and riding but his favourite recreations were reading, family golf, and gardening. A chief virtue of his character was an endearing modesty, to which were added shrewd common sense, moral courage, and a far-sighted liberalism of outlook. He was devoted to children, and young people were always at ease in his company. He devoted much time and trouble to the Cheyne Hospital for children, and was president of the National Hospital for Chest Diseases. At various times he was a British government director of the Suez Canal Company and a director of the P. & O. and the British India steam navigation companies and various banking and insurance concerns. Cromer was not a rich man, and these City interests were of importance to him since the office of lord chamberlain carried no pension rights. In 1934-5 he was president of the MCC. He received many high British honours and a variety of foreign orders. He was sworn of the privy council in 1922 and rose to the rank of grand cross in the orders of the Bath, the Indian Empire, and in the Royal Victorian Order, and received the Royal Victorian Chain in 1935. Cromer died suddenly on 13 May 1953 at 20 Devonshire Place, London. He was survived by his wife and was succeeded by his only son, (George) Rowland Stanley Baring (1918-1991), who was governor of the Bank of England from 1961 to 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 30586


Baring, Thomas George, first earl of Northbrook (1826-1904), politician and viceroy of India, was born at 16 Cumberland Street, London, on 22 January 1826, the eldest son of Sir Francis Thornhill Baring, third baronet and later first Baron Northbrook (1796-1866), and his first wife, Jane (1804-1838), daughter of Captain Sir George Grey RN, first baronet. She was a niece of Earl Grey of the 'Great Reform Bill', and sister of the second Sir George Grey, an influential figure in mid-nineteenth-century whig cabinets, revered by his nephew. Thomas George Baring, so called to distinguish him from his tory uncle Thomas, united in his person the political traditions of the Greys and the wealth of the Barings, one of the greatest of City families. He was always true to his reforming whig origins, after as before he joined the Unionist secession from the Liberal Party in 1886, and his banking forebears' devotion to sound finance was natural to him. 
The elder Baring, a Wykehamist, had no kind memories of his old school and some doubts about his son's strength of character. After a little time at what later would have been called a preparatory school, the boy was entrusted to private tutors. Well taught and well read, he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1843, taking a second in classics in 1846, a performance considered creditable to someone who gave the superficial impression of being typical of the scions of aristocracy at the House. His college friendships endured, and were the only close ones of his adult life. He was to sit in cabinet with two of those friends, Chichester Fortescue, later Lord Carlingford, and John Wodehouse, first earl of Kimberley -- cultured, serious-minded young men like himself behind a conventional exterior. Baring's father, a former and future cabinet minister, encouraged him to enter politics, and arranged for a thorough grounding in his chosen career as an unpaid private secretary to a succession of ministers, to all of whom he was related. Between 1846 and 1857 he worked for an uncle, Henry Labouchere, when he was chief secretary for Ireland and then president of the Board of Trade; for another uncle, Sir George Grey, at the Home Office; and for Sir Charles Wood, a cousin, at the India board and the Admiralty. In an interval during this lengthy apprenticeship, he married on 6 September 1848 Elizabeth Harriet (1827-1867), the daughter of Henry Charles Sturt of Crichel, Dorset, and sister of two brothers in his Christ Church circle. They had three children. He read up political economy without much relish for its bleak imperatives and concluded that 'unfortunately free trade is true, and we must use all our efforts to give our manufacturers the power of underselling the world' (Mallet, 39). 
At the invitation of two leading Quaker families with local influence, the Foxes and the Gurneys, Baring stood for Penryn and Falmouth at the general election of 1852, setting his face against the bribery for which the borough was well known, and lost. Returned in 1857, he was to look back nostalgically on the elections he fought there in the days of open voting: 'Strange taste, is it not?' (Mallet, 38). With his connections and experience he was at once given minor office, as civil lord of the Admiralty in the first Palmerston administration. In the second, following an interlude of tory government, he served as under-secretary in three departments: the India Office, 1859-61 and 1861-4, under Wood; the War Office, January to July 1861; and the Home Office, 1864-6, under Grey. He was particularly interested in War Office business, to which he came with nearly twenty years' service in the Hampshire yeomanry; from 1864 he commanded and met the bills for the troop based at Winchester. The military machine, he decided, was in need of 'extensive but judicious changes' ('Hansard 3', 93, 16 July 1868, 1243). When he went back to the War Office in December 1868 as a peer and Cardwell's under-secretary, he was wholly in sympathy with his minister's far-reaching reforms and ably supported them. In a phrase that stung his opponents, he described the purchase system in the army, abolished in 1871 after a bitter struggle, as 'a spider's web of vested interests' (ibid., 207, 13 July 1871, 1550). Never a good speaker, he stuck closely to his departmental brief; but his quiet competence and authentic liberalism commended him to the premier, who early in 1872 rated him the under-secretary in the Lords best qualified for promotion to the cabinet (Gladstone to Argyll, 13 Feb 1872, Gladstone, 'Diaries', 8.110). 
Northbrook, as he became on his father's death (6 September 1866), thought his political career had ended when he left the Commons, and was reconciled to the life, which he found quite satisfying, of a country gentleman with varied interests. The deaths of his wife, whom he never ceased to mourn, and of his younger son, a midshipman lost at sea three years later, intensified a deeply religious outlook, rooted in an eirenical Christianity. Politics became, and remained, a question of duty, if it had ever been anything else. He wrestled with his conscience and self-doubt when Gladstone, urged on by Wood, now Lord Halifax, preferred him to Lord Dufferin as viceroy of India. 'Not a case of duty', he told himself; 'No ambition for [the] office or feeling that I could do good in it' (Mallet, 53). But after telling Halifax that he did not wish the offer to be made, he accepted, succeeding Lord Mayo, assassinated in February 1872. 
Northbrook's first months in India confirmed him in a severely realistic view of the British position in the subcontinent: 'We are tolerated as being a less ['sic'] evil than what would be likely to follow us' (Northbrook to Gladstone, 9 Sept 1872, BL, Add. MS 44266). Against that background he attached great importance to reducing taxation of every kind and keeping it down. Before he left Britain he had discussed with Halifax the abolition of the unpopular income tax reintroduced by his predecessor, and carried it over the objections of half his council in India. Earlier that year, citing the political risks, he had vetoed a municipalities bill for Bengal in the light of Indian protests at the higher taxes it entailed. He was especially concerned about the most productive of Indian taxes, the land revenue assessed upon the ryots, the peasants: under-assessment was always preferable to over-assessment resulting in 'a discontented, and possibly a dangerous class' (Moulton, 46-7). In Bombay and Oudh the subordinate governments were induced to moderate their demands on the cultivator. He counted as one of his successes the battle with 'the Strachey School' -- believers, like Sir John Strachey, a member of the viceroy's council and governor of the North-Western Provinces, in the economic virtues of forcing up the land revenue (Northbrook to Ripon, 8 Aug 1884, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/4). In one of his first letters to a presidency governor, another appointment from home, Northbrook remarked how little many high-ranking British civil servants in India appeared to know of the people, and advised him to elicit the views of district officers, and those of Indians 'wherever we can get them to speak freely'. He had come out fortified not only by the opinions of his enlightened whig circle, but by his time at the India Office, where the conservatism of Indian society and the dangers of exciting its fears were well understood after the rising of 1857: 'I shall therefore... legislate as little as possible', he decided from the outset (Northbrook to Lord Hobart, 19 May 1872, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/13). The mutiny was still fresh in British minds. When, later on, the question of increasing the size of the Indian army arose, he asked his friends at home to be careful in discussing it; everything they said was the subject of comment by Indian journalists, whose ability impressed him: 'It would not mend matters to tell our native troops that we never can trust them thoroughly after what has happened' (Northbrook to Lord Bessborough, 25 Jan 1875, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/23). 
These anxieties did not have the usual effect of making Northbrook afraid to contemplate some of the changes that Westernization must inevitably bring. As his private secretary he had been involved in the preparation of Wood's education dispatch of 1854, and now saw the central problem of the not very distant future in the emergence of 'able men... with feelings and interests adverse to British rule... [and] a real desire... to show their independence and use their English education' (Northbrook to Maurice Drummond, 13 June 1875, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/23). They were, through their newspapers, creating an Indian public opinion of which an alien regime was compelled by its own liberal values to take note. Northbrook regarded this element more sympathetically than did many of his officials -- 'the Baboos are not... devoid of fun' -- and defended the freedom of the Indian press against those who would have liked to restrict it (Northbrook to Argyll, 26 Sept 1872, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/9). A government with no representative institutions needed the newspaper criticisms even when they were 'more or less violent.... It is far more safe that these things should be said openly than that they should be said without the knowledge of government' (Moulton, 268-9). His internal and external policies for India were complementary. The determination to reduce both expenditure and the deficit he had inherited strengthened his opposition to the suggestions, increasingly being heard, that Russian expansion in central Asia should be countered by a corresponding British movement to secure India's north-western approaches. In his view Russia's advance made her more vulnerable, with over-extended lines of communication open to attack by local guerrillas financed and directed from India, relatively inexpensively. By the beginning of 1874, when the Liberals left office in Britain, India was on the way to a budgetary surplus and able to absorb the cost of averting mass starvation in the Bengal famine of that year. 
Northbrook and the outgoing secretary of state, the duke of Argyll, worked well together. Lord Salisbury, the future tory premier who took over at the India Office, had held the post before, in 1866-7. He distrusted all bureaucracies -- India's rather more than most -- and was critical of the councils which the 'India Act' of 1858 had given to the secretary of state in London and had continued for the viceroy in India. Salisbury reorganized the department, dominated his council, and sought by private correspondence with Northbrook to reverse a process by which the viceroy's councillors had acquired 'something of independent power' (Salisbury to Northbrook, 18 Dec 1874, Steele, 136). Northbrook, however, could not be persuaded to embrace the doctrine that a transient viceroy was alone deserving of the home government's full confidence. Through two years of argument on the point Northbrook insisted that his powers were properly exercised by the 'Governor-General 'in Council'' (Northbrook to Salisbury, 3 March 1876, Salisbury MSS, HHM/3M/E12). This did not imply the viceroy's subjection to the council: he contrasted his control of its decisions with the independence that councillors had asserted under John Lawrence (1864-9). 
Northbrook and Salisbury differed, the former realized, on 'some of the first principles of Indian administration' (Northbrook to Halifax, 2 Oct 1874, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/22). One of Salisbury's first actions at the India Office was to instruct the government of India in March 1874 to send legislative proposals home for approval prior to their introduction into the viceroy's council, sitting with additional members, European and Indian, in its law-making capacity. He followed this up with the 'India Councils Act' of the same year, adding a public works member to Northbrook's council against his wishes. Salisbury's later 'Indian Legislation Bill', enabling the secretary of state to veto part of an Indian measure instead of having to sanction or disallow the whole, had to be withdrawn for lack of parliamentary time, and also because it was known that Northbrook's political friends were going to fight it. The viceroy did not dispute the authority of the secretary of state, with the cabinet and the House of Commons behind him, but argued that it should not take the form of dictation to 'men of Indian experience... in a position to give... advice with complete independence', that is, to councillors enjoying security of tenure under the act of 1858 (Northbrook to Salisbury, 20 Aug 1874, Salisbury MSS, HHM/3M/E12). Happy to work with those advisers, Northbrook did not want greater powers for himself. 
By the time he left India Northbrook felt that ''Any stick is good enough to beat a dog with', and... I have the honour of being the dog' (Northbrook to Salisbury, 16 Aug 1875, Salisbury MSS, HHM/3M/E12). A cause of steadily worsening disagreement with Salisbury was policy towards Afghanistan, the buffer state in the path of Russian expansion. Viceroy and secretary of state both thought it would be unwise to advance into a fiercely Muslim and xenophobic country. Salisbury was much less influenced than Northbrook suspected by Sir Henry Rawlinson and Sir Bartle Frere, members of his council in London, who contended for a 'forward policy'. He believed it was enough that Britain and India should insist on a permanent diplomatic presence in Afghanistan -- something considered impossible since the massacre of the British mission at Kabul in 1842 and the destruction of its supporting garrison. Northbrook adhered to Lawrence's school in frontier policy: neither British prestige nor the Russian threat required a resident envoy. 'Why the government were determined to meddle beats my comprehension', he reflected (Northbrook to Sir G. Clerk, 11 Feb 1876, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/23). 
The same conviction that impelled Northbrook to resist 'a wrong thing' led to open conflict with Salisbury over the Indian cotton duties (Northbrook to Sir L. Mallet, 25 Feb 1876, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/23). For domestic and imperial reasons, Salisbury wished to end what Lancashire claimed was discrimination in favour of the infant Indian cotton industry. Northbrook and his council ignored Salisbury's statements to that effect and, more importantly, the directive of March 1874 when in August of the following year they passed new tariff legislation which preserved the duties with only minor changes and did so without first consulting the secretary of state. Salisbury did not disallow the legislation, as he was at first inclined to do. To have taken that step would have precipitated a crisis between the two governments and attracted parliamentary intervention. But he censured the government of India for its action. Northbrook represented that he had not been specifically ordered to begin doing away with the duties. While that was true, he had never seen any justification for relieving British exports of a light burden at the expense of Indian taxpayers. If Lancashire was really feeling the competition from Indian mills, over-trading with inferior goods was to blame (Northbrook to Mallet, 2 Oct, 29 Oct 1874, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/23). To the extent that the duties were protective he defended them by recalling that before the industrial revolution and free trade Britain had discriminated against Indian textiles. The sacrifice of Indian interests to Lancashire risked alienation of 'the best and most loyally disposed of the educated natives' (Northbrook to Salisbury, 29 Jan, 25 Feb 1876, Salisbury MSS, HHM/3M/E 12). In the event, the abolition of the duties carried through largely by Northbrook's successor, Lytton, did not inhibit the growth of the Indian industry. 
Their differences obscured the much wider area of agreement between Salisbury and Northbrook. With the mutiny in mind they looked on Islam in India as the most worrying of potential threats to British rule; Mayo's assassin was a Muslim. Where the princely states were concerned, Northbrook was rather more careful than Salisbury of the princes' feelings and their rights, as in the cases of Baroda and Hyderabad's claim to Berar. In defence of the nizam of Hyderabad, he quoted Charles James Fox on the pervasive influence of British constitutionalism in India, even on 'the most absolute despotism'. Yet he persuaded Salisbury to excise the words 'the interests of the people' from his dispatch on Berar: used to justify withholding the territory from the nizam, they might be employed against the British (Northbrook to Salisbury, 30 Sept 1875, Steele, 132). That prudence was evident in his thinking on the delicate question of allowing a Westernized elite to enter the covenanted civil service in more than token numbers. While he disagreed with Salisbury's decision to lower the age limit for the competitive examination, to the assumed disadvantage of Indians, he also held that a change in the regulations was as yet unnecessary. If too many Indians did pass into the service, they might simply be barred from the examination: 'at any rate nothing should be done to encourage native candidates to compete' (Northbrook to Salisbury, 30 Sept 1875, Salisbury MSS, HHM/3M/E12). Consistently with these private views, Northbrook did not reverse the tory Mayo's educational policy, although he modified its application by Sir George Campbell as lieutenant-governor of Bengal. Too little had been spent on the beginnings of elementary education, and too much on secondary and higher education, often of doubtful quality; Northbrook did not care for the growing 'half-educated class' any more than Salisbury did. Like Salisbury again, he thought India's recent progress had been too rapid for comfort (Northbrook to Salisbury, 26 Feb, 12 Sept 1875, Salisbury MSS, HHM/3M/E12). 
With hindsight, Northbrook was satisfied that the peasant masses had benefited from his policies, intended ''to give the land rest', as some of the natives phrased it': the Western-educated handful were, after all, only 'the froth of Indian society' (Northbrook to Lord Dufferin, 8 Sept 1884, 14 March 1885, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/5). It is, at first sight, surprising that this conservative fell out with a tory secretary of state. Northbrook failed to heed a friendly warning from a member of Salisbury's council that the telegraph 'tends much to reduce the viceroy to a puppet' (Sir E. Perry to Northbrook, 9 July 1875, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/23). He resented as interference the insistence of an unusually able and interested minister on being involved in Indian decision making from an early stage. He disliked, too, the tone of Salisbury's dispatches with their 'strong flavour of 'Saturday Review' smart writing' (Northbrook to Lord Camperdown, 14 June 1875, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/5; Northbrook to Dufferin, 5 Aug 1885, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/5). The adviser closest to him and the moving spirit in his council's defiance of the secretary of state was not an Indian civilian but the law member, Arthur Hobhouse -- a partisan Liberal who incited the viceroy to think Salisbury's behaviour arbitrary and unconstitutional. When Northbrook cut short his five-year term in India, it was supposed, Hobhouse told him, that he had been 'worried and bullied out of office' by Salisbury (Steele, 137). That was at least partly true; although Northbrook pleaded family reasons, interpreted to mean anxiety to take his son and heir away from an unsuitable attachment formed in India. He had not been a masterful viceroy but a competent administrator with clear ideas about what was desirable and possible. Official India respected him: educated Indians, to whom the future belonged, believed he was their friend. 
If the earldom conferred (10 June 1876) by the tory government was in the nature of a routine promotion for a retiring viceroy, Northbrook's reputation stood high with his party when he returned home in May 1876. It rose higher when events justified his adherence to Lawrence's policy on the frontier. Under a new and weaker minister at the India Office, Lytton went further than Salisbury had envisaged: the disasters of 1879-80 were the outcome. Northbrook privately allowed that, in the circumstances, Salisbury 'was more sinned against than sinning' (Mallet, 145). Gladstone made the former viceroy first lord of the Admiralty after the Liberals' election victory in 1880, with the understanding that the cabinet would also draw on his Indian expertise. He gave Lord Hartington at the India Office and Lord Ripon, as Lytton's replacement, the benefit of his advice. He was staunchly Gladstonian about withdrawing the troops sent into Afghanistan: 'To me the moral aspect of the question is the one to which I attach the greatest weight. What right have we to annex Afghanistan?' He supported Ripon's resumption and extension of his own cautious liberalism in India, while counselling him 'not to forget... the lessons of the Mutiny' (Northbrook to Ripon, 22 Sept, 25 June 1880, BL, Add. MS 43570). When Ripon got into difficulties over the 'Ilbert Bill', Northbrook was equally mortified by the violent outcry from British expatriates at the prospect of having to appear before Indian magistrates. He championed the viceroy publicly, and in their correspondence suggested the compromise which saved 'the principle of... no race distinction in regard to... judges and magistrates... English or native', but narrowed its application (Northbrook to Ripon, 12 Aug 1882, BL, Add. MS 43572). The pragmatism was evident, more controversially, in his response to the pressures on him at the Admiralty. 
With his naval connections, Northbrook always believed in the classical Liberal doctrine of 'keeping up our naval strength rather than playing at being a great military power' (Northbrook to Mallet, 31 May 1874, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/22). Yet he and his Admiralty board were famously indicted by W. T. Stead in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (September 1884) for their comparative neglect of the fleet. Writing half a century afterwards, the leading modern historian of the Victorian navy found Northbrook and his board guilty as charged of the gradual decline of the Royal Navy as a fighting force (Marder, 120). France and Germany between them had more first-class ironclads than Britain; Russia and Italy were expanding their navies. Amid gathering international tensions, the public took fright. The reaction to Stead's articles compelled Northbrook to announce a dramatic increase in spending on construction and ordnance. Defending himself against the criticisms, he pleaded that it was impossible for any British government 'to undertake large expenditure in advance of the general feeling of the people'. His estimates had been subject to Gladstone's political expectations of economy in the services ('Hansard 3', 299, 14 July 1885, 624; Gladstone to Northbrook, 15 Dec 1880, Gladstone, 'Diaries', 9.643). Moreover, the record showed that Northbrook and his professional advisers had hesitated over the admittedly difficult decisions that quickening technological change imposed. His standing never recovered, though he was able to demonstrate that within the limits set by domestic political considerations he had worked with the first naval lord, Admiral Cooper Key, to protect the navy from obsolescence. 
Northbrook approved of a temporary British occupation of Egypt in 1882 to secure the Suez Canal and keep the French out. Like Gladstone, he considered the defeated nationalist leader, Arabi Pasha, to be a 'mere military adventurer' (Northbrook to Ripon, 16 June 1882, BL, Add. MS 43577). Although privately critical of the premier's slowness to agree to the Gordon relief expedition, he supported the decision to abandon the Egyptian Sudan to the Mahdi and his followers. A Northbrook mission was first suggested in April 1884 before the breakdown of the London conference of creditor nations called to strike a balance between the claims of their bondholders, the interests of the Egyptian government and people, and those of the occupying power ('Gladstone-Granville Correspondence', 2.180 n.1). The idea and the man were acceptable to Gladstone, who wanted to withdraw from Egypt with the minimum of delay, and to Hartington, who headed the more imperially minded wing of the cabinet. Their mutual choice stipulated that he should be accompanied by his cousin, Evelyn Baring, the British agent and consul-general in Cairo, then on home leave. Baring, Northbrook's influential private secretary in India, had become a central figure in Britain's relations with Egypt and her effective ruler. Northbrook said afterwards that he could not have carried out his hurried task (September-October 1884) without the help of this 'Egyptian Whig', as Evelyn Baring described himself (E. Baring to Sir A. C. Lyall, 6 Nov 1879, Lyall MSS, MS Eur. F. 132/3G). Opposed to annexation, and sharing Gladstone's conviction that it would be an 'unnatural proceeding' to institute direct rule in what was, unlike India, a predominantly Muslim country, Northbrook had sided with the premier, and against Hartington, in preferring to see Egyptian neutrality secured by an international agreement that would permit the British to evacuate (Stanley, Derby diary, 7 May 1884, DER 920 (15); Northbrook to Ripon, 13 June 1884, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/4). 
The most pressing problem in Egypt was financial: the London conference failed because France would not consent to a reduction in the interest paid to bondholders, the demand on which the British stood their ground. Northbrook was asked early in August to go out as a special commissioner and report urgently on the administration and finances. After their lengthy discussions before he left, Gladstone told him that he had accepted 'an impossible task and with the impossible no man can successfully contend'. The premier could discern no escape from the financial impasse. On his side, it is clear, Northbrook did not allude to thoughts about a possible solution which he knew would be unpalatable to Gladstone. Nothing could be done 'without making some sacrifice ourselves', by way of a large British loan; he enjoined his friend Sir Reginald Welby of the Treasury to keep this ''strictly and entirely' to yourself' (Gladstone to Northbrook, 29 Aug 1884, Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP6/4/2/11; Northbrook to Welby, 30 Aug 1884, Baring archive, Northbrook MSS). The danger arising from French resentment of the British presence in Egypt, and Bismarck's encouragement of France, weighed heavily with him. In the plan which took shape soon after his arrival in the country the continental powers were to be placated by the assurance that their bondholders would be paid in full. As Gladstone objected, these proposals meant that the British taxpayers were to underwrite the bondholders; it was, in his eyes, an unwarrantable surrender to international pressure. 'I have recommended a pusillanimous policy for Egypt', Northbrook admitted, 'because I know we could not hold our own at sea if there was to be a war' (Northbrook to E. Baring, 7 Nov 1884, Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP 6/4/2/3(2)). To Gladstone the British loan was at the same time a 'Jingo policy' that must strengthen the hands of those who wanted annexation, or at least an indefinite occupation ('Gladstone-Granville Correspondence', 2.280). Northbrook reduced the figure for the loan from $15 million to $8 or $9 million, but Gladstone was immovable. On the day he asked his colleague to go to Egypt, he had promised the Commons not to commit Britain to any financial obligations there without consulting the house ('Hansard 3', 291, 2 Aug 1884, 1528-9). 
The disregard shown by the cabinet envoy for Gladstone's known position that 'Egypt... should... pay what and when she could' infuriated the latter. In one of his rare lapses into profanity, the premier complained that Northbrook had ''bitched' the whole concern from beginning to end' (Gladstone to Granville, 24 Sept 1884, 'Gladstone-Granville Correspondence', 2.266; Hamilton, 2.759). Gladstone had, it seems, conceived of the mission as a move in the campaign to get other creditor states to concede a reduction in the bondholders' interest. Northbrook's remaining proposals were overshadowed by the rejection of the loan and of a cut in the coupon. They included the substitution of British for Anglo-French administration of the railways and state lands, and more latitude for the Egyptian government in taxation. Coupled with a continuing British occupation for an unspecified period, they were designed to free Britain and Egypt from the legitimate intervention of the continental powers, and above all of France, based on Egyptian indebtedness. Their implementation would have made Evelyn Baring's indirect rule considerably easier and shortened his work of financial reconstruction. Gladstone simply refused to contemplate asking the Commons to sanction a guaranteed loan. With H. C. E. Childers, the chancellor of the exchequer, he set the Treasury to prepare an alternative solution and worked the press against Northbrook. Although all its peers favoured the Northbrook proposals, Hartington was the only member of the Commons in the cabinet to do so. 'I never had harder or more disheartening work in my life', wrote Northbrook just before he lost in December: 'Gladstone and Childers want to 'burke' my recommendations altogether' (Northbrook to E. Baring, 27 Nov 1884, Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP 6/4/2/3(2); 'Financial memorandum, 1884-5', Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP 6/4/2/15). They succeeded: and his threatened resignation did not materialize. He had nothing to show for his efforts since August. Evelyn Baring's verdict stands: 'His mission was a failure' (Cromer, 2.371). 
For the rest of the government's life Northbrook aligned himself with the cabinet critics of Gladstone's policy in Egypt and the Sudan, and was poised to resign more than once. The eventual solution to the problem of Egyptian finance, adopted by another London conference in March 1885, provided for an international guaranteed loan of $9 million, with no reduction of existing interest payments beyond a small face-saving Egyptian tax on the coupon for two years. The bondholders and France had prevailed. Northbrook consoled himself with the thought that he had contributed to the slow amelioration of the fellahin's lot by his brief visit and two reports, one financial and the other on the country's prospects generally: 'If we can say we have got rid of the courbash and corvee... we shall have done more for the people than all the dynasties' (memorandum, 29 Jan 1885, Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP 6/4/2/17). 
Northbrook had been a distinctly liberal whig, supporting Gladstone's Irish land bills of 1880-82 with few of the misgivings that others felt. Nor does he appear to have had any serious qualms about Gladstone's handling of parliamentary reform in 1884. He made no secret, however, of his unhappiness with the way he had been treated over the Egyptian mission. Relieved to be out of office from June 1885, he declined Gladstone's offer of the viceroyalty of Ireland in the ministry formed in February 1886 to carry Irish home rule. He recognized the case for trying some form of home rule; he no longer had enough confidence in his party to join them in the experiment. From saying that he hoped the Liberals would be successful in a 'difficult and dangerous' enterprise, he moved quickly to private and public denunciation of Gladstone, 'the ablest,... the most eloquent and, I am afraid, the most conscientiously unscrupulous leader... in the history of English politics', whose failures of policy, Northbrook now discovered, made him 'more than any other man' responsible for the unrest in Ireland (Northbrook to Dufferin, 5 Feb, 30 July 1886, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/5; 'Hansard 3', 317, 6 July 1887, 902). Reflection had convinced him that there could only be one answer to 'the real question': was it right to hand Ireland over to 'Parnell & Co.' (memorandum, 11 Oct 1887, J. Chamberlain MSS, JC/8/4/3/22)? Yet Northbrook was never really at home in the Unionist alliance; he had no hesitation in turning down an invitation to enter Salisbury's cabinet in January 1887 with G. J. Goschen. Shortly before his death in 1904 he was one of those who came out against Unionism's shift away from free trade. 
Something of an innocent in politics, Northbrook was deficient in its basic skills. 'I did not feel myself at liberty to give information to the newspapers', he told Gladstone's private secretary when he learned that the press was being worked against his Egyptian proposals ('Financial memorandum, 1884-5', Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP 6/4/2/15). While he had enjoyed electioneering in the past, and appeared regularly on Unionist platforms, he deplored the more heated atmosphere of the eighties: 'Oh, this constant extra-Parliamentary oratory, it is ruining us all', he lamented in 1885 (Mallet, 218). Northbrook was, perhaps, unfortunate in coming into conflict with two such formidable politicians as Salisbury and Gladstone. He was at his best in India, where the circumstances called for a period of consolidation. It has been unfairly said that he was 'frightened into inertia' (Gopal, 125). He understood better than some in his position the impact of Westernization and the nice judgements it demanded of liberal rulers. When he went to Egypt he secured the appointment to his staff of an Indian Muslim who could tell Egyptian notables of Northbrook's respect for the 'native raj' in the princely states and of his solicitude for the peasantry (Northbrook to Ripon, 8 Aug 1884, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/4). In his final report he strongly recommended lowering the land tax paid by the fellahin. His sympathy with a Westernized elite and his political insight led him to establish, and largely maintain, a club for Indian students in London which bore his name. He urged Salisbury, who was known to have doubts about the small concession to Indian opinion involved, not to drop what eventually became the 'Indian Councils Bill' of 1892, saying characteristically, 'the Congress agitation... not altogether a comfortable thing... is not now dangerous' (Northbrook to Salisbury, 10 June 1890, Baring archive, Northbrook MSS, NP 6/4/1/4). 
A. O. Hume, the British administrator who founded the Indian National Congress and endorsed Northbrook's caution in the seventies, nevertheless described him as 'feeble', but rich in private and public virtues (Gopal, 125). Physically strong, Northbrook filled much of his leisure with the traditional recreations of a wealthy countryman, besides yachting and continental travel, and was happiest fishing on the Itchen near his Hampshire home. Widely read, without being particularly intellectual, he sketched and painted in watercolours. He added to and cherished his impressive collection of old masters, mostly inherited from his uncle Thomas Baring on the latter's death in 1873, and was a generous patron and a friend of Edward Lear. In Lear's eyes, this reserved man was 'a luminous and amiable brick' -- a glimpse of the humanity beneath a sometimes oppressive 'gravitas'. A substantial share of his uncle's great fortune made him a much richer man. His income from urban landholdings on the southern edge of London and other non-agricultural investments enabled him to be a model landlord in town and country. In 1885 he was spending the gross rental of his 9000 acres in Hampshire on the upkeep of the estate ('Carlingford's Journal', 144). His standing in that county was acknowledged by his appointment as lord lieutenant in 1892, followed by the chairmanship of the county council from 1894 to his death. 
An unostentatious piety underlay the sense of duty that offset a lifelong want of self-confidence. When his friend Lord Ripon, a convert to Catholicism, replaced Lytton in India, Northbrook sent him a copy of the prayer he had used himself as viceroy. 'I am but a little child', it ran in words taken from '1 Kings' 3: 7-9; 'Thy servant is in the midst of a great people... give... an understanding heart to judge... that I may discern between good and bad' (Northbrook to Ripon, 17 Feb 1884, BL, Add. MS 43570). His beliefs were not as simple as this might suggest; he read and reread the sermons of John Henry Newman, among others. His ideal of a churchman was A. P. Stanley, someone with 'broad liberal views' who did not 'push the dogmas of the Church of England to the detriment of the doctrines of Christianity' (Northbrook to Argyll, 21 March 1873, Northbrook MSS, MS Eur. C. 144/9). Christian divisions seemed insignificant to him beside the great religions of India. In his old age he compiled for the Indian mission field 'The Teaching of Jesus Christ in his own Words' (1900); it had a huge circulation in English and in Indian languages. At home he used his chairmanship of the county council and of its education committee to select, personally, the Anglican, nonconformist, and Catholic members of a small 'ad hoc' committee that devised an interdenominational syllabus for religious teaching subsequently taken up by several other counties as well. 
Once the passions aroused by home rule in 1886 had begun to cool, Northbrook stepped easily into the part of elder statesman. He chaired a royal commission on the controversial question of mining royalties in 1890, and his views on Indian subjects were heard with respect. He died at his seat, Stratton Park, Hampshire, on 15 November 1904 and was buried four days later at Micheldever parish church, which he had restored. A privy councillor and GCSI (7 August 1869; 13 April 1876), FRS (8 January 1880), and the recipient of honorary doctorates from Oxford and Cambridge, he was succeeded by his elder and surviving son, Francis, Viscount Baring (died 1929), a Liberal and then Unionist MP (1880-85 and 1886-92). 


@@@@@


doc= 30587


Gould, Sabine Baring- (1834-1924), Church of England clergyman, author, and folksong collector, born at Dix's Field, Exeter, on 28 January 1834, was the eldest of the three sons and a daughter of Edward Baring-Gould, a captain in the armed forces of the East India Company, invalided out in 1830 as the result of an accident in India when still a young man. He returned home to the uneventful life of squire of Lew Trenchard, Devon, and in 1832 married his first wife, Sophia Charlotte, daughter of Admiral Francis Godolphin Bond RN. Cold, stern, and with a low threshold of boredom, Captain Baring-Gould in 1837 took his wife, young son, and servants to the continent until 1844, when they returned home to begin Sabine Baring-Gould's English education. He boarded at King's College, London, from 1844 to 1846, and in 1847 he attended Warwick grammar school. 
Sabine's delicate health persuaded his willing father to resume the family sojourns in Europe, visiting France, Belgium, Italy, Germany, and Austria. The sons, Sabine and William, were educated by tutors and travel. Sabine Baring-Gould had a photographic memory, read voraciously, and picked up languages with ease. At sixteen he organized the excavation of a buried Roman pavement at Pau, and at seventeen he determined his three tasks in life: to help in the spiritual rousing of the people, to restore the family home of Lew House, and to restore Lew Trenchard church. In 1852 the Baring-Goulds temporarily moved to Tavistock, near Dartmoor, and in 1853 Baring-Gould entered Clare College, Cambridge, as a student of the classics, in which he was poorly versed. Tall, handsome, and romantically religious, he was attracted by the Tractarian movement, and hoped to become a priest, but in 1856, after graduating BA with a pass degree, he encountered parental opposition. As elder son he had to become squire, thus leaving the family living for his brother. 
Disappointed, Baring-Gould turned to teaching, starting at the choir school of St Barnabas, Pimlico, where he met the Revd C. F. Lowder, a well-known Tractarian. He moved to Lancing, a Woodard school, and then to its associate school, Hurstpierpoint College. But in 1863 his parents changed their minds about his ordination, for William refused to go into the church; in 1864 Baring-Gould was made deacon at Ripon, and became curate to the Revd John Sharp, rector of Horbury, Yorkshire. In 1865 Baring-Gould was ordained priest and dispatched to the rough district of Horbury Brig to organize a church mission. 
Baring-Gould relished the task, worked day and night, set up an evening school, and won all hearts by his story-telling. Four of his hymns, 'On the Resurrection Morning', written in December 1863 on his mother's death; 'Onward, Christian soldiers', written at Hurstpierpoint College in 1864; and 'Through the night of doubt and sorrow', translated from the Danish, and 'Now the day is over', both written at Horbury Brig, became favourites at the mission. 
In 1866 Baring-Gould met his future wife, Grace Taylor, at Horbury Brig. She was a beautiful factory girl of sixteen, who had been working since she was ten years old. Both sets of parents (in 1865 Captain Baring-Gould had married Lavinia Snow, a younger family friend who, with her mother, had accompanied the Baring-Goulds to the continent in 1847) opposed the marriage, but Baring-Gould persisted. Grace Taylor lived for two years in York with a female relative of John Sharp, acquiring an education. On 24 May 1868 the couple were married by Sharp at Horbury Brig, no relatives of bride or groom being present. Five sons and ten daughters were born, one daughter dying in infancy. Grace Baring-Gould was self-possessed and much loved. She died on 8 April 1916, and the words 'Dimidium animae meae' (Half my soul) were inscribed over her tombstone. Baring-Gould's first novel, 'Through Flood and Flame' (1868), is held to be partly autobiographical. 
In 1867 Baring-Gould became perpetual curate at Dalton, Yorkshire, where he wrote steadily, following his 'Book of Were-Wolves' (1865) and 'Curious Myths of the Middle Ages' (1866, 1868). His 'Origin and Development of Religious Belief' (1869, 1870), suggested by Darwin's theories, was condemned by Roman Catholics, Anglicans, and extreme protestants, but W. E. Gladstone liked the book, and in 1871, when prime minister, he offered Baring-Gould the crown living of East Mersea, Essex. There Baring-Gould wrote 'The Vicar of Morwenstowe: a Life of Robert Stephen Hawker' (1876), criticized for glaring inaccuracies but loved for its true flavour of Hawker and the west country. He began the 'Lives of the Saints', published in fifteen volumes; it comprised 3600 biographies arranged in order of the saints' days, Baring-Gould working at them from 1872 to 1877. The Roman Catholic church put them on the Index. The 'Lives' was reprinted in 1897-8 and again in 1914. Three volumes -- the British, the English, and the Northumbrian saints -- were reprinted in 1990. He also wrote a powerful novel, 'Mehalah' (1880), likened by the poet Swinburne to 'Wuthering Heights'. 
When his father died in 1872, Baring-Gould inherited the Devon estate, but his elderly uncle remained the incumbent at Lew Trenchard. In addition, Baring-Gould had to support his brother, William, his stepmother, his young half-brother, Arthur, and his half-sister, Lilah. He therefore let Lew House, remained at East Mersea, and frequently took his family abroad, partly for health reasons and partly for research. In his absence the parish was looked after by the Revd J. M. Gatrill. His uncle died in 1881, whereupon Baring-Gould presented himself to the family living and moved into Lew House. 
Baring-Gould was a popular parson whose forceful sermons attracted people from outside the parish. He revived harvest festivals and encouraged activities for children. His books paid for new cottages, repairs to farms, and the restoration of the manor house and the church. He wrote over forty novels; over sixty theological volumes of sermons, hymns, and devotional books; twenty-four guide and travel books; a score of general interest books; and collections of folksongs. His books were constantly reprinted, many remaining in print at the end of the twentieth century. 
Baring-Gould's folksong collecting began in earnest in 1888, with help from the Revd H. Fleetwood Sheppard and Dr F. W. Bussell. He recorded the tunes accurately but did not hesitate to write fresh words if he considered the existing ones to be indecent. Thus 'Kit has Lost her Key [Cow]' became 'Strawberry Fair'. The words of 'Widecombe Fair' are believed to be authentic. He encouraged his daughter Joan to teach folk dancing in the village. From 1904 he was a friend and collaborator of Cecil Sharp, the folksong and dance collector. Baring-Gould believed his most important work to have been the folksong collecting. He hoped it would 'resuscitate the traditional music of the English', and to that end he deposited copies of the songs and tunes he collected in the Free Municipal Library in Plymouth, thus making them available to all. 
Baring-Gould and Robert Burnard examined Dartmoor's past, and were founder members of the Dartmoor Exploration Committee in 1894. Baring-Gould also belonged to the Devonshire Association and was president in 1895. He was a member of the Royal Institution of Cornwall, and president for ten years from 1897. He won the Henwood gold medal for his presidential addresses on the 'Early history of Cornwall' and on 'The Celtic saints'. In 1918 Clare College made him an honorary fellow. 
Baring-Gould spent his last years writing his 'Reminiscences' and two religious books, 'The Church Revival' (1918), and 'The Evangelical Revival' (1920). He died at Lew House on 2 January 1924, and was buried in Lew Trenchard churchyard next to his wife. Above his tombstone was inscribed 'Paravi lucernam Christo meo' (I have prepared a lantern for my Christ). 


@@@@@


doc= 30588


Barker, Sir Ernest (1874-1960), political theorist, was born on 23 September 1874 at Heald Cottage, Woodley, Cheshire, the eldest of the seven children of George Barker, a miner turned farm labourer, and his wife, Elizabeth Pollitt. The family home was a small cottage on the farm of his maternal grandparents close to the Cheshire-Derbyshire border. He owed his academic success first and foremost to his mother, who was determined that her eldest child should become a scholar. But at the village school he was fortunate also in serving as a 'pacemaker' for the son of a local businessman who was working for a scholarship to the Manchester grammar school. In the event, Barker won the scholarship and began ascending one of few educational ladders to Oxford then available (first as classical scholar at Balliol in 1893, then as a Craven scholar in 1895, and as Jenkyns exhibitioner in 1897). 
The firm, classical basis of Barker's education that had been laid at Manchester grammar school was well sustained at Oxford. But following firsts in classical moderations (1895) and in 'literae humaniores' ('Greats') (1897), and undecided about his future, he read for the school of modern history. Under the guidance of the master of Balliol, A. L. Smith, he secured a first in 1898. Abandoning tentative thoughts of entering the civil service, Barker embarked upon a career of teaching and scholarship in which classics and history were never clearly demarcated. He combined a seven-year prize fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, from 1898 to 1905 with a lectureship in modern history at Wadham College from 1899 to 1909 and a tutorship for the non-collegiate students from 1899 to 1913. Although he was subsequently elected to fellowships in modern history at other Oxford colleges -- St John's (1909-13) and New College (1913-20) -- his classical learning continued to stimulate other scholarly interests. In this he was not untypical of contemporary Oxford dons. Indeed -- as Barker himself commented in his autobiography, 'Age and Youth' -- 'Greats' constituted 'something of a 'lingua franca' and a common 'esprit de corps'' across the different faculties (Barker, 17). 
During this formative period of his life Barker married on 26 July 1900 Emily Isabel Salkeld (died 1924), sister of a friend from Manchester grammar school and daughter of Richard Salkeld, the vicar of St Mark's, Dukinfield; there were two daughters and one son. The latter, Arthur Ernest Barker (1901-1989), was a foreign correspondent for 'The Times' until joining the BBC in 1938. Barker's elder daughter, Margaret, married the painter John Mansbridge, son of the adult education pioneer Albert Mansbridge; his younger daughter, Elisabeth Barker (1910-1986), was a diplomatic correspondent for Reuters and writer on eastern European affairs. A research fund administered by the British Academy commemorates her achievements. 
Barker used ancient Greece as a sounding-board for his ideals of, and beliefs about, the modern world in his first book, 'The Political Thought of Plato and Aristotle' (1906). This work analysed the writings of Plato and Aristotle from the perspective of a liberal concerned to uphold the twin values of personal liberty and government based upon the rule of law, while recognizing the integral role of society to the development of individuality. Here two streams of thought -- those of whig liberalism and philosophical idealism -- competed for Barker's political sympathies. However, he could neither accept the negative attitude towards the state that came to characterize a Liberal like Dicey with links to whiggism, nor embrace wholeheartedly the identity of state and society which characterized idealism in its less guarded moments. In his preface Barker acknowledged a substantial debt to T. H. Green, whose conception of the conformity of the ideal with the reality of the state was notoriously qualified. Green's understanding of the state as inherently less than perfect was important in shaping Barker's judgement of the respective merits of Plato and Aristotle's political ideas: while Plato was chided for the 'zeal' with which he pursued the notion of the state as the embodiment of reason and unity in society, Aristotle was praised for the more relaxed and flexible view that the state was merely 'the supreme association and the dominant end' (p. 228). 
But further influences were at work too, not least a conception of English national character -- a touchstone that was to become increasingly pronounced in Barker's political thought: he remarked that while there was 'something French in Plato's mind, something of that pushing of a principle to its logical extremes', in Aristotle's thought 'it hardly seems fanciful to detect more of an English spirit of compromise' ('The Political Thought of Plato and Aristotle', 162). Also, when Barker emphasized Aristotle's awareness that the state co-existed with other communities, that a precondition of unity was diversity (ibid., 233), his receptiveness to the rising tide of pluralist thought is equally apparent. A deep impression had been made upon him by the legal historian F. W. Maitland, who introduced the pluralist ideas of the German jurist Otto von Gierke to an English readership in 1900. In 1897 he had heard Maitland deliver the Ford lectures, 'Township and borough', at Oxford, which he later recalled as a formative experience (Barker, 330). 
This synthesis of the ideas of idealism, whiggism, and pluralism characterized and informed Barker's thought in the decades to come. It was never an entirely stable and coherent synthesis: the balance he attempted to strike between individuals, voluntary societies, and the state was uneven, and at various times in his life he tended to favour one at the expense of another. Early on in his career, he was strongly drawn towards pluralism, although even then his support was never unreserved. Later, however, his allegiances shifted more towards sovereign authority (see his preface to the American edition of 'Church, State, and Education', 1957). A critical factor here was the clear demonstration in the inter-war period that groups can develop malignant tendencies, belying the 'clubbable' side of associational life to which Maitland had warmed. When Barker turned to a translation of a further instalment of Gierke's 'Genossenschaftsrecht' -- published as 'Natural Law and the Theory of Society' in 1934 -- his introduction was more sombre than Maitland's of some three decades earlier. Greatly disquieted by the 'upsurge' of groups in continental Europe, he warned of the dangers of the Romantic legacy in the theory of groups, a legacy whose full implications were currently being drawn out in Germany ('Natural Law and the Theory of Society', xvii). But Romanticism was not only implicated in the ascendancy of racial exclusiveness in Germany: its spirit could also be detected in the dominance of nation in Italy and class in Russia ('Reflections on Government', 1942, 160, 163). Barker defended the 'regnum' with new zest against these tendencies, not least out of a deep concern for individual liberty and the never more evident threat posed to it by the assignment of 'real personality' to groups. He was drawn to the emphasis which Maitland gave to the associational instinct in British life, and also the stroke of genius by which the English system of equity had created trusts as diverse as churches, trade unions, Lloyd's Coffee House, the Jockey Club, and London clubs. The trust had allowed groups a considerable degree of latitude denied to them in Germany, where the odious 'concession' theory of groups prevailed under Roman law. However, Barker himself was wary of groups and their capacity to browbeat both members and non-members alike. While he gave all the groups and institutions to which he belonged his full commitment, he readily confessed in his autobiography to an entrenched aversion to 'Institutionalism' (Barker, 304). 
Barker's two decades as a member of the Oxford modern history faculty were fruitful for him as both a teacher and a writer. He taught students as diverse as Harold Laski -- who became professor of political science at the London School of Economics in 1925 -- and the Christian sociologist Maurice Reckitt. He kept his distance from the political and religious views of both writers, while recognizing their talents and enjoying their acclaim. He also taught T. E. Lawrence and his brother Will. But he seems to have been most stimulated by the pupils he taught from the Roman Catholic religious orders, which were beginning to re-establish themselves at Oxford at the end of the nineteenth century. He seems to have particularly enjoyed the company of the Benedictines, and through his pupils he established lasting links with two major Benedictine schools in England: Ampleforth and Douai. He also taught pupils who became leading Catholic writers and journalists: for example, Christopher Dawson, Douglas Jerrold, and Douglas Woodruff. While he seems never to have considered becoming a Catholic himself, he did convert from the Congregationalism in which he had been brought up to Anglicanism just before he left Oxford in 1920. His Congregational background at the Hatherlow Chapel near his home had steeled him against the agnosticism which he found widespread at Balliol as an undergraduate (Barker, 301). But he did not conceive of his embrace of Anglicanism as a break with Congregationalism, nor as distancing himself from Catholic orders in England like the Benedictines (ibid., 53). Indeed, he valued organized religion in all its diversity, and in particular its capacity to enrich national life, not least English national life, and to be enriched in turn. 
For the most part, Barker carried on teaching at Oxford during the First World War, drawn away only temporarily in order to, among other duties, inspect factories and works committees in the north of England for the Ministry of Labour. But he was by no means a passive bystander: a master of crisp and direct as well as erudite prose, he wrote solemn and persuasive defences of Britain's role in the war for popular audiences. With other history dons at Oxford, he contributed to a book entitled 'Why we Are at War' (1914) and also wrote a series of articles in 'The Times' which were brought together in 'Mothers and Sons in Wartime' (1915). He deplored what he regarded as 'the worship of power' in modern Germany, made evident in the actions of statesmen like Bismarck and in the ideas of philosophers such as Nietzsche and Treitschke alike. In other pamphlets he contrasted favourably British with German policy towards its constituent nations, noting in particular German repression of its linguistic minorities and British tolerance of the Irish language. Indeed, the war did much to crystallize his ideas on nationalism as a force for tyranny and instability. Far better, he argued in a journal article of 1919, to love one's neighbour than one's fellow national: neighbourliness was a 'quiet' virtue, yet 'deep and permeating' for all that ('Nationality', 'History', Oct 1919, 144). This was -- in effect -- a call for the elevation of patriotism over nationalism. 
Translating this principle into the problem of Ireland, Barker supported home rule but not independence. He rejected moves to bestow dominion status on Ireland in 1921, proclaiming to A. D. Lindsay that he believed in 'the state rather than the nation' (Stapleton, 'Englishness', 97). None the less, while he stressed the priority of statehood over nationhood, and patriotism over nationalism, his unfailing loyalty to Britain was to the recognizably English symbols and institutions through which British identity was principally focused. This was not least because he conceived of England as a model of national inclusiveness -- a cardinal theme of the Stevenson lectures he gave in Glasgow, which were published as 'National Character and the Factors in its Formation' in 1927 (see especially p. 194). 
The Stevenson lectures were the fruit of one of the few pieces of research Barker was able to undertake during his time as principal at King's College, London, from 1920 to 1927. He had not been able to resist the challenge of administration, an appetite for which had grown steadily upon him at Oxford. Also, he had developed London connections through his membership of the group formed around the periodical the 'New Europe' -- an offshoot of the Round Table movement -- and spearheaded by such specialists in eastern European nationalism as R. W. Seton-Watson. At King's he enjoyed the stimulation of a notable academic community, and also forged ties with some of London's leading men of affairs. He did not feel at all disadvantaged by his working-class roots, as he was certain he would have done if he had become head of an Oxford college; in 1924 he was approached on several fronts concerning the forthcoming vacancy of the wardenship of New College (Barker to Julian Huxley, 8 Nov 1924, Huxley MSS, Rice University). In London he was also well placed to become involved in government. For example, he was recruited to the Hadow committee, which produced the report 'The Education of the Adolescent' in 1927. Barker believed fervently in the importance of public provision for practical secondary education, this being in keeping with what he perceived as the active and 'practical' nature of 'the English genius'. He insisted, however, that an education in practical things could be a liberal education, and as chairman of the drafting committee he would have been responsible for emphasizing the need for parity between the two streams of grammar and secondary modern schools. 
There were difficult times as well, particularly those which stretched Barker's capacity to deal with conflict. One such episode was the controversy over the Koraes chair in modern Greek, a post that had been funded partially by the Greek government but which threw the college into crisis as the first incumbent, Arnold Toynbee, denounced Greek atrocities in Anatolia. He was also greatly disconcerted by the short skirts of female students at King's (Catlin, 344-5). However, Barker was certainly not opposed to greater opportunities for women, despite cautioning against attempts to ground those opportunities in logic and individualism. (See his 'History and the position of women' in Z. Fairfield, ed., 'Some Aspects of the Woman's Movement', 1915, 44-6.) As principal he did all he could to secure employment for young women such as May Wedderburn Cannan whose lives had been devastated by the First World War (see Wedderburn Cannan, 172-5). His time at King's was overshadowed by the death of his first wife in 1924. 
It was with some sense of relief from the burdens of administrative office that Barker accepted in 1927 the offer of the newly established chair of political science at Cambridge, funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. It was only the third such chair in Britain. He had married again earlier that year, on 24 March. His new wife was Olivia Stuart Horner (1891-1976), daughter of John Stuart Horner, a Balliol man and director of an engineering firm; they had one son 
(Nicolas John; 'b'. 1932)
and one daughter 
(Sara Juliet; 'b'. 1934)
. While his eleven-year tenure of the chair was not notable for its wealth of publication, he laid the foundations for the long and productive retirement which followed. He became a fellow of Peterhouse and member of the Cambridge history faculty, which he chaired in the last three years before his retirement. He was charged with teaching the two political science papers which had been instituted by Sir John Seeley in the historical tripos. It was on the basis of the lectures that he had given for these courses, as well as those which he delivered as a visiting lecturer at other universities, that he published two widely used texts in post-war political studies, 'Reflections on Government' (1942) and 'Principles of Social and Political Theory' (1951). These books and other writings were also inspired by his work for the National Council of Social Service, through which he became the chairman of a committee which sought to enhance the provision of community centres on the new housing estates of inter-war Britain. This task seemed ripe for the application of pluralist ideals of voluntary association and Aristotle's notion of the optimum conditions of the good social life. His tenure of the Cambridge chair, and the writings that arose out of it subsequently, was enriched too by the generous opportunities for travel abroad that it afforded. While he did not take full advantage of the one term off in every three to which he was entitled, he nevertheless travelled extensively in Europe, America, and India. 
First-hand experience of the fascist turn in the politics of continental Europe made a particularly deep impression on Barker (Barker, 173). It helped to consolidate his ideas about the 'eruption of the group' and consequent 'militarization of the conception of the political' that constituted a unique contribution to political theory in the second quarter of the twentieth century ('Reflections on Government', 142, 271). He was one of few people in Britain to appreciate the force of the 'friend-foe' analysis of politics of the Nazi political theorist Carl Schmitt. He easily straddled the institutional-theoretical divide in political science through his studies of extremist political systems in inter-war Europe. These he contrasted with the democratic and legal institutions of Britain, in particular, the characteristics of which acquired new poignancy when set against the disturbing features of continental politics. In this sense, Barker's own doubts and those of others, notably his earlier memoirist George Catlin (see the entry he wrote for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and obituary in 'PBA'), about his success in forging new paths for the discipline of politics were misplaced. Through deploying the traditional approaches of philosophy and history, he shed considerable light on contemporary political life. 
Barker continued to assail Nazi, fascist, and Soviet dictatorship, and the ideologies which sustained them, throughout the 1930s. He exposed the evils of Nazism and Nazi propaganda -- for example, reproducing a Nazi school history textbook covering the period 1914 to 1933 for the Friends of Europe publications in 1933. He contrasted modern dictatorship with the dictatorships of ancient Rome in a lecture at Chatham House in 1934 ('The prospects for democracy', published in 'The Citizen's Choice', 1937). And he made trenchant criticisms of Marxism in the editorial he wrote for 'The Times' on the fiftieth anniversary of Marx's death (14 March 1933). Nevertheless, Barker vociferously supported Chamberlain on appeasement, defending his 'realism' against the 'Johnny Head-in-the-Air' attitude towards Germany of those -- not least, fellow Liberals like Gilbert Murray -- who protested (letter to 'The Times', 6 March 1939). Throughout the 1930s he grew increasingly disenchanted with the Liberal Party, which had hitherto provided his principal political anchorage, disliking its tendency towards what he called 'abstract intellectualism'. Indeed, so much was this the case that, like a fellow 'old' Liberal, G. M. Trevelyan, he gravitated towards the Conservative historian and activist Arthur Bryant. He never gave up on Liberalism, however, and became a trenchant critic of the 'progressivism' that issued in the post-war Labour government's penchant for planning ('Change and Continuity', 1949). 
Barker's retirement coincided with the outbreak of the Second World War. He was immediately recruited as director of studies for the courses in military and political studies which the War Office had established for selected officers, and which ran at Cambridge until 1941. As in the First World War, he also served his country through the pen, producing patriotic pamphlets for both the Ministry of Information at home and the British Council abroad. He worked closely with other scholars on more extended projects, editing, for example, 'The Character of England' for Oxford University Press, which appeared in 1947. But he served the allied cause more widely through work which enhanced his European consciousness. He became chairman of the Books Commission established by the allied ministers of education in 1943. The commission's chief function was to provide a centre for the collection of books and periodicals and their dispersal to libraries in allied countries whose stock had been destroyed by bombing. For this work he was knighted in 1944. 
Barker's new European horizons arising out of the war led to his editorship, with Paul Vaucher and George Clark, of 'The European Inheritance' (1954). This work is significant in another respect. For despite Barker's concern to keep up his credentials as a 'publicist', which he had acquired at Oxford at the end of the nineteenth century (Barker, 183), he produced a steady stream of scholarly writings throughout his retirement. A sense of scholarly duty led him to accept an invitation to lecture on political science from an English point of view at the University of Cologne in the winter of 1947-8, a difficult although not unrewarding experience for a 73-year-old. The gratitude of the German government was made clear in the attendance of a representative of the German ambassador at the memorial service which was held for him at Peterhouse just after his death (see 'The Times', 27 Feb 1960, 12). The last four years of his life saw the publication of his histories of political thought through translated documents which spanned the Hellenic and patristic worlds and Byzantium, 'From Alexander to Constantine' (1956) and 'Social and Political Thought in Byzantium' (1957). He was also a founder member of the Political Studies Association of Great Britain (1950). His autobiography appeared in 1953. 
Barker was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1947. He was awarded the degree of DLitt at Oxford (1922) and ('ad eundem') Cambridge (1928); honorary doctorates were conferred on him by the universities of Edinburgh, Harvard, Calcutta, Dalhousie (Canada), and Salonica. His foreign distinctions included membership of the order of the White Lion (Czechoslovakia) and the King Haakon VII liberty cross (Norway). 
Tall and lanky in appearance, Barker never lost his broad Manchester accent. He was the subject of many anecdotes, nearly all of them affectionate and appreciative. He was a gifted and conscientious lecturer and tutor. Contemporaries remarked upon his frankness, naive curiosity, acuteness, integrity, and sometimes unexpected perverseness ('The Times', 13a). He was hailed, however, as an exemplary citizen-scholar for whom no service to the cause of greater intellectual and political understanding could be too much trouble. He died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 17 February 1960; he was cremated, and his ashes were buried on 25 March 1961 in St Botolph's churchyard, Cambridge. 
Barker's work plunged into a period of relative obscurity soon after his death. His ideas about democracy -- particularly the centrality to it of discussion -- enjoyed some prominence with the retreat from positivism in political science during the 1970s (Holden, 118). However, interest in his work on a more concerted and wide-ranging scale began to pick up in the 1990s. This interest was fuelled by the revival of pluralism and ideas of civil association as the statism and class polarization of the post-war decades began to recede. Barker's writings seemed to strike relevant chords here. As well as becoming the subject of a full-scale study (Stapleton, 'Englishness'), Barker's interest in the relationship between church, state, and nationality was explored alongside that of other leading churchmen like William Temple (Grimley). In 1997 his contribution to pluralist thought received its most extended and nuanced exploration yet (Runciman). In addition, Barker began to attract attention as an exponent of civic nationalism more in keeping with the devolutionist times than the alternative 'ethnic' model (Kearney; Aughey). Furthermore, work on Barker has also featured in studies of intellectuals in the twentieth century (Jennings). The interest and sympathy that Barker has generated in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries draws much on his sense of the importance of diversity to unity in society and of community to individuality; the close integration of religion and culture; and the model he provided of the citizen-scholar. But he would have been the last to claim that he had resolved any of these antinomies. The basis of his thought lay in a conception of the irreducible nature of human personality and the overriding priority of individual liberty. 


@@@@@


doc= 30589


Barker, Sir Herbert Atkinson (1869-1950), bone-setter, was born at Southport on 21 April 1869, the only son of Thomas Wildman Barker, solicitor, who became coroner for south-west Lancashire, and his wife, Agnes Atkinson; both parents died while Barker was a schoolboy. After leaving the grammar school at Kirkby Lonsdale and following a short visit to Canada, Barker was apprenticed to his cousin, John Atkinson, a bone-setter, of Park Lane, London, who himself had been taught by the famous Robert Howard Hutton. Atkinson was highly successful, enjoying the patronage of many aristocratic and wealthy patients. In 1889 Barker set up in practice on his own, first in Manchester, then in London, and later in Glasgow. In Manchester he was very successful, helped by referrals from the distinguished surgeon Walter Whitehead. He returned to London again in 1905 and managed at his second attempt to establish himself there. In 1907 he married Jane Ethel Walker, daughter of William Wilson Walker JP. There were no children. 
Barker was a controversial figure. He fell foul of members of the medical establishment who were concerned about his lack of formal medical qualifications and who wanted to stop him practising. However, he also had many influential friends, including leading journalists, and a number of newspaper articles appeared in support of 'manipulative surgery', as he styled his bone-setting practices. An article, 'What is a quack?', published in 'The Times' in 1912, argued that Barker did cure patients, many of whom had failed to obtain relief from qualified doctors. Both W. T. Stead, editor of the 'Review of Reviews', and R. D. Blumenfeld, editor of the 'Daily Express', wrote robust articles supporting Barker and his claims for recognition as a respectable practitioner. Barker also enjoyed the confidence of his patients, many of whom were public figures. The controversy over his practice reached its height after 1911 when the General Medical Council took action against Dr F. W. Axham for acting as anaesthetist for the unqualified Barker; Axham was removed from the professional register. This case aroused further public support for Barker, who also gained sympathy in 1917 when the refusal of his offer to treat soldiers was discussed in parliament. The government eventually conceded that individuals might consult an unqualified person but only on their own responsibility. By this time many eminent people, including leading medical practitioners, were anxious that Barker's skill should receive appropriate recognition. In 1920 the archbishop of Canterbury was asked to exercise his special powers and award Barker the degree of MD, Lambeth. However, this would not have 'qualified' him because it was not a degree recognized by the General Medical Council for registration. Finally, Barker was knighted in 1922. Following his retirement from regular practice soon afterwards, he spent much of his time on the continent and in the Channel Islands. 
The animosity of the medical profession gradually died down. In 1936 Lord Moynihan suggested to the British Orthopaedic Association that Barker should be invited to demonstrate his techniques. A special meeting was held at St Thomas's Hospital, London, and the cases were later reported by Walter Rowley Bristow, a leading orthopaedic surgeon, in 'The Lancet', on 27 February 1937. Later, films were made at St Thomas's of Barker at work. Although he was never accepted as a conventional orthopaedic surgeon, he was held in great respect by many practitioners who were working hard during the 1920s and 1930s to establish orthopaedics as a speciality of high status. Bristow and many of his colleagues in the British Orthopaedic Association came to recognize the value of Barker's manipulative techniques and had great sympathy with his emphasis on treating patients 'holistically'. In 1941 Barker was elected manipulative surgeon to Noble's Hospital in the Isle of Man. 
There had been many bone-setters before Barker, but none so eminent. His name became a household word, due in part to the reporting of his squabble with the medical profession, though this antagonism had been aroused, in part at least, because of the considerable professional reputation he had achieved. The secret of Barker's remarkable success was that in spite of being unqualified he had a gift for healing. He also had a strong personality, believing firmly in himself, and exuding confidence. He willed his patients back to normal life and did not cease treating them until they were cured. Long experience taught him which patients were unlikely to respond to his methods, and his medical friends (of whom he had many) were inundated with patients, mostly incurable, referred by him. 
Barker died in the Royal Infirmary, Lancaster, on 21 July 1950; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30590


Barker, Dame Lilian Charlotte (1874-1955), prison administrator, was born on 21 February 1874 in Islington, the fifth of seven children and youngest daughter of James Barker, tobacconist, and his wife, Caroline Williams. Educated at the local elementary school, she was trained at Whitelands College, Chelsea, and began her career as a teacher in elementary schools under the London county council. After a break of seven years to nurse her invalid mother she resumed her teaching. Her success at teaching both boys and girls revealed her exceptional ability, and led to her appointment in 1913 as principal of the council's Women's Institute, which from 1914 was in Cosway Street, Marylebone. 
The outbreak of war interrupted Barker's career and in 1915 she was appointed the first commandant of the women's legion cookery section in which she did valuable work in training cooks for the army. Later in 1915 she became lady superintendent at Woolwich arsenal, where her talent for dealing with people first found full scope. She was responsible eventually for the welfare of some 30,000 women in an organization where women had never before been employed. She set up canteens, first-aid posts, cloakrooms, and rest rooms. She organized outside recreation, sick visiting, convalescent and holiday homes, and the care of unmarried mothers and their babies; for all this she raised the necessary private funds. Output soared. She subdued strikers by oratory and her public presence, telling one mass meeting that anyone who limited output betrayed husbands and sweethearts at the front. Barker rejected 'ladies' as supervisors, preferring any woman with managerial experience. She was appointed CBE in 1917. 
In 1919 Barker joined the training department of the Ministry of Labour, and in 1920 became executive officer of the central committee on women's training and employment to administer $600,000 for training and supporting women who had suffered from the economic effects of the war. In 1923 she became governor of the Borstal Institution for Girls at Aylesbury. Borstal training for girls had little public recognition, and the prison commissioners were fortunate to attract her services. She took a considerable drop in salary, but saw that the post was important, and took it when the commissioners assured her that she would have a free hand. 
Up to that time Aylesbury, which housed about 100 of the worst female offenders between the ages of sixteen and twenty-one, had been run on lines which differed little from a contemporary conventional prison regime, and the results were not encouraging. Lilian Barker brought a new spirit. She used the insights of her experience at Woolwich, arguing that the will to lead a good and useful life is never manifest in the unhappy and unfulfilled, and at once set to work to humanize the treatment of 'her girls'. Print dresses replaced the old prison clothes, cells were transformed into pleasantly furnished rooms with comfortable beds, meals became appetizing, and organized games and a swimming pool were introduced. Even more important was her own personal influence. 
Short and stocky, with iron-grey hair cut short under a pork-pie hat, and almost always dressed in a tweed suit of severe cut, Barker's somewhat mannish appearance was reinforced by a deep voice and a manner which could be very direct and even brusque. Both munitions workers and borstal residents speculated that she was a man. She was a devout Christian but common sense was more her text than scripture. 
Contemporaries reported that Barker's laugh was full and infectious, her humour dry but penetrating; her bright eyes could flash with fun as well as anger. Her nightly talks to her girls over a cigarette were one of the secrets of her success. She was, however, a disciplinarian in her own way. Her punishments were imaginative if unconventional and aimed to fit the crime: the girl who in a fit of temper tore her blankets into strips was made to sew them up and sleep under the resulting covering. It was not long before Lilian Barker won the respect and affection of her difficult charges, yet there was never any doubt at Aylesbury that discipline was maintained. She continued to receive a voluminous fan mail from her old girls long after they had left, and took an interest in their weddings and their children. She herself never married. 
In 1935 Lilian Barker was invited to become the first woman assistant commissioner of prisons. Although it cost her much to leave Aylesbury, she responded at once to this call to wider service. She became responsible for all women's prisons in England and Wales, and, by arrangement with the prison department there, also in Scotland. Under her guidance improvements were made in the clothing and feeding of women prisoners, and she was immersed in plans for creating a new prison for women outside London when the outbreak of war in 1939 brought this and other developments in which she was interested to an end. She retired in 1943 and was appointed DBE in 1944. She continued to live at her cottage at Wendover Dean and to maintain a lively interest in affairs until her death on 21 May 1955 while on holiday at Trouts Hotel, Hallsands, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 30591


Barker, Thomas (1838-1907), mathematician, was born on 9 September 1838, the son of Thomas Barker, farmer, of Murcar, Balgonie, near Aberdeen, and of his wife, Margaret Knowles. Three other children died in infancy. He attended the grammar school, Aberdeen, and King's College, Aberdeen, graduating in 1857 with great distinction in mathematics. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as minor scholar and sub-sizar in 1858, became foundation scholar in 1860, and Sheepshanks astronomical exhibitioner in 1861. He was coached for the mathematical tripos by Routh, and came out senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman in 1862. He was elected a fellow of Trinity, and was assistant tutor until 1865, when he was appointed professor of pure mathematics in the Owens College, Manchester. He held this post for twenty years, during which the college expanded, gained prestige, and became the nucleus of the Victoria University in Manchester. While doing his share of committee work, Barker kept a low profile within the university administration. 
Mathematically, Barker turned his back on Cambridge methods and interests. He had a severely critical mind which restrained him from publishing much and inclined him to follow De Morgan and Boole; like them he was interested in certain fundamental aspects of mathematics. In this respect he was ahead of his time, presaging the introduction of 'rigour' into mathematics. In his teaching he endeavoured to set forth the processes of mathematical reasoning as a connected system from their foundation. His lectures consequently had a reputation for being 'unintelligible to all but the elect' (Wilkinson, 51) but on these few he made a deep impression. His success as a teacher is attested to by a number of distinguished pupils on whom he exercised a great and possibly a determining influence. These include John Hopkinson, J. H. Poynting, A. Schuster, Sir Joseph John Thomson, A. E. Steinthal, and J. W. Capstick. 
Barker lived a simple life, was unmarried, and fortunate in his investments enabling him to retire in 1885 and devote his time to studying mosses, on which he was an authority. He maintained a lifelong friendship with J. Stirling, another former senior wrangler. Barker lived first at Whaley Bridge, Derbyshire, and afterwards at Buxton, where he died at his home, Woodlea, Lightwood Road, Fairfield, on 20 November 1907. He was buried in the Manchester southern cemetery. In his will he provided for the foundation of a professorship of cryptogamic botany at Manchester University, and for the endowment of bursaries for poor students in mathematics and botany. 


@@@@@


doc= 30592


Barkla, Charles Glover (1877-1944), physicist, was born at Albert Road, Widnes, Lancashire, on 7 June 1877, second son of John Martin Barkla, a Cornishman and secretary of the Atlas Chemical Company. His mother, Sarah Glover, came from Prescot. Barkla attended the Liverpool Mechanics' Institution until 1895 when he won Bibby and county council scholarships to University College, Liverpool. He studied mathematics, and subsequently experimental physics under Oliver Lodge, obtaining a first-class BSc in 1899. He helped found the University Physical Society, becoming its first president. Barkla proceeded, with an 1851 Exhibition scholarship, to the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, to study under J. J. Thomson the propagation of electric waves along thin wires. In his second year he transferred from Trinity to King's College, where he joined the chapel choir under A. H. Mann; Barkla had a magnificent bass voice, which attracted large audiences. 
In the spring of 1902, feeling isolated from the mainstream of Cavendish research and at Thomson's suggestion, Barkla began studying secondary rays scattered from gases exposed to X-rays. He was much influenced by G. G. Stokes's theory, adopted by Thomson, that X-rays were pulses of electromagnetic radiation. Barkla conceived a great admiration for Thomson, recalling that 'I felt that the papers that I wrote were for him to read: the appreciation of others was of quite secondary importance. His interest and his publications on and around the subject were then my greatest inspiration' (Barkla to Rayleigh, 20 Dec 1940, priv. coll.). Nevertheless, poor facilities and a lack of intellectual privacy prompted Barkla to leave the Cavendish later in 1902. 
Barkla was awarded a Cambridge BA research degree in 1903, having already taken up the Oliver Lodge fellowship at Liverpool. In 1904 Liverpool University made him a DSc. In 1907, following his appointment to a special lectureship, Barkla married Mary Esther, daughter of John Thomas Cowell JP of the Isle of Man. They had three sons and one daughter. Barkla was tall, well built, and conservative in dress, with a friendly manner, especially with children. He always preferred living in rural surroundings. A staunch Methodist, he saw scientific investigation as 'a part of the quest for God, the Creator' ('DNB'). 
Barkla's finding that X-rays were scattered by the electrons within atoms was published in the 'Philosophical Magazine' in 1903 (6th ser., 5, 685-98). Thomson incorporated this conclusion within his scattering formula, which Barkla in turn used to obtain two major results. The first was his demonstration that the number of electrons in an atom was comparable with the atomic weight (published in 'Philosophical Magazine', 6th ser., 7, 1904, 543-60), which dealt a significant blow to the view that matter was composed entirely of electrons, and indicated that most of the atom's mass must reside in the positive portion. The second result came from his realization that scattered X-rays should be polarized. In 1904 he tried scattering low energy X-rays from carbon. Encouraged by the results, he undertook a double scattering experiment suggested by his colleague L. R. Wilberforce. His unambiguous demonstration that X-rays could be polarized succeeded where every experimentalist since Rontgen had failed, and reinforced the supposition that X-rays were transverse electromagnetic waves; the experiment appeared in 'Proceedings of the Royal Society', 77A (1906), 247-55. 
In 1907-8 Barkla became embroiled in a controversy with W. H. Bragg over whether gamma and X-rays were waves or particles, which was finally resolved only in the 1920s with appreciation of their dual nature. Barkla predicted that for unpolarized X-rays twice as much radiation should be scattered forward as at right angles to the incident ray. His experimental confirmation was regarded as strong evidence for the wave nature of X-rays. Barkla found that contrary to light element scattering, radiation scattered from heavy elements such as iron was both unpolarized and of significantly lower energy than the incident rays. It appeared to have an energy characteristic of the emitting element. Working with A. L. Hughes, C. A. Sadler, and J. Nicol, he confirmed the homogeneity of the characteristic radiation and distinguished two groups of homogeneous X-rays from each heavy element. He interpreted these as two series of X-ray spectral lines, 'denoted by the letters K and L... as it is highly probable that series of radiations both more absorbable and more penetrating exist' (C. G. Barkla, 'The spectra of the fluorescent Rontgen radiations', 'Philosophical Magazine', 6th ser., 22, 1911, 406). The importance of this interpretation was widely recognized when H. G. Moseley demonstrated the relation between X-ray spectra and atomic number. 
In 1909 Barkla was appointed Wheatstone professor of physics at King's College, London. He continued to live in the country, at Northwood, Middlesex. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1912. With his students he continued working on characteristic X-rays, investigated the ionization of gases and used new values of the relevant constants to recalculate the number of electrons per atom. He found this to be about half the atomic weight, predating by a year the realization of the significance of the atomic number by E. Rutherford, N. Bohr, and H. G. Moseley. 
In 1912 W. Friedrich and P. Knipping's demonstration of X-ray diffraction was of great significance to Barkla, for it exploited characteristic X-radiation and appeared conclusive evidence for the wave nature of X-rays. Barkla immediately began experiments on X-ray diffraction, collaborating with G. H. Martyn. These were interrupted by Barkla's move to Edinburgh University, where he was appointed professor of natural philosophy in the summer of 1913, soon moving his family to the Hermitage of Braid. He became well known for his singing, and served as a member of the faculty of music, establishing a close friendship with D. F. Tovey, professor of music. 
Barkla took a prominent part in instituting honours degrees in pure science at Edinburgh and in developing the honours school of physics, modelling his leadership style on that of Thomson at the Cavendish. Among other work on the behaviour of electrons, he and A. E. M. M. Dallas obtained results which foreshadowed the discovery of the Auger effect in 1925 ('Philosophical Magazine', 5th ser., 47, 1924, 1-23). In 1916 he gave the Bakerian lecture; he was awarded the Hughes medal of the Royal Society in 1917, and he received the 1917 Nobel prize for his discovery of characteristic X-radiation. In 1918 he decided against applying for the Cavendish professorship at Cambridge, despite Thomson's encouragement. 
After moving to Edinburgh Barkla began searching for a J-series of characteristic radiations, foreshadowed by his work in 1911. In 1916 he and J. G. Dunlop found evidence, when scattering heterogeneous X-rays, for a series of energetic X-rays from the light elements. His first suggestion that these represented transitions from an electron shell inside the K shell proved untenable as atomic theory developed. Barkla then proposed a radically new idea, the J phenomenon. Through his suggestion that the characteristics of a heterogeneous X-ray beam depended on the beam as a whole rather than being the sum of the characteristics of its constituent wavelengths as was generally assumed, Barkla hoped to arrive at a fundamental physical picture underlying the mathematical formalism of quantum theory. While most physicists ignored his results, a few apparent refutations implied that Barkla was a crank. Reassessment in the 1970s suggested that Barkla's results remained unexplained by quantum theory and that although his interpretation may have been mistaken, his questioning of fundamental assumptions was valid, expressed in his view that: 'It is to the apparent violations of known laws and not to further confirmation under very precise and specialized conditions that we must look for advance in knowledge' ('Nature', 131, 1933, 166). 
Barkla ceased publishing after 1933 but continued investigating the J phenomenon, relying extensively on his personal assistant, W. H. Stevens. In 1943 he wrote, 'I hope for a solution before I retire in five years! That would be worth many years of toil' (Barkla to Russ, 5 Jan 1943, priv. coll.). Twenty-one months later Barkla died relatively suddenly at his home, Braidwood, 23 Corrennie Gardens, Edinburgh, on 23 October 1944, his health undermined by the death of his youngest son in service at Carthage the previous year. His wife and three children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30593


Barling, Sir (Harry) Gilbert, baronet (1855-1940), surgeon and academic administrator, the fourth son of William Barling (died 1896), farmer and veterinary surgeon, of Newnham-on-Severn, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Eliza Sharpe, was born at Newnham-on-Severn on 30 April 1855. Barling was educated at a boarding-school at Weston, near Bath. The agricultural depression prevented him from succeeding his father as a farmer, and the family lacked the money necessary to fund his medical training. When almost sixteen, Barling was therefore apprenticed to a chemist in Manchester, where he learned little of value and was used by his principal as a drudge and errand-boy. Nevertheless, he qualified as a chemist and passed the matriculation examination of London University. 
In 1874 Barling became a student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, where lack of funds compelled him to take part-time employment. Finding that this occupied too much of his time, he began to coach younger students. One of his pupils was the son of a Birmingham surgeon, who so much appreciated the kindness shown to his son that he promised to help Barling if the opportunity ever arose. Shortly after graduating MB from London in 1879, Barling made use of this contact and managed to obtain the appointment of resident pathologist at the General Hospital, Birmingham. On 21 October 1885 he married Katharine Jaffray (died 1920), second daughter of Henry Edmunds, bank manager at Edgbaston; they had two daughters. 
Elected FRCS in 1881, Barling was appointed assistant surgeon at Birmingham in 1885, and full surgeon in 1891, a position which he occupied until his retirement in 1915, when he was appointed consulting surgeon. While an assistant surgeon, Barling drew up a scheme for rebuilding the hospital which was accepted and used in the construction of the new General Hospital, opened in 1897. 
Barling's association with the University of Birmingham was as important as that with the General Hospital. In 1885 he was appointed demonstrator of anatomy at Queen's College, where the medical school was based until its transfer to Mason College, the precursor of the university. He was the first holder of the chair of pathology, to which he was appointed in 1886, and in 1893 he was made professor of surgery. After seven years' tenure of the deanship of the medical faculty, he resigned it in 1912, and the following year was elected vice-chancellor (a title changed to pro-chancellor in 1927); he held this office for twenty years, during which time under his guidance the university research departments in mental diseases and cancer were founded. As a result of his financial skill and ability to influence generous donors, the university, when he retired, was free from debt, and had a greatly increased income, despite the great developments in staffing and in buildings which had taken place during his tenure of office. 
Apart from the period between October 1916 and August 1917, when he was consulting surgeon in France, Barling was consulting surgeon to the southern command of the British army during the First World War. For these services he was twice mentioned in dispatches, was appointed CB in 1917 and CBE in 1919, and in the latter year was created a baronet. 
Barling took a leading part in the early negotiations for the union of the two voluntary teaching hospitals in Birmingham -- Queen's and the General -- into one body, the United Hospital, and he was also chairman of the committee which launched the Hospitals Centre Scheme. This scheme planned the building of a hospital teaching centre and a new medical school in close proximity to the main university buildings at Edgbaston. Unfortunately, in 1926, a serious illness forced Barling's retirement from the committee, but he lived to see the first part of the scheme completed and the opening of a large new general hospital, the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, as well as a well-equipped medical school. Although Barling retired from the active staff in 1915 he maintained an interest in the General Hospital and was its president for four years (1924-7). 
Barling was a hard worker and talented administrator, teacher, and speaker. His record of hospital, university, and other public service was recognized in 1935 by the presentation of the gold medal of the Birmingham Civic Society; the university conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD in 1937. Barling died at his home, 6 Manor Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 27 April 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 30594


Barlow, Sir (James) Alan Noel, second baronet (1881-1968), civil servant, was born in London on 25 December 1881, the eldest of the five children of Sir Thomas Barlow (1845-1945), who was created baronet in 1901, physician to the royal family, and his wife, Ada Helen (1843-1928), daughter of Patrick Dalmahoy, writer to the signet, of Edinburgh. He was educated at Marlborough College and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, of which he was a scholar and later an honorary fellow, and took a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1904. 
In 1906 Barlow was appointed to a clerkship in the House of Commons but a year later Sir Robert Morant, displaying his characteristic ability to spot men of talent, selected him as a junior examiner in the Board of Education. Here he rose to be private secretary to the parliamentary secretary in 1914, but not before he had married, on 6 April 1911, Emma Nora (died 1989), the daughter of Sir Horace Darwin; they had six children. His wife was the granddaughter of Charles Darwin, whose 'Beagle' diaries and autobiography she edited in 1933 and 1958 respectively, and it was she who fostered in Barlow an interest in science. Given his own strong artistic instincts this laid the basis for success in his later career -- a success not unhindered by his own family connections and his wife's relationship through marriage to Sir Edward Bridges, the future cabinet secretary and head of the civil service. 
In 1915 Barlow was transferred to the Ministry of Munitions as private secretary to Christopher Addison in his capacity first of parliamentary secretary and then of minister. In 1917 Barlow was promoted to deputy controller of labour supply and a year later to controller of the labour department. He became well versed in the problems of industrial relations, and so after the war it was natural that he should join the newly founded and much overstretched Ministry of Labour, where he was initially responsible for demobilization and training before securing in 1924 a major promotion to principal assistant secretary in charge of the industrial relations department. 
After 1929 Barlow's main responsibility reverted to training and it was in this area that he left his principal mark. His decisiveness and executive drive established a core of efficient and well-respected government training centres which could be, and were, rapidly expanded in war. His sensitivity to the antipathy of both the Treasury and the labour movement, however, allied to his own instinct (as a descendant of a family of Manchester cotton spinners) that industry should train its own workforce, meant that government in peacetime did little to remedy the country's chronic lack of skilled manpower. 
In 1933 Barlow was selected, at the surprisingly late age of fifty-one, to be principal private secretary to the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald. The appointment was not a success. The two men were temperamentally unsuited, and his brother, Sir Thomas Dalmahoy Barlow, as a leading member of the Lancashire chamber of commerce, became embroiled in a major political row over the doctoring (to the government's advantage) of the chamber's evidence to the parliamentary committee on Indian constitutional reform. Barlow was transferred in 1934 to the Treasury, as under-secretary in charge of the supply divisions and thus public expenditure, a responsibility he retained when promoted to third secretary in 1939 and second secretary in 1942. During the war he also assumed responsibility for, and thereby became a member of an interlocking range of committees concerned with, the machinery of government. 
At the Treasury Barlow's influence was largely covert, although it has been claimed that he was one of the six most creative reformers to leave a lasting mark on the modern civil service (Chapman and Greenaway, 217). He shared the traditional Treasury distaste for public expenditure. The one major exception was educational expenditure, to which he was generally sympathetic, and he famously chaired the committee whose 1946 report, 'Scientific man-power' ('Parl. papers', 1945-6, 14, Cmd 6824), called for the doubling of scientific graduates and the establishment of a new technological university -- an unfulfilled ambition which caused resignations from the Conservative cabinet in 1953. He must also share the blame for failing permanently to adapt Whitehall to the greater interventionist role of post-war government in economic and social policy, and thus for what has been called ''the' greatest lost opportunity in the history of British public administration' (Hennessy, 120). In the short term, however, his range of contacts -- not least in the scientific world -- ensured the flexibility of the wartime service, just as his contacts with the artistic world ensured that its interests were not wholly neglected by government in peace. 
Barlow's contacts were consolidated and much of his work discharged in a range of London clubs, most notably the Savile and the Athenaeum, where he was well known as 'a man of the world, of the dining and card tables, of conversation and of appropriate silences' (Meynell, 238). This urbanity was somewhat at odds with his initial appearance, for as Austin Strutt noted 'with his heavy and lined face he could, peering through his glasses, appear a forbidding person' ('DNB'). Hugh Dalton even called him 'desiccated and sinister' (Pimlott, 700). To those who knew him, however, he was warm, sympathetic, even-tempered, and humorous, albeit ever ready to offer direct and forceful advice to whomever, and at whatever level, it was required. He was appointed CBE (1918), CB (1928), KBE (1938), KCB (1942), GCB (1947), and succeeded his father as second baronet in 1945. 
Barlow retired from the Treasury in 1948. His economic and scientific interests were reflected by his membership of the Iron and Steel Board from 1946 to 1948 and his continuing membership of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy. His academic contacts were maintained as a member of the court of the University of London between 1949 and 1956. Above all, however, his artistic interests were recognized by his appointment between 1948 and 1955 as a trustee of the National Gallery (where he served as chairman from 1949 to 1951) and as president of the Oriental Ceramic Society. He had himself an exceptional collection of Islamic pottery and Chinese ceramics, which he had started at the age of eighteen and from which he made many donations to the Ashmolean, Fitzwilliam, Victoria and Albert, and British museums as well as to the University of Sussex. Together with his love of old books and modern printing he also became interested in archaeology, particularly in his home county of Buckinghamshire. Here, as well as being a keen gardener, he farmed several hundred acres near Wendover; and it was at his farm, Boswells, that he died on 28 February 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 30595


Barlow, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1845-1945), physician, was born at Brantwood Fold, Edgworth, near Bolton, Lancashire, on 4 September 1845; he was the eldest of seven children of James Barlow (1821-1887) of Greenthorne, Edgworth, who established the cotton mills of Barlow and Jones at Edgworth and Bolton, and his wife, Alice (died 1888), daughter of James Barnes, also of Edgworth. Barlow's early scientific interests led to thoughts of a medical career despite his father's wish that he join the family business. After four years at Owens College, Manchester, where he read natural sciences, Barlow graduated BSc (London) in 1867. There was, however, no good clinical training available in Manchester at that time, and the following year he entered University College, London, as a medical student. Having qualified in 1870 he was appointed house physician to Sir William Jenner at University College Hospital. Jenner's rigorous clinical method, particularly regarding post-mortem examination, was an important influence on Barlow's development as a clinician and medical researcher. He passed his second MB and BS in 1873, both with first-class honours, and was awarded his MD the following year. 
In 1874 Barlow was appointed medical registrar at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London, and was elected assistant physician the following year. In 1885 he was promoted full physician, from which position he retired in 1899. He was also, successively, assistant physician at Charing Cross Hospital (1875-7) and of the London Hospital (1877-80) before returning to University College Hospital in 1880 as assistant physician; there he served as full physician from 1885 until his retirement in 1910, when he became consulting physician. He held the Holme chair of clinical medicine from 1895 to 1907. He was also, from 1884 to 1888, on the staff of the London Fever Hospital. 
On 30 December 1880 Barlow married Ada Helen (1843-1928), daughter of Patrick Dalmahoy, writer to the signet, of Edinburgh. She was a former ward sister at the Great Ormond Street Hospital; they had three sons and two daughters, the younger of whom died in infancy. The eldest son was Sir (James) Alan Noel Barlow (1881-1968); the second was Sir Thomas Dalmahoy Barlow (1883-1964); and the third, Patrick Basil (1884-1917), died on the western front during the First World War. 
Barlow is best known for his original researches on scurvy in infants and young children. Although the disease in infants had been described by Francis Glisson in the seventeenth century, its subsequent decline in Britain led to some confusion among clinicians confronted by an increasing number of cases of rickets in the second half of the nineteenth century. The increase was associated with the adoption of artificial infant feeds, especially among the middle classes. Until Barlow's research was published the pseudo-scorbutic symptoms in such cases were generally viewed as conditions of acute rickets. Barlow's isolation of scurvy from rickets as a definite and separate disease -- although often concomitant in the same child -- was a triumph of deductive reasoning; outside the British Isles infantile scurvy is still commonly termed Barlow's disease. In March 1883 Barlow published his first findings on infantile scurvy, and its post-mortem appearances in three fatal cases, in a paper entitled 'On cases described as 'acute rickets'... the scurvy being an essential and the rickets a variable element', which appeared in 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions'. For his Bradshaw lecture of 1894, entitled 'Infantile scurvy and its relation to rickets', Barlow added thirty-three more cases from his own personal experience. 
In other diseases of children Barlow also made major contributions, notably in the study of meningitis and rheumatic illness. In 1878, in association with S. J. Gee, he published an article 'Cervical opisthotonos of infants' in 'St Bartholomew's Hospital Reports' (vol. 14), which was an important contribution to the differentiation of tuberculous from simple meningitis; an account of the former was included in volume 7 of T. C. Allbutt's 'System of Medicine' (1899, vol. 7). In volume 7 Barlow also published, with D. B. Lees, 'Simple meningitis in children', which elaborated further the distinction between forms of the disease. In 1881, with Francis Warner, Barlow presented to the International Medical Congress a paper on the subcutaneous tendinous nodules associated with acute rheumatism in children, establishing their relation to cardiac disease (published in 'Transactions of the International Congress of Medicine, London, 1881', 4.116-28). 'Rheumatism and its allies in childhood' was printed in the 'British Medical Journal' (1883, 2.509-14). Barlow's other research interests were mainly in the neurological area. He translated Maurice Raynaud's papers 'Local asphyxia' and 'Symmetrical gangrene of the extremities' from the French, and published a number of cases of the condition known as Raynaud's disease. He contributed an article on the latter to volume 6 of Allbutt's 'System of Medicine', together with another on erythromelalgia, a related condition mainly affecting the feet. In 1906 Barlow addressed the Neurological Society, of which he was president, on nervous complications of acute febrile diseases, his paper later appearing in 'Brain' (23.303-31). 
Most of Barlow's important research was accomplished by the age of forty. After the mid-1880s his attention was increasingly focused on private practice. Resident first in Bloomsbury and, from 1887, at 10 Wimpole Street, he ministered to an ever more elevated circle of private patients, including the dukes of Grafton and Rutland, lords Selborne and Salisbury, and Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury. In 1896 he was appointed physician to the royal household and, from 1899 to 1901, he was physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria, being present at her deathbed. He continued to hold court appointments under Edward VII and also under George V. In 1901 he was created a baronet and, later the same year, was appointed KCVO. 
Barlow's Wesleyan upbringing influenced his whole life. Until middle age he was an active Methodist, and at King's Cross chapel he was a leader in the weekly 'Bible' class; later he attended Church of England services. He was a lifelong teetotaller and, from 1923 to 1930, he was president of the National Temperance League. Barlow's later life was laden with honours. He was elected FRS in 1909 and president of the Royal College of Physicians the following year, serving until 1914. In 1913 he presided at the Seventeenth International Medical Congress, held in London. In retirement Barlow spent more time at his country home, Boswells, near Wendover in Buckinghamshire. He continued to travel, at home and abroad, accompanied by his surviving daughter, Helen (1887-1975), who never married. He died at 10 Wimpole Street on 12 January 1945, aged ninety-nine. 
Barlow was short and stout, with a carefully trimmed beard, and he always wore spectacles. Throughout his life he retained traces of a Lancashire accent. His avuncular appearance matched his character, which was modest and humane. 


@@@@@


doc= 30596


Barlow, Sir Thomas Dalmahoy (1883-1964), industrialist and banker, was born in London on 23 February 1883, the second son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Sir Thomas Barlow (1845-1945), physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria and kings Edward VII and George V, and his wife, Ada Helen (1843-1928), daughter of Patrick Dalmahoy, writer to the signet, of Edinburgh. Thomas's elder brother was Sir (James) Alan Noel Barlow (1881-1968). 
Thomas was educated at Marlborough College (1897-1900) and Trinity College, Cambridge, and then entered the century-old family textile business, Barlow and Jones Ltd, of Bolton and Manchester, where he became one of the most prominent figures in the cotton-spinning and weaving industry. In 1911 he married Esther Sophia (died 1956), daughter of Henry Gaselee, barrister-at-law; they had one son and two daughters. He also became a distinguished banker, joining the board of the District Bank in 1922 and becoming its chairman in 1947. 
The interests of Lancashire industry were close to Barlow's heart. He became chairman of the Lancashire Industrial Development Council, and from 1931 to 1933 was president of the Manchester chamber of commerce. This experience fitted him for the wartime post of director-general of civilian clothing, which he held from 1941 to 1945. Shortly after the outbreak of war he went to work at the Board of Trade when Sir Cecil Weir and Alix Kilroy (later Meynell) were setting up the control of factory and storage premises. Their work involved closing factories not required by the war effort or for essential civilian production, thus releasing both employees for essential work and premises, which could be used for the replacement of factories which had been bombed. Such buildings could also be used for storage, particularly of American materials sent to Britain before the United States entered the war. Barlow was controller of factory premises, and indeed cleared one of his own factories of spinning and weaving machinery. As director-general of civilian clothing, Barlow had to cope with thousands of small businesses. Despite his outspoken and forthright manner and his vigorously held opinions, Barlow won the affection and co-operation of these businesses. Having gained their confidence, he was able to control them with a firm hand. He was an unassuming and courteous man, of great integrity and transparent honesty, with the strongest sense of public service. If he found in wartime that not everyone lived up to his high standards, he had no hesitation in telling them so, whoever they might be. 
Barlow cannot have relished spending the whole week in London, but he had a strong sense of duty and must have known that he was at the top of a very short list of people who could do this job. Perhaps what finally decided him to accept was the thought that he would be able to wear his oldest clothes in London, thus demonstrating publicly his resolve not to buy a new suit until the end of the war. For among his many remarkable qualities masochism held an honoured place. He was known to catch a late, slow train, in order to avoid a public dinner in Manchester or a cocktail party in London. People were apt to wonder at his dislike of the latter curious form of entertaining which, it was argued, was entirely suited to his temperament, but was certainly not to his taste. For he was an excellent judge of food and wine, especially Moselle, and liked to invite a couple of friends to a small dinner at his house at Strand on the Green, Chiswick. He would carefully choose a simple dinner to match the qualities of the wines, on which his running commentary was an education. Perhaps, if the next morning were Saturday, he would catch a train to Manchester, where his wife had promised to meet him and escort him to a British restaurant, just completed in a disused factory. She was a great public worker and felt it was essential for him, a well-known personality, not only to visit such an institution, but to be seen to lunch there and, if possible, enjoy the novel experience. 
Despite his robust views, Barlow was tolerant of those who disagreed with him. From disagreement there often developed respect and friendship. His annual statements to the District Bank shareholders, until his retirement in 1960, had the typical Barlow stamp of outspoken practicality, sound industrial and trade experience, and an understanding of financial affairs. His financial knowledge led him to be appointed a member of the Capital Issues Committee in post-war years. 
Barlow's practical knowledge went hand in hand with artistic appreciation. He was a member of the Council for the Encouragement of Art in Industry. It was natural that Tommy Barlow, as he was known to everyone, should be called in for the preliminary discussions of the project to establish its successor, the council of industrial design, and that he should emerge as the chairman. In the early days of the council his valuable, down-to-earth comments were accepted by the well-known manufacturers who were invited to sit on the council but had not the advantage of his wide interests. It was certainly unfortunate that in 1947 he was reluctantly forced to give up the chairmanship on the strong advice of his doctors to avoid so much travelling. It was typical of him that almost immediately he took on the chairmanship of the District Bank in Manchester where, as a consolation, he was known to walk about with a book of Greek poems in his pocket. With his deep interest in the arts and his rare wish to influence his great textile business, he had started up before the war a small subsidiary, Helios, inside Barlow and Jones, to produce the finest individual weaving, and for this purpose had appointed a distinguished Swiss designer, Marianne Straub. Barlow also became a member of the council of the Royal College of Art. 
Barlow's interest in beautiful things originated in his youth. He became a successful collector of early books and manuscripts, and gathered, over a period of forty years, a fine collection of Durer woodcuts, engravings, and illustrated books. This collection was sold in 1956 to the National Gallery of Victoria, in Melbourne, to which Barlow had previously given important items. Barlow also lent pictures to the Art Treasures Centenary Exhibition (1957) of the Manchester City Art Gallery, of which he was for some years chairman of the council. He was created KBE in 1934 and GBE in 1946. Barlow died at his London home, 49, Strand on the Green, Chiswick, on 22 November 1964, from bronchial pneumonia. 
Gordon Russell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30597


Barlow, William Hagger (1833-1908), dean of Peterborough, born at Matlock on 5 May 1833, was the younger son (of five children) of Henry Barlow, curate in charge of Dethick, near Matlock, and afterwards vicar of Pittsmoor, Sheffield, and his wife, Elizabeth, only daughter of John Hagger, of Sheffield. William, sent first to the grammar school and then to the collegiate school at Sheffield, won a school exhibition and a scholarship in classics at St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in October 1853. He took honours in four triposes -- a rare achievement (sixteenth junior optime and third in second class, classical tripos, 1857; second in first class, moral sciences tripos, and second class in theological examinations, 1858). He also won the Carus Greek Testament (bachelors') prize, 1858. He proceeded MA in 1860 and BD in 1875. Incorporated MA of Oxford through Christ Church (1874), he proceeded BD and DD there in 1895. 
Barlow was ordained deacon on 30 May 1858 and priest on 10 June 1859, serving the curacy of St James, Bristol. When the new ecclesiastical district of St Bartholomew was formed out of this poor parish and a church built in 1861, he was the first vicar (1861-73). On 15 August 1861 he married Eliza Mary, eldest daughter of Edward Pote Williams of Upton Park, Slough (she died on 4 October 1905). She played an important part in his parish missions. After a brief incumbency of St Ebbe's, Oxford (1873-5), he was appointed in 1875 by the committee of the Church Missionary Society principal of their college in Upper Street, Islington, London, for the training of missionaries. Barlow quickly succeeded in improving the numbers and course of training. In 1883 he helped to collect $18,000 for the enlargement of the society's headquarters in Salisbury Square. 
In 1882 Barlow was appointed vicar of St James, Clapham, London, and in 1887 was promoted by the trustees at the wish of the evangelical leaders to the vicarage of Islington, the 'blue ribbon' of their patronage. Barlow's tenure of this important benefice greatly strengthened his influence as an evangelical leader. He was a rural dean and was made trustee of the Peache, the Aston, and the Sellwood Church patronage trusts, which governed about 200 English and Welsh benefices. He became one of the chief founts of patronage in the Church of England of his day. The annual Islington clerical meeting, founded in a small way at the vicarage by Bishop Daniel Wilson in 1827, greatly expanded after Barlow took over its management in 1888, and it became the rallying point of the evangelicals. From 1887 to 1894 he was official chairman of the Islington vestry, and when the 'Local Government Act' of 1894 took away the right of the vicar, the vestry continued to elect him to the chair from 1895 to 1899, entitling him to be JP for London. 
Barlow, who was made a prebendary in St Paul's Cathedral by Bishop Mandell Creighton in 1898, accepted in May 1901 Lord Salisbury's offer of the deanery of Peterborough. Though a convinced evangelical, he attempted no changes in the manner of service at the cathedral, contenting himself with taking the north-end position at holy communion. He raised money for repairs in the north transept and the clerestory of the choir. 
While actively engaged in the management of the chief evangelical, missionary, and educational institutions, Barlow was a member of Bishop Creighton's round-table conference at Fulham Palace on the holy communion (1900); served on the prayer-book revision committee of the lower house of Canterbury convocation which was appointed on 15 February 1907; was examining chaplain (1883-1900) to J. C. Ryle, bishop of Liverpool; and was select preacher at both Oxford and Cambridge. He was one of the promoters of Ridley Hall, Cambridge, and was on its council until 1908. He mainly owed his wide influence to his shrewd advice, his knowledge of men, and his ability to draw out opinions from others without parading his own. He died at the deanery, Peterborough, on 10 May 1908, and was buried beside his wife on the south side of the cathedral. 
The Barlows had three sons and three daughters. The eldest son, Henry Theodore Edward Barlow (1862-1906), was honorary canon of Carlisle and rector of Lawford, Essex. The second son, 
Barlow published several works, including 'Church and Reform' (1902) and 'Barlow Family Records' (2 vols., 1932-5), and many commentaries on statutes, including those on education (1902), old-age pensions (1908), dock legislation (1910), and war pensions (1918). In 1934 he married Doris Louise, 'nee' Reed, formerly an administrator in the WRAF. Montague-Barlow died on 31 May 1951 and, being childless, his title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 30598


Barlow, William Henry (1812-1902), civil engineer, was born on 10 May 1812 at Woolwich, London, the younger son of Peter Barlow (1776-1862), mathematician and physicist, of the Royal Military Academy. His elder brother was Peter William Barlow (1809-1885). Following private schooling, at the age of sixteen he studied civil engineering with his father for a year. He then began three years' engineering pupillage, initially in the machinery department at Woolwich Dockyard, and subsequently at London docks under the civil engineer Henry Robinson Palmer (1795-1844). In the spring of 1832, when he was still only twenty, he went to Constantinople on behalf of the firm of Maudslay, Sons and Field to install equipment for recasting and reboring Turkish ordnance. 
Barlow remained in Turkey for six years, erecting a large structure to house the boring equipment, and reporting for the Turkish government on the lighthouses at the mouth of the Bosphorus. This work led to his first scientific papers, 'Experiments made at Constantinople on Drummond's light' ('Philosophical Magazine', 8, 1836, 238-42) and 'The adaptation of different modes of illuminating lighthouses as depending on their situations and the object contemplated in their erection' ('PTRS', 127, 1837, 211-16). There was to be a steady stream of papers for the remainder of Barlow's career. For his work in Turkey Barlow was made a member of the Nishan Iftikhar. 
On his return to England in 1838 Barlow was appointed assistant to G. W. Buck on the Manchester and Birmingham Railway. On its completion in 1842 he became resident engineer on the Midland Counties Railway on the section between Rugby and Derby, retaining a similar position on the Midland Railway when it was incorporated in 1844. Barlow's links with this ambitious company were to enable him to emerge as one of the most important civil engineers of the nineteenth century. The Midland rapidly expanded its network and Barlow became its chief engineer. He developed the wrought-iron saddleback rail (patent 12438, 1849), which became known as the Barlow rail and was widely used, particularly on the Great Western Railway. He described this in his paper on the construction of the permanent way of railways ('PICE', 9, 1849, 387). Barlow had been elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) on 1 April 1845, contributing his first paper, also concerned with permanent way, the same year. 
In 1857 Barlow removed from Derby to 19 Great George Street, Westminster, setting up as a consulting engineer; and it was in subsequent years that he undertook his most significant projects. As consultant to the Midland Railway Company he was responsible for the southern section of its extension from Bedford to London (1862-9). This work included the 240 ft span St Pancras Station roof, the largest in the world at the time of its construction, and a structure that was pioneering in its abandonment of crescent trusses or other external bracing as a means of stiffening the arch ribs. Barlow was helped in its design by R. M. Ordish (1824-1868). It was one of the triumphs of Victorian structural engineering. 
Barlow was involved as a consultant with a number of other outstanding structures. He had helped Sir Joseph Paxton with his calculations of the strengths of columns and girders for the Great Exhibition building. Following the demolition of the Hungerford suspension bridge in 1861 Barlow was appointed with John Hawkshaw (1811-1891) as joint engineer for a scheme to complete I. K. Brunel's proposed Clifton suspension bridge, which with a span of 702 ft was the largest in the country at the time. Barlow described the bridge in his paper to the ICE ('PICE', 26, 1867, 243). 
Following the failure of the Tay Bridge in December 1879 Barlow was appointed to the Board of Trade's commission of inquiry, one of the results of which was to recommend an investigation of wind pressure on railway structures. Barlow was appointed to the consequent Board of Trade committee which recommended inclusion of an allowance (of 56 lb per square foot) for wind pressure for the first time in the Board of Trade requirements for railway structures. The North British Railway Company appointed Barlow the engineer for the replacement Tay Bridge, the construction of which was entrusted to Barlow's second son, Crawford Peter Barlow (died 1920), who was his partner from 1874. 
In the wake of the Tay Bridge failure work had been suspended on the proposed Forth railway bridge, and Barlow, as consultant to the Midland Railway, was asked, along with John Fowler (1817-1898) and Thomas Elliott Harrison (1808-1888), the engineers to the other railway companies involved, to report on a suitable design for the crossing. Barlow was also consulted about Dufferin Bridge over the Ganges at Benares in 1880, and the Hawkesbury river bridge in New South Wales in 1885. 
Alongside his design work Barlow pursued a series of scientific investigations. While in charge of the Midland's electric telegraph system he observed spontaneous deflections of the needles of the telegraph instruments and the effects of magnetic storms, and concluded that there were electric currents on the earth's surface ('Notices and Abstracts of Communications to the British Association for the Advancement of Science', 1848, 2.21-2; 'PTRS', 139, 1849, 61-72). In the 1870s he became interested in recording the sound of the human voice, developing the logograph, which recorded sound waves graphically ('PRS', 22, 1874, 277-86; Royal Dublin Society, 'Scientific Proceedings', 2, 1880, 153-72). 
Barlow also investigated a range of structural problems typically faced by the engineers of the day. His first report, 'The existence, practically, of the line of equal horizontal thrust in arches, and the mode of determining it by geometrical construction' ('PICE', 5, 1846, 162), was sceptically received by engineers such as Robert Stephenson as being of little practical assistance in design. It was, however, theoretically sound. In 1857 Barlow comprehensively revised G. W. Buck's classic work, 'Oblique Bridges', first published in 1839. 
In recognition of this scientific research, Barlow was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 6 June 1850. He also served as president of the ICE in 1879-80, and in his presidential address stressed the importance of study and experimental research, referring to his father's experiments on beams. He had himself undertaken work in this field in the 1850s, writing several papers on what he described as the 'resistance of flexure' ('PTRS', 145, 1855, 225-42; 'PTRS', 147, 1857, 463-8). This work included an investigation into continuous girders, which led to his patent 908 of 1859, which described girders continuous over piers, where they had their greatest depth. This was, in essence, the principle followed in the Forth railway bridge design. His final paper on beams was published in 1870 ('PRS', 18, 1869-70, 345-7). 
From 1858, when he had begun testing steel at Woolwich arsenal, Barlow supported its use by engineers. He was a member of the committee of civil engineers formed in 1868 to conduct further tests. Following his presidential address to the mechanical section of the British Association in 1873 urging the adoption of steel he was appointed to a Board of Trade committee of inquiry. In 1877 this recommended for the first time a safe level of working stress for the use of steel in railway structures. 
Barlow married Selina Crawford Caffin, the daughter of W. Caffin who worked in Woolwich arsenal, but the date is unknown. Of their four sons and two daughters only Crawford became a civil engineer. He and his father worked as W. H. Barlow & Son from 2 Old Palace Yard, Westminster, until 1891 when they removed to 53 Victoria Street. They both retired in August 1896. Barlow's own health had been in decline for a number of years and in 1888 he had been obliged to withdraw from the ordnance committee, of which he had been one of the original civil members, owing to ill health. Widely respected in his profession, he was an honorary member of the Societe des Ingenieurs Civils de France, and a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and the Society of Arts. Barlow died of exhaustion, following a fracture of the femur, at his house, High Combe, Old Charlton, Kent, on 12 November 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 30599


Barnaby, Sir Nathaniel (1829-1915), naval architect, the eldest son of Nathaniel Barnaby, inspector of shipwrights at Sheerness Dockyard, and his wife, Anna ('nee' Fowler), was born at Chatham on 25 February 1829. At the age of fourteen, Barnaby became a shipwright apprentice at Sheerness, and in 1848 he won a scholarship at the Portsmouth central school of mathematics and naval construction. On leaving there in 1852 he was appointed draughtsman in the royal dockyard at Woolwich; in 1854 he became overseer of the 'Viper' and 'Wrangler', ships being built in the Thames for the Crimean War. Later in 1854 he was appointed to the naval construction department of the Admiralty, where he assisted with the designs for the last wooden sailing line-of-battle ships and for the 'Warrior', the first British armoured battleship. He married in 1855 Sarah (died 1910), daughter of John Webber of Birmingham; they had one son and two daughters. 
When Sir Edward James Reed, who had married Barnaby's sister Rosetta, became chief constructor of the navy in 1863, he made Barnaby head of his staff, and as such Barnaby worked on most of Reed's designs, including that of the 'Monarch', Reed's fully rigged seagoing turret ship. 
Meanwhile the first lord, Hugh Childers, was forcing through the rival design of the 'Captain' over the objections of Reed and Sir S. Robinson, the controller of the navy. In July 1870 Reed resigned, and Childers tried unsuccessfully to persuade Laird, builder of the 'Captain', to replace him. After the 'Captain' sank on 7 September, Childers, whose son drowned aboard her, blamed Robinson, Reed, and their staff. Although he could not avoid appointing Barnaby, the obvious internal candidate to replace Reed, as a public mark of lack of confidence he was denied his brother-in-law's title and appointed only as 'president of the council of construction'. He later became chief naval architect in 1872 and director of naval construction in 1875. 
The loss of the 'Captain' aroused intense distrust in new warship designs, especially of turret ships, and Barnaby at once had to cope with the first of several outside committees of inquiry to be appointed during his term of office. The immediate focus of concern was the new turret ships 'Devastation' and 'Thunderer', then being built to Reed's design. As mastless ironclads mounting their main armament in two turrets fore and aft of the central superstructure, they can now be seen as the prototypes of twenty-five years of steady development, and Barnaby was able to persuade the committee of the essential soundness of the design, as well as suggesting improvements to its immediate successor, the 'Dreadnought'. 
Barnaby's first important design for a battleship was that for the 'Inflexible', laid down in 1874. She had moderate sail power, and a one-calibre armament of four 16 inch 80 ton muzzle-loading guns, two in each of two turrets placed in echelon in a central citadel 110 feet long, protected with armour 24 inches thick. The ends of the vessel were without side armour but were fitted internally with belts of cork upon strong under-water decks. By this time Reed, embittered by his ejection from the Admiralty, had adopted the truculent and unmeasured opposition to all Admiralty designs that he maintained for the next twenty years with all the weight that his professional reputation and a seat in the Commons gave him. His essential point was that all large warships should be unsinkable, and that any sacrifice of armour for some other purpose, such as carrying guns, was unacceptable. Accordingly he attacked the 'Inflexible's' unarmoured ends, but another committee of inquiry rejected his strictures, and four similar but smaller vessels -- 'Ajax', 'Agamemnon', 'Colossus', and 'Edinburgh' -- followed, the last in 1879. 
Barnaby's next design was that for the 'Collingwood', laid down in 1880. She and five similar vessels -- the 'Admiral' class -- varied somewhat in gun power, and were without sail. They carried breech-loading guns in barbettes, and a belt of 18 inch armour over nearly half the length of the ship. 
Barnaby designed various other armoured vessels, including the cruisers 'Imperieuse', 'Warspite', 'Shannon', 'Nelson', and 'Northampton', and some notable unarmoured designs. The cruisers 'Iris' and 'Mercury', laid down in 1875 and 1876, were the first vessels for the Royal Navy built entirely of steel, which Barnaby advocated and introduced. He designed the cruisers 'Rover' and 'Bacchante', and the 'Mersey' class and the 'Comus' class, while the 'Leander' class, the navy's first protected cruisers, were designed under his supervision. He also designed the 'Vesuvius', the first British vessel fitted with a tube for discharging torpedoes under water; the torpedo-ram 'Polyphemus', armed with underwater torpedo tubes; and the 'Rattlesnake', the forerunner of the destroyer. 
As a naval architect, Barnaby was a brilliant technician, responsible for many important innovations, but he had the misfortune to work in an era of weak and confused naval thinking, under boards of Admiralty more willing to specify design details than to consider what sort of ships the navy required, and for what purposes. He was not the man to supply their deficiencies. His own ideas of naval warfare were at best unrealistic, at worst completely fanciful, and many of his designs lacked such practical qualities as seakeeping, speed, range, and the ability to steer straight. When Lord George Hamilton became first lord in 1885, and immediately discovered that the new cruisers of the 'Orlando' class were completing seriously overweight because of muddle and irresponsibility in the Admiralty, in which Barnaby was greatly implicated, he resolved to seek a new director of naval construction. Barnaby himself, still close to his sister and a near neighbour of the Reeds, was so wearied by his brother-in-law's constant attacks that he was not unwilling to resign. 
Barnaby was one of the founders of the Institution of Naval Architects; he presented many papers, and took an active part in discussing those relating to warship design. As a debater he was skilful and convincing. The foundation of the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors was largely due to him, and he became its first head. 
Barnaby was made CB in 1876 and KCB in 1885; he also received several foreign decorations. He devoted much time to the Sunday school of the Baptist chapel at Lee, Kent, and wrote several hymns for it. He died at his home, Moray House, Belmont Hill, Lee, on 15 June 1915, and was buried in St Margaret's churchyard at Lee. 


@@@@@


doc= 30600


Barnardo, Thomas John (1845-1905), philanthropist and founder of Dr Barnardo's Homes, was born on 4 July 1845 at 4 Dame Street, Dublin, the fourth of five children of John Michaelis Barnardo (1800-1874), a Prussian subject and furrier, and his second wife, Abigail, daughter of Philip O'Brien and his wife, Elizabeth 'nee' Drinkwater. John Barnardo had arrived in Dublin in 1823 and in 1827 married Elizabeth O'Brien, elder sister of Abigail. She died in childbirth in 1836 leaving five children. John Barnardo married Abigail at the German church in London in 1837 and was naturalized a British subject in 1860. 
Thomas Barnardo's birth was difficult and he was not expected to survive. A delicate child, he was baptized at St Andrew's Church, Dublin. His mother was more or less an invalid, and it was due to the care of his half-sister Sophie, who nursed him through several severe illnesses, that he grew into a lively, strong-willed, intelligent boy. He went first to a school kept by the Revd Mr Andrews and subsequently followed his two elder brothers to the School for Collegiate and General Education, 112 St Stephen's Green, Dublin, run by the Revd William Dundas. Dundas was a bully and Barnardo retained unhappy memories of his school days. Unlike his elder brothers he did not go on to Trinity College, but was apprenticed at fourteen to a wine merchant. Dissatisfied with his life, he reluctantly allowed himself to be taken to revivalist evangelical meetings by his mother and two brothers. When, in 1862, as he himself put it, he was brought to Christ, Barnardo's life was changed. His natural arrogance and assertiveness found a new base, and his newly acquired conviction that his life was to be a channel for God's work gave him a sense of purpose, albeit ill-defined. 
To mark his changed life Barnardo went through a ceremony of believer's baptism in the Baptist Chapel in Abbey Street, and shortly after joined the open Plymouth Brethren and worshipped at Merrion Hall. Barnardo took up Sunday school teaching, joined the YMCA, and went visiting and preaching with Swift's Alley Mission. Barnardo was small, only 5 feet 3 inches, and his weak eyes meant he always had to wear spectacles; serious and with an earnest assertiveness, he was a somewhat conspicuous figure. With his restless energy, he found his life in Dublin unfulfilling. 
Listening to Hudson Taylor's account of his work with the China Inland Mission, Barnardo was fired with ambition to go to China. Against his father's wishes he left for London in 1866, and lodged at 30 Coburn Street with several other potential candidates. It was Barnardo's inexperience as well as his unwillingness to accept the necessity of 'headship and government' in the China mission that decided the leaders to delay consideration of his candidacy. There had been an outbreak of cholera in the East End and Barnardo visited and prayed with many of the sick. To gain experience while he waited Barnardo enrolled as a student at the London Hospital in 1867, and at the same time started teaching at the Ernest Street ragged school as well as preaching in the streets. Wishing to be his own master he appealed for funds for rooms where he could both teach and preach, and in 1868 acquired two cottages in Hope Place. Established as the East End Juvenile Mission this was the true beginning of Barnardo's work. 
The discovery of Jim Jarvis, a homeless child, and the realization of the scale of child destitution and homelessness in the East End of London changed the focus of Barnardo's work. Originally concerned for the children's spiritual welfare, he saw the equal need to care for their material and physical well-being. Barnardo, always practical, set up a wood-chopping brigade and other trades to give the boys a means of earning a living, and those thought unlikely to prosper were sent to Canada under the auspices of Miss Annie McPherson, Scottish philanthropist and orphan-emigrator. Barnardo had the gift of telling a good story, boundless self-confidence, and a burning sense of mission. He was both appealing for funds and writing stories in 'The Revival', later known as 'The Christian'. His stories provided him with a modest income; his appeals, coupled with the sale of photographs and help from wealthy evangelicals, enabled him to buy his first home for boys in Stepney in 1870-71. 
Barnardo, an ardent advocate of the temperance movement, bought a notorious public house, the Edinburgh Castle in Limehouse, east London, in 1872 and transformed it into the British Working Men's Coffee Palace. Barnardo had never finished his studies at the London Hospital, but appropriated the title of 'doctor' and ordered that he should henceforth be known by that title. His decision to open another coffee house in the Mile End Road, however, brought him into conflict with another evangelist, Frederick Charrington, a member of the brewing family, who regarded the Mile End Road as his province. 
Barnardo married Sarah Louise (Syrie) Elmslie on 17 June 1873 at Spurgeon's Metropolitan Tabernacle, London, in a Baptist service. The Elmslies lived in modest comfort in Richmond, and Barnardo had met Syrie through their joint interest in ragged-school work. Her father did not approve of the marriage, but a wealthy supporter, John Sands, gave the young couple a wedding present, Mossford Lodge, Barkingside, Essex, which enabled Barnardo to provide a home for girls as well as boys. The couple lived in the house, the girls all together in the coach house. It proved impossible to manage sixty girls under one roof, and Syrie's organizational powers in no way matched those of her husband. The experiment was not a success. Undaunted, Barnardo began to appeal for funds to build thirty cottages in the grounds. 
The cottage-home system originated on the continent, and Barnardo, understanding its advantages, campaigned vigorously for a girls' village home. Funds for the first cottage were given as a memorial to a dead child, a popular idea, and in 1876 the first fourteen cottages were opened by Lord Cairns, the lord chancellor. It was at this time that the slogan 'No destitute boy ever refused admission' was changed to 'No destitute child ever refused admittance', a policy that would lead to repeated financial crises for the organization. Barnardo had acquired a magazine, the 'Children's Treasury', in 1874, for which he wrote and which was financially successful. He set up an editorial office at 279 Strand, London. His work in the East End was increasing and it was acknowledged that his mission was the largest and the fastest growing. With his flair for publicity, his entrepreneurial instincts -- he set up a photographic studio and sold 'before' and 'after' photos of children he rescued -- and his fund-raising ever more successful, his organizational skills and capacity for work were exceptional. 
A pattern to Barnardo's life was now emerging. In his haste to expand he worked phenomenally long hours, but he paid the price in terms of illness. The stress under which he worked led to bouts of nervous exhaustion, insomnia, and depression which could last for weeks. He suffered from bronchial trouble and, for the last ten years of his life, from angina and increasing deafness. In his almost messianic drive to succour destitute children the organization was seldom out of debt, a fact which alienated many of his Brethren friends, as they believed in the precept 'owe no man anything'. It was sometimes difficult to disentangle Barnardo's own financial situation from that of the homes, but by 1874 Mossford Lodge had become too expensive to maintain as a private residence and the Barnardos moved to Newbury House, Bow Street, Hackney. 
Always sure of the righteousness of his cause, Barnardo broadcast the fact that he alone controlled the organization's funds, which had risen to over $23,000 by 1875. His outstanding success blinded him to the dangers such overconfidence breeds. Less successful rivals, in particular Frederick Charrington and George Reynolds, an obscure Baptist minister, spread rumours about Barnardo's financial probity, the treatment of the children, and his right to the title of doctor, and finally made allegations about his personal life. Asserting his doctorate Barnardo produced a letter from the University of Geissen, later shown to be forged. Unwisely he sanctioned the publication of two letters, signed 'A Clerical Junius', in the 'East London Observer' on 28 August and 4 September 1875 attacking Charrington in vitriolic terms. Reynolds responded, and with the secret connivance of the Charity Organization Society (COS) published a pamphlet, 'Dr Barnardo's Homes: Startling Revelations'. The publication gave the COS a reason to become publicly involved. One of the COS's functions was to investigate bogus charities and send warning letters to subscribers, and they blacklisted Barnardo's Homes. Barnardo took out a writ against Reynolds. 
The evangelical community was appalled, as both sides had supporters. Although it was a bitter blow to Barnardo his trustees insisted that managerial responsibility be vested in them, and henceforth he was to be the director, appointed by them and able by them to be dismissed. They called in accountants, but the damage was done and funds started to fall. Barnardo himself went to Edinburgh and at the end of four months had obtained his licentiate from the Royal College of Surgeons. The trustees made Barnardo withdraw his writ against Reynolds and pushed Reynolds to agree to arbitration. They made application to the court of the exchequer and appointed the Hon. Alfred Thesiger to defend Barnardo, assisted by two juniors. The COS, which was covertly backing Reynolds, contributed to his defence, while Lord Cairns headed Barnardo's defence fund. 
The opposition of the COS was based on its belief that indiscriminate charity was undermining the poor law, and under the leadership of C. S. Loch it never relaxed its efforts to discredit Barnardo both before and after the award was made. The arbitration was not exhaustive because Barnardo refused to reveal the name of the writer of the Clerical Junius letters. He admitted that he was closely associated with their production and accepted moral responsibility for them, but his refusal to name the writer was seen by many as a device to protect himself. As a result Reynolds refused to continue with his cross-examination, but the judges made an award none the less. 
The arbitration had developed into a confrontation between those who sincerely disapproved of unorganized religious philanthropic endeavour and those who feared the threat to Barnardo's work represented a threat which could affect the whole Christian philanthropic movement. The award was generally favourable to Barnardo and the homes were crucially recognized as worthy of public confidence. Barnardo was criticized for his refusal to answer Reynolds and the use of artistic fiction in his photographs. He never sold photographs after 1877 and discontinued the use of the 'before' and 'after' photographs. 
The arbitration, a turning point in Barnardo's life, was skated over in his official memoirs, edited by his wife and James Marchant in 1907. The case left Barnardo exhausted mentally and physically, and both director and the homes encumbered by debt. He had become a public figure, but doubts about his personal integrity lingered on. The homes now became known as Dr Barnardo's Homes and the title East End Juvenile Mission fell into disuse. Much against his will a committee of management was set up to bring about a measure of control. Cairns became president, a finance subcommittee was set up, and a visiting rota of trustees was established. To add to Barnardo's distress, owing to a business failure in 1883 he was forced to ask for an annual stipend, which was immediately granted. The arbitration also precipitated Barnardo's withdrawal from Brethrenism. He regarded his return to the Anglican fold as a private matter, fearing that if it became public he might lose supporters. The decision left him isolated and lonely. 
Barnardo now had three children, William Stuart ('b'. 1874), Herbert ('b'. 1876), and Gwendoline (1879-1955), known as Syrie ['see 'Maugham, (Gwendoline Maud) Syrie], who married Henry Wellcome in 1901 and, secondly, Somerset Maugham in 1917. The family had moved to The Cedars, Banbury Road, Hackney, in 1879 where Kenward ('b'. 1881), Tom ('b'. 1882), who died as a baby, Cyril ('b'. 1884), and Marjorie ('b'. 1890), who suffered from a lifelong disability, were born. Both Herbert and Kenward died young of diphtheria. 
Barnardo increasingly viewed his fund-raising campaign as a form of ministry. Public confidence began to return, but despite the growth of the Girls' Village Home and the acquisition of more properties by gift and purchase, Barnardo saw emigration as the only way in which he could keep to his 'ever open door' policy and meet the ever-increasing demands on the homes. In 1882 the first party of boys left for Canada, followed by a party of girls in 1883. Barnardo acquired a receiving home for girls and acquired by purchase and grant land and buildings for an industrial farm in Manitoba. Emigration became a key policy, and by 1905 more than 11,000 children had been sent overseas, mainly to Canada. Encouraged by the idea that emigration was advantageous to the child and the empire, Barnardo was supported both by the public and the state. He visited Canada five times, the last in 1900 in failing health when disquiet was already being voiced in Canada about the effects of emigration both for children and on the Canadian population. 
In 1888 Barnardo became embroiled in a series of court cases involving three mothers, backed by the Roman Catholic church, who demanded that their children be restored to their custody. Barnardo's response was typically high-handed: two children were sent overseas and Barnardo applied to the courts to support his claim to keep the third child, arguing that what he called 'philanthropic abduction' was justified in certain cases. Barnardo took the case to appeal, incurring much hostile public criticism. Although he did not win the case, it was during this period that the 'Custody of Children Act' of 1891 was passed. Barnardo's influence can be seen in that for the first time parental rights were subordinated to the overriding consideration of the welfare of the child, the principle at the heart of his argument. 
By the end of 1880s the committee, unable to control the dynamic and driven director, who had now added a hospital for sick children and a boarding-out scheme to his work, became so alarmed at debts amounting to nearly $200,000, for which they were personally liable, that they demanded that Barnardo curtail his work. He had opened seven regional centres with the 'ever open door' slogan, which increased the number of admissions, and although he had appointed five lecturers to share the burden of fund-raising and created the Young Helpers League, more loans and mortgages had had to be taken out. 
Barnardo fought back, but, alienated from his committee and friends, unable to accept criticism, unable to delegate, and with his stubborn intransigence increasing his sense of isolation, he was nevertheless forced to retrench. However his passion for the cause of destitute children, his deep religious belief, and his powerful personality won him many supporters, a devoted and loyal staff, and the respect and gratitude of many of his children. 
Barnardo was by then personally prosperous, and the family moved to a large house, Ardmore, Buckhurst Hill, Essex, before moving finally to St Leonard's Lodge, Surbiton. His appearance was described as being 'short and round, his complexion florid, his cheeks puffy and his eyes somewhat fierce. Even his moustache was martial' ('The Star', 21 Sept 1905). Despite royal patronage and twice yearly packed meetings at the Albert Hall, where Barnardo was able to indulge his taste for drama and showmanship, the financial situation of the homes during the 1890s showed little improvement. In 1899 it was decided to apply for a certificate of incorporation, and to give the work a national character an impossibly clumsy title was chosen, The National Incorporated Association for the Reclamation of Destitute Waif Children, otherwise known as Dr Barnardo's Homes. The trustees, no longer personally liable, seemed to have abandoned all attempts to curb Barnardo's expansionist plans after that. 
In response to need, more regional receiving homes, together with more orphanages, industrial homes, and homes for sick and blind children, were opened; Watts Naval Training School, the gift of E. H. Watts, trained boys for the navy and merchant service. By the time of Barnardo's death in 1905 total liabilities amounted to $249,000, and in spite of a national memorial appeal it was several years before all liabilities could be met. He was not the first to send children overseas or to use the boarding-out system for small children, but his close personal attention to detail, his thoroughness, and the scale of his work made his methods an example to others. He recognized from the start that it was not enough to rescue children from destitution but essential to train them to enable them to earn a living. He fervently believed that it was an essential part of his mission to ensure that they were brought up according to protestant evangelical principles. 
Barnardo died at his home, St Leonard's Lodge, on 19 September 1905 from a heart attack, having returned too ill to complete a further course of treatment at Nauheim in Germany, where he had been on several previous occasions. Barnardo's body lay in state at the Edinburgh Castle for three days, and was then taken through streets lined with mourners to Liverpool Street Station. From Barkingside the cortege went to the Girls' Village Home, and Barnardo was interred on 4 October at a spot he had chosen himself. An imposing memorial by Sir George Frampton RA marks Barnardo's tomb. He stands out as a most successful philanthropist and a social reformer. Both through his work and his writings he publicized and tried to meet the needs of destitute children long before the state actively sought to deal with the issue. 


@@@@@


doc= 30601


Barnes, Ernest William (1874-1953), bishop of Birmingham, was born on 1 April 1874 in Altrincham, Cheshire, the eldest of the four sons of John Starkie Barnes (1843-1922) and his wife, Jane Elizabeth Kerry (1850-1938), of Charlbury, Oxfordshire. The fact of his having been born on April fool's day delighted his many antagonists in later life. An elementary schoolteacher, J. S. Barnes was appointed headmaster of a school in Birmingham, so his son's boyhood was spent in the city which later knew him as its bishop. Educated at King Edward's School (the school of B. F. Westcott, J. B. Lightfoot, and E. W. Benson), Barnes went up to Cambridge as a scholar of Trinity College in 1893 and in 1896 was bracketed second wrangler. In 1897 he became president of the union and was placed in the first division of the first class in part two of the mathematical tripos. In the following year he was first Smith's prizeman and was elected a fellow of his college, becoming assistant lecturer in 1902, junior dean (1906-8), and tutor from 1908 to 1915. In 1909 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Barnes's relations with his Cambridge colleagues were not always harmonious. A shy man conscious of unusual powers, he could be arrogant in controversy and did not shrink from declaring his views. In particular, the strong pacifist principles of which the outbreak of war in 1914 found him an ardent champion failed to endear him to the more bellicose of his colleagues at Trinity, who deprived his friend Bertrand Russell of his fellowship because of his pacifism. It is said that Barnes, whose father was a Baptist, was a professed atheist when he first went up to Cambridge but as an undergraduate experienced conversion to Christianity. In 1902 he was made deacon and in 1903 he was ordained priest. In 1915-19 he was master of the Temple; in 1918 he was made canon of Westminster; and in 1924 Ramsay MacDonald, in the first act of episcopal patronage by a Labour government, nominated him bishop of Birmingham. In 1916 Barnes married Adelaide Caroline Theresa (1881-1963), daughter of Sir Adolphus Ward, master of Peterhouse, Cambridge; there were two sons of the marriage, which was a very happy one. The younger son, William Peter Ward Barnes, became a distinguished public servant. 
A broad churchman, whose training at Cambridge had been primarily mathematical, Barnes conceived it to be his mission and duty to urge the need to substitute a world outlook based on the natural sciences for the traditionally scriptural outlook characteristic of Christian theology. He preached what came to be known as 'gorilla' sermons, supporting the evolutionary theory of man's biological descent from some creature akin to the apes. He opposed all forms of the doctrine of the real presence of Christ in the eucharist, which he saw as a hangover from pagan mystery religion. The essence of Christianity, as he understood and practised it, lay in a personal discipleship of the Jesus of the gospels, and in accepting an ethic based on the sermon on the mount. His congregation at the Temple during his mastership he believed to consist of 'wistful agnostics' in need of the spiritual diet of somewhat self-conscious modernism which he provided. 
It was probably during this period that Barnes's best work as a preacher was done. There was a challenging incisiveness about his utterances, and an evident, if somewhat naive, intellectual honesty, which his congregation of able lawyers could appreciate; nor at this stage does controversy of a public kind appear to have arisen, although at the Temple, as in Cambridge, there were those who shook their heads at Barnes's pacifism. The canonry of Westminster gave him a wider audience, and by the time of his appointment to Birmingham he had already become something of a controversial figure. His opinions were by now well known. His gorilla sermons were generally held to be unnecessary since the theory of evolution had long ceased to be a matter of dispute among educated churchmen. But his attacks upon the doctrine of the real presence caused pain and distress to many and were widely resented. 
The Birmingham diocese to which he went in 1924 was largely Anglo-Catholic in tone, and there were plenty of parishes in which the accustomed usages were not such as the bishop approved. Barnes, who had no prior experience of parish life, was shocked to discover that the reservation of the sacrament was common in Birmingham churches. In 1925 trouble threatened because he refused to institute a patron's nominee to a vacant benefice (St Mark's, Washwood Heath), unless he agreed in advance to discontinue the practice of reservation which had been customary in the parish. The incumbent designate preferred to withdraw; the next candidate gave the assurance, although it went beyond anything the bishop was legally entitled to demand. Fifteen other Birmingham incumbents refused to accept his prohibition on the reservation of the sacrament; Barnes treated them as rebels, refusing to license curates for them, or to allow them support from diocesan funds. 
In September 1927 the bishop preached a vigorous gorilla sermon in Westminster Abbey, and in Birmingham a fortnight later he delivered an address on sacramental teaching which contained a provocative onslaught on the doctrine of the real presence. A public protest was made ten days later in St Paul's Cathedral, where the bishop was about to preach, by a London incumbent who appeared with a large body of laymen. Denouncing the bishop as a heretic, he demanded that the bishop of London should inhibit Barnes from preaching in his diocese and that the archbishop of the province should arrange for his trial. The bishop took the unusual course of addressing an open letter to Archbishop Davidson in which he complained of the disturbance and, defending his position, remarked that no one should drive him to Tennessee or to Rome. The archbishop published a courteous reply, assuring the bishop that no one in England desired to lead or drive him to either, dismissing the evolutionary sermons as of little importance, but criticizing as needlessly wounding what the bishop had said about sacramentalism. Before the end of the year the bishop published, in reply to his critics, a book giving a positive account of his beliefs, with the title 'Should Such a Faith Offend?', which caused the controversy to die down for a time. 
In 1929 the bishop once again refused to institute to a benefice the nominee of the patrons unless promises were made which went beyond those required by law. The patrons of this parish (St Aidan's, Small Heath) included the bishop of Truro, W. H. Frere, and the controversy went on for eighteen months. In the end the patrons obtained from a judge of the High Court a writ of mandamus directed to the archbishop of Canterbury enjoining him to license a fit person to the benefice. Archbishop Lang admitted the patrons' original nominee. Barnes was also a leading campaigner against prayer book revision in 1927-8, opposing the new book's latitude on the question of reservation. 
The Second World War saw Barnes involved in a controversy with the makers of cement. At a public meeting in Birmingham in November 1940 about providing air raid shelters, he had attacked the Cement Makers' Federation as a ring of monopolists holding up the supply of cement at a time of great public need in the interests of their own private profit. The bishop was sued for slander. He did not appear in court, although he was represented by counsel. The cement companies were awarded $1600 damages. It was an index of the respect, and even affection, in which Barnes was held by this time that the money was raised by lay friends in the diocese. In a speech in the House of Lords in June 1941 the bishop returned undaunted to the attack, maintaining that a cement ring did exist, that it was contrary to the public interest, and that big business was using libel and slander actions to suppress criticism. 
In 1947 Barnes entered the lists as a theological author. His book 'The Rise of Christianity' aroused fierce opposition for his denial of miracles and his disparaging treatment of St Paul. Barnes's grasp of 'New Testament' criticism was slight, confused, and outdated, and even his fellow modernists were embarrassed by the book. The outraged orthodox demanded his condemnation. Under great pressure to take action of some kind, but unwilling to prosecute, Archbishop Fisher, in a presidential address to convocation, after expressing deep appreciation of the bishop's Christian character and of the sincerity of his aims, delivered a strong and damaging criticism of his book and of certain of its presuppositions, and cautioned readers against accepting its claim to be an adequate and impartial setting forth of the truth. While declaring that he 'would have no trial in this matter', he went on to say: 'If his views were mine, I should not feel that I could still hold episcopal office in the church'. The hint was ignored by Barnes who made a defiant personal statement in the House of Bishops. Action parallel with that of the archbishop of Canterbury having been taken also in York convocation by Archbishop Garbett, the matter was allowed to drop. 
The furore made the book a best-seller, and it was serialised in the 'Sunday Pictorial'. But its long-term impact was negligible; Roger Lloyd described it as 'a theological dead-end' (Lloyd, 481). Nevertheless, many modernists felt that Barnes had gravely damaged their cause. For his part, Barnes always denied that he was a modernist, insisting instead that he was an evangelical. 
Barnes also made controversial public interventions on other questions. He supported divorce law reform and the ordination of women, while his belief in eugenics led him to criticize Commonwealth immigration to Birmingham in the early 1950s, as he believed that immigrants would dilute the national stock. 
The external record of recurring crises and controversies by which his tenure of the see of Birmingham was marked exhibits Barnes as a very unusual type of prelate: a stormy petrel of the episcopate. Yet there is another side to the story. Thorny and unbending in controversy, and indifferent to the exasperation roused by his utterances, he was none the less personally charming and manifestly a man of the highest character and purpose. He had made initial mistakes, but in the later phases of his episcopate he mellowed appreciably. He had either worn down opposition or had reached a tacit 'modus vivendi' with his opponents. His was a complicated and many-sided character; he could be shy and awkward, but he was inwardly eager for friendship and capable of great personal kindness. The story is told that a young Anglo-Catholic curate who went to tea with him returned from the encounter remarking: 'I do not know whether I agree with him, but I know he is a saint'. By all but a few of the laity of his diocese he was held in the highest honour and admired as a man of inflexible courage. The administrative side of a bishop's work was admittedly not congenial to him, but during his time at Birmingham a considerable number of new churches were built and consecrated, and new parishes were formed to meet changing conditions. He resigned his see in May 1953 and died on 29 November of the same year at his home at Hurstpierpoint in Sussex. His ashes were interred in Birmingham Cathedral. 
The best contemporary sketch of Barnes came from Hensley Henson: 'Tall, pallid with much study, with stooping shoulders, and a voice at once challenging and melancholy, he commands attention as well by his manner as by his opinions, which are almost insolently oppugnant to the general mind. He is a good man, but clearly a fanatic, and in a more disciplined age, could not possibly have avoided the stake. (Henson, 272)' Though he escaped the stake, Barnes suffered the punishment of ostracism by his fellow bishops, and became increasingly lonely and paranoid at the end of his life. One of his sons, Sir John Barnes, wrote a sympathetic biography, 'Ahead of his Age' (1979), which went some way towards restoring Barnes's reputation as a serious thinker and church leader. Barnes was a fellow of King's College, London (1919) and Gifford lecturer at Aberdeen (1926-8); he received the honorary degrees of DD from Aberdeen (1925) and Edinburgh (1927), and LLD from Glasgow (1926). 


@@@@@


doc= 30602


Barnes, George Nicoll (1859-1940), trade unionist and politician, was born on 2 January 1859 at Lochee, Forfarshire, the second of five sons of James Barnes, a skilled engineer and mill manager from Yorkshire, and his wife, Catherine Adam Langlands. The family moved back to England and settled at Ponders End in Middlesex, where his father managed a jute mill in which George himself began working at the age of eleven, after attending a church school at Enfield Highway. He then spent two years as an engineering apprentice, first at Powis James of Lambeth then at Parker's foundry, Dundee. After finishing his apprenticeship he worked for two years at the Vickers shipyard in Barrow before returning once again to the London area, where he experienced unemployment during the slump of 1879. He had a number of short-term jobs before settling for eight years at Lucas and Airds in Fulham. In 1882 he married Jessie, daughter of Thomas Langlands, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. 
During his time in London Barnes became an active member of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, a committed member of the co-operative movement, and a keen if moderate socialist, which led him to join the Independent Labour Party (ILP) on its foundation in 1893. Within the engineers' union he was a significant figure in the network of young London socialists who were influenced initially by figures on the far left, but who moved decisively back into the Labour mainstream during the 1890s. He succeeded John Burns on the national executive in 1889, organized Tom Mann's unsuccessful campaign to become the national secretary in 1891, and was eventually elected to that post himself in 1896 after four years as assistant secretary. For the next twelve years he therefore held a key post in the craft-union world, but it was to be a period of turmoil for the engineers since, while the industry was expanding and the employers were becoming increasingly united and aggressive, the union retained a high level of district autonomy which drew it into bitter and costly industrial disputes. 
Thus in the summer of 1897 the London district's insistence on pressing for the eight-hour day resulted in a lengthy national lock-out without support from other unions, leading inevitably to a costly defeat for the engineers even if the principles of recognition and collective bargaining were maintained. Then in the course of the next decade Barnes found himself caught between the restrictive terms of settlement which had been imposed after the national defeat in 1898 and a resurgence of district pressure for improved conditions when local labour markets were buoyant. It became increasingly difficult to maintain the integrity of the union's decision-making processes in the face of district committees' refusals to follow the policies of the national executive, and Barnes resigned in frustration in 1908. 
As an enthusiastic socialist Barnes had long been a champion of increased political representation for labour: he stood (unsuccessfully) as an ILP parliamentary candidate for Rochdale as early as 1895 and was the Amalgamated Society of Engineers delegate at the conference in London, on 27 February 1900, which founded the Labour Representation Committee (LRC). Standing for the ILP against both Conservative and Liberal opponents, he was elected for Glasgow Blackfriars (later Gorbals) at the 1906 general election, and was among the twenty-nine MPs elected under LRC auspices. He continued to hold the seat largely on the basis of the Irish nationalist vote until his retirement in 1922. No doubt the alternative attractions of an enhanced political career influenced his decision to resign his trade-union post. He went on to become one of the major spokesmen for the Labour position on such key Liberal welfare reforms as old age pensions and national insurance, having studied industrial welfare provision in Germany, Denmark, Sweden, and the USA (the latter as a member of the Mosely industrial commission in 1902). For a brief period in 1910 he served as chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party. 
Barnes was therefore well placed to continue as a leading Labour spokesman during the mobilization of national resources to fight the First World War. As well as helping to recruit skilled engineers for war work, visiting Canada for the purpose, he sat on a government committee on war pensions, chaired (1916) a government committee on savings, and was appointed as the first minister of pensions in the coalition government of December 1916, in which post he improved both the level and the system of administration of service pensions. In August 1917 he succeeded Arthur Henderson in the war cabinet as minister without portfolio representing the interests of organized labour, in which role he was responsible for a major sympathetic government inquiry into industrial unrest in 1917. 
However, this role once again placed Barnes between two conflicting forces as the Labour Party began to move away from the coalition government over the speed and the methods of reaching a peace settlement with Germany. He took the view that he had been mandated to serve as a Labour representative in the government until a peace treaty was concluded, resigning from the Labour Party in order to remain in the cabinet. Consequently he faced increasing criticism from some of his erstwhile colleagues as well as an unsuccessful challenge for his parliamentary seat from an official Labour Party candidate (John Maclean) in the 1918 general election. Barnes, however, had not changed his political views and, as British labour's only representative at the Paris peace conference, he began to use his status to press for international machinery to promote the rights of working people. With the assistance of civil servants from the Ministry of Labour he drafted a set of proposals which, following further consultations with the leadership of the Labour Party and extensive discussions within the Commission for World Labour, eventually became the basis of part 13, or the labour chapter, of the treaty of Versailles. This covered such issues as minimum employment conditions for women and young people, industrial safety, and the right of combination, though Barnes himself saw such general commitments as less important than the establishment of an organization to promote specific reforms: the International Labour Office in Geneva and regular conferences of the International Labour Organization. 
Seeing this as the culmination of his earlier choice between his party and the government, and aware that he had become physically very run down, Barnes resigned his ministerial post early in 1920, at which point he was made a Companion of Honour. However, he still attended the first assembly of the League of Nations later that year as one of the three British delegates, as well as remaining a back-bench supporter of the coalition government until his retirement from politics when the Labour Party announced that it would again field a candidate against him in the general election of 1922. As it was clear that the tide would turn strongly towards the official Labour candidates throughout Glasgow, and as he had no wish to serve in any other party, he decided to withdraw from his seat. 
Barnes had a long and active retirement, continuing to support the International Labour Organization, serving as chairman of the Co-operative Printing Society, and publishing several books, including his autobiography, 'From Workshop to War Cabinet' (1923), and a 'History of the International Labour Office' (1926). He was a pleasant-looking, mild-mannered man, but little is known about his private life; one of his sons was killed during the First World War. He died on 2 April 1940 at his home, 76 Herne Hill, London, and was buried in Fulham cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30603


Barnes, Sir George Reginald (1904-1960), radio and television director and college head, was born in Byfleet, Surrey, on 13 September 1904, the son of Sir Hugh Shakespear Barnes (1853-1940), lieutenant-governor of Burma, and his second wife, Edith Helen, sister of Sir Kenneth Barnes, principal of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, and the actresses Irene and Violet Vanbrugh. Educated at the Royal Naval College at Osborne and Dartmouth, he was ultimately rejected for the navy because of his eyesight. But his interest in naval affairs never diminished, however varied and strong his other interests. With Commander J. H. Owen he published in 1932-8 four volumes of the private papers of the fourth earl of Sandwich and he always cherished the dream of finding time to write a study of the British navy in the early nineteenth century. 
From Dartmouth, Barnes went to King's College, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class in part one of the historical tripos (1924) and a first in part two (1925). There was some expectation that he would try for the Foreign Office but the pull of the navy proved too strong and he returned to Dartmouth for three years (1927-30) as an assistant master. In 1927 Barnes married Dorothy Anne, daughter of Henry Bond, master of Trinity Hall, Cambridge (1919-29); they had one son. In 1930 he went as assistant secretary to the Cambridge University Press where he developed 'a fine taste and a good judgement in the economics as well as the aesthetics of the trade', and revised the 'Hand-List of Cambridge Books', extending it to 1800. 
In 1935 Barnes joined the British Broadcasting Corporation, where his strong social conscience gave an educational impetus to his work. He believed that public taste needed guiding: that it should be led, not followed. Coupled with this belief was his sense of responsibility towards listener minorities and the complex needs of each individual listener. In 1941 he was appointed director of talks in succession to Sir Richard Maconachie, under whom he had worked since Maconachie joined the corporation in 1937; in 1945 he became Maconachie's assistant controller of talks. In that year he made his first visit to the United States, from which he returned with his horizons widened and with a final access of assurance which never deserted him. 
When the Third Programme was established in 1946 Barnes was the obvious choice to give the idea practical form. He aimed at the highest standards in both programme and performance: 'We shall live or die by the amount we are prepared to experiment... We will experiment with new forms of radio, new writers, new performers, and new presentations' (private information). His own lifelong devotion to music found scope which he described as 'vast and even thrilling' in the Third Programme's long-term plan to give the finest available performances of music of every style and epoch, with special emphasis on rarely heard works of interest and beauty. Comparably large in conception was the great series of programmes entitled 'Ideas and Beliefs of the Victorians' (1948). 
In 1948 Barnes joined the BBC's board of management as director of the spoken word and in October 1950 he was appointed to the newly created post of director of television. The BBC's five-year plan to expand and develop its television service, giving priority to 'coverage', had been under way for a year. New transmitters were opened at Sutton Coldfield (1949) and Holme Moss (1951) and the Lime Grove Studios were taken over early in 1950. But the service was still based on Alexandra Palace and 'for two nightmare years', as Barnes later recorded in the 'BBC Quarterly', 'every piece of scenery and every property for the half-dozen different productions each day had to be transported twenty-four miles' (Barnes, 66). It was not until 1954 that concentration at Shepherd's Bush was achieved. 
The enormous increase in range that BBC television obtained during the six years of Barnes's directorship is reflected in an increase in licences from 343,882 (1950) to 5,739,593 (1956). Among the many new ventures were the first experimental schools television programmes (May 1952); the televising of the coronation of Elizabeth II (June 1953); the first large-scale Eurovision link-up of eight countries (June 1954); the inauguration of a daily 'News and Newsreel' (July 1954); and ceaseless experiment with colour television (the first colour television outside broadcast, transmitted on closed circuit to the children's hospital, Great Ormond Street, was of the coronation). In October 1953 on a visit to Lime Grove Studios the queen knighted Barnes with a sword which had been smuggled in from Buckingham Palace. 
In 1955 the Independent Television Authority began commercial television. In the previous year Barnes had stressed the necessity of a second channel for the BBC to provide a planned alternative programme in order to cater for the varying tastes of its public; in 1956 he emphasized the need to maintain high standards and avoid the exclusive pursuit of mass popularity: 'The audience figures that are being bandied about in the fine shouting-war that is going on are not a criterion of excellence. To seek success in popularity alone is a trivial use of a great invention. Mass without mind always comes a cropper... (private information)' In 1956 Barnes became principal of the University College of North Staffordshire, which had been unfortunate in the death of its first two principals (Lord Lindsay of Birker and Sir John Lennard-Jones) within a few years of their appointment. A similar fate was to strike Barnes, who died at Keele on 22 September 1960, after no more than four years of stimulating service to the new foundation. A memorial fund was devoted to the development and teaching of music in the university which Barnes had done much to improve. His concern was ever with quality, whether in music, the visual arts, or human relationships. From a wide circle of friends he entertained at Keele distinguished writers, politicians, painters, and scholars, whose visits greatly enriched the life of a small and relatively isolated university; and by his own diligence in accepting public engagements he sought in his turn to make Keele more widely known. A frail-looking man, he possessed great resilience and inner strength, nourished by his deep concern for the life of the chapel. His naval training imbued him with a sense of service and he devoted all his energy and practical idealism to the furtherance of the things of the mind and of the spirit that he valued. 
At one time or another Barnes served on many bodies concerned with the interests he had at heart. They included the council of the Royal College of Art, the British Film Institute, the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries, the Council of Industrial Design, the Wedgwood Society (formed early in 1955 with Barnes as first chairman), the British Pottery Manufacturers' Federation, and the committee appointed in January 1958 by the Gulbenkian Foundation to inquire into the needs of the arts in Britain. He received the honorary degree of DCL from Durham in 1956. 
Laurence Gilliam', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30604


Barnes, John Gorell, first Baron Gorell (1848-1913), judge, was born at Anfield Cottage, Walton on the Hill, near Liverpool, on 16 May 1848, of a Derbyshire family. He was the eldest child of Henry Barnes, a shipowner in Liverpool, and Georgiana, 'nee' Smith, the daughter of the rector of Staveley, Derbyshire, who had also been a fellow and dean of Trinity College, Cambridge. His great-grandfather Edward Gorell was a member of the religious sect founded by John Glas, but his father and uncles eventually left the sect to become Anglicans. Barnes was educated at various private schools around Liverpool before being sent, after his father's sudden death on 15 February 1865, to Peterhouse, Cambridge, the college of the mathematician Edward John Routh who was related to the Barnes family by marriage. He was classed as a senior optime in his BA examination in January 1868. Cambridge had a big influence on his life and he was made an honorary LLD in 1898 and an honorary fellow of Peterhouse in 1899. 
After a short period in his father's old shipowning firm, Barnes joined a firm of solicitors in Liverpool. He was never admitted and a few years later took his firm's advice to go to the bar. He joined the Inner Temple in 1873, and after reading in equity chambers became a pupil in October 1874 of James Charles Mathew, then the leading commercial junior in the Temple and later Court of Appeal judge. He worked there until Mathew was promoted to judge in 1881. Called to the bar in 1876, Barnes succeeded to Mathew's great junior practice. He gradually added a substantial Admiralty practice and much mercantile work on the northern circuit. He appeared regularly in the Court of Appeal, the House of Lords, and the privy council. In 1881 he married Mary Humpston (died 1918), eldest daughter of Thomas Mitchell of West Arthurlee, Renfrewshire; they had two sons and a daughter. 
After seven years of hard work, Barnes became queen's counsel in 1888 in an attempt to reduce his workload. He made an immediate mark as a weighty, industrious, and popular leader and in June 1892 was unexpectedly made a judge of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division in succession to Sir Francis Henry Jeune, afterwards Lord St Helier, who had just succeeded Sir Charles Parker Butt as president. In February 1905 Barnes succeeded Jeune, remaining president until February 1909, when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Gorell of Brampton, near Chesterfield. As president, he sat in the Court of Appeal and on the judicial committee of the privy council, and from July 1909 to July 1912 he sat regularly in the House of Lords. 
Gorell found time and energy for much extra-judicial work. He was a member of a committee appointed by the lord chancellor to consider improvements in the High Court. He was chairman of the county courts committee which reported in 1909 and laid the basis for some of the proposals of the royal commission on divorce. In 1909 he also acted as an arbitrator in a dispute between the Great Eastern Railway Company and its employees. In the same year he was chairman of the copyright committee, whose report led to the 'Copyright Act' of 1911. 
Following a strong speech which Gorell made in the House of Lords in which he said that the law which he had administered as a judge for sixteen years needed radical amendment, a royal commission on divorce and matrimonial causes was established in 1909 and Gorell was appointed chairman. The majority report (signed on 30 January 1912) recommended an extension of the grounds for divorce to include desertion, cruelty, incurable insanity, habitual drunkenness, and penal servitude for life in commutation of a death sentence. The minority report, meanwhile, rejected any extension of the grounds for divorce. There was, however, agreement on a large number of reforms in law and procedure, including far-reaching proposals relating to nullity of marriage, presumption of death for purposes of remarriage, equality of the sexes for divorce purposes, and restraints on the publication of reports of divorce cases. 
The commission came to an end in November 1913. By then Lord Gorell's health was rapidly breaking down. He died at Menton in France on 22 April 1913 and was buried on the 28th in Brampton churchyard, near Chesterfield, beside his grandfather John Gorell Barnes. 
Gorell had a brief, rapid, and smoothly successful career at the bar. The judgments he made as a judge of first instance were rarely reversed. To him can be credited, in part at least, the foundation of the commercial court, since it was an idea he developed jointly with Sir James Charles Mathew. Soon after his appointment to the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division, he announced that he was prepared to take cases raising points of insurance law, and so attracted commercial solicitors. The establishment of the commercial court from 1 March 1895 under Mathew was a successful development of Gorell's experiment (see 'Weekly Notes', 2 March 1895). 
Gorell combined enthusiasm for his work with an unusual capacity for mastering complicated facts. He was particularly adept at exposing the principle underlying any particular set of circumstances. Many of his judgments made distinct contributions to the growth of English law, while his work on the divorce commission revealed his liberal and reformist tendencies. Throughout his life he retained some of the theological severity which had been so pronounced in his parents and grandparents. 
Gorell was succeeded by his elder son, Henry Gorell Barnes, second Baron Gorell, a barrister of promise, who was killed in action at Ypres in January 1917, and was succeeded as third baron by his younger brother, Ronald Gorell Barnes. 


