@@@@@


doc= 30605


Barnes, Sir Kenneth Ralph (1878-1957), college head, was the youngest child of the Revd Reginald Henry Barnes (died 1889), vicar of Heavitree, Devon, and prebendary of Exeter Cathedral, and his wife, Frances Mary Emily, 'nee' Nation. He was born at the vicarage on 11 September 1878, and grew up within a close, richly talented family of six. Two of his sisters became the celebrated West End actresses Violet Vanbrugh and Irene Vanbrugh; another sister, Angela, became a professional musician; and his brother Reginald a distinguished and much decorated officer of hussars. In 1885 ill health obliged his father to relinquish his parish, and the entire family moved to west London, enabling young Kenneth to acquire a taste for theatre by seeing spectacular pantomime at Drury Lane, Buffalo Bill's Wild West show at Earls Court, and, at the Lyceum, what he later called the 'hypnotic' acting of Henry Irving. 
Barnes was educated at Westminster School (1891-5) and, from January 1897, at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a member of the Oxford University Dramatic Society (OUDS), and did just enough work to gain an indifferent pass degree in 1899. He led a comfortable middle-class existence -- notwithstanding his father's death when he was eleven and his mother's subsequent remarriage -- and indulged a penchant for foreign travel with tours of France, the Low Countries, and Germany (where he came under the operatic spell of Wagner) and a six-month visit to India. Footloose on leaving university, he was offered a clerkship at the Land Registry, a secure but undemanding post which allowed him to reside in London with ample leisure to enjoy membership of the Garrick Club, cricket at Lord's, and free passes at any theatre for the asking. He resigned after a few years in order to become a freelance writer and journalist, earnestly drafting plays, contributing dramatic criticism to 'The Times' and other newspapers, and making an English adaptation of Paul Hervieu's Parisian success 'Connais-toi' (ultimately produced as 'Glass Houses' at the Globe in 1910) for his brother-in-law, the actor-manager Arthur Bourchier. 
On the strength of these modest accomplishments and a recommendation from his other theatrical brother-in-law, Dion Boucicault the younger, Barnes was invited in September 1909 to take charge of the school of acting which had been founded by Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree at His Majesty's five years earlier but which was now languishing for want of effective management. Expected by many to preside over its demise, he contrived to breathe new life into it. By regularizing audition procedures, maximizing fee income, and introducing progress-related student scholarships, he soon restored the venture's artistic and economic health, and then acquired the house and garden adjacent to its Gower Street premises to provide room for future expansion and the construction of a theatre for public performances fronting on Malet Street. In 1913 Barnes oversaw the incorporation of the Academy of Dramatic Art as a limited liability company. Further initiatives were interrupted by the outbreak of war, when, as an ex-territorial officer, he volunteered for duty. In 1915 he was commissioned in the Hampshire regiment, with which he served in India, the Middle East, and, after the armistice, in Siberia in support of the White Russian counter-revolution. Fortunate enough to escape armed combat, he devoted his energies to organizing garrison concert parties and dramatic performances, among them short plays of his own and an 'allegorical masque' on the theme of war -- morale-boosting exercises for which he was mentioned in dispatches. 
Barnes returned home in December 1919 to find the academy undersubscribed and again in financial difficulties. He set about remedying the situation, while raising additional money to complete the theatre, which had been left unfinished in 1914, and which was eventually opened by the Prince of Wales in May 1921. Other significant achievements under his administration between the wars included the award of a royal charter in 1920 and the acquisition by the newly dignified Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) of protective privileges already enjoyed by London's chartered music colleges -- namely the allocation of an annual grant-in-aid from the Treasury, the ratification of charitable status (with consequential remission of income tax), and, most contentiously, the legal recognition of acting as a 'fine art' for the purposes of exemption from payment of the general rate. In 1923 Barnes collaborated with the Central School of Speech and Drama in launching a university diploma in dramatic art under the aegis of London University. 
Barnes's next imperative was to fund the demolition of his existing, and inadequate, teaching accommodation and its replacement by a customized new building, opened in November 1931 by the duchess of York. She agreed to become the academy's patron and maintained a continuing interest in its welfare both as queen and as queen mother. In 1938 Barnes initiated a tradition of Shakespearian performances by his students to audiences of London schoolchildren. In the same year, at the instance of George Bernard Shaw, a firm friend and generous benefactor, he was knighted for services to the stage. During the Second World War, while acting as general secretary to the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA), he resolutely kept the academy open, despite the destruction of its theatre in an air raid in April 1941. Thanks to his establishment of a post-war rebuilding fund -- swelled by the proceeds from all-star matinees in the West End and donations he solicited from friends and colleagues -- a new, better equipped theatre was completed in December 1954, the academy's jubilee year. It was named the Vanbrugh Theatre in memory of his actress sisters, who had done much to ensure the survival of the entire undertaking. 
Barnes's dedication to the affairs of RADA left little room for outside activities, though he served on the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CEMA) and several committees connected with the theatre, and had two further plays performed: 'Undercurrents' by a club of RADA alumni in 1921 and 'The Letter of the Law' at the Fulham Grand in 1924. On 12 December 1925 he married Daphne Graham ('b'. 1903), daughter of Sir Richard James Graham, fourth baronet; she had been a student of his, and acted professionally as Mary Sheridan. After his retirement in August 1955 at the age of seventy-six, a bronze bust of Barnes by Clemence Dane was installed in the entrance hall at Gower Street, and he had time to complete an illuminating autobiography, published posthumously in 1958 under the title of 'Welcome, Good Friends', before dying at his home, Spring Tide, Kingston Gorse, Sussex, on 16 October 1957. He was buried six days later at St Mary's, Hurley, near Maidenhead, Berkshire. He was survived by his wife, but was predeceased by their son Michael, whose untimely death at twenty-five had been a grievous loss. 
Barnes clearly saw the development of RADA as his life's work, pursuing it with exemplary single-mindedness, tenacity, and commitment to his students' spiritual as well as professional well-being. The disadvantage of his relative lack of theatrical experience was offset by a sustaining religious faith and his profound belief in acting as a vocation rather than simply a career. His ready access to people of influence within the aristocracy, his university circle, and the theatre itself enabled him to advance the academy's cause and to give it a high public profile. These influential contacts, while attracting allegations that he was running a finishing school for the socially privileged and ignoring genuine, raw talent, helped the academy to overcome the opposition it had initially encountered from the acting profession. Barnes thus left behind an institution sturdy enough to meet the demands of more radical successors and of a changing theatrical climate. 


@@@@@


doc= 30606


Barnes, Robert (1817-1907), obstetric physician, was born in Norwich on 4 September 1817, the second of the six children of Philip Barnes (1791-1874), an architect and one of the founders of the Royal Botanic Society of London, and his wife, Harriet Futter, daughter of a Norfolk squire. His father claimed to be a descendant of Robert Barnes ('c'.1495-1540), the sixteenth-century heretic. After education at Bruges from 1826 to 1830 and at home, where one of his tutors was George Borrow, author of 'The Bible in Spain', at the age of fifteen Barnes began his medical training as an apprentice in Norwich to Richard Griffin, the founder of an association of Poor Law medical officers. When Barnes's family moved to London he continued his medical studies at University College, the Windmill Street School, and at St George's Hospital. After qualifying MRCS in 1842, he went to Paris, where he pursued his interest in mental illness. On his return to London a year later he applied without success for the post of resident physician at Bethlem Hospital; he thus settled in general practice in Notting Hill, supplementing his income by means of literary work for 'The Lancet'. In 1848 he graduated MD (London), and he became LRCP in 1853 and FRCP in 1859. 
Barnes's ambition, however, was to be a medical teacher. After holding minor posts in London as obstetric surgeon to the Western General Dispensary and as lecturer on midwifery at the Great Windmill Street School of Medicine and on forensic medicine at Dermott's School, on 1 April 1859 he was elected assistant obstetric physician, and on 14 July 1863 obstetric physician to the London Hospital. He was also appointed physician to the Seamen's Hospital, the East London Hospital for Children, and the Royal Maternity Hospital. In April 1862 Barnes was invited to fill the post of lecturer on midwifery at St Thomas's Hospital, and on 24 April 1865 he was elected obstetric physician to that hospital. He was dean of St Thomas's medical school when he left in 1875 to take up a post as obstetric physician at St George's Hospital; in 1885 he was elected consulting obstetric physician there. He was also physician to the Chelsea Hospital for Women. 
Barnes was actively involved in medical politics. He took a prominent part in the foundation of the Obstetrical Society of London in 1859 and was president in 1865-6. In 1876, as one of the examiners for the midwifery licence of the Royal College of Surgeons, he refused to examine Sophia Jex-Blake and her friends, who were trying to gain access to medicine by exploiting a loophole in the regulations for the licence. In 1884 a dispute with the council of the Obstetrical Society of London led him to found the British Gynaecological Society, of which he was honorary president until his death. A pioneer of operative gynaecology, Barnes strenuously advocated the right of obstetricians to perform ovariotomy and other major gynaecological operations, but the Obstetrical Society of London had no sympathy for his cause. Ovariotomy was a controversial procedure and older obstetricians, notably James Matthews Duncan, a rival of Barnes both in debates and in practice, firmly believed that such operations were beyond the scope of obstetrics. The cause Barnes advocated eventually gained the day, and he lived to see the two societies united and merged into the Royal Society of Medicine (1907). 
A leading teacher and gynaecologist, Barnes was censor at the Royal College of Physicians (1877-8) and he had the rare distinction of receiving the honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1883; he was also honorary fellow of the Medical Society of London (1893) and of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society (1905). He delivered the Lettsomiam lectures at the Medical Society of London in 1858 and the Lumleian lectures 'On convulsive diseases in women' at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1873. He was one of the first to take an interest in the histopathology of the female reproductive system, and gave his name to an obstetric instrument and to a curve of the pelvis. Besides writing an official report on scurvy at the Seamen's Hospital (1864) and contributing many papers to the 'Transactions of the Obstetrical Society of London' and to the 'British Gynaecological Journal', Barnes was the author of standard works on obstetrics and gynaecology. His collected 'Lectures on Obstetric Operations, Including the Treatment of Haemorrhages' (1870) established his fame and were translated into French. 'A Clinical History of the Medical and Surgical Diseases of Women' (1873), a classic in the literature of obstetric medicine, was followed by 'A System of Obstetric Medicine and Surgery' (2 vols., 1884), written with his son, Fancourt Barnes. 
Barnes was twice married, first to Eliza Fawkener, daughter of a London solicitor; second, in 1880, to Alice Maria, daughter of Captain W. G. Hughes, of Carmarthenshire, deputy lieutenant and JP for that county. With his first wife he had one son, R. S. Fancourt Barnes, a loyal supporter and collaborator, and two daughters; with his second wife he had one son and one daughter. 
Barnes was an energetic man with a reputation for bellicosity. He forcefully defended his opinions, and in the process he made many enemies. Intellectually and physically vigorous to the end, he impressed his contemporaries by learning Spanish at the age of eighty-five, and by rowing out to sea and bathing from the boat daily until he was eighty-nine. He was a director of the Prudential Assurance Company (1848-9; 1884-1907), accumulated a large fortune, and gave generously to medical institutions. He died at his home, Bernersmede, in Eastbourne on 12 May 1907, of cerebral thrombosis, and was buried at Eastbourne on 16 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 30607


Barnes, Sydney Francis (1873-1967), cricketer, was born on 19 April 1873 at Cross Street, Smethwick, Staffordshire, the second son of the five children of Richard Barnes, a metal tester and later foreman shipper, who worked in Birmingham for the Muntz Metal Company for sixty-three years, and his wife, Ann Wood. He made four appearances for Warwickshire (1894-6) but was, from the start, reluctant to play on the day-to-day basis expected at first-class county level. Nor could any county offer him the financial return which he could achieve from Saturday afternoon cricket and a job during the week. 
An association with Rishton (1895-9) in the Lancashire league, for whom he took 411 wickets in Saturday afternoon games, typified Barnes's cricketing allegiance to the leagues throughout his career. Nevertheless, he agreed to play two matches for Lancashire in 1899 while declining to join the staff. Instead, he joined Burnley (1900-01). At the end of 1901 the Lancashire captain, A. C. MacLaren, persuaded him to play against Leicestershire in the last match of the season. Barnes took six for 99 in the match (besides making 32 with the bat). On the strength of this performance and of his reputation as a bowler, MacLaren offered him a place in the team he was taking to Australia in less than a month's time. 
Barnes justified his surprise selection by adding nineteen wickets in the first two tests to the mere thirteen he had taken in first-class cricket up to that point. MacLaren, however, overbowled him, and he broke down with a knee injury after bowling seven overs in the third test and did not play again on the tour. But he had done enough to top the England bowling averages for the series. With some reluctance -- and a certain obligation imposed by MacLaren -- he played as a professional for Lancashire in 1902 and 1903. His injury still troubled him but in two seasons he took 213 wickets. His relations with the county committee were never easy, and he parted company on three counts: there was no guarantee of winter employment; the terms offered were no better than those made to any other professional; and there was no promise of a future benefit in the match of his choice. 
Barnes married Alice Maud, daughter of Charles Pearce, jeweller, and divorced wife of George Taylor, on 25 May 1903. They had one son. Having parted company with Lancashire, Barnes returned in 1904 to the comparative obscurity of league cricket. 'Wisden' caustically remarked that had he 'possessed enthusiasm for the game... he might have made a great name for himself' ('Wisden', 1904, 63). The point was missed. Barnes was ahead of his generation in his genuine concern for the financial security of the professional cricketer. League cricket and regular employment gave him what county cricket could not. As for the 'great name', the years to come established him, in the view of the critics -- especially Australian ones -- as the best bowler in the world. 
Barnes bowled medium-pace off an accelerated run. He was capable of swinging the ball one way and breaking it the other in an era when one ball had to suffice for a whole innings. Pelham Warner wrote in 1909, when Barnes had shown his skills at the highest level, that he kept a perfect length, was deceptive in flight with a leg-break 'not only accurate but very quick off the pitch [and had] every attribute of a great bowler' ('Wisden', 1910, 161). 'His greatness', wrote Neville Cardus, 'was directed by a subtle reserve power of destruction. The prehensile fingers, curving the ball gloatingly, were directed by one of the sharpest of all cricket intelligences' (Cardus, 153). 
After leaving Lancashire, Barnes played for various clubs in seven different leagues from 1904 to 1940 -- including the First World War and with the single exception of 1939. In 1940, at the age of sixty-seven, he took twenty-eight wickets (at an average of 8.28). He also began an association with Staffordshire (1904-14, 1924-35), for whom he took 1441 wickets (8.15) in the minor counties' championship. His numerous successes included fourteen wickets for 13 runs against Cheshire (in one day) in 1909, fourteen for 29 against All-India in 1911, seventeen for 59 against Monmouthshire in 1912 and -- as late as 1932 at the age of fifty-nine -- thirteen for 50 against Lancashire. Throughout these years he took 4069 wickets (6.08) in league and club cricket. 
Yet it is in his performances in test cricket that Barnes's stature must be measured. Like some meteor suddenly descending with awesome power, he went on to appear for England in a further twenty-three test matches up to 1914. He returned to Australia both in 1907-8 and in 1911-12, and helped England to a one-wicket win at Melbourne in 1908 by taking five for 102 and making a crucial 38 not out. On the same ground on 30 December 1911 he opened the test match, in dramatic fashion, by dismissing Australia's top four batsmen in five overs for one run. Against the South Africans, during the triangular tournament of 1912, he took thirty-four wickets for 282 in three tests, and finished his test career against the same opponents in 1913-14 by taking forty-nine wickets (10.93) in the series, including seventeen for 159 at Johannesburg, a test match record which stood until 1956. He was invited to tour Australia for a fourth time, in 1920-21, at the age of forty-seven, but he declined as he was not allowed to take his family with him as part of his remuneration. In test cricket he took 189 wickets (average 16.43) in twenty-seven matches. He was the last man to play test cricket regularly who did not have a first-class county affiliation. 
Barnes made other occasional forays into the first-class game. He made his highest score of 93 for MCC against Western Australia in 1908. There were matches at home for MCC, the Players (against the Gentlemen), the minor counties, and Wales. In 1929 he was again the scourge of the South Africans. Against them, for the minor counties, he took eight for 41 in thirty-two consecutive overs. A month later, again versus the South Africans, playing for Wales (for which he had a brief residential qualification) he had a match analysis of ten for 90: at one point he had taken six for 8. His record in first-class cricket (1894-1930) was 719 wickets (average 17.09) together with 1573 runs (12.78). In all cricket it has been estimated he took 6229 wickets (8.33). At lower levels, he was a useful batsman and made several centuries. 
Before 1914 Barnes earned his regular living as the clerk in a Staffordshire colliery. He was over forty when the First World War broke out. Too old to serve, he continued as a clerk and as a league cricketer (for Saltaire in the Bradford league). Thereafter he worked in the legal department of Staffordshire county council well into extreme old age. He was a calligrapher of rare quality and inscribed illuminated documents. In 1957 he presented Elizabeth II with a scroll of his own work describing the visit of Elizabeth I to Stafford. 
Barnes was thus the epitome of a self-made Victorian, but without the deference to his superiors displayed by many another working-class man (including professional cricketers). The establishment found him hard to handle, while his fellow county cricketers failed to realize that he was taking a stance for their own future economic and social status. His taciturn manner, authoritative tone, and gaunt appearance did not make for easy relations with fellow cricketers; popularity and acceptance came only with the dignity and mellowness of age. Yet Pelham Warner saw him as a man who responded to kindness and the courtesies of life and he believed (in 1948) that there had 'been no greater bowler in the history of the game' (Duckworth, 202). The claim that Barnes was the best bowler of his generation gains credibility from the fact that all his contemporaries said so. The idea that he was the greatest bowler of all time must be tested against such statistics as length of service, aggregate of wickets, and test career. 'Wisden' in 2000 conducted a voting survey of the greatest cricketers of the twentieth century. Of those who were strictly bowlers, Barnes was placed fourth ('Wisden', 2000, 17). 
Barnes was, in 1949, among the first list of professional cricketers made honorary members of the Marylebone Cricket Club, and four years later a testimonial match took place at Stafford in which many test cricketers participated. Barnes, who had just turned eighty, bowled two overs. Ten years later, at the age of ninety, he was elected president of the Warwickshire Old County Cricketers' Association. Age had conferred its accolades on the doughty nineteenth-century defender of players' rights. In his later years he was a firm friend of Pelham Warner, his exact contemporary and his antithesis in social background. They would be seen together watching cricket at Lord's. Barnes died at his home, 59 Moss Street, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, on 26 December 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 30608


Barnes, Sir Thomas James (1888-1964), lawyer and public official, was born on 21 March 1888 at Wilmslow, Cheshire, the only son of Thomas Barnes and his wife, Esther Mary Pither. His father was a clerk attached to the Chancery Division of the High Court of Justice. After education at Mercers' School, Barnes was articled for five years to Robert John Ball, a partner in the firm of H. C. Coote and Ball, solicitors in the City of London, which specialized in shipping matters. He was admitted a solicitor in 1911. He did not take out a practising certificate, but just before his admission he followed his father into the Lord Chancellor's Department. He joined as a temporary clerk and later became a principal clerk in the Chancery registrars' office. Shortly after the outbreak of war in 1914 he joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. He became a chief petty officer in 1915 and sub-lieutenant in 1916, serving in the Dover patrol. His ship was blown up in 1916 and as a result of this experience he developed a lasting form of neurosis and was discharged in May 1917. In the following month he was lent by the Lord Chancellor's Department to the Ministry of Shipping legal adviser's department and within two years he had become the legal adviser. In 1920 he was appointed solicitor to the Board of Trade at the early age of thirty-two. 
In 1934 Barnes was appointed procurator-general and Treasury solicitor, a position which he retained for nearly twenty years. He was the first solicitor ever to be appointed to these offices and he proved to be the outstanding government lawyer of his generation. During his time there was an enormous increase in the work of his office. At the beginning of the war new departments were set up for which the Treasury solicitor acted; many of them remained for the rest of his term of office. 
As a general rule Barnes was content to let his staff get on with their allotted work with the minimum of supervision. He did, however, take personal and active charge over a number of matters of special importance and difficulty. He directed a number of inquiries under the 'Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act', 1921, the best-known being the budget leak in 1936 and the Lynskey tribunal in 1948. During the war he was particularly successful in settling difficult problems of compensation arising from the requisitioning of land and other property by the armed forces and government departments. Towards the end of the war he was actively concerned in the arrangements for setting up the Nuremberg tribunal to try the major war criminals. 
Barnes had always been a formidable champion of the crown's position in the courts, but after the war he played a leading part in the 'Crown Proceedings Act', 1947, which made the crown liable to all the ordinary forms of action. The proposals for this reform had languished for twenty years or more, but he realized that the time had arrived for a big step forward, and he threw himself wholeheartedly into preparing the legislation, and later into making it work smoothly. 
While Treasury solicitor, Barnes served on a number of important committees, including the Evershed committee on Supreme Court practice and procedure (1947-53). To all these problems he brought a lively intelligence. He worked very quickly and had an astonishing resourcefulness in solving intractable problems. He never dwelt on difficulties, but turned his acute and practical mind to the task of finding a solution. He had a real talent for negotiation. He always disclaimed an academic knowledge of the law, but he had an extremely tenacious memory and acquired a fund of legal wisdom and experience which was always available and to the point. It was a delight to work with him. He was always accessible and informal. If a colleague brought him a problem, he would listen intently, pick up the problem quickly, and then make some helpful suggestions, often referring to a precedent in the office or to some decided case which on examination proved to be exactly apposite. It was all done quickly and decisively and with charm and humour. He generously encouraged others. He had a good political sense and his advice was essentially practical. All these qualities endeared him to the ministers and departmental officials for whom he worked, and to his own staff. 
Barnes retired in 1953 and became a part-time director of the Prudential Assurance Company. But the work did not appeal to him and he soon resigned. In 1954 he joined the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices Commission and remained a member until the end of 1959, when he retired on the grounds of ill health. While Treasury solicitor he had frequently been called on to advise on ecclesiastical matters. After his retirement, right up to the time of his death, he took a leading part in revising the canon law of the Church of England. 
Barnes's main recreation was golf, which he much enjoyed. He had been brought up at Sunningdale, and for most of his life he was a leading member of Sunningdale and Swinley Forest golf clubs. Between the wars he played to a single-figure handicap, and was a difficult man to beat. 
On 24 May 1924 Barnes married Elsie Margaret Clover, a widow, daughter of John Alexander, formerly chief clerk of Bow Street police court; they had no children. He was knighted in 1927, appointed KCB in 1938, and promoted GCB in 1948. He died at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, on 4 February 1964 and his widow later in the same year. 
Robert Speed', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30609


Barnes, William Emery (1859-1939), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, was born in London on 26 May 1859, the younger son of Samuel Emery Barnes, wine merchant, of London, and his wife, Charlotte Ann Noss. He was educated at Islington proprietary school and in 1877 went to Peterhouse, Cambridge; he gained a first class in the 1881 theological tripos, as well as the Jeremie prize ('Septuagint'), the Crosse scholarship (divinity), and the Tyrwhitt scholarship (Hebrew); he became BD (1891), and DD (1897). In 1883 he was ordained to a curacy at St John's Church, Waterloo Road, Lambeth, in London, and he returned to Cambridge in 1885 as lecturer in Hebrew at Clare College. Afterwards he was lecturer in Hebrew and divinity at Peterhouse, as well as a fellow, from 1889; he was college chaplain from 1885 to 1904, Hulsean professor of divinity at Cambridge from 1901 to 1934, and dean of Peterhouse from 1920 to 1921. In 1934 he retired to live at Canterbury, continuing, however, as warden of the Central Society of Sacred Study for the diocese of Canterbury, taking classes and giving occasional lectures. He married on 27 March 1890 Georgina de Horne (1847/8-1917), daughter of Alexander Bevington, underwriter of Lloyd's. They had no children. 
Barnes was a fine scholar in Hebrew, rabbinic, and Syriac, and he had a working knowledge of several other languages. When pressed in his latter years to begin the study of Persian, he replied that he already kept seven languages going and could not add another. His most substantial contributions were in Syriac. After the death of R. L. Bensly, Barnes edited his unfinished 'Fourth Book of Maccabees and Kindred Documents in Syriac' (1895), writing the general introduction and translating four of the six documents included. He published an 'apparatus criticus' to the Peshitta text of 'Chronicles' (in 1897); an edition of Samuel Lee's Syriac 'Pentateuch' (in collaboration, in 1914); and an edition of the Peshitta text of the 'Psalms' (1904). For younger students he produced editions of 'Chronicles' (1899), 'Kings' (1908), and 'Haggai', 'Zechariah', and 'Malachi' (1917) in the Cambridge 'Bible'. 
As joint editor with C. H. Turner of the 'Journal of Theological Studies' at its inception in 1899, Barnes set a high standard and thereafter contributed to it various articles, notes, and reviews. He remained joint editor (from 1902 with Henry Austin Wilson) until 1903. 
Always averse to controversy and unwilling to commit himself, Barnes accepted the new learning of his time and the new approach to the literary and historical study of the 'Old Testament', but used it very cautiously. Much of the new literature he regarded as 'wild' and he disliked intensely the way some scholars cut texts about; but he evaluated their arguments before rejecting them. With his strong conservative and devotional tendencies and his respect for tradition he was happiest in drawing out the moral and spiritual values of the books on which he commented, as he did in his edition of the 'Psalms' for the 'Westminster Commentaries' (1931). 
Bishop Arthur Mesac Knight, a younger contemporary of Barnes at school, remembered him then as 'a trim and somewhat prim little figure, precise, careful, but with strength of character... and he had his own opinions'. This remained true of Barnes all through his later life. Gentle, quiet, sincere, kindly, and mildly humorous, he was a good friend to many different people and enjoyed gathering with them at luxurious lunches in Peterhouse. As a teacher he was painstaking and straightforward, anxious not to be above the heads of his pupils. 
Of small stature and slight physique, Barnes was keenly interested in warfare. In his early days he joined the university rifle volunteers (later the officer training corps), when it had little support, and almost to the end of his time in Cambridge he went to the butts to fire. Military history, strategy, and tactics were his hobby, and in discussions of them in the combination room he sometimes corrected the master of his college, Field Marshal Lord Birdwood. He also favoured the revision of English spelling, on which he wrote to 'The Times' and other papers, and he liked to make excursions into other fields of study, with something of his own to illustrate the subject. While visiting Exeter to lecture, he died there, at Mowbray House, on 17 August 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 30610


Barnett, Dame Henrietta Octavia Weston (1851-1936), social reformer, was born in Clapham, Surrey, on 4 May 1851, the daughter of Alexander William Rowland (died 1869), whose family fortune derived from Rowland's Macassar Oil Company, and Henrietta Monica Margaretta Ditges (died 1851). Her mother died shortly after giving birth to Henrietta, who was raised in comfort by her father. Her formal education consisted of several terms spent at a boarding-school in Dover run by the Haddon sisters, disciples and sisters-in-law of the controversial aural surgeon and social and moral philosopher James Hinton. Given Hinton's and the Haddons' commitment to social altruism it is not surprising that Henrietta first demonstrated compassionate interest in the lives of poor children during her student days. Upon the death of her father in 1869 she devoted herself to helping the housing and charity reformer Octavia Hill conduct her philanthropic labours in the parish of St Mary's, Bryanston Square, Marylebone. Hill introduced her to Samuel Augustus Barnett (1844-1913), a fellow worker and curate at St Mary's. They were an unlikely pair: she was, as her friend Beatrice Webb described her, 'pretty, witty and well-to-do' (B. Webb, 'My Apprenticeship', New York edn, 1926, 204); he was awkward in appearance and manners. But their shared passion for helping the poor convinced her that the 'gift' of Samuel's love 'was too holy to refuse' (H. Barnett, 'Canon Barnett', 1.53). On 28 January 1873 they married, and embarked on their remarkable collaboration as social reformers, and husband and wife, in the impoverished parish of St Jude's, Whitechapel, in east London. Beatrice Webb saw the Barnetts as 'an early example of a new type of human personality, in after years not uncommon; a double-star-personality, the light of the one being indistinguishable from that of the other' (Webb, 182). 
From the outset Henrietta Barnett was her husband's equal partner in all their celebrated initiatives. She quickly threw herself into parish work on behalf of women and children, and gathered a circle of devoted women workers around her. In 1875 she was the first nominated woman guardian, and in the next year began her long association with the poor law district schools at Forest Gate, as a school manager. Despite her rescue work with female prostitutes and her belief that women should have the parliamentary franchise she was associated with neither the campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' nor the movement for female suffrage. She preferred to use her formidable creative energies and skills as an organizer more directly towards improving the lives of the London poor. She was a co-founder in 1876 of the Metropolitan Association for the Befriending of Young Servants and long-time leader of its Whitechapel branch. Her experiment, in 1877, of sending slum children for restorative country holidays grew into the Children's Country Holiday Fund (1884). She played a leading role in the departmental committee appointed to inquire into 'the condition of Poor Law Children', which led her and her sister Alice's husband, Dr Ernest Hart, to form in 1896 the State Children's Association, with Henrietta Barnett as honorary secretary. 
In 1884 Henrietta and Samuel led the movement to establish the University Settlement in east London, better known as Toynbee Hall, in memory of their recently deceased friend the Oxford economic historian Arnold Toynbee. Settlements, as first envisioned by the Barnetts, were residential colonies of university men in the slums intended to serve both as centres of education, recreation, and community life for the local poor and as outposts for social work, social scientific investigation, and cross-class friendships between elites and their poor neighbours. A paper that Henrietta delivered on settlement work to the Cambridge Ladies' Discussion Society in the Lent term of 1887 led to the proposal to found the first women's settlement: the Women's University Settlement in Southwark. An important female presence at all-male Toynbee Hall and an outspoken advocate for the worldwide growth of the settlement movement, she also expanded her innovative parish work during these years. As Toynbee Hall demanded more of Samuel's time he confessed in 1886 that Henrietta had become 'Church as well as home curate' (Samuel Barnett to Frank Barnett, Easter 1886, Barnett papers, LMA, F/Bar/132). To the chagrin of more conventional churchmen and women she and Samuel organized free musical concerts and oratorios on Sundays, as well as the renowned Whitechapel Picture Exhibition of fine art held each year, about Easter, in St Jude's schoolrooms. The latter developed into the Whitechapel Art Gallery, of which Henrietta remained a trustee from its founding in 1901 until her death. At nearly seventy-two she took up painting, and her pictures were hung in several Royal Academy exhibitions. 
In 1903 Henrietta Barnett embarked on her last and most ambitious project, which dominated the final decades of her life: rescuing 80 acres of Hampstead Heath for public enjoyment and creating the Hampstead Garden Suburb. She had long recognized that Toynbee Hall, with its transient and all-male population, was an 'artificial protest' (Barnett and Barnett, 338) against social divisions that could not serve as a society-wide model for those essential links between private domestic and public political life. Collaborating with the pioneer socialist architects of the Letchworth Garden City, Raymond Unwin and Barry Parker, she created a blueprint for a new kind of organic community consisting of young and old, able-bodied and infirm, rich and poor, married and unmarried. While the largest homes of wealthy residents were placed far from the modest cottages designed for artisans Henrietta hoped that residents of the suburb would be bound together by shared religious, social, educational, and recreational spaces. To this end she successfully advocated the erection of an Anglican church and a nonconformist chapel, along with a purpose-built clubhouse for artisans and their families; the institute, designed by Edwin Lutyens, served as the suburb's focal point for educational, cultural, and civic activity. Henrietta balanced her unwavering commitment to the mutual advantages of relationships between the classes with a staunch belief in the ineradicability of class differences. Autocratic and forceful in her dealings with others, her personality was tinged with elitist discomfort about the impact of the 'democratic microbe' (H. Barnett, 'Thrift in the home', 'Charity Organisation Review' (June 1907), 307) on British society, and intolerance of her Jewish neighbours in Whitechapel. During her later years she vigorously supported two institutions: Barnett House at Oxford (1914), named in memory of Samuel, which remains the centre for social work and social policy education at the university; and the Dame Henrietta Barnett School (the foundation stone of which was laid on 23 October 1918), a single-sex, voluntary-aided school in Hampstead that emerged out of the educational programmes for girls at the institute. 
Henrietta Barnett's many publications spanned fifty years and encompassed topics ranging from domestic economy ('The Making of the Home', 1885) and human physiology ('The Making of the Body', 1894) to social questions ('Practicable Socialism', 1888; 'Practicable Socialism, New Series', 1915, and 'Towards Social Reform', 1909, all three written jointly with Samuel Barnett). She also wrote 'Matters that Matter' (1930), a collection of quasi-autobiographical essays on various topics, and her most enduring monument to her partnership with Samuel: the two volume 'Canon Barnett: his Life, Work, and Friends' (1918). 
Henrietta Barnett valued highly motherhood and women's distinct moral gifts as peacemakers capable of defusing class war. Having no children of her own she was legal guardian of both her badly brain-damaged elder sister, Fanny, who shared her home for fifty-eight years, and of Dorothy Woods, the Barnetts' beloved adopted ward. From the 1890s Marion Paterson (whom Henrietta had first met in 1876) was her constant assistant, nurse, secretary, confidante, and companion. After Samuel's death, in 1913, her friendship and dependence upon Marion deepened, and it was Marion who received and responded to letters of condolence when Henrietta died, in their Hampstead home, on 10 June 1936. Henrietta had been appointed CBE in 1917 and DBE in 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 30611


Barnett, Lionel David (1871-1960), orientalist, was born in Liverpool on 21 October 1871, the eldest son of Baron Barnett, banker, and his wife, Adelaide Cowan. He was educated at the high school, institute, and University College, Liverpool. He went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1892 and was elected a scholar in 1893. He was Sir William Browne's medallist (Greek ode, 1893, 1894, 1896; Greek epigram, 1893); gained a first class (division 1) in part one of the classical tripos in 1894 and was elected Craven scholar the same year. In 1896 he was awarded a first class, with special distinction in language, in part two of the classical tripos, together with the chancellor's medal. He was appointed Craven student in 1897 and in 1900 the University of Manchester conferred on him the degree of LittD. He studied Sanskrit at Cambridge and Halle. In 1901 he married Blanche Esther (died 1955), daughter of the Revd B. Berliner, minister of the St John's Wood synagogue. They had a daughter and a son. 
In 1899 Barnett joined the staff of the British Museum as assistant keeper in the department of oriental printed books and manuscripts, and after only nine years was promoted keeper of the department in succession to Sir Robert Douglas. To the duties of this post, its functions officially defined as 'to conserve, augment and catalogue the collections', he brought a remarkable threefold equipment of fine scholarship, administrative ability, and business acumen which resulted in the museum's store of oriental manuscripts and books being enormously enriched during his twenty-eight years of office. The vast range of his erudition in the cultures of both East and West was probably unique in the museum's history. He compiled a monumental series of no fewer than ten descriptive catalogues of oriental printed books in the Indo-Aryan and Dravidian languages, covering Sanskrit, Pali, Prakrit, Kannada, Badaga, Kurg, Tamil, Telugu, Burmese, Hindi, Bihari, Pahari, Panjabi, Saurashtra, and other languages, large quarto volumes containing in all some 8000 columns of text. 
Library administration and bibliography on this massive scale were only a part of Barnett's many-sided activity. From 1906 to 1917 he held the professorship of Sanskrit at University College, London. When the university's School of Oriental Studies was founded he was included on its staff from 1917 as lecturer in Sanskrit; he was also lecturer in ancient Indian history and epigraphy (1922-48) and librarian (1940-47). When he retired from the school in 1948 a special volume of its 'Bulletin' was published in his honour. He was elected FBA in 1936 and appointed CB in 1937. A prominent figure in the Royal Asiatic Society, he was at various times a member of council and vice-president, its honorary librarian from 1939 onwards, and was awarded its gold medal in 1950. 
The Greek and Latin classics were Barnett's first love and throughout life his prodigious memory was stored with them. For the benefit of the young student and the cultured lay public he published between 1900 and 1904 a succession of useful volumes, some translated from the German, on classical history and literature. Thereafter the works he produced, as separate books or as monographs in learned periodicals, dealt almost entirely with Indological subjects. In addition to his translations, editions, and secondary studies of classical Indian texts in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and other languages, he also published a number of accessible and successful works aimed at informing a wider readership in Indian history, religion, and culture; these included several volumes in the series called 'The Wisdom of the East', some of which can still be profitably read by students. His numerous articles and book reviews in learned journals embraced Indian history, epigraphy, folklore, drama, philology, and Tibetan as well as Indian texts. He published translations of Spanish documents relating to the history of the Jewish community of which he was a faithful and active member, holding several of its honorary offices. 
Barnett's encyclopaedic learning was carried with effortless ease and with never a trace of ostentation. His natural humility and his countless unobtrusive kindnesses, especially towards younger scholars, drew to him the affection of a host of friends. Although little given to outdoor recreation he enjoyed constant good health, until suddenly in 1932 his eyesight gave way under the intense strain of years, one eye becoming permanently useless and the sight of the other impaired. This grievous blow did not deter him, after a brief convalescence, from pressing on with fruitful academic work both in the study and in the lecture room. In 1948 when he retired from his university duties he might reasonably have sought an easier life after half a century of ceaseless industry, but hearing that his old department at the British Museum from which he had retired in 1936 was in sore straits for staff, he offered his services as an assistant keeper and for the last twelve years of his life the museum once more profited from his vast knowledge and experience. A fortnight before his death in London on 28 January 1960, the Asiatic Society of Bengal awarded him the Sir William Jones gold medal. His son, Richard David Barnett (1909-1986), was keeper of the department of western Asiatic antiquities in the British Museum from 1955 to 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30612


Barnett, Samuel Augustus (1844-1913), Church of England clergyman and social reformer, the elder son of Francis Augustus Barnett (died 27 Dec 1883) and his wife, Mary Gilmore (died 6 Nov 1880) of Bristol, was born at 5 Portland Square, Bristol, on 8 February 1844. His father was a wealthy manufacturer of iron bedsteads; his mother came from a long-established Bristol merchant family engaged chiefly in overseas shipping. Educated at home, Barnett went in June 1862 to Wadham College, Oxford. Undistinguished as a student (second class in law and modern history 1865, BA 1865, MA 1869), he subsequently was revered by generations of university men for bringing them in direct and living contact with the problems of the urban poor: Barnett House, founded at Oxford University in 1914 to promote the study of social problems, stands as testimony to this legacy. Barnett claimed that a journey to the United States in 1867 eradicated the last traces of his inherited tory prejudices. When he returned to England in December 1867 to be a curate at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London, under William Henry Fremantle (later dean of Ripon), he struck contemporaries as a rather ordinary young man, distinguished more by his scraggly beard, balding pate, and dishevelled appearance than by any great promise. 
Barnett's abilities as a worker on behalf of the Marylebone poor became quickly evident during his curacy under Fremantle. During these years (1867-73) he shared Fremantle's zeal both for church reform, which brought Barnett into contact with men like Arnold Toynbee, and for reforming the organization of charity in London. The latter led to the founding of the Society for Repressing Mendicity and Organising Charity (better known as the Charity Organization Society or COS) in 1869. Through the COS Barnett came under the influence of the housing reformer Octavia Hill, who in turn introduced him to one of her young workers, his future wife, Henrietta Octavia Weston Rowland ['see 'Barnett, Dame Henrietta Octavia Weston]. 
Married on 28 January 1873, Samuel and Henrietta shared and inspired one another's work for the next forty years. Shortly after their marriage they went to St Jude's, Whitechapel, a notoriously poor and lawless parish in east London, where their imposition of COS principles, including the curtailment of outdoor relief, dismayed the poor but established their reputations as formidable reformers. Convinced of the benefits of direct one-to-one relations between rich and poor, the Barnetts none the less began in the early 1880s to distance themselves from the rigid opposition of the central office of the COS to all forms of state-funded assistance outside the new poor law (1834 and later legislation). They forged an alternative vision of social politics, 'practicable socialism', which combined a reverence for individual initiative and self-improvement with municipal and state support intended to address specific material needs. They also often found themselves in disfavour with traditional Anglicans who distrusted their innovations in Sunday worship, such as oratorios and picture exhibitions. Imbued with the aesthetic theories of John Ruskin, Barnett insisted that 'pictures... could take the place of parables' (Barnett to Bishop Jackson, 3 April 1882, Fulham MSS, vol. 2) as moral teachers to the poor. Under the Barnetts' aegis, the annual picture exhibitions held in the St Jude's schoolrooms grew into the Whitechapel Art Gallery, which was opened in 1901. Barnett further alienated some Anglicans of varied persuasions in 1884 when, on a non-denominational basis, he launched the scheme on which his fame most securely rests, Toynbee Hall, the university settlement in Whitechapel. Octavia Hill, his erstwhile mentor, was so disturbed by what she viewed as Barnett's lax churchmanship that she supported a rival plan undertaken on an explicitly religious basis by the high-church party of Keble College, the Oxford House settlement in Bethnal Green. Barnett's connections with Whitechapel lasted throughout his life, though he resigned St Jude's in 1893 to serve as a canon of Bristol, by which title he is best-known to posterity. In 1895 he was a select preacher at Oxford, and at Cambridge in 1889 and 1905; from 1906 to 1913 he was canon, and finally subdean, of Westminster. 
While Barnett's fame rests mostly on his accomplishments as a secular social reformer, he was actuated by deep religious convictions informed by the teachings of the Christian socialist F. D. Maurice. His friend Beatrice Webb credited Barnett with importantly shaping the 'rediscovery' of poverty in the 1880s and social reform in late Victorian England by his insistence that 'the sense of sin has been the starting-point of progress' (Webb, 174). During his first decade at St Jude's, Barnett developed an extensive network of clubs and classes to address not only the spiritual but the intellectual and recreative needs of his parishioners. The unpopularity of these ventures encouraged him to think of an alternative non-parochial institutional framework for his work. Barnett capitalized on the anxieties unleashed by the sensational pamphlet about slum life 'The Bitter Cry of Outcast London' (1883). He announced a plan to establish what he called a settlement, a residential colony of university men, committed to no particular religious creed, who would live among the poor as friends, neighbours, social-scientific observers, and practical social workers. From 1884 to 1906 he served as warden of Toynbee Hall, which attracted distinguished visitors and many imitators worldwide. 
A man of abiding humility and optimism, Barnett believed in the potential goodness and educability of all people regardless of their life station. He was closely associated with university extension in east London, the Oxford Day Training College, pupil-teacher centres, and the Workers' Educational Association. There were few movements for social, cultural, or moral improvement of the poor in which Barnett did not take a prominent part. While 'Punch' gently mocked his cultural philanthropy, Barnett was also actively involved in many initiatives to improve the economic and material conditions of the poor, including slum clearance and housing reform (he was a leading promoter of the 'Artisans' Dwelling Act' of 1875), old-age pensions, and labour farm colonies. He died at 69 Kings Esplanade, Hove, Sussex, on 17 June 1913; the funeral service on 21 June was, at Barnett's own instructions, held at St Jude's, but there is a memorial to him in Westminster Abbey; his remains were cremated. Predeceased by his adopted ward, Dorothy Woods, he had no children. 
M. Clemenceau remarked in 1884 that Barnett was one of the 'three really great men' (Barnett, 2.45) he had met in England. While Barnett was an effective speaker and a pithy, aphoristic writer, his 'greatness' lay in his personality. His public and private persona were marked by a singular lack of vanity in his own achievements and a keenly tolerant sympathy for others which enabled him to discover what was best in those he counselled and help them to make it effective. His impact on twentieth-century Britain is most apparent in the work of the men whose lives he influenced during their residence at Toynbee Hall, including Robert Morant, Hubert Llewellyn-Smith, R. H. Tawney, William Beveridge, and Clement Attlee. Barnett's most important published works include 'Practicable Socialism' (co-authored with Henrietta Barnett in 1888), 'Religion and Progress' (1907), 'Religion and Politics' (1911), 'Worship and Work' (1913), and 'Vision and Service' (1917), the two last-named published posthumously and edited by Henrietta Barnett. 


@@@@@


doc= 30613


Gaikwar, Sayaji Rao, maharaja of Baroda (1863-1939), social reformer, was born on 11 March 1863 at Kavlana in Nasik district of Bombay presidency, and named Gopal Rao, the second son of Kashi Rao, a village headman, who belonged to the Maratha family which had created the state of Baroda in Gujarat during the eighteenth century. After the British government of India had deposed Maharaja Malhar Rao as ruler of Baroda in 1875 for misconduct (which reputedly included attempting to poison the British resident with diamond dust) and misgovernment, the maharani, Jamnabai (1863-1898), widow of his brother and predecessor, was permitted to adopt a collateral relative as heir. Her choice was the twelve-year-old Gopal Rao, who took the name Sayaji Rao III when he was installed on the 'gadi' or throne of Baroda in May 1875. F. A. H. Elliott, an Indian Civil Service officer and member of the Minto family which had a long tradition of imperial service in India, was appointed as tutor for the new heir and established a rigorous regime of literary education in English, Gujarati, Marathi, and Urdu as well as practical training in administration. At the same time, the British government of India secured the appointment of Sir T. Madhav Rao, a Maratha administrator reputed to be both progressive and loyal to the British, as 'diwan' or chief minister. During the minority of the young prince, the 'diwan' reformed the court system and state police while building schools, hospitals, and roads, and achieving a balanced budget. 
Invested with governing powers in December 1881, shortly before his nineteenth birthday, Sayaji Rao, short, stocky, and socially reserved, was an administratively active ruler. He soon earned a reputation as a model prince for his attention to duty and social programmes. His first priority was to make educational institutions available in all segments of his state of about 8000 square miles, which consisted of four provinces dispersed within the Gujarat and Kathiawar areas of the British Indian province of Bombay and had a population of slightly more than 2 million (1881). In 1893 free compulsory primary education was inaugurated in Amreli district as an experiment; in 1907 it was extended throughout Baroda state. Although the legal sanctions against parents who did not send their children to school were not strictly enforced, especially during periods of famine or floods when parents found it difficult to withdraw their children from economic production, the positive effect of this initiative was reflected in higher literacy rates in Baroda than in the surrounding Bombay presidency by 1921. Sayaji Rao viewed education as a precondition for effective social changes and developed a comprehensive library system, including mobile units in rural areas, to reinforce classroom instruction. A second concern was to enhance the legal rights of women through legislation such as the 'Hindu Widow Marriage Act' in 1902, the 'Infant Marriage Prevention Act' in 1904, and the 'Hindu Divorce Act' in 1930. A third focus was to end discrimination based on caste status. Institutional provisions for depressed castes, the so-called untouchables, included special scholarships, schools, and hostels, and the maharaja himself undertook a public relations campaign, speaking at many public functions of associations both within his state and in India advocating changes in social attitudes. In the tradition of princely patronage he granted scholarships to B. R. Ambedkar, the prominent scheduled caste leader, to study in India and later law at Columbia University. 
Reflecting his commoner birth and later education, Sayaji Rao was a complex synthesis of populist and paternal autocrat. To staff his administration and educational institutions he recruited talented Indian nationalists as well as bureaucrats. They ranged from Romesh Chander Dutt, an Indian Civil Service officer who formulated the theory that the British drained India of its economic resources, to Aurobindo Ghose, eventually a mentor to radical Bengali students. In 1908 the ruler inaugurated a legislative council (Dhara Sabha) which was mainly advisory and had no budgetary oversight. Desirous of being a modernizer while still retaining his authority, he promoted social mobility and political consultation but not political responsibility or democracy among his subjects. 
Sayaji Rao's relations with the British government of India followed a tortuous path. He owed his 'gadi' to British policy which, after the uprising of 1857, was to refrain from annexing princely states where there was no natural heir. After his installation he was carefully groomed to be an enlightened ruler and socialized into British imperial culture, beginning with his presentation to the prince of Wales (later Edward VII) during his Indian tour in 1875 and his participation in the imperial durbar in 1877 in Delhi. In order to relieve health problems reputedly brought on by overwork and variously described as neurasthenia or nervous prostration, sleeplessness, and gout, he made his first trip to England in 1887 despite the spiritual and social ostracization which orthodox Hindus then endured after crossing the ocean. Received by Queen Victoria, he was viewed as an exemplary imperial collaborator. However, as he sought greater personal and public autonomy, points of tension arose with the imperial authorities. Plagued by continuing ill health and curious about modern institutions abroad, he extended his stays in England, where he purchased several residences including the former home of Lord Tennyson at Aldworth in Sussex, near Haslemere (Surrey), during the 1890s. His absences from Baroda were one factor leading the viceroy, Lord Curzon, in 1900 to order that Indian princes seek viceregal permission before leaving their states. On a personal level, Sayaji Rao deeply resented this imperial interference, while his continued employment of Indian critics of the British and toleration within his territory of presses that published material which the British deemed seditious caused some British officials to question his loyalty. This friction reached a climax in 1911 when he allegedly insulted George V at the imperial durbar in Delhi by turning his back on the king-emperor while walking away after being presented. The British and Indian press debated his motives, and some called for his deposition. Sayaji Rao apologized, and his relations with the British improved as he generously supported Britain during the First World War. Appointed GCSI in 1887, he became GCIE in 1919. 
After 1919 Sayaji Rao travelled and lived in Europe and Britain for several months each year. Capable 'diwans', especially Sir Manubhai Mehta (1916-26) and Sir V. T. Krishnamachari (1926-44), oversaw a centralized administration which implemented social and economic reforms, including industrial projects, and acquiesced in controlled demonstrations of popular support for Indian nationalists, especially Mahatma Gandhi. Recognized as an elder statesman among the Indian princes, Sayaji Rao participated in the first and second round-table conferences on constitutional reform in London during the early 1930s, when the princes enunciated their support for a federation with British Indian provinces. During the first round-table conference his dinner with a scheduled caste guest at his West End hotel occasioned perhaps even more publicity than his speeches. 
The maharaja was married twice: first on 6 January 1880 to Lakshmibai ('c'.1864-1885), daughter of Haibatrao Mohite, of the Maratha princely family of Tanjore, who took the name of Chimnabai. They had one son (who predeceased the maharaja) and two daughters before Chimnabai's death on 7 May 1885. On 28 December 1885 he married Gajrabai (1871-1958), daughter of Bajirao Amritrao Ghatge, subsequently named Chimnabai II, from a branch of the Maratha Ghatge family settled in Dewas state. In 1914 Chimnabai II publicly ceased to observe purdah in Baroda after returning from her tenth trip to Europe, co-authored with S. M. Mitra 'The Position of Women in Indian Life' (1911), and was the first president of the All India Women's Conference in 1927. The couple had three sons (the elder two predeceased their father), and one daughter, who became the maharani of Cooch Behar and a well-known hostess in London during the 1920s and 1930s. 
After spending most of the 1930s travelling to seek relief for health problems at various European spas, Sayaji Rao III returned to India in November 1938. Too ill to travel to Baroda, he died in Bombay on 6 February 1939 of a heart attack complicated by uraemia; his remains were cremated the following day in Baroda. He was succeeded by Pratapsinh, his grandson from the son of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 30614


Baron, Bernhard (1850-1929), tobacco manufacturer and philanthropist, was born on 5 December 1850 in the Russian town of Brest Litovsk. His parents were both Jewish and he was probably of French descent. In 1867 he emigrated to New York, where he worked in a tobacco factory, sleeping at night in the tobacco sheds; with tobacco lent to him by one of the foremen, he started to manufacture handmade cigarettes. He then moved to New Haven, Connecticut, where he found customers among the students of Yale University. After the failure in 1874 of a New York bank in which he had invested his savings, he was forced to find employment in the tobacco factory of Kinney Brothers of New York but, as soon as he had saved enough, moved to Baltimore, where he began manufacturing cigars. The business prospered and, according to Baron, became the largest undertaking of its kind south of Philadelphia. During this period, the mechanization of cigarette production was in its infancy, and in 1872 Baron took out his first patent for a machine for making cigarettes. In 1890 Baron was persuaded by a group of financiers to join a venture aimed at challenging the powerful tobacco trusts, and during 1890-95 was managing director of the National Cigarette Tobacco Company of New York. 
In 1895 Baron visited England to sell the patent rights of his cigarette-making machine, but, attracted by the opportunities, decided to settle in London at St James' Place, Aldgate, where he established the Baron Cigarette Machine Company Limited (the patent was later sold to the United Cigarette Machine Company for $120,000). Subsequently, he decided to expand into the production of tobacco and cigarettes, and, at its incorporation in 1903, joined the board of Carreras Limited, a firm of tobacco retailers and blenders. The following year he became managing director and in 1905, chairman; he held both positions until his death. Carreras's cigarettes, notably their Black Cat and Craven A brands, which were backed by innovative marketing, including competitions and gift coupons, proved highly popular. In 1920 the business moved to new premises, the Arcadia Works, City Road, London, which in 1928 were replaced by a major new factory at Mornington Crescent. 
Baron's business success brought him immense wealth, which was matched by the scale of his philanthropic ventures. The harshness of his early life fostered a deep sympathy with the poor and he gave liberally, regardless of religious creed. Among his major gifts were $65,000 to the St George's Jewish Settlement in east London, $35,000 to the London Hospital, and a new children's ward at the Middlesex Hospital. A caring employer, in 1926 he purchased Pennant Lodge at Brighton and set up a trust to manage the Bernhard Baron Convalescent Home for the use of his employees and others engaged in manual and domestic labour. Two years later he created a further trust of $575,000 to benefit hospitals and homes for disabled children, and in his will established a charities fund which supported organizations of many religious denominations. He celebrated his birthdays by making numerous gifts; to mark his seventy-seventh birthday he distributed $32,000, and that year alone donated a total of $180,000. During the course of his lifetime it is estimated that he gave at least $2 million to help the poor, but he was still able to leave almost $5 million at his death. An enthusiastic supporter of the Labour Party, he also gave generously to party funds. 
While still living in the USA Baron had married Rachel Schwartz of Washington, who predeceased him in 1920. There were three daughters and one son, Louis Bernhard, who succeeded his father as chairman of Carreras and was created a baronet in 1930. Baron died at his home, 64 The Drive, Hove, Sussex, on 1 August 1929, and was buried on 6 August at the cemetery of the Liberal Jewish synagogue, Willesden, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30615


Barr, Archibald (1855-1931), engineer and manufacturer of range-finders, was born at Glenfield, near Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 18 November 1855, the third son of Archibald Barr, yarn merchant, and his wife, Jeanie Stirrat, of Paisley. From Paisley grammar school he entered the local works of Messrs A. F. Craig & Co., manufacturers of spinning and weaving machinery, as an engineering apprentice under the Scottish 'sandwich' system, which enabled him to attend the winter sessions of Glasgow University, from which he graduated BSc in 1878. 
In 1876 Barr was appointed as 'Young assistant' to the regius professor of civil engineering and mechanics, James Thomson. In 1884 he was appointed professor of civil and mechanical engineering at the Yorkshire College of Science, later Leeds University. Glasgow University recalled him in 1889, to succeed Thomson in the oldest chair of engineering science in the United Kingdom; this gave him the freedom to continue his important consultative business. He graduated DSc in 1890. 
At Leeds, Barr met William Stroud, the professor of physics. Stroud had a talent for applying scientific theory to practical problems, and Barr was highly accomplished in mechanical design. In 1888 they collaborated on an improved optical range-finder, which they patented that year. A version of the instrument was adopted by the Royal Navy in 1892, and in 1894 the professors set up a company, Barr and Stroud's Patents, to market the range-finder and other inventions. In 1895 they established a small workshop in Glasgow to assemble and test range-finders, expanding in 1904 into a large purpose-built factory at Anniesland on the outskirts of Glasgow. The firm supplied range-finders to nearly all of the world's navies, and manufactured smaller, portable instruments which were adopted by the British, French, and other European armies. In 1912, Barr and Stroud became a private limited company. Barr, who was the senior partner and the head of the design team at Anniesland, resigned his university chair at Glasgow in 1913, becoming emeritus professor. He remained chairman of Barr and Stroud until his death. Barr and Stroud remained the sole supplier of periscopes to the Royal Navy, and a leading supplier of optronics, including thermal imaging equipment, to the British army. 
Although Barr published relatively little academic work during his university career, he was widely admired as a teacher. Like Lord Kelvin, with whom he had worked, he believed in fostering links between town and gown; he was able to raise $40,000 from local industrialists and charitable bodies to build Glasgow's James Watt engineering building in 1901 and to persuade companies to donate most of the $14,000 required for the purchase of the scientific equipment installed in its laboratories. When he returned to the university in 1889, there were only thirty-nine students in his field, but the number had risen to over 200 by the time of his retirement. His contribution to the university extended beyond the department of civil and mechanical engineering; he helped to organize a new faculty of science in 1893, and successfully campaigned for a lectureship in electrical engineering, which was established in 1898. 
Barr married in 1885 Isabella (1862-1928), eldest daughter of John Young, a wood merchant, of Priory Park, Castlehead, Paisley; they had three sons, the second of whom was killed in action in France in 1915, and a daughter. He received the honorary degree of LLD from Glasgow University in 1914 and was elected FRS in 1923. He was president of several learned societies. A keen motorist, he was a member of the Scottish Automobile Club and an organizer of Scotland's first motor car reliability trials in 1901; he also helped to form the Scottish Aeronautical Club in 1909, becoming its president, and was a promoter of Scotland's first aviation meeting, held at Lanark in 1910. His charity manifested itself in his service as a governor of the Royal Scottish National Institution for the care of those with learning difficulties, in his gift of $8000 towards the cost of a new organ for Paisley Abbey, and in his bequest of his house for charitable purposes. 
In 1913 Barr was presented with two portraits, painted by G. Fiddes Watt. They represent the professor in a mood of seriousness which was rarely evident to his students. Barr died at his home, Westerton of Mugdock, near Milngavie, near Glasgow, on 5 August 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 30616


Barrett, Wilson (1846-1904), actor and playwright, was born on 18 February 1846 at Manor House Farm, Chelmsford, Essex, the second child and eldest son of George Barrett, a farmer, and his wife, Charlotte Mary, 'nee' Wood. The failure of his father as a farmer drove the family in 1857 to London, where Barrett worked first as a labourer in a corn exchange and then with a firm of printers and engravers. He began his professional stage career as a 'general utility' actor at the Theatre Royal, Halifax, in 1864. After a series of temporary engagements at Nottingham and Liverpool he joined the company in Aberdeen, where he met Caroline Heath (1835-1887). She was an experienced performer and, despite her family's objections to the fact that she was more than ten years older than Barrett, they were married on 21 July 1866. 
The period to 1879 was marked by extended provincial engagements with occasional London visits. Barrett formed his own company in 1870 and began management of the Theatre Royal, Halifax, in 1869 and the Theatre Royal, Hull, in 1877. His first professional London engagement was at the Surrey, playing Tom Robinson in Charles Reade's 'It's Never too Late to Mend' (26 June 1867); while employed at Drury Lane in 1868 he changed his forename to Wilson. He then formed his own combination company, which included his brothers George and Robert and his sister Mary, and which by 1875 comprised twenty-five actors touring a repertory of about twenty plays throughout northern England. Barrett was later to claim that he was the first manager to make the combination system a permanent fixture in England ('The Era', 28 Aug 1886). He took the lease of the Leeds Amphitheatre in 1874, and opened in W. G. Wills's version of 'Jane Shore' on 8 March 1875, when his wife played Jane and he himself took the part of Henry Shore. It was their first enduring success. After the theatre burnt down, destroying his entire stock of costumes and sets, Barrett was asked to advise on the building of a new theatre in Leeds. The Grand opened under his management on 16 November 1878, and he retained it for the next sixteen years. 
While the Barretts were performing at the Princess's Theatre (June 1878-May 1879), Barrett decided to go into London management for the first time. He took over the Court Theatre, and opened with an adaptation of Sardou's 'Fernande' on 10 October 1879; Henry Arthur Jones's first London play, 'A Clerical Error', was added to the programme on 13 October. Caroline Heath, however, returned to their home in Leeds to recuperate from a nervous breakdown, the symptoms of which had already been evident while she was on tour in 1877. 
Barrett's tenancy of the Court introduced Helena Modjeska to the English stage in Mortimer's adaptation of 'The Lady of the Camellias', renamed 'Heartsease' (1 May 1880). He demonstrated an acute awareness of the value of publicity by using Modjeska's aristocratic contacts. In 1881 he produced the first in his career of three stagings of Shakespeare: 'Romeo and Juliet', with Modjeska as Juliet, Johnston Forbes-Robertson as Romeo, and himself as Mercutio (26 March). At the same time he started his management of a series of companies which toured his successes, while he settled in London at 21 North Bank, St John's Wood. Though critically less than successful, Barrett's production of W. G. Wills's sombre 'Juana', again with Modjeska (7 May 1881), began his collaboration with E. W. Godwin as his archaeological stage adviser. 
Barrett decided to lease the ailing Princess's in 1881 and began his management with Comyns Carr's adaptation of Meilhac and Halevy's 'Frou-Frou', his last production with Modjeska (4 June). He augmented his company with Mary Eastlake, E. S. Willard, and his own brother George, and produced his first unqualified success, G. R. Sims's 'Lights o' London' (10 September 1881). The play's combination of contemporary issues, detailed realism in staging (including supernumeraries drawn from among actual costermongers and street hawkers), and the manipulation of large crowd scenes doubtless influenced by the theatre practices of the Meiningen company, all contained within a populist melodramatic framework, became Barrett's house style for the remainder of his career. This was followed by a Dickensian crime drama, 'The Romany Rye', adapted by Sims from the novel by George Borrow (10 June 1882). Looking for a vehicle to crystallize his emerging artistic vision, Barrett collaborated with Henry Arthur Jones and Henry Herman on 'The Silver King' (16 November 1882). The role of Wilfred Denver enabled him to develop a performance combining intense pathos, inner strength, and saintliness, which coloured most of his later roles. Critics unanimously proclaimed that Barrett had invested the melodramatic form with new meaning, which received even Matthew Arnold's approval ('Pall Mall Gazette', 6 Dec 1882). The rights to the play were sold to American and Australian managers and Barrett made a profit of nearly $10,000. 
Barrett's last great financial success at the Princess's came with Wills and Herman's 'Claudian', which was assisted by Godwin's archaeological reconstruction of Byzantium (6 December 1883). The scenery was much praised by John Ruskin, and the sensational act II earthquake scene made it a popular hit. There were those, however, who reacted against the play's religiosity and questioned the basis of Barrett's popularity. In 1883 Barrett's broker in Leeds absconded with the profits he had invested so that by the end of 1884 Barrett owed an accumulated debt of $32,000. Although he retained the Princess's until 1886, none of his remaining productions proved financially viable. He worked with Jones on three further plays: 'Chatterton' (22 May 1884), 'Hoodman Blind' (18 August 1885), and 'Lord Harry' (18 February 1886), and with Sydney Grundy on a verse tragedy, 'Clito' (1 May 1886). His most interesting production in the period, however, was of 'Hamlet' (16 October 1884). Barrett seems to have attempted deliberately to flout prevailing performance orthodoxy by rejecting the reflective melancholy so much identified with Irving. Instead, audiences were challenged by an energetically youthful Hamlet who delivered his lines as though the play were a middle-class melodrama. The critical reaction was polarized, and there is evidence to suggest the beginnings of a deliberate campaign by critics with vested theatrical interests to discredit him. Pamphlets were circulated suggesting that Barrett was consciously manoeuvring to displace Irving, and ill feeling was exacerbated by public controversy about the exact extent to which Barrett could claim authorial contribution to 'The Silver King' (Thomas, 85-6). The bad press and declining attendances were enough to have Barrett end his lease of the Princess's (23 July 1886). He had already mortgaged the rights to his plays and he now negotiated with his creditors for a licence to continue operating without being declared bankrupt. To recoup his losses, a preoccupation which remained with him for the next ten years, Barrett left with his company on his first visit to America on 21 September 1886, and opened at the Star Theatre, New York, with 'Claudian' (11 October). A tour which included Boston, Chicago, Washington, and Philadelphia ended profitably, and the company returned to England in May 1887. Two months later Caroline Heath, who had never returned to the stage, died of a brain haemorrhage in London. 
From December 1887 until mid-May 1888 Barrett managed the Globe Theatre, and his successes in revivals, particularly 'The Lady of Lyons' (22 February 1888), and his collaborative work with Sims on 'The Golden Ladder' (22 December 1887) enabled him to start repaying his creditors. Once again he returned to the Princess's, where he began work with Hall Caine on adapting 'The Deemster', renamed 'Ben-my-chree' (17 May 1888). It was his only real success, and he added it to his repertory on his second American tour, which began in Boston on 14 October 1889, and this time took in St Louis and San Francisco. The costs of the company's transport and the general economic depression, however, exhausted his funds and Barrett returned to England in August 1890. 
Over the next five years Barrett battled to retain his reputation both in London and in the provinces and to repay his creditors by further trips to America. These included a third tour, embracing Canada for the first time, from October 1892 to April 1893 and a fourth, which took in the southern states, including Texas, from November 1893 to June 1894. These years saw Barrett dogged by family tragedy: his daughters Ellen and Katherine died in 1892 and 1893 and his brothers Robert and George in 1893 and 1894 respectively. There were few successes by way of compensation. He relied principally on revivals, and added old triumphs of W. C. Macready such as Sheridan Knowles's 'Virginius' to his stock. Even his staunchest admirers felt that his acting was showing 'mannered and mechanical methods' ('The Theatre', December 1891). This was redressed somewhat by his performances as Othello at the Court Theatre, Liverpool (22 October 1891), and as Pete Quilliam in his own version of Hall Caine's 'The Manxman' at Leeds (22 August 1894). But his absences on extended tours made his management of the theatres at Hull and Leeds untenable and he was forced to relinquish them both, in 1891 and 1894. 
The turning point at this stage of Barrett's career came during his fifth American tour (November 1894-July 1895), with the opening at the Grand Opera House, St Louis, of his own 'The Sign of the Cross' (27 March 1895). After a further tryout in Leeds (26 August 1895) it was staged at the Lyric (4 January 1896) and played for 435 performances, until 30 January 1897. The enormous popular success of the play enabled Barrett to pay off all his debts. However, it was his last major achievement. 
The play itself aroused considerable critical hostility. Critics such as Shaw and William Archer saw it as a society drama clothed in a meretricious form of Christianity, while humanists, including G. W. Foote, found it prurient. On the other hand, religious journals took the play's message of conversion at face value, and Barrett's astute marketing ensured that audiences totally unfamiliar with theatregoing attended the production with the warm support of their clergy. Once again Barrett was able to send out touring companies to perform his own plays, and London audiences saw him as Virginius and Othello. Despite the antagonism of Archer and Shaw towards 'The Sign of the Cross', both men admired his revised version of 'The Manxman', which opened at the Lyric on 16 November 1896, and which Shaw described as 'a serious modern play' ('Saturday Review', 5 Dec 1896). 
There was much discussion about actors who might be considered for a knighthood during the diamond jubilee year, and Barrett's name was raised. In the event he was passed over. In December 1897 he began his first tour of Australia, and played his established repertory in Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide. He returned to England in July 1898 and after further provincial touring took over the management of Irving's Lyceum Theatre. Neither an original play, 'Man and his Makers', written with L. N. Parker (7 October 1899), nor revivals of 'Hamlet' and 'Othello' were sufficient to warrant extending his term beyond December. Moreover, declining audiences in the provinces suggested that his plays were suffering from overexposure. 
Barrett went on his second Australian tour, beginning in August 1901, with Lillah McCarthy as his leading lady. This time he visited New Zealand and, on his return journey, South Africa, and arrived home in August 1902. Once again he alternated between the provinces and occasional London appearances. He tried out 'The Christian King', a sprawling epic about Alfred and the coming of Christianity to England, at the Prince's Theatre, Bristol (6 November 1902), before playing it at the Adelphi (18 December 1902). His last original play, 'Lucky Durham', opened at the Shakespeare Theatre, Liverpool (9 January 1904), and it was there that he gave his final performance, as Wilfred Denver. Although he had signed a lease for the Comedy Theatre in London on 15 June, he fell ill and was taken to a nursing home at 45 Devonshire Street, where he died from complications arising after a cancer operation, on 22 July 1904. He was buried at Hampstead cemetery on 25 July, leaving assets valued at more than $30,000. 
Barrett's theatrical values were uncompromisingly Victorian. As such he looked back: his performances were modelled on those of Macready and his productions on the picturesque realizations of antiquity which both Macready and Charles Kean had pioneered. At the same time he saw his own role as pleasing and educating a popular audience. His personal attributes of a fine physique and voice made him an attractive stage personality, although his vanity inclined him to affectations which diminished his very considerable talents. His performances in Shakespeare's plays, for example, suggested a radically different approach to their interpretation. He chose, however, to devote his energies to revitalizing melodrama, a genre increasingly denigrated by his contemporaries. Conservative critics such as Clement Scott and William Winter admired Barrett's championing of traditional theatrical verities; Archer, Arthur Walkley, and Beerbohm were affronted by his failure to come to terms with the 'new drama' or were outraged particularly by what they took to be his conscious identification with his religious roles. 
Nevertheless Barrett was an astute manager and entrepreneur who appreciated the value of publicity, which many of his fellow managers saw as vulgar and self-aggrandizing. He was devoted to the fellow actors in his companies, assisting them with their stagecraft and caring for their welfare with unflagging paternalism just as he diligently developed the dramatic talents of such writers as Jones and Caine. Though he may have been despised and rejected by many critics, his religious plays undoubtedly attracted new audiences to the theatre and provided enduring subject matter for the cinema. 


@@@@@


doc= 30617


Barrie, Sir James Matthew, baronet (1860-1937), playwright and novelist, was born in a small house in The Tenements, Brechin Road, Kirriemuir, Forfarshire, on 9 May 1860, the ninth child and third and youngest son of David Barrie (1814-1902), a handloom weaver in Kirriemuir, and his wife, Margaret (1820-1895), daughter of Alexander Ogilvy, a stonemason. 
The Barrie family had to endure not only poverty but a number of domestic tragedies, including the early death of two daughters. These events occurred before James was born, however. The first tragedy to involve him personally was the death in a skating accident of his thirteen-year-old brother David. In his autobiographical novel, 'Margaret Ogilvy' (1896), Barrie tried to recapture his own childhood memories of this incident, especially as it affected his mother. 
When David died in 1867 James was still at a local school. But a more ambitious academic route was planned for him. Taking advantage of the democratic Scottish university entrance system, Barrie's parents sent his eldest brother, Alexander, to Aberdeen University. Having graduated with honours in classics Alexander became a teacher at Glasgow Academy. James followed him as a pupil and studied there from 1868 until February 1871, when he transferred to Forfar Academy. When Alexander became one of the first school inspectors his younger brother again followed him, this time to Dumfries Academy. He later recorded in 'The Greenwood Hat' (1930) that the years he spent there, from 1873 until 1878, were among the happiest of his life. The drama society in particular interested him, and for it he composed his first play, a melodrama in six scenes entitled 'Bandalero the Bandit'. 
Barrie was himself being prepared for higher education. Edinburgh University was chosen, and he matriculated there in 1878. In 'An Edinburgh Eleven' (1888) he paid tribute to the broad disciplinary base provided by this degree. His literary studies under Professor David Masson not only initiated a creative desire to imitate the dramatists of the English Renaissance; they also led Barrie to compose academic essays on Skelton ('The rector of Diss') and Nash for a projected academic work to be entitled 'The Early Satirical Poetry of Great Britain'. In Professor Campbell Fraser's classes he studied one of the earliest psychology courses offered in Scotland. Fraser's views on perception and the fragility of personal identity had a lasting influence on a young man conscious of the many roles that he played in his own life. In an intensely competitive system Barrie graduated with an ordinary MA, in 1882. 
It was journalism rather than academe that first welcomed Barrie. While still an undergraduate he had written articles for the 'Edinburgh Courant'. An unexpected opportunity to become leader-writer at the 'Nottingham Journal' then opened up, and he went south in January 1883. In Nottingham he learned techniques of writing and note-taking that remained with him for the rest of his life. His position also implied tackling a wide range of topics, from the Irish question to Darwinism. As Barrie also contributed fiction and reviews to the paper it is surprising that he found time to compose material for London magazines as well. Some of these were published, and so when the 'Nottingham Journal' folded, in October 1884, he considered moving to the capital as a freelance writer. He wrote for advice to Frederick Greenwood, editor of the 'St James's Gazette', as he had shown particular interest in his 'Scotch' stories. When Greenwood sternly warned him against coming his young correspondent reacted by catching a train to London. 
Barrie arrived in the capital on 28 March 1885 and soon justified the bold move he had made. In the succeeding five years he published six books while contributing articles and reviews to fifteen major journals. The most immediately successful of these books were the story-collections 'Auld Licht Idylls' (1888) and 'A Window in Thrums' (1889). These were based largely on his mother's reminiscences of Kirriemuir. None the less the narrator clearly warns his readers not to interpret either village or characters realistically like 'a dull historian' (J. M. Barrie, 'Auld Licht Idylls', 10), but imaginatively. Seen in those terms Thrums represents those reinvented dreams of their rural past that its exiled inhabitants use to strengthen their identity in urban exile after the industrial revolution. 
After the comparatively solitary life that he had led in Nottingham Barrie found London more congenial. The friends that he did make -- notably Thomas Gilmour, secretary to Lord Rosebery, and Alexander Riach, a journalist on the 'Daily Telegraph' -- soon discovered their own lives appearing, lightly disguised, in their companion's other early prose works. For example the hero of 'Better Dead' (1887) is called Riach, and Lord Rosebery becomes one of the leading figures that he considers killing in its highly melodramatic plot. Barrie's own romantic and sexual problems also figure in these works. Less than 5 feet tall, he was acutely conscious that women overlooked him in more ways than one. In his earliest fiction unprepossessing artisan writer-heroes recur with some regularity and have more sexual success than their creator had in the days when he shared a houseboat with Gilmour and the novelist Henry Marriott Watson. As outsider he had watched their romances unfold; in 'When a Man's Single' (1888) Barrie turned the fictional tables on them. In that novel it is his own 'alter ego', the rustic journalist Rob Angus, who wins the beautiful, talented, and affluent heroine. 
The 1890s saw Barrie firmly established as a leading novelist. Old Kirriemuir was revived in 'The Little Minister' (1891) and this was followed by three novels on the topic of the artist as young man: 'Sentimental Tommy' (1896), 'Margaret Ogilvy' (1896), and 'Tommy and Grizel' (1900). These produced initial sales of over 225,000 copies in Britain and the United States. Yet with the exception of works on the Peter Pan theme -- 'Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens' (1906), 'Peter and Wendy' (1911) -- they were also the last novels that he wrote. Instead he turned to and persevered with drama, although a mixed reception had greeted his early experiments in that mode. While 'Ibsen's Ghost' (1891) and 'Walker, London' (1892) proved him capable of writing farces in one-act and three-act form respectively, his attempt at a problem play, 'The Wedding Guest' (1900), had failed to move its audiences. Even his dramatization in 1897 of 'The Little Minister' did not match the popularity of its prose source. But Barrie was now under the spell of the theatre, attracted by its glamour and the artistic challenge of adapting to its visual dimension. 
Social and sporting interests relieved Barrie's heavy work schedule. His love of cricket led him to found his own club, the Allahakbarries, in 1887; this group of media stars, explorers, and dignitaries remained active until 1913. His habit of invading the families of married friends and inventing dramatic games for their children also dates from this period. Before the children of Arthur and Sylvia Du Maurier famously became the 'co-authors' of 'Peter Pan', Margaret, the daughter of W. E. Henley, and Bevil, the son of Arthur Quiller Couch, had enjoyed that role. 
Romantically, however, Barrie was less successful. Attracted throughout his life to independent women who had gained that freedom on the stage or through noble birth, he found his powers of invention of more limited use in this area. In 1891 the object of his infatuation was Mary Ansell ('b'. 1862), the ambitious actress daughter of a licensed grocer. He demanded a major part for her in 'Walker, London'. Three years later, when Barrie's mother became ill, this actress-playwright alliance was still in force, and Mary accompanied Barrie to Kirriemuir. Their engagement and marriage at his parents' house in July of that year were somewhat subdued, as Barrie himself had also fallen ill with pneumonia. That physical problems existed for the couple can be indirectly deduced from Sentimental Tommy's self-absorbed, role-playing inability to 'think himself' into sexual love (J. M. Barrie, 'Tommy and Grizel', 168, 380), but proof was as yet withheld. 
Between 1901 and 1904 Barrie produced three major plays, all of which followed the pattern of those Shakespearian romances that Masson placed at the apex of literary achievement. In 1902 'Quality Street' and 'The Admirable Crichton' used that form to explore different kinds of social imprisonment. In the former Phoebe Throssel's gender and gentility, in the latter Crichton's social position prevent their full potential flourishing in hierarchical, paternalistic, Victorian England. Once the central issue has been defined these plays test it out imaginatively in their equivalent of Prospero's island in 'The Tempest'. The ball scenes in 'Quality Street' and the island in 'Crichton' allow them fantastically to prove those powers for greatness that are doomed to waste unseen in early twentieth-century England. 
While 'Quality Street' ran for eighteen months and 'The Admirable Crichton' for ten it was the third 'romance' -- 'Peter Pan' (1904) -- that broke all previous theatrical records and proved Barrie's most enduring success. Testing out the age-old questions of origin in a child's 'Never land', this strange adult pantomime uses the allegorical method described in 'The rector of Diss' to link the simplest kind of sensual appeal to a mythic exploration of the issues recently highlighted by Darwin. If Barrie prided himself on counterpointing light and serious messages in his art he was also intent on pushing the resources of the theatre to their absolute limits. 'Peter Pan' was his most ambitious attempt at each. It should be remembered that only his most enthusiastic friend, the American impresario Charles Frohman, was willing to take a chance on producing a spectacle that, in its original form demanded a cast of over fifty, with five major scene changes and almost every dangerous piece of theatrical business known. It was this strange work that became the high point of every Christmas in the London theatre for three decades. 
The fact that its central character was a little boy unable to face the facts of adulthood at a time when Barrie's own sexual inadequacies came under public scrutiny adds a sadder twist to the plot of the author's life. When he wrote 'Peter Pan' he had found another 'distant' woman to adore. Sylvia Du Maurier, now wife of Arthur Llewelyn Davies, was a talented society lady. She also had a young family for Barrie to captivate in his accustomed role of playmate and storyteller. In his dedication to 'Peter Pan' in 1928 he suggested that the games he played with the Llewelyn Davies boys in his newly acquired Surrey property, Black Lake Cottage, were part of the work's creation process. While he was enjoying the fruits of his theatrical fame and finding excuses to invade the Llewelyn Davies family Mary Ansell found herself deprived of both a professional career and her husband's attention. In 1907 she began an affair with the young actor Gilbert Cannan. When Barrie's gardener blurted out the truth to him, and Mary refused his appeals to end the liaison, divorce proceedings became inevitable. The undefended case, on grounds of adultery, that the playwright brought before the court on 13 October 1909 was fully reported. As his own failure to consummate the marriage was part of the evidence his impotence became common knowledge. 
In the light of this Barrie's continued dramatic interest in different kinds of female power is understandable. His basic thesis, as expressed in the dedication to 'Peter Pan', is that woman has a complex Russian-doll type of mind, superior to its simple male equivalent. This is played out in Wendy's clever manipulating of Peter. Before this it had been malevolently established in 'Becky Sharp' (1893) and had been benevolently matched, ten years later, in 'Little Mary' (1903). 'Alice Sit by the Fire' (1905), 'What every Woman Knows' (1908), 'The Adored One' (1913), and 'A Kiss for Cinderella' (1916) extend the survey. Unsurprisingly while London's West End found the benevolent side of heroine power easy to applaud it was not at all happy when the manipulative potential of the Machiavellian female was dramatized. The socially unthreatening cleverness of Maggie Shand in 'What every Woman Knows' was acceptable. But when Leonora in 'The Adored One' throws a man to his death from a railway carriage because his smoking annoys her baby, then fools a male judge and jury into acquitting her, the audiences booed. Barrie rewrote the conclusion, turning her crime (and the subversive power-play that accompanied it) into a dream. 'Reality' now became a rural idyll, with Leonora restored to Edwardian, paternalist views of woman's role in society. 
Barrie's experiments with film techniques and the music hall also belong to this period. But it is the one-act form that dominates. The best of these -- notably 'The Twelve Pound Look' (1910) and 'Rosalind' (1912) -- continued his dual interest in heroine-ism and the split personality. Barrie admitted that personal problems were interrupting his work and causing him to tear up more plays than he completed. Before his divorce Barrie's agent, Addison Bright, was found guilty of embezzlement, and committed suicide in 1906. His friend and financier Charles Frohman sank with the 'Lusitania' in 1915. First Arthur and then Sylvia Llewelyn Davies died, in 1906 and 1910 respectively, making Barrie the guardian of their 'lost boy' children. In 1913 his close friend the explorer Robert Scott wrote to him from the South Pole 'as a dying man', asking him to look after his wife and child ('Letters of J. M. Barrie', 46, n. 3). Although Lady Scott maintained her independence Barrie was now at the head of a vastly expanded 'family'. That he took his duties very seriously is confirmed in the many thoughtful and loving letters he wrote to the Davies boys as they grew up. 
Barrie's melancholic moods were commented upon frequently by his friends during the period 1915-20. A more pessimistic view of life is also reflected in the two major fantasy plays, which appeared in 1917 and 1920. 'Dear Brutus', whose very title is drawn from 'Julius Caesar', is the most overtly Shakespearian of all Barrie's plays. There is, however, a melancholy wistfulness absent from its major source 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. The magic wood into which the Puck figure, Lob, sends his house guests on midsummer's eve is used to enact the sad truth that most people, if offered a second chance in life, would make the same mistakes all over again. 'Mary Rose', whose troubled ghost returns sadly from the world of faery to seek out her lost son, draws its storyline from a summer holiday spent in the Western Isles and from James Hogg's poem 'Kilmeny' rather than from Shakespeare; but it too is tragicomic in spirit. 
In 1910 Barrie had been among those considered by the Liberal government for a peerage if a forced creation became necessary to get Lloyd George's budget through the House of Lords. Although this initiative proved unnecessary he was created a baronet by the king in 1913. In 1922 he was appointed to the Order of Merit. A year earlier Michael, one of the Llewelyn Davies boys, whom he had come to regard as his sons, died unexpectedly and in mysterious circumstances. Cynthia Asquith, who in 1918 had become the author's secretary at his Adelphi Terrace house, records 'What his death dealt Barrie in shock and in sorrow cannot -- should not -- be told' (Asquith, 135). Life and work continued, however, and in 1923 five of his plays were running contemporaneously in London. His powers as an orator were also regularly called upon at this time either to promote causes or to mark the honours being conferred upon him. His rectorial address at St Andrews University in 1922 wittily and pathetically discusses the need for 'courage', while his inauguration as Edinburgh University's chancellor, in 1930, produced an equally passionate speech, defending the right of all social classes to higher education. As he became president of the Society of Authors in 1928 and gained honorary doctorates from Oxford (1926) and Cambridge (1930) public opportunities to celebrate and brood upon his own life were not lacking. 
The ghost story 'Farewell Miss Julie Logan' (1931) ended Barrie's prose fiction on a high note. Theatrically he was not so fortunate. The conclusion of his career saw him once more bewitched by a young actress, this time Elizabeth Bergner. It was at her suggestion that he began his last play, on the biblical theme of David and Jonathan. As 'The Boy David' it had a successful trial run in Edinburgh towards the end of 1936. But the London opening was damned with faint praise, and it closed after seven weeks, on 21 January 1937. Barrie had been ill throughout this period. Cancer was suspected, bronchial pneumonia set in, and he was moved from his home, 3 Adelphi Terrace, to a nursing home at 57 Manchester Street, Marylebone, London, where on 19 June 1937 the curtains closed on his own life. His body was buried in the family grave, on the hillside above Kirriemuir, on 24 June. At his request his name was inscribed on the stone 'with no embellishment of any kind' (Mackail, 718). 
Barrie's literary epitaph is not so clearly established. That he was a genius was taken for granted in his own day. For William Archer 'no rational being doubts that Sir James is a humorist of original and delightful genius' (Archer, 231). Robert Louis Stevenson agreed: 'It looks to me as if you are a man of genius' ('Letters', 273). But adulation turned to denigration shortly after Barrie's death. With the advent of Freudian criticism the temptation to turn 'this diminutive, dark-haired Scotsman' with the 'deep-hoarded sadness in his blue eyes' (Asquith, 2) into an Oedipal version of his own most famous creation proved irresistible. In 1971 Harry M. Geduld produced the most exhaustive of these analyses. While Geduld's 'James Barrie' seeks evidence of a mother complex across a wide range of texts, later writers have advanced the same thesis from a much reduced canon, confined to 'Margaret Ogilvy', the Tommy novels, and 'Peter Pan'. 
While this movement withdrew Barrie's claim to genius on the grounds of authorial immaturity the Scottish literati were busy rejecting him on other grounds. As their interest was confined to treatments of Scotland another eclectic canon in which the prose works of his literary apprenticeship again dominate was erected. Critics like George Blake, whose own novels were resolutely realistic, serious, socialistic, and nationalistic, were unlikely to have much sympathy with a manneristic, right-wing, comic myth-maker offering Scottish stereotypes for the amusement of London audiences. Blake's book 'Barrie and the Kailyard School' dismisses his countryman in literal and naturalistic terms, despite Barrie's consistent plea -- from 'The rector of Diss' (1884) to 'The Greenwood Hat' (1930) -- that his art was essentially allegorical and artificial. Later a counter-movement, initiated by Jacqueline Rose and Leonee Ormond, paid attention to these claims. By redefining him on his own terms, as a man of many personalities whose finest dramas followed the seriously fantastic method of Shakespearian romance, they saw him not as a backward-looking sentimentalist but as one of the first modernists. 
In the worlds beyond academe a more positive judgement had already been made. In the popular imagination Barrie's myths are retranslated for each age. Psychologically (the 'Wendy complex'), politically ('the boy David'), and commercially (Quality Street chocolates) his mythic prototypes outlive him. Andrew Birkin's BBC television trilogy 'The Lost Boys' (1978), with its sensitive portrayal of Barrie's powerfully mysterious character, carried this legacy forward in another mode. Birkin's script and subsequent book also illustrated how Barrie's enthusiasms for the theatre and the media in general usually found support from those who shared these passions. 
Later West End revivals of 'The Admirable Crichton' and 'Peter Pan' proved Barrie's continued power to please. More humbly his major full-length and one-act plays continued to attract amateur companies throughout Britain. The visual power of his dramas also made him an established cinematic favourite. From the earliest days of silent film, when Cecil B. de Mille produced 'The Admirable Crichton' as 'Man and Woman' (1919), to Disney's 'Peter Pan' (1953), and Spielberg's 'Hook' (1991), his thought-provoking images have given pleasure to audiences across the world. 
The assessment emanating from stage and stalls was always of paramount importance to Barrie. His constant attendance at rehearsals, amending his text in consultation with actors and directors, proves the first contention; his absence from most first-night performances, in fear of audience rejection, the second. None the less James Barrie MA also sought academic approbation throughout his life. To this end he provided a far more detailed critical commentary on his own art than most authors do. Any academic assessment of his status as a writer must surely begin from those premises. 


@@@@@


doc= 30618


Barrington, Rutland (1853-1922), actor and singer, was born at Penge, Surrey, on 15 January 1853. He was the fourth son of John George Fleet, a wholesale sugar dealer in Fenchurch Street, London, and his wife, Esther, the daughter of the Revd Ferdinand Faithfull, rector of Headley, near Epsom. He was educated at first by a private tutor, then at Headley rectory, and thereafter at Merchant Taylors' School, London, and, on leaving, entered business in the City, where he remained until he was twenty-one. His aunt, Emily Faithfull, was a well-known dramatic reader, and she was instrumental in obtaining his first engagement with the actor Henry Neville. He made his first appearance on the stage at the Olympic Theatre on 1 September 1874 as Sir George Barclay in 'Lady Clancarty' by Tom Taylor. In the following year he went on tour with Mrs Howard Paul, and he remained with her when she obtained an engagement with Richard D'Oyly Carte and insisted that Barrington should be engaged also. 
Barrington made his debut under D'Oyly Carte's management at the Opera Comique on 17 November 1877, when he took the part of Dr Daly in 'The Sorcerer' by Gilbert and Sullivan, and had an immediate success. This first engagement with D'Oyly Carte lasted for eleven years, first at the Opera Comique and later at the Savoy, during which period he played many original parts in Gilbert and Sullivan operas, including Captain Corcoran in 'HMS Pinafore' (May 1878), Archibald Grosvenor in 'Patience' (April 1881), and King Hildebrand in 'Princess Ida' (January 1884). Most important of his original roles was Pooh-Bah in 'The Mikado' (March 1885), after which he was even given the affectionate nickname of Pooh-Bah by many of his admirers. 
After quitting the Savoy, Barrington managed the St James's Theatre, and opened on 13 October 1888 with 'The Dean's Daughter' by Sydney Grundy and F. C. Phillips, which was followed by Gilbert's 'Brantinghame Hall'; but both plays proved unsuccessful, and Barrington was forced into bankruptcy. 
For a short period Barrington played at the Comedy Theatre under Charles Hawtrey, but he returned to the Savoy, under D'Oyly Carte, in December 1889 in order to play the part of Giuseppe in Gilbert and Sullivan's 'The Gondoliers'. This second engagement at the Savoy covered a period of four and a half years (1889-94), in the course of which he appeared in 'The Nautch Girl' (1891), 'The Vicar of Bray' (1892), 'Haddon Hall' (1892), 'Jane Annie' (1893), and 'Utopia Unlimited' (1893). In 1894 he joined George Edwardes's company in order to play Dr Brierley in 'A Gaiety Girl' on tour and at Daly's Theatre. After a few other engagements, including an appearance at the Savoy as Ludwig in the last Gilbert and Sullivan opera, 'The Grand Duke' (1896), he became increasingly absorbed by musical comedy rather than comic opera and returned to Daly's, where he remained from 1896 to 1904, playing in 'The Geisha', 'A Greek Slave', 'San Toy', 'A Country Girl', and 'The Cingalee'. 
Thereafter, beyond appearing in 'Amasis' (1906), 'The Girl in the Train' (1910), and in occasional revivals at Daly's and the Savoy, Barrington received only minor engagements at various theatres and music-halls. From 1916 to 1918 he was engaged with John Martin-Harvey. With that manager he played his last part, that of Claus in Maurice Maeterlinck's 'The Burgomaster of Stilemonde' at the Lyceum Theatre, Edinburgh, in October 1918. In the following January he had a paralytic seizure, but he lingered on, in very straitened circumstances, for a few years. A benefit performance was given for him at the Savoy Theatre in February 1921, and in April 1922 he was elected an annuitant of King George's pension fund for actors. He died on 1 June 1922 at St James's Infirmary, Wandsworth Common. 
Barrington was the author of a play, 'Bartonmere Towers' (1893), a version of Kingsley's 'The Water Babies', and of two volumes of autobiography (1908, 1911). He also contributed to 'Punch', writing as Lady Gay. He had considerable skill as a watercolourist. In his time Barrington was a man of considerable importance in the theatre, with a fine figure, an abundant sense of humour, and a soft though penetrating voice. The tradition he left in the parts which he created at the Savoy and Daly's long survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30619


Ward, Sir Lancelot Edward Barrington- (1884-1953), surgeon, was born at Worcester on 4 July 1884, the second son of Mark James Barrington-Ward (died 1924) and his wife, Caroline Pearson; the father was an inspector of schools, and later became rector of Duloe in Cornwall and an honorary canon of Truro Cathedral. Barrington-Ward's four brothers all distinguished themselves in their various professions, one of them, R. M. Barrington-Ward, becoming editor of 'The Times'. Barrington-Ward entered Westminster School as a classical scholar, but became unwell and was transferred to Bromsgrove in his native county, where he was restored to health. He gained a classical exhibition at Worcester College, Oxford, but decided on medicine as a career and entered Edinburgh University, where he qualified in 1908. Also captain of the university rugby fifteen, he was awarded four English international caps and played against Wales in the first international match played on the new ground at Twickenham. 
Barrington-Ward passed the Edinburgh fellowship examination in 1910 and the English fellowship two years later, after studying at the Middlesex Hospital in London. In 1913 he returned to Edinburgh to obtain the degree of ChM and was awarded the Chiene medal for outstanding ability. His London career in surgery began with his appointment in 1910 as a resident at the Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children, where he assisted two of the leading children's surgeons of the day -- George E. Waugh and Thomas Fairbank. He continued his work at this hospital as medical superintendent, and was appointed to the consulting staff in 1914. Immediately after the outbreak of war later that year he volunteered to go to the Balkans as surgeon-in-chief of no. 2 Serbian Relief Fund Hospital, with the honorary rank of lieutenant-colonel. He was awarded the grand cross of the Norwegian order of St Olave and the Serbian order of St Sava. 
While still a young man Barrington-Ward's skill as a surgeon was widely recognized. He was much sought after by private patients and operated on several members of the royal family. In 1935 he was appointed KCVO and two years later he was made surgeon to the king's household. In 1952 he was invited to become an extra-surgeon to the queen. 
Barrington-Ward's experience in children's surgery is recorded in numerous articles which he published in various journals, and in a standard textbook entitled 'Abdominal Surgery of Children' (1928). In addition to his work at Great Ormond Street, he was also on the staff of the Wood Green and Royal Northern hospitals. At the last of these he eventually became senior surgeon. He suggested to his colleagues there that they produce a textbook of operative surgery in which the various members of staff dealt with their own specialities; under his editorship 'Royal Northern Operative Surgery' was published in 1939. As a surgeon, his success was not only due to his clinical judgement and technical skill; he was also gentle and sympathetic and had the enviable knack of obtaining the confidence of children who were his patients. In the operating theatre he showed punctilious courtesy to all the staff including the most junior nurse. 
Barrington-Ward was twice married: first in 1917 to Dorothy Anne, second daughter of T. W. Miles, of Caragh, co. Kerry; she did much charitable work for the hospitals with which her husband was connected and also for the Peter Pan League. She died in 1935, leaving three daughters. In 1941 Barrington-Ward married Catherine Wilhelmina, only daughter of E. G. Reuter, of Harrogate; they had one son. 
Barrington-Ward enjoyed welcoming his friends to his country home, Hawkedon House, Hawkedon, near Bury St Edmunds. He was knowledgeable enough about agriculture to be elected president of the Suffolk Agricultural Association. Unfortunately he did not have the chance to enjoy retirement, for despite undergoing drastic surgery he died at his home on 17 November 1953. 
MN. Love', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30620


Ward, Robert McGowan Barrington- (1891-1948), journalist, was born in Worcester on 23 February 1891, the fourth son of Mark James Barrington-Ward (died 1924), an inspector of schools and later rector of Duloe, Cornwall, and his wife, Caroline Pearson. The surgeon Lancelot Edward Barrington-Ward was an elder brother. He was educated at Westminster School, where he gained distinction in the classics and was captain of the school, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship (1909-13). At Oxford he wrote light verse for university magazines, and became president of the union in 1912. Having obtained a second in classical moderations (1911) and a third in Greats (1913), and been awarded the Tancred scholarship at Lincoln's Inn in 1911, he had intended to embark upon a legal career. However, a parallel interest in journalism resulted in a fortunate introduction to Geoffrey Robinson (later Geoffrey Dawson), then editor of 'The Times'. Barrington-Ward joined the staff of the newspaper in 1913, and showed sufficient promise to be made editorial secretary in February 1914. He contributed the chapter 'The foreign office and its agencies' to the 'Oxford Survey of the British Empire' (1914). 
On the outbreak of war in August 1914, Barrington-Ward was commissioned in the 6th battalion of the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry, and he became battalion adjutant in 1916. Wounded at Bellacourt in 1917, he became brigade major of the 174th infantry brigade, and in 1918 he wrote 'Platoon Fighting', an attempt to apply the tactical lessons of the fighting on the western front. He was a brave soldier who was awarded both the MC (1917) and the DSO (1918). 
Like many young men of his generation, Barrington-Ward was 'marked by the trenches' (Cowling, 128) and fearful of another war, and was a strong supporter of the League of Nations. He covered the peace negotiations for 'The Observer' in Paris and sympathized with German grievances, a sentiment which was shared by many in Britain. During the 1920s his belief in the need for a revision of the Versailles treaty was reinforced by French policy (particularly the occupation of the Ruhr in 1923), and he came to epitomize the unease felt by many about the treatment of Germany at Versailles, dragging the 'nation's self-forged fetters around with him and [raising] his voice in grief-stricken means of self reproach' (Lentin, 150). 
Although called to the bar in 1919, Barrington-Ward decided to follow a career in journalism, and spent eight years as assistant editor to 'The Observer' under J. L. Garvin (who shared his views on the Versailles treaty) before returning to 'The Times' in October 1927, as assistant editor under Geoffrey Dawson. In 1926 he married Margaret Adele (died 1974), daughter of Evasio Radice of the Indian Civil Service; they had two sons and a daughter. 
As the position of foreign editor was abolished in 1928, Barrington-Ward and Geoffrey Dawson were responsible for 'The Times''s coverage of foreign affairs. Barrington-Ward was also chief leader writer. A particular interest was Anglo-German affairs, and he remained convinced that the treaty of Versailles had been misconceived. Although no admirer of Nazism, he hoped for an accommodation with the Hitler government. Thus, two days after the Germans illegally re-entered the demilitarized Rhineland on 7 March 1936, the 'Times' leader (written by Barrington-Ward) was headed 'A chance to rebuild'. 'As to British opinion generally,' he wrote to A. L. Kennedy on 24 March, 'our difficulty has been to find enough letters stating what might crudely be called the anti-German view to balance the correspondence'. In the same letter he lamented that Britain was ''tied and bound by the chain of our sins', stretching all the way back to the General Election of 1918' (Barrington-Ward to A. L. Kennedy, 24 March 1936, News Int. RO, 'The Times' archive). 
The pro-appeasement line of Dawson and Barrington-Ward caused tensions in the 'Times' office, as the latter admitted -- writing in his diary during the 1938 Czech crisis that 'most of the office is against Dawson and me' (MacDonald, 48). Outside it, the line taken by the 'Times's' leaders could also arouse fierce opposition, so that when the paper urged concessions on the Czech government before Godesberg, Harold Nicolson denounced what in this case he erroneously believed to be the deputy editor's work (to his face), as 'a masterpiece of unctuous ambiguity' (Nicolson, 362). 
In later years Barrington-Ward, like Dawson, had to live with the opprobrium directed towards the policy of appeasement advocated by 'The Times' ['see 'Cliveden set], and as a result his wider record was largely forgotten. His leaders on unemployment, for example, resulted in the appointment of a government commission in 1934. After his appointment as editor on 1 October 1941, when Dawson retired, he was a strong supporter of Sir William Beveridge and of the need for wholesale social reform. During his editorship, 'The Times' moved to the left, and during the war advocated many of the welfare measures subsequently enacted by the Labour government elected in 1945. The condemnation by 'The Times' of British intervention in Greece in 1944 provoked a stinging response by Winston Churchill in the House of Commons on 18 January 1945. Barrington-Ward noted that the parliamentary cheer which followed Churchill's attack was the 'loudest, largest and most vicious -- even savage -- that I have ever heard in the House' (Barrington-Ward, diary, 18 Jan 1945). Churchill himself had not forgiven 'The Times' for its association with appeasement, though it is likely that (as Barrington-Ward believed) many tory MPs were expressing anger at what they perceived as the leftward drift of the paper. Nevertheless Barrington-Ward regarded himself as a tory radical, and not a socialist. 
Like Dawson, Barrington-Ward delegated the initial drafting of editorials to others, notably to E. H. Carr, later a distinguished left-orientated historian. The consistent radicalism of his later years, in the direction of the post-war corporatist consensus, hardly substantiates the suggestion that Barrington-Ward's later poor health undermined his judgement. Despite his radicalism he liked to keep in touch with his old roots: he was, for example, involved in the discussions about the succession to his old mentor Garvin at 'The Observer'. 
Barrington-Ward was a governor of Westminster School and wrote a memoir (1924) of his headmaster, James Gow. In 1947 he was made an honorary fellow of Balliol College. His health weakened (from the early effects of Parkinson's disease) at a relatively early age, and he died on 29 February 1948 from cerebral malaria while on a cruise to South Africa designed to help recovery. He was buried in the Kiriondoni cemetery, Dar es Salaam. 


@@@@@


doc= 30621


Barry, Alfred (1826-1910), Anglican bishop of Sydney and educationist, was born at Ely Place, Holborn, London, on 15 January 1826, the second son of Sir Charles Barry (1795-1860), architect, whose 'Life and Works' he published in 1867, and elder brother of Edward Middleton Barry, whose Royal Academy lectures on architecture he edited with a memoir in 1881; his mother was Sarah (1798-1882), daughter of Samuel Rowsell. Educated at King's College, London, from 1841 to 1844, Barry proceeded in 1844 to Trinity College, Cambridge; in 1848 he was placed fourth among the wranglers and seventh in the first class of the classical tripos. He also won a Smith's prize. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in the same year. He graduated BA in 1848, and proceeded MA in 1851, BD in 1860, and DD in 1866. He was made a DCL of Oxford in 1870 and of Durham in 1888. 
Ordained deacon in 1850 and priest in 1853, Barry became sub-warden of Trinity College, Glenalmond, the combined theological college and public school of the Scottish Episcopal church in 1849. On 13 August 1851 he married Louisa Victoria, daughter of Thomas Smart Hughes, canon of Peterborough. In 1854 he became headmaster of Leeds grammar school, and from 1862 to 1868 he was principal of Cheltenham College. During his tenure of the latter office he extended the buildings of the school and raised its academic prestige. 
In 1868 Barry was appointed principal of King's College, London (of which he had been a fellow since 1849), in succession to Richard William Jelf. Barry was an innovative and energetic, even pushy, principal. He reorganized the administration of the college and relaxed the rules that demanded strict religious conformity. He brought its teaching up to date, especially in the fields of engineering and medicine, and extended the evening-class department to meet the needs of young working men keen to further their education. He arranged that students for the theological associateship could attend classes for two years without sacrificing their daytime employment, and devote their whole time to their college course only in their third year. A strong supporter of higher education for women, in 1871 he instituted 'lectures for ladies' at Richmond and Twickenham, and in 1881 he established at Kensington a women's department. From 1871 to 1877 he served on the London school board. 
Of a fine presence and with a sonorous voice, Barry was an effective speaker and preacher. Gladstone made him a residentiary canon of Worcester in 1871, and in 1881 he transferred him to a similar office in Westminster Abbey. Appointed honorary chaplain to Queen Victoria in 1875, and chaplain-in-ordinary in 1879, Barry also held the Boyle lectureship from 1876 to 1878. He published the first series of lectures as 'What is Natural Theology?' (1877) and the second as 'The Manifold Witness for Christ' (1880). 
Barry always had his aim set on high office in the church. However, his 'intense and notorious desire to secure a see' (Hearnshaw, 334) counted against him, and he was not appointed to an English bishopric. After refusing the see of Calcutta in 1876, in 1883 he accepted appointment to the diocese of Sydney, Australia. The bishop of Sydney was also primate of the Church of England in Australia and Tasmania, and was metropolitan of New South Wales. Barry was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on 1 January 1884. Misfortune attended his departure: he sent on to Australia his entire library, lectures, and manuscripts in a vessel which was lost in a shipwreck. Queen Victoria and others showed their sympathy by endeavouring to replace the books. 
Barry was enthroned on 24 April 1884 in St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney. Later that year he published a collection of sermons, 'First Words in Australia'. Evangelicals, who were powerful in the diocese of Sydney, had not wanted Barry as bishop. He himself was a low-churchman of liberal sympathies, opposed to church parties and keen to promote Anglican comprehensiveness. In Sydney, where anti-Christian secularists were on the attack, he sought through lectures and writings to reinterpret Christian doctrines in the light of modern science and scholarship. For the sake of 'the higher life of the colony', he offered to co-operate with Christians of other denominations (Phillips, 14). Many protestants welcomed his leadership, but evangelicals were alarmed by his liberalism and his unwillingness to discourage the spread of moderate high-church practices in some Sydney churches. Barry emphasized the importance of the cathedral as the centre of diocesan life and introduced daily choral services, and he also overhauled the diocesan administration. 
In the field of education Barry was likewise very active: he strengthened the existing church secondary schools, founded two more, and encouraged Anglicans to utilize the provisions for religious instruction in state schools. Elected in 1886 to the senate of the University of Sydney, he wanted to see closer links between theological and university education. To this end he arranged to move the diocesan theological college, Moore College, from the edge of Sydney to a new site adjacent to the university. 
In 1886 he was the first bishop in Australia to 'set apart' a deaconess. As primate he successfully urged the Australian church to accept responsibility for missionary work in New Guinea. However, despite his vigorous leadership Barry was never at home in New South Wales. In colonial eyes his manner appeared distant and condescending. His two visits to England, involving long absences from Australia, seemed to indicate where his heart was. It was no surprise when in 1889 he resigned the see and returned permanently to England. 
In England Barry once more failed in his quest for a see, and from 1889 to 1891 he was assistant to A. W. Thorold, bishop of Rochester. In 1891 he took charge of the diocese of Exeter during the absence in Japan of Bishop Edward Henry Bickersteth. Finally, from 1891 until his death, he was canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, where he continued his literary activities. In 1892 he was Bampton lecturer at Oxford, taking as his subject 'Some lights of science on the faith'; in 1894-5 he gave the Hulsean lectures at Cambridge, entitled 'The ecclesiastical expansion of England in the growth of the Anglican communion'. From 1895 to 1900 he was rector of St James's, Piccadilly, rendering episcopal assistance in central London to the bishop, Frederick Temple. After 1900 he confined himself to his canonry at Windsor, representing the chapter in the lower house of convocation from 1893 until 1908. He died in his sleep at his residence in the cloisters, Windsor Castle, on 1 April 1910, and was buried on 6 April in the cloisters at Worcester Cathedral, beside his only daughter, Mary Louisa, who had died in 1880. His wife and two sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30622


Barry, Ernest James (1882-1968), sculler, was born on 13 February 1882 at 17 Hermit Road, Canning Town, London, the son of Henry Barry, lighterman, and his wife, Elizabeth Spall. While still an apprentice in 1902, he was entered for the Newcastle handicap, a sculling race on which considerable betting took place, and reached the final. He started favourite but lost by a length to Jack Dodds of Hexham, who, according to the local press, 'got five cuts at the water before Barry left the stakeboat'. There is little doubt that Barry was held back at the word 'go'. Coming out of his time, Barry won the 1903 Doggett's Coat and Badge 'pretty easily' but there are no further records until 1908. Then, still a virtual novice, he raced the Australian George Towns, who had already won the world championship four times and held the British championship since 1899. Towns led the lighter Barry as far as Chiswick church but was beaten by two lengths in 21 minutes 12.4 seconds, a time for the Putney to Mortlake course which was subsequently only once bettered in seventy years. 
Barry challenged Dick Arnst of New Zealand for the world championship in August 1910 and the pair raced over 31/4 miles on the Zambezi River, 5 miles above Victoria Falls. Fearing the effects of the altitude, Barry delayed his effort until the last quarter-mile but both scullers stopped 300 yards from the finish. The huge New Zealander recovered first and paddled home alone. In 1911 and 1912 Barry successfully defended the 'Sportsman' challenge cup for the British championship against W. Albany of Lea Bridge and W. H. Fogwell of Australia, and in July 1912, in appalling conditions, he took his revenge on Arnst over the Putney to Mortlake course to become the first English world champion for thirty-six years. After starting at odds of three to one on, Arnst led by two lengths at Harrods, where Barry closed the gap and with superior watermanship drew level above Hammersmith. The lead changed hands several times before Chiswick steps and at the crossing to Duke's Meadows, Barry, mastering the rough water better, gained two lengths within 150 yards. Arnst was six lengths behind at Barnes Bridge but with a final effort closed to within two lengths. He could do no more, however, and stopped 80 yards from the post. The race was described as the finest professional sculling race ever seen in England. 
Three months later Barry easily retained his title against the Canadian Edward Durnan over the same course, winning the 'Sportsman' cup outright and $1000. In 1913 there followed a second defence of his world title for $500 a side against Harry Pearce of Australia, father of the 1928 Olympic winner and subsequent world champion Bob Pearce. Pearce led to Hammersmith but was six lengths down by Chiswick steps. One month after the outbreak of the First World War, in which he spent four years in the army, Barry beat another Australian, J. Paddon, and there were no further challengers until Felton in 1919. 
The Zambezi River race of 1910 was Barry's sole defeat until, at the age of thirty-seven, in 1919, he lost to F. Felton of Australia, who was fitter and 2 stones heavier, when it was so rough at Putney it was possible to see under the bottom of the boats. This reverse was avenged by Barry a year later in 1920, before an estimated 150,000 spectators, on the Parramatta River, when he won by twelve lengths to gain his fifth world championship. He was, with some justice, known as the Incomparable. After his retirement as a sculler, Barry spent the rest of his working life as a professional coach in Denmark and Germany, enjoying such success that it is remarkable, and even sad, that he was never employed by British clubs. He was appointed king's bargemaster, a position from which he retired in 1952 because of ill health. 
Over 6 feet in height, Barry still weighed no more than 11 stone 9 lb for his last race. Though a sufferer from asthma in old age, he retained full mental alertness and an upright, soldierly bearing. He married Lottie Hammerton, of Twickenham; there were two sons and three daughters of the marriage. Later in his life Barry had to sell all but two of his trophies to support himself and his daughter Thelma, who contracted poliomyelitis. He died at West Middlesex Hospital, Isleworth, on 21 July 1968. 
Desmond Hill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30623


Barry, Sir Gerald Reid (1898-1968), journalist and Festival of Britain administrator, was born at Fairfax, Berrylands Road, Surbiton, Surrey, on 20 November 1898, the fourth child of George Duncan Barry (1864-1945), who was then curate of St Mark's, Surbiton, and his wife, Edith Geraldine Reid (1859-1898). His mother died while giving birth to him and his father remarried. One of his elder siblings was Frank Russell Barry, who became bishop of Southwell. He was educated at Marlborough College, and in 1916 was elected to an exhibition at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he planned to study history. But from 1917 to 1919 he served in the Royal Flying Corps and RAF, being demobilized with the rank of captain. 
After the war Barry became a journalist, writing for the 'Daily Express'. In 1921 he joined the 'Saturday Review' as assistant editor, becoming its editor three years later at the age of twenty-six. The circumstances which led to his leaving that post in February 1930 caused a sensation and won him a great deal of sympathy and support. When its directors suddenly committed the 'Saturday Review' to support Lord Beaverbrook's United Empire Party, without Barry's knowledge, he resigned, and his editorial staff went with him. The last issue of the 'Saturday Review' edited by Barry strongly criticized the United Empire Party line; the next issue supported the Beaverbrook position. He and his editorial staff were applauded for their stand in defence of independent journalism. 
Six days after his resignation the 'Week-End Review' was created and Barry was announced as its editor. With his old editorial team, he produced the first number on 14 March 1930, which included messages of support from the prime minister, Baldwin, and public men from all parties. With a distinguished list of contributors, Barry made the 'Week-End Review' a success, notably by running 'spreads' on subjects of topical interest. In 1932 he edited 'A Week-End Calendar' and in 1933 he published 'This England', extracts from a 'Week-End Review' column compiled from readers' submissions of absurdities from the English press. By late in 1933 the 'Week-End Review' had lost its financial backing and in January 1934 it was merged into Kingsley Martin's 'New Statesman'. Barry joined the board of directors of the 'New Statesman' and the journal continued the famous 'This England' column and some other features from the 'Week-End Review'. 
In 1934 Barry became features editor of the popular, left-leaning daily, the 'News Chronicle', and its managing editor in February 1936. He brought to the paper his light touch and made it more readable. As editor through the challenging days of the abdication and Munich, and then throughout the Second World War, he enjoyed wittily attacking in his newspaper the blackshirts in Britain, Franco in Spain, Mussolini in Ethiopia, and the Japanese in Manchuria. He was also the founder of the celebrated 'News Chronicle' schools competition. He resented the interference of the 'New Chronicle's' chairman, Walter Layton, in editorial matters -- most notably on the eve of the Munich agreement, when Layton prevented him from publishing evidence of Hitler's plans for further annexations. While Layton was a war civil servant, from 1940 to 1944, Barry had a freer hand to push the paper in a leftward direction, as he successfully excluded the acting chairman, Laurence Cadbury, from editorial decisions. In 1947 he resigned as editor, but remained on the board. 
Barry's next position was the one for which he is best remembered. On 10 March 1948 Herbert Morrison, lord president of the council, announced that Barry had accepted the job of director-general of the Festival of Britain, 1951. Barry was a founding member of the Labour think-tank PEP (Political and Economic Planning), along with Morrison's under-secretary, Max Nicholson, who helped Morrison select most of the festival committee. In addition, Barry had written an open letter to Stafford Cripps, as president of the Board of Trade, in the 'News Chronicle' (14 September 1945) supporting the proposal of the Royal Society of Arts that the centenary of the 1851 exhibition should be marked by another international exhibition, focusing on trade and culture. In the end an international exhibition was deemed far too expensive and impractical in view of post-war shortages and the costs of reconstruction. In 1947 it was decided that a smaller, national exhibition should be funded by the government. Nicholson called Barry 'a great impresario', and Hugh Casson, who served as the 1951 South Bank site's chief architect, claimed that 'all architects knew him as a lover of architecture' ('The Times', 25 Nov 1968). Barry saw the 1951 festival as a great opportunity for patronizing the arts, including poetry, music, painting, sculpture, architecture, design, and engineering. To work on the festival he picked a young team, most of whom had gained their experience in the war and were enthusiastic to display their designs and buildings to the public. Casson wrote upon Barry's death that 'he was marvellously equipped by his endless curiosity, seriousness of purpose, enthusiastic receptivity to ideas, personal courage and his capacity -- amounting almost to genius -- for getting the best out of everybody who worked for him' (ibid.). Barry bore three years of financial crises, opposition, bad press, and worse weather, guiding the festival to its completion and ultimate success. There were eight official government-funded exhibitions in England, Scotland, Northern Ireland, and Wales, twenty-two designated arts festivals, and a pleasure garden in Battersea. Eight and a half million people visited the London South Bank exhibition and the BBC aired 2700 festival-related broadcasts. On the local level, 2000 cities, towns, and villages across the UK organized and funded a festival event of some kind. 
Barry, who famously described the festival as 'a tonic to the nation' after the privations of the war years, was determined that it should be 'a manifestation of gaiety and ordered imagination in a world that he knew to be short of both'. As well as restoring morale and raising aesthetic standards, he had a vision of the festival as 'a corporate act of national reassessment and of affirmation of our faith in the future', reflecting the national characteristics, ideals, and activities of an entire people (Leventhal, 449). In the event, the ideal of putting on a people's show was realized only to a limited extent, for instead of being staged by the people, the festival was devised mainly by professionals for them. Some of the values behind the festival have been criticized by later generations: 'radical, deep-felt, middle-class, humorous, redolent to contemporary eyes of do-gooding and Hampstead, of petition-signing and Ealing films', as one of Barry's team recalled ('The Times', 25 Nov 1968), but they were genuinely held. The organizers themselves were identified as typically 'the backbone of the BBC' (Frayn, 331). In 1951 Barry was knighted for his work on the festival and a plaque commemorating him was unveiled outside the Festival Hall in 1971. 
Following his festival triumph and his wide-ranging interests, Barry served in a series of posts as consultant. These included working with the London county council on the redevelopment of the Crystal Palace site, advising the National Farmers' Union on public policy, and chairing the new Barbican committee. He also served on the government committee on the scope of town and country planning, the Cities Development Research Committee, and as deputy chairman of a committee on obscene libel laws. In 1959 Granada TV made him executive in charge of educational programming. He was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (1940) and a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. In 1965 he edited, with J. Bronowski, James Fisher, and Julian Huxley, 'Health and Wealth'. 
Barry was married four times, and was three times divorced. In 1921 he married Gladwys Williams, daughter of G. Chishom Williams, a surgeon, and they had one son. In 1932 he married Mrs Helen Edith Selwyn Jepson, daughter of Richard Rigg, a barrister and former MP who later became mayor of the city of Westminster. His third marriage, in 1944, was to Mrs Vera Burton (1911-1992), daughter of Vladimir Poliakoff, and they also had one son. In 1959 he married Mrs Diana Wooton Schlumberger. He died in London on 21 November 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 30624


Barstow, Sir George Lewis (1874-1966), civil servant and business executive, was born in India on 20 May 1874, the second son of Henry Clements Barstow (1838-1902) of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Cecilia Clementina, daughter of the Hon. and Revd John Baillie, canon of York. His grandfather was Thomas Barstow of Fulford Park and Garrow Hill, York; members of the family had been prominent merchant adventurers in York since the early seventeenth century. Barstow was a scholar of Clifton College, Bristol, and Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was in the first class in both parts of the classical tripos (1895-6). He entered the home civil service in the Local Government Board in 1896 and transferred to the Treasury in 1898. 
In 1904 Barstow married Enid Lilian, only daughter of Sir Alfred Tristram Lawrence (later first Baron Trevethin). They had a daughter and two sons, the elder of whom won the DSO, and the younger of whom was killed in action, in the Second World War. Barstow became a principal clerk at the Treasury in 1909 and was appointed companion of the Bath in 1913. During the First World War he was primarily involved in the problems of supply to the armed forces. In the unprecedented circumstances of a world war he earned the gratitude and respect of many chiefs of the services for being so positive and helpful when dealing with their requirements. But he was also a firm advocate of tight fiscal control and he questioned Winston Churchill's decision, as minister of munitions, to build four large-scale electricity generating plants, when smaller installations could be built at a reduced cost that would still provide the power necessary for munitions production. He suspected Churchill of seeking 'not to provide for war necessities but to equip the country for after-the-war trade', a form of 'State Capitalism' at the taxpayers' expense which his rigid Treasury outlook would not allow (Peden, 118). 
In 1919 Barstow was appointed an assistant secretary in control of one of the major functions of the Treasury, the supply services, and served until 1927 in the post, where he was notable not only for his efficiency but also for the humour he brought to his job. It fell to him to approve on behalf of the Treasury the settlement of the numerous points, some trivial in terms of money but some serious, and many of them highly technical, arising out of the financial control of the railways during the war. It was not always easy to see where the Treasury might benefit from pressing against a particular company -- and there were then over 100 of them covered by the agreement. But Barstow's acumen in discerning what to challenge and where to compromise impressed the highly skilled railway accountants with whom he dealt, and he showed an almost instinctive ability to combine a sense of equity with instant insistence on what was due to the public purse. He was promoted KCB in 1920. 
During the British navy's transition from coal- to oil-firing before the war Barstow had been concerned in the Treasury with the negotiations whereby the British government took a substantial share in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. When he left the Treasury in 1927 he was appointed to be the government director of the Anglo-Persian (later Anglo-Iranian) Oil Company in succession to Lord Bradbury and he so remained until 1946. By the time that he left the Treasury he had been in the civil service for nearly thirty years, but his resignation may have been hastened by a clash of personalities with Churchill, who was chancellor of the exchequer in 1924-9. Churchill was often impatient in his search for new ideas and methods, and Neville Chamberlain observed that he treated 'the older Treasury men like Barstow' with such 'marked discourtesy' that they 'eventually resigned' (Gilbert, 296). 
Barstow was for many years also a director of the Midland Bank and other companies, but his most significant work after leaving the public service was on the board of the Prudential Assurance Company. He joined as a director in 1928, became deputy chairman in 1935, and was chairman from 1941 until his retirement from the board in 1953. He bore the heavy responsibility of chairman during the war years in London after 1941 and after the war he served the Prudential during a period of vigorous growth and reorganization. The board exchanged much of its earlier formal routine for a more lively and informed participation by all the directors who, under Barstow's chairmanship, learned to work in close intimacy with the management; the change had lasting effect. 
As chairman Barstow regarded with trepidation the Attlee government's implementation of the insurance proposals in the Beveridge report. At the Prudential's annual general meeting in 1946 he hailed the 'humanitarian' instincts of the 'National Insurance Bill' then before parliament, but also warned against undermining the spirit of free enterprise and voluntary thrift (Dennett, 293). And in May 1949 he went further, condemning the government's proposals to nationalize industrial assurance as 'an unmitigated disaster to the insurance industry and to the country' ('The Times', 6 May 1949, 4f). He remained an active chairman until his retirement in 1953. At the Prudential, as in the civil service, Barstow was long remembered for his wit. He was a man of erudition and wide reading with catholic tastes both in literature and in the arts and a most retentive memory. A member of the Society of Dilettanti, he also possessed a marked talent for writing light verse which he employed for the pleasure of his family and friends. In the Confreres, a well-known dining club, he excelled most in the cut and thrust of conversation across the table rather than in the more formal statements of points of view which followed dinner. 
While still at the Prudential, and after his retirement, Barstow reorganized the finances of the Church in Wales as chairman of the finance committee at an important time. He took a great interest in the University of Wales, and in particular University College, Swansea, of which he was president from 1929 to 1955. He was also deputy chairman of the court of the University of London and a governor of Christ College, Brecon. The Barstows were devoted to their home, Chapel House, Builth Wells, Brecknockshire, where Barstow died on 29 January 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 30625


John George Bartholomew (1860-1920), geographer and cartographer, was born on 22 March 1860 at 10 Comely Green Place, Edinburgh. He was educated at the Royal High School and Edinburgh University but did not take his degree. About 1880 he started work at his father's firm, but in his early twenties he developed a severe tubercular condition, which, despite a recuperative eight-month sea voyage to Australia, troubled him throughout his life. 
John George entered actively into the work of the business and perfected the intricate skills of map compilations and production under the guidance of his father. He saw through the press the first examples of contour layer coloured maps used for Baddeley's 'Lake District Guide' in 1880, and showed a keen interest and sensitivity in developing the best colour gradations for the new half-inch maps. On his father's retirement John George, although only twenty-eight years old, took full control of the business. On 23 April 1889 he married Janet, known as Jennie (1857-1936), the daughter of Alexander Sinclair Macdonald, JP, of Sydera Hall, near Dornoch, Sutherland, with whom he had two daughters and three sons, including John (Ian) ['see below'], who succeeded him as head of the company. 
In the year that he took control of the company, John George formed a partnership with the publisher Thomas Nelson, and in 1889 they moved into their new premises in Park Road, adjacent to Holyrood Park. After Nelson's death in 1892 he took as his partner his cousin Andrew G. Scott (1861-1938), and in 1911 he realized his ambitious plan for purpose-built offices and printing works at 12 Duncan Street, Newington. 
It was as a result of John George's flair and energy that the business prospered. The company changed from producing maps solely for specific customers to the status of a fully fledged publishing house with its own list. John George introduced new popular titles that were revised at frequent intervals over the following years. They included the 'Survey Gazetteer of the British Isles' (1887; eighteen editions to 1972), 'Citizen's Atlas of the World' (1898; ten editions to 1952), and 'Handy Reference Atlas of London' (1907; thirteen editions to 1968), plus commercial reference maps of the world and plans of major cities. Print runs increased; the firm produced half a million plans of London for the 1897 jubilee celebrations for Newnes, 60,000 cycling maps, 225,000 timetable maps for the London and North West Railway, and 40,000 road maps for the Automobile Association, as well as a plethora of individual maps and diagrams for books and encyclopaedias, and ephemera such as circular maps for the pottery of McIntyre of Burslem. 
John George was reserved and studious, and his insistence on accuracy and quality in all his work made him a strict and exacting employer. He was also a benevolent one, however, who organized recreational activities and an innovatory company profit-sharing scheme for his staff. His friend Dr George Chisholm noted that, despite his ill health, he was 'singularly, though quietly, happy, a natural result of the qualities in him which inspired confidence and affection among those who came into intimate contact with him.' He was an elder at the United Free Church of St George, Edinburgh. 
Throughout his life John George never lost his enthusiasm for accepting new challenges and furthering his interest in the geographical sciences. He enjoyed close acquaintance with many leading academics and travellers of the day, such as the explorers Sir Ernest Shackleton, Dr William Bruce, H. M. Stanley, and Cecil Rhodes. These friendships led him into collaboration with many of them to represent their work and discoveries in map form. To reflect the academic aspect of his work he gave his company premises the title of the Edinburgh Geographical Institute, the equal of the Perthes Geographical Institute in Gotha. The title proudly adorned the Palladian frontage of his new building, which had been taken from Falcon Hall in Morningside, where the family had lived from 1899 to 1907 before it was demolished. 
John George's interest in the development of the geographical sciences led him with others to found in 1884 the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, of which he was honorary secretary until his death. He also compiled the detailed travellers' maps for the society's 'Scottish Geographical Magazine' from its inception. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1887) and of the Royal Geographical Society of London (1888), receiving the latter institution's Victoria medal in 1905. In 1904 he was awarded the prestigious grand prix at the St Louis International Exhibition. He (unsuccessfully) championed the cause of a chair in geography at Edinburgh University, from which he received an honorary doctorate of laws in 1909, being described in his citation as 'a very Prince of Cartographers... [who] had done more than any other man to elevate and improve the standards and methods of cartographical workmanship'. His portrait by Edward Arthur Walton commemorating the event is now in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. In 1910 he was honoured by appointment as geographer and cartographer to George V. He was an honorary member of various overseas geographical societies, including those of Paris, Portugal, Budapest, and Chicago, and in 1918 was awarded the Geographical Society of Chicago's Helen Carver medal. 
John George's skill in depicting complex distributions clearly in map form was evident in a range of important maps and atlases, among them Sir Archibald Geikie's 'Geological Map of Scotland' (1892), 'The Naturalist's Map of Scotland' (1893), and 'Botanical Map of Scotland' (1907). The 'Survey Atlas of Scotland' (1895) offered, in addition to thematic maps, complete coverage of Scotland on the half-inch to 1 mile scale. It was followed by the volume for England and Wales (1903), the 'Climatological Atlas of India' (1906), and the 'Atlas of World's Commerce' (1907). However, John George's grand scheme of representing the current state of knowledge of the natural sciences in a major five-volume physical atlas to rival the renowned 'Physikalischer Atlas' by Berghaus foundered; the project was too large for a single publisher, and only the 'Meteorology' (1899) and 'Zoogeography' (1911) volumes were published. He successfully prepared Sir John Murray's 'Bathymetrical Survey of the Scottish Freshwater Lochs' (1910), using the newly developed layer colouring to great effect, and mapped the scientific findings of the 'Challenger' oceanographic expedition of 1872-6, which included the newly discovered Bartholomew Deep, a 25,000 foot trench off Antofagasta in Chile, which Murray named in honour of his friend. 
John George began working on 'The Times Survey Atlas of the World' (1922), a very detailed portrayal of the world and Europe after the changes of the First World War, with a sequence of specially prepared thematic maps. He did not live to see it completed, however, since he had to travel to Estoril in Portugal with his wife and daughters to regain his health. Despite moving to the healthier hills around Sintra, he died on 14 April 1920, and his remains were buried there. The first and subsequent editions of 'The Times' atlas made it one of the most important and respected atlases of the later twentieth century and a fitting memorial to John George's illustrious career. 
John George's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 30626


Bartlet, James Vernon (1863-1940), ecclesiastical historian, was born on 15 August 1863 in Scarborough, the only son of George Donald Bartlet (1823-1906), an English Presbyterian minister who was also a schoolmaster in Scarborough and in London, and his wife, Susan Robe McNellan, formerly of Alloa, near Stirling. He was educated at his father's private school in Highgate and at Highgate School, from where he proceeded in 1882 with a scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford. He obtained a first class in classical moderations (1883), a second class in 'literae humaniores' (1886), and a first class in theology (1887). He won the senior Hall-Houghton Greek Testament prize in 1889. In that year he was appointed tutor and the first librarian at the newly established Mansfield College, Oxford, which he had entered in 1887 and where he studied under Andrew Martin Fairbairn. He remained at Mansfield until his retirement in 1928, being senior resident tutor from 1890 to 1900 and thereafter 'professor' of church history. He received the honorary degree of DD from St Andrews University in 1904. 
Bartlet's upbringing was narrow and ultra-orthodox, but he was too good a scholar and had too great an integrity of intellect to be able to remain within its confines; not without personal struggle, he won through to a broader outlook. At Oxford he was greatly influenced by Edwin Hatch and by William Sanday, of whose 'New Testament' seminar he was a valued member. 
In 1900 Bartlet married Mary Elizabeth ('c'.1875-1904), daughter of Robert Edward Gibson, surgeon, of Norwich, with whom he had two sons. In 1904 Elizabeth Bartlet died, shortly preceded by her younger son. In 1906 Bartlet married Sarah, daughter of James Burgess, Congregational minister, of Little Baddow, Essex. She outlived her husband. 
As a scholar, Bartlet's chief work was in 'New Testament' studies, and early church history, and he was recognized as one of the leading Oxford scholars in these fields. In 1900 he published 'The Apostolic Age: its Life, Doctrine, Worship and Polity'. This was followed by two commentaries, 'The Acts' (1901) and 'St Mark' (1922), in the 'Century Bible' series. His Birkbeck lectures, delivered at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1924, were edited by Cecil John Cadoux, his former student, and published posthumously (1943) as 'Church-Life and Church-Order during the First Four Centuries'. He was a frequent contributor to symposia, encyclopaedias, and theological journals, his work always being marked by careful learning and a meticulous desire for accuracy. His presentation was strictly historical in its perspectives, never allowing finality to the terms or thought forms which they represented. This approach was developed through his membership of the Oxford Society of Historical Theology, of which he was secretary from 1894 to 1936, and found particular expression in the chapters which he contributed to 'Christianity in History: a Study of Religious Development' (1917), a work produced in collaboration with Alexander James Carlyle. 
Keenly interested in Christian reunion, and always eirenic in temper, Bartlet believed that the path to church unity lay through an 'objective' study of church history. He was a founder member of the Free Church Fellowship, and had a wide circle of friends in many denominations. He took a prominent part in the Conference on Christian Politics, Economics and Citizenship (COPEC) in 1924 and in the World Conference on Faith and Order held at Lausanne in 1927. Although never ordained, he was regarded as a leading figure in the Congregational churches. Tall and dignified in bearing, and delicate in health, he was a vehement teetotaller and non-smoker. His personal influence on generations of students was profound, despite strangely convoluted forms of speech and writing. His gentleness, sincerity, and deep devotion won the affection of all. 
Bartlet died at his home, 35 Museum Road, Oxford, on 5 August 1940. His funeral service was held in Mansfield College chapel, and he was buried on 8 August in Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford, next to his parents and his first wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30627


Bartlett, Sir Ellis Ashmead (1849-1902), politician, born in Brooklyn, New York, on 24 August 1849, was the eldest son of Ellis Bartlett of Plymouth, Massachusetts, a graduate of Amherst College and a good classical scholar, who died in 1852. His mother was Sophia, daughter of John King Ashmead of Philadelphia. On his father's side he was directly descended from Robert Bartlett or Bartelot, of Sussex, who landed on Plymouth Rock from the ship 'Ann' in 1623 and married in 1628 Mary, daughter of Richard Warren, who had sailed in the 'Mayflower' in 1620. On his mother's side he derived, through her father, from John Ashmead of Cheltenham, who settled in Philadelphia in 1682, and, through her mother, from Theodore Lehman, secretary to William Penn, first governor of Pennsylvania. 
Ellis and his younger brother, William Lehman Ashmead (later married to Angela Burdett-Coutts), were brought to England in early boyhood by their widowed mother, and were educated at a private school, The Braddons, at Torquay. Ellis showed precocity in classics, but illness interrupted his studies, except in history, of which -- aided by an admirable memory -- he early gained a wide knowledge. On 16 February 1867 he matriculated from St Mary Hall, Oxford, but soon migrated to Christ Church. A taste for politics asserted itself at Oxford. Becoming the recognized leader of the Conservative Party in the Oxford Union, and an ardent champion of Disraeli, he was elected president of the union in Easter term 1873, defeating H. H. Asquith by a large majority. He was also prominent in athletics. After gaining a third class in moderations, he graduated BA at Christ Church in 1871 with first-class honours in law and history, and proceeded MA in 1874. After leaving Oxford he became an inspector of schools, 1874-7, and an examiner in the privy council office (education department), 1877-80. On 13 June 1877 he was called to the bar from the Inner Temple. 
In 1874 Bartlett married Frances Christina (1851/2-1929), daughter of Henry Edward Walsh; they had five sons and three daughters. His liaison with Blanche Hozier, mother of Clementine Churchill, caused a public scandal in 1889. 
Bartlett was initially influenced by H. P. Liddon, active in the campaign against the Turks' 'Bulgarian atrocities' of 1876, and helped to organize the London conference on them in December 1876. But in 1877-8 he visited Serbia, Bulgaria, and Roumelia and became strongly Russophobic. On his return to Britain he began a vigorous campaign against Russia. In 1880 Lord Beaconsfield assigned to him what was practically the 'pocket borough' of Eye, in Suffolk. He held the seat until it was disfranchised under the 'Redistribution Bill' of 1884. In 1885 he was elected for the predominantly middle-class constituency of the Ecclesall division of Sheffield, for which he sat until his death. Energetic in his loyalty to the Conservative Party, he chiefly devoted himself both inside and outside the House of Commons to the interests of British imperialism as he conceived them. In the house he was untiring in his attacks on Liberal foreign policy and, notably in his first parliament, proved a constant torment to Gladstone. Strident even by the standards of that parliament, he became something of a caricature of a tory imperialist. At the time of the Hozier affair, W. S. Blunt thought him 'a rather absurd middle-aged Member of Parliament... with much underbred pretension... at whom the world generally laughs' (Longford, 272). Outside the house he quickly gained an exceptional reputation as a platform speaker, which he maintained throughout his public life. He was probably in greater demand among Conservative organizers of popular meetings than any other speaker, and invariably roused the enthusiasm of his audiences to the highest pitch. His organizing capacity was also of much service to his party. He was chairman of the National Union of Conservative Associations for three years, 1886-8, and he carried on a ceaseless propaganda on behalf of his principles and his party by pamphlets, articles, and letters to the press; characteristic are 'Shall England Keep India?' (1886) and 'Union or Separation' (1893). In March 1880 he started 'England', the first Conservative penny weekly newspaper, which he maintained at considerable personal loss until 28 May 1898. The paper helped to involve him in financial embarrassments which clouded the closing years of his life. 
Bartlett was civil lord of the Admiralty in Salisbury's minority government in 1885, and again in Salisbury's government of July 1886 to August 1892; he was knighted on the fall of the ministry. He published two pamphlets on South Africa, 'British, Natives and Boers' (1894) and 'The Transvaal Crisis' (1896). On the outbreak of war between Turkey and Greece in 1897 Sir Ellis went to Constantinople, where the sultan conferred on him the grand cordon of the Mejidiye, and he joined the Turkish army in the field. He was present at the defeat of the Greeks at Mati and was among the first non-combatants to enter Tyrnavo and Larissa (see his account in 'The Battlefields of Thessaly', 1897). He was afterwards taken prisoner by the commander of a Greek warship and carried to Athens, but was soon released. When the South African War broke out in South Africa in October 1899, Sir Ellis went to the front and witnessed some early stages of the campaign, in which two of his sons took part. He died, almost penniless, at 18 Langham Street, London, after an operation for appendicitis, on 18 January 1902, and was buried at Tunbridge Wells. His first son, also Ellis Ashmead-Bartlett (1881-1931), was a prominent war correspondent and briefly a tory MP. 


@@@@@


doc= 30628


Bartlett, Sir Frederic Charles (1886-1969), psychologist, was born in Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, on 20 October 1886, the second son of William Bartlett, master bootmaker, and his wife, Temperance Matilda Howman. He was educated at home in his teens, his health being thought too poor, following an attack of pleurisy, for him to go away to school. This apparent handicap allowed him to read very widely, and to spend time walking in the Gloucestershire countryside. He preserved throughout his life a tendency to observe human everyday activity and to base psychological thought upon that observation, rather than upon academic thinking. 
As an external student of London University, Bartlett obtained first-class honours in philosophy in 1909 and an MA with special distinction in 1911. He moved next to Cambridge; he had by this time strong interests in sociological questions, and was attracted to St John's College, where W. H. R. Rivers was active. Rivers combined anthropological interests with a belief in the importance of experimental measurements of the performance of individual people and he encouraged Bartlett to work in the new laboratory of experimental psychology under C. S. Myers. Bartlett graduated in 1914, obtaining a first in part one of the moral sciences tripos, and then became assistant director of the laboratory. His health made him unfit for military service, whereas Myers and Rivers left Cambridge for the duration of the war, leaving Bartlett with the major responsibility for the laboratory. Even when they returned to Cambridge, Myers soon left again, and Rivers died; thus from 1922 Bartlett became director of the psychological laboratory and reader in experimental psychology. In 1920 he married Emily Mary (died 1974), daughter of William Henry Smith JP, of Helmshore, Lancashire, herself a psychologist from the early days in Cambridge; they had two sons. 
In 1931 Bartlett was made the first professor of experimental psychology in Cambridge, a post which he retained until he retired in 1952. During the thirty-year period of directing the laboratory he developed it from one assistant to over seventy staff and research workers, and trained many remarkable students. In the post-war years the chairs at Oxford, Cambridge, London, and numerous other universities were for a substantial time all occupied simultaneously by Bartlett's former students. His achievements within the university were accompanied after 1939 by much public service. The war created a need for more information about people's performance under stress, their sensory abilities, and their ability to operate such devices as radar screens, target indicators, or tank gunnery controls. Bartlett served on the flying personnel research committee of the Air Ministry, and also on the Medical Research Council, and his laboratory in Cambridge became a centre for investigations of this kind. This work led to design improvements in the devices themselves and to changes in the models used to understand human behaviour. 
Bartlett was assisted in his wartime research by K. J. W. Craik, who was one of the first to see the possible use in psychology of explanations derived from cybernetics and control engineering. Bartlett actively encouraged Craik's ideas, and following Craik's tragic accidental death in 1945, Bartlett fostered a group of research workers developing similar theories. Characteristically, Bartlett's own interest in control processes was stimulated not only by intellectual influences, but also by his keen interest in cricket and tennis. He would frequently discuss the ways in which the everyday behaviour of the player making a stroke required the psychologist to suppose that each action was controlled by a computed model of future events, a process far more complex than the simple theories of classical psychology. 
After the war, Bartlett's research on human performance and machine design was extended to industrial problems: from 1944 the Medical Research Council maintained an applied psychology research unit within Bartlett's department, and after his retirement he continued to act as a consultant to it, as well as taking part energetically in committee work on the problem of improving the efficiency of individuals at work. 
Bartlett's scientific thought was highly original and unconventional at the time, but was later widely accepted. Of the ten books which he wrote, or to which he contributed, the best-known is 'Remembering' (1932), in which he reported a lengthy series of experiments on perception and on memory, which showed that human awareness of events was both selective and constructive: much which struck the eye was never seen or remembered, and conversely a great deal was thought to have been perceived or recalled which had not in fact occurred. This, as well as the choice of the items which were correctly reported, showed that perception and remembering were controlled by some process sensitive to the purposes and interests of the individual concerned. This line of thought departed from current orthodoxies, which, whether behaviourist or gestaltist, saw human awareness as passively determined by the pattern of present events or of past experience. Though they owed something to the work of Rivers, Myers, James Ward, whom he had known in Cambridge, and the neurologist Henry Head, Bartlett's ideas largely originated with his own observation of human behaviour, and 'Remembering' is copiously illustrated with cases in which Africans had selectively remembered events of little importance to Britons or vice versa. 
Bartlett was kindly, encouraging, and informal. He inspired enthusiasm, and could bring out the value in even the humblest contribution. His influence spread more through discussion classes and informal meetings than through his exciting lectures. 
From 1924 to 1948, an unenviably long tour of office, Bartlett was editor of the 'British Journal of Psychology'. He was president of section J (psychology) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1929. He was elected FRS in 1932, the only psychologist so honoured for many years. He was created CBE in 1941 and knighted in 1948. He was president (1950) and honorary fellow (1954) of the British Psychological Society, and was an honorary member of the Experimental Psychology Society of the UK (1960). He was a foreign member or associate of the Societe Francaise de Psychologie, of the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, of the US National Academy of Arts and Sciences, and of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and an honorary member of a number of foreign psychological societies. He received honorary degrees from Athens, Princeton, Louvain, London, Edinburgh, Oxford, and Padua. He also received the Baly and the Huxley medals (1943), the royal medal of the Royal Society (1952), the Longacre award of the Aero Medical Association (1952), and the gold medal of the International Academy of Aviation and Space Medicine (1964). 
To the end of his life Bartlett took an active interest in new developments in psychology, which he discussed with a worldwide network of leading investigators who always found his comments worth seeking. He died in Cambridge on 30 September 1969; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30629


Bartley, Sir George Christopher Trout (1842-1910), banker and politician, was born at Rectory Place, Hackney, on 22 November 1842, the son of Robert Bartley, of the War Office and his second wife, Julia Anna, 'nee' Lucas. After early education at Blackheath, at Clapton, and at University College School, London, he became, in 1860, science examiner at the education branch of the Department of Science and Art in South Kensington, under Sir Henry Cole. In 1864 he married Mary Charlotte, Cole's third daughter. They had four sons and one daughter. In 1866 he was made official examiner, and remained there until 1880 as assistant director of the science division, which was responsible for the establishment of science schools throughout the country. 
Since 1870 Bartley had written several pamphlets on social questions, especially on thrift and poor law and on education. His first published work, 'The Educational Condition and Requirements of one Square Mile in the East End of London' (1870) was quoted by William Edward Forster during the discussion of the 'Education Bill' of 1870. In 1871 there followed 'Schools for the People', which treated of the historical development and methods of schools for the working classes in England, and, with Emily Shirreff, he edited the journal of the Women's Educational Union, which aimed at the general improvement of women's education. 
Poverty and the harsh effects of the existing poor law system also claimed his attention and in a series of pamphlets he urged its reform. In 1872 he read a paper before the Society of Arts on old-age pensions, urging that help should be given in old age to those who had made some provision for themselves. Twenty-one years later he laid before the House of Commons a bill for old-age pensions, which embodied his earlier principles. For the encouragement of thrift among the masses he published in 1872 twelve penny 'Provident Knowledge Papers', which he supplemented with other homilies on the same theme. In 1872 he started the instalment club at 77 Church Street, Edgware Road, London, which enabled workmen to buy tools or clothes by regular weekly payments. The foundation of the Middlesex Penny Bank at the same address followed the same year. In 1875, in conjunction with Sir Henry Cole, the duke of Devonshire, H. N. Hamilton Hoare and others, Bartley established the National Penny Bank, so-called because the minimum deposit was 1died To encourage thrift, collectors were authorized to take deposits at many workplaces, such as the London docks and schools; other local branches were open in the evenings for the workmen's convenience. The scheme was a great success. By the year of Bartley's death over 2,800,000 accounts had been opened and some $25 million had passed through the bank. 
In 1880 Bartley resigned his post at South Kensington to stand for parliament in the Conservative interest. He unsuccessfully opposed Henry Fawcett at Hackney in March of that year. From 1883 to 1885 he was chief agent to the Conservative Party. In 1885 he was returned for North Islington, and retained that seat until 1906. He was narrowly defeated in November 1907 at a by-election in West Hull. In the House of Commons Bartley, although a fluent speaker, strenuously advocated the curtailment of parliamentary speeches; in 1891 he voted against his party in opposition to the 'Free Education Bill' brought in by the Salisbury government, and he played a prominent part in obstructing the chief measures of the Liberal government (1892-5). Bartley was created KCB in November 1902, and served as a JP for London and Middlesex. 
He died at Henrietta House, 14 Henrietta Street, London, on 13 September 1910 after an operation, and was buried in Holtye churchyard, near Shovelstrode Manor, East Grinstead, his country house. He was survived by his wife and by his four sons and his daughter. His second son, Douglas Cole Bartley, barrister, succeeded him as managing director of the National Penny Bank. 


@@@@@


doc= 30630


Barton, Sir Edmund (1849-1920), prime minister of Australia, was born at Glebe, Sydney, New South Wales, on 18 January 1849, youngest son of William Barton, Australia's first stockbroker, and his wife, Mary Louisa ('nee' Whydah), a schoolteacher. Known familiarly as Toby, he was educated at Sydney grammar school (1859-64), and after a brilliant career at Sydney University (BA 1868, MA 1870) was called to the bar in 1871. On 28 December 1877, he married Jean Mason Ross (1851-1938), daughter of David Ross, an engineer of Newcastle, New South Wales; they had four sons and two daughters. Barton proved himself a devoted family man. 
Professional success came slowly, but, a keen cricketer, Barton caught the public eye by his tactful umpiring of a contentious game between New South Wales and a touring English eleven in 1879. Later that year he entered the New South Wales legislative assembly as member for Sydney University; he subsequently represented Wellington (1880-82), East Sydney (1882-7, 1891-4), and Hastings and Macleay (1898-1900). He was a member of the nominated legislative council in 1887-91 and 1897-8. A moderate Protectionist, he was speaker of the legislative assembly in 1883-7 and attorney-general for seven weeks in 1889 under George Richard Dibbs. 
Previously seen as an amiable dilettante in politics, Barton found his energies roused by the first federal convention in Sydney in March-April 1891. He was one of the small committee who largely drafted the federal constitution, and his federalist credentials were endorsed by the veteran premier Sir Henry Parkes, who, although a political opponent, urged Barton to take on the leadership of the movement. Again attorney-general under the anti-federalist Dibbs from October 1891 to December 1893, Barton accepted office only on the assurance of a free hand to promote the federal cause. Although the legislative assembly assented to the main principles of the 'Constitution Bill' drafted at the Sydney convention, the movement stagnated in the face of a severe commercial depression and widespread industrial disputes. Barton, acting-premier for four months in 1892, incurred the mistrust of the labour movement through his handling of a bitter miners' strike at Broken Hill. Throughout the 1890s the labour movement was largely anti-federalist, fearing that a central government would favour employers. 
Hoping to mobilize public opinion and thus to stimulate parliamentary action, Barton established the Federation League in Sydney in mid-1893. Working-class republicans attempted to take over the first meeting, but their influence soon dwindled; and on 31 July 1893 a conference of federalists at Corowa, on the border of New South Wales and Victoria, adopted the strategy of urging the popular election of delegates to a second federal convention to revise and adopt the draft constitution. From 1894 to 1897 Barton was out of parliament and in financial difficulties, and it was largely due to his rival George Houston Reid that a conference of premiers at Hobart in February 1895 agreed to the Corowa formula. When the New South Wales delegates were elected Barton was returned at the head of the poll; and at the meeting of the convention at Adelaide on 18 March 1897 he was chosen to draw up the preliminary resolutions and act as leader of the convention. 
During this convention and its subsequent sessions at Sydney (September 1897) and Melbourne (January-March 1898) Barton was on top of his form. As chairman of both the constitutional and the drafting committees he was largely responsible for the revised 'Constitution Bill'. A tactful manager of business and adroit lobbyist, he greatly facilitated the achievement of consensus, notably in securing an acceptable compromise over the respective powers of the senate, or states' house, and the popularly elected house of representatives. In New South Wales, which had most to lose as the only free-trade colony among protectionist neighbours, he was less successful. Nominated to the legislative council in 1897 as a spokesman for federation, he disliked the council's numerous and unwelcome amendments to the bill. During the referendum campaign in New South Wales in 1898 he stumped the country, coining the phrase: 'A nation for a continent and a continent for a nation'; but at the poll on 3 June a sufficient majority was not attained. 
Considering Reid as premier too lukewarm for federation, Barton stood against him in the East Sydney seat at the July 1898 elections. He was defeated, but came into the legislative assembly at a by-election for a rural constituency in September 1898, and William Lyne relinquished the leadership of the Protectionist Party to him. Finding the partisanship required of a leader of the opposition incompatible with his role as spokesman for federation, Barton stood down in favour of Lyne, who in September 1899 managed to detach the Labor Party from its support of Reid and replace him as premier. Barton meanwhile led the 'Yes' campaign at a second federation referendum in 1899, this time successfully. He also campaigned in Queensland and took a prominent part in negotiations to bring in Western Australia. 
In 1900 Barton went to London as leading member of the deputation which watched the passage of the 'Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Bill' through the British parliament. He led the majority of the delegates in a bid to preserve section 74 of the constitution, making the future high court of Australia the final court of appeal on cases involving constitutional interpretation, but eventually accepted Joseph Chamberlain's compromise formula retaining the privy council in certain specified areas. Many saw Barton as the first prime minister of a federated Australia, but the governor-general, Lord Hopetoun, in December 1900 invited Lyne, as premier of the senior colony, to form a ministry. Unsupported by leading politicians elsewhere in Australia, Lyne failed and Barton was sworn in on 1 January 1901 as prime minister and minister for external affairs. 
Tall, erect, clean-shaven, with iron-grey hair and remarkably expressive eyes, the new prime minister looked the part of 'Australia's noblest son', as his admirers called him. To the less reverent he was Tosspot Toby, whose love of food and drink was reflected in an 18-stone portliness. Yet he was capable of sustained hard work, and he was probably the only contemporary politician able to take command of a crew of captains who were accustomed to leadership in their respective states, and whose sympathies ranged from radical to conservative. The first federal elections in March 1901 left the Australian Labor Party holding the balance of power between Barton's Protectionists and the Free-Traders led by Reid. Labor supported Barton until his resignation in September 1903. 
The new parliament was opened in Melbourne on 9 May 1901 by the duke of York (later George V). In its first session it legislated for a white Australia policy, excluding non-Europeans and political undesirables through a dictation test. The sugar industry was compensated for its loss of Pacific island labour by tariff protection. The racism behind these policies went with a concern to protect working-class living standards, then among the highest in the world. South-east Australia's manufacturing industries, hit by the 1890s' depression, were protected by a scale of tariffs, at first moderate out of deference to rural interests. The new Australian commonwealth saw itself as a laboratory for social reform. In 1902 women gained the right to vote and stand for parliament. In 1903 legislation was prepared for a system of industrial arbitration and conciliation. 
In 1902 Barton visited Europe for Edward VII's coronation; he returned as a GCMG but was criticized by protestants for an audience with Pope Leo XIII at which both participants spoke Latin. Weary of office, in September 1903 he accepted doctor's orders to quit politics, taking a seat on the newly created high court, but with characteristic modesty assigning the post of chief justice to Sir Samuel Griffith. In his early years on the bench, Barton was sometimes criticized as being a mere echo of Griffith, with whom he shared a tendency to resist encroachment of the commonwealth government's powers on state rights. After serving as acting chief justice in 1913 he took a more cautiously evolutionary and independent line. On Griffith's retirement in October 1919 Barton hoped to succeed him, but was disappointed. Shortly afterwards his health broke down. While on vacation in the Blue Mountains he died suddenly on 7 January 1920 of cerebral embolism, at the Hydro Majestic Hotel, Medlow Bath. He was buried at South Head cemetery, Sydney, after a state funeral, on 9 January. 
Possessing natural dignity and great charm, Barton won a respect and affection uncommon among Australian politicians. Although a less creative statesman than his friend and contemporary Alfred Deakin, he was more than once the indispensable architect of consensus when the Australian commonwealth was shaped. 


@@@@@


doc= 30631


Barton, John (1836-1908), missionary, was born at East Leigh, Havant, Hampshire, on 31 December 1836, sixth of the nine children of John Barton (1789-1852) and his wife, Fanny (died 1842), daughter of James Rickman. After schooling at Bishop Waltham and at Cholmondeley School, Highgate, Middlesex, he entered Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1855, to read mathematics. He was a hardworking and laconic but sociable giant of a man, and an avid botanist, mountaineer, and hillwalker; he was also an invigorating secretary of the university's Church Missionary Union, none of which left much time for his studies. In 1859, after last-minute cramming, he graduated with honours in mathematics and natural science. In the same year he was accepted as a missionary by the Church Missionary Society (CMS), in March, and on 5 May he married Catherine Frances, daughter of Edward Wigram and sister of Frederic Wigram honorary secretary of the CMS. Of frail health, she died in May 1860, followed soon afterwards by their two-month-old daughter. 
In December 1860 Barton arrived in Calcutta. He was ordained priest in the following February and posted up-country to superintend the CMS college at Agra and the nearby orphanage at Sikandra. In May 1863 he was transferred to the mission school at Amritsar. Here he met Emily Eugenia, second daughter of the Revd Charles Boileau Elliott; they married at Ludhiana on 12 October 1863. In March 1865, after a year's furlough, Barton became principal of the CMS's new university college at Calcutta. He had originally doubted the worth of missionary colleges but was now convinced that the prestige and respect they generated were crucial in persuading Indians to listen to what missionaries had to say. 
Barton was plagued by dysentery and every hot season he left Calcutta for southern India, the foothills, or Burma. He returned to Britain in 1869 to recoup his health, and he worked as secretary under Henry Venn at Church Missionary House before returning to India in the autumn of 1871 as secretary of the CMS's Madras mission. Barton was neither doctrinaire nor conservative in matters of ritual and his two tours of the Madras missions, combined with his earlier travels, convinced him that church union was the only way forward for India's Christian community. 
Barton left Madras in 1876. In 1877, with six sons and two daughters all in need of an education, he accepted the living of Holy Trinity, Cambridge, where he remained until 1893, with the exceptions of a four-month deputation to Ceylon in 1884 and a year as acting bishop at Tinnevelly in Madras in 1889. At Cambridge he was a founder council member of Ridley Hall Theological College, and a hugely successful popularizer of missionary endeavour; ninety-seven undergraduates were accepted as missionaries during his time in Cambridge. 
Barton turned down the bishoprics of Travancore (in 1889), Tinnevelly (in 1889), and Japan (in 1893). In 1893 he became chief secretary of the Church Pastoral Aid Society, a body which handed out grants-in-aid to clergy needing extra curates and lay preachers. The job bristled with the politics of personality, and additionally Barton was too liberal for many of the evangelicals on his committee. He resigned in 1899. His active retirement was curtailed by a stroke in 1905 and he died at his home, Moorcroft, Weybridge, Surrey, on 26 November 1908, and was buried in the Weybridge parish churchyard on 1 December. A tablet and memorial window to him were placed in Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge. 
Barton was survived by his second wife and eight children, one of whom, Cecil Edward Barton (1870-1909), missionary in the Punjab, wrote -- but did not live to see published -- a memoir of his father (1910). 


@@@@@


doc= 30632


Barton, Sir Sidney (1876-1946), diplomatist, was born at Devonshire Place, Union Road, Exeter, on 26 November 1876, the youngest son in a family of four sons and four daughters of James Barton (1834-1919), captain in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Mary Barbara (died 1929), youngest of four daughters of Sir David William Barclay, tenth baronet, of Pierston, Ayrshire, and his first wife, Lise Josephe de Rune, youngest daughter of Charles Malo de Rune, of Mauritius. James Barton had resigned his army commission on becoming a member of the Plymouth Brethren during the wave of religious feeling that swept Britain after the Crimean War and from him Barton inherited the religious feeling that dominated his life. 
Barton was a foundation scholar of St Paul's School but there was no question of his proceeding to higher education since his father, who had 'peculiar views on education... objected to universities' ('The Times', 22 Jan 1946). Instead, in September 1895, Barton went straight from school to Peking (Beijing) as a student interpreter in the consular service. The Boxer uprising found him absent on special service at Weihaiwei, but he contrived, as ever, to reach the centre of things by joining as interpreter and then assistant political officer the China field force which stormed Tientsin (Tianjin) and subsequently took part in the relief of the legations. For his services he was awarded the China medal with clasp and was mentioned in dispatches. 
Barton passed with distinction through the various grades in the consular service and in November 1910 was called to the bar by the Middle Temple. In May the following year he was promoted to the responsible post of Chinese secretary in Peking and in March 1922 he became consul-general in Shanghai, a post which at that time came next to New York in importance. He was able to render most valuable services to British interests which he defended to the limits of his great vitality and nervous energy. This naturally made him very popular with the British community, while he was respected but cordially disliked by the Chinese officials with whom he had to deal. Although temperamentally inclined to forceful measures he was by no means a 'gunboat consul'. In a period when central government, indeed any government at all, had broken down, strong measures were frequently deemed necessary to protect British interests. Barton was never afraid to advocate such measures or to take them on his own responsibility, but he was careful not to overstep the line between the defensive and the aggressive. His qualities of strength, resourcefulness, courage, and good temper under strain were exactly right in the circumstances of the time and he played a leading part in keeping alive British trade and influence through long years of storms. 
In May 1929 Barton was promoted to the diplomatic rank of British minister in Addis Ababa. His methods were characteristically blunt and he proved himself, as in China, to be quite fearless and at his best in dangerous situations. He won the confidence of the emperor to an exceptional degree and was making a great success of his post when Italy invaded Abyssinia (Ethiopia) in 1935. He was horrified and deeply upset that the League of Nations and Britain in particular did not take a tougher line to prevent 'an international crime' (telegram, 18 Feb 1935, TNA: PRO, FO 371/20166 J643/1/1). He also spoke forcefully of Italy's 'criminal frightfulness' in using mustard gas and inflicting 'appalling' suffering on the Ethiopian people (telegram, 20 March 1936, TNA: PRO, FO 371/20166 J2458/45/1). Meanwhile, with his usual energy he organized security for British and foreign nationals and made ready to receive refugees at the British legation. According to a contemporary source, Barton was distressed by the 'thinly disguised portrait' Evelyn Waugh had drawn of him and his daughter Esme in 'Black Mischief' (written after Waugh attended the emperor's coronation in 1930 (W. F. Deedes, 'Dear Bill: W. F. Deedes Reports', 1998, 32). He returned to England after Italy captured Addis Ababa in May 1936 and he retired in May 1937. He maintained his keen interest in Abyssinian affairs and was partly instrumental in securing the secret return of the emperor to his capital. 
Barton was appointed CMG in 1913, KBE in 1926, KCVO in 1931, and GBE in 1936. On 23 July 1904 he married Mary Ethel Winifred (died 1945), eldest daughter of Alexander Palmer MacEwen, a director of Jardine, Matheson & Co. She shared her husband's ideals and vigorously pursued complementary activities which were rewarded with appointment as an OBE in 1928 and, in 1937, a CBE (for welfare work in Addis Ababa). They had two sons and two daughters, one of whom married, in 1933, Baron Filippo Muzi Falconi, Italian minister at Sofia. His wife died in April 1945 and on 20 January 1946 Barton died of cancer of the lung and larynx, at his home, 19 Neville Street, South Kensington, London. He was survived by one son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30633


Bashforth, Francis (1819-1912), mathematician, was born at Thurnscoe, near Doncaster, on 8 January 1819, the eldest son of John Bashforth, who farmed the glebe at Thurnscoe. He was educated at Brampton Bierlow and afterwards at Doncaster grammar school, going on to enter St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar, in 1840. An entirely different account of Bashforth's parentage and early life, which was published in 'The Times' (14 February 1912, 11d) and repeated in the 'Yorkshire Weekly Post' (17 February 1912, 24a), was corrected by Bashforth's son in a letter to 'The Times' (23 February 1912, 11c) to the version given here. Bashforth was second wrangler in 1843, when John Couch Adams was senior wrangler. Although not intimate as undergraduates, the two mathematicians later became firm friends. Bashforth was elected a fellow of his college in 1843, and was ordained deacon in 1850 and priest in 1851. In 1857 he accepted the college living of Minting, near Horncastle, Lincolnshire, of which he remained rector until 1908. In 1905 he was made an honorary fellow of his college. 
After taking his degree Bashforth spent three years in practical civil engineering, working partly in London and partly with one of the new railway companies which were then being formed throughout the country. He was engaged on the survey of projected lines, and in this way gained that practical experience in careful measurement which afterwards proved so valuable to him in his experiments in gunnery. He published 'A description of a machine for finding the numerical roots of equations and tracing a variety of useful curves' (1845), which contained the basic idea for tide prediction machines, a table for calculating earthworks for railways and canals (1847), and a treatise on the construction of oblique bridges (1850). Bashforth was anxious to obtain a post as professor of mathematics in the provinces, but such appointments were rare in those days. In 1864, however, he was appointed professor of applied mathematics to the advanced class of artillery officers at Woolwich, which afterwards developed into the Artillery College. 
Bashforth's main interest lay in the science of ballistics, and he initiated a series of experiments between 1864 and 1880 which led to an understanding of the effects of air resistance on projectiles. Great Britain entered the Crimean War with obsolete military equipment. The muzzle-loading musket, 'Brown Bess', and the cast-iron smooth-bore cannon, firing a spherical solid shot, were still employed. The ineffectiveness of such artillery in the Crimea in general, and the exigencies of the siege of Sevastopol in particular, called for more powerful weapons. In the preface to his 'Mathematical Treatise on the Motion of Projectiles' (1873) Bashforth wrote: 'Feeling that the satisfactory solution of any question in gunnery depends upon the construction of a trustworthy chronograph, it therefore became my duty to recommend that a proper instrument should be procured, and that a systematic course of experiments should be undertaken to determine, in the first instance, the resistance of the air to the motion of projectiles.' He accordingly set to work to construct the chronograph, first tried in November 1865, which bears his name; under his direction the military authorities carried out at Shoeburyness, Essex, experiments to determine the air resistance, in which projectiles were fired through a series of screens whose ruptures were electrically timed by the chronograph. His results are set out in his 1873 treatise, and he described his experiments in his 'Report on the Experiments Made with the Bashforth Chronograph (1865-1870)', published by the government in 1870, and republished with revisions and supplements in 1879, 1890, 1895, and 1900. On 14 September 1869 Bashforth married Elizabeth Jane, daughter of the Revd Samuel Rotton Piggott, vicar of Bredgar, Kent. They had one son. 
Bashforth's ballistic experiments and the theory based upon them required continual amplification, and he received much assistance from his pupils. In 1872 a new scheme of army reorganization reduced the scope and importance of his post, and he resigned his position at Woolwich, receiving a government award of $500 for improvements to the chronograph. Thereafter he resumed his clerical duties at Minting, the living of which he had been allowed, by the indulgence of his bishop, to retain. Nevertheless, in 1873 he was appointed adviser to the War Office on questions relating to the science of artillery, and in 1878 he was requested by the government to lend his chronograph and to help in a new series of experiments to be carried out with both very high and very low velocities. The invitation gave Bashforth much satisfaction, and he superintended the working out of the results of a large number of experiments made in the years 1878 to 1880. His 'Final Report' was published in 1880, and in 1885 he received from the government a grant of $2000 for his work. He utilized his leisure by preparing, in conjunction with Professor Adams, a treatise entitled 'Capillary Action' (1883), and he also published 'The Bashforth Chronograph' (1890). He has strong claims to the authorship of the tide predictor, his work of 1845 on the subject being reprinted in 1892 with an appendix on the invention of the tide predictor. In 1908 he retired to Torunnan, Woodhall Spa, Lincolnshire, where he died on 13 February 1912. Bashforth was a worthy successor to Benjamin Robins (1707-1751); they are the two principal English authorities on the science of ballistics. 


@@@@@


doc= 30634


Bass, Michael Arthur, first Baron Burton (1837-1909), brewer and benefactor, was born at Brewery House, High Street, Burton upon Trent, on 12 November 1837, the elder son of Michael Thomas Bass (1799-1884), brewer, and his wife, Eliza Jane (died 1897), daughter of Major Samuel Arden of Longcroft Hall, Staffordshire. He was educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1860, MA in 1864. On leaving university, he entered the flourishing brewing business of Bass, Ratcliff, and Gretton. He married on 28 October 1869 Harriet Georgiana, daughter of Edward Thornewill of Dove Cliff, Staffordshire; they had a daughter, Nellie Lisa, born on 27 December 1873, who married in 1894 James Evan Bruce Baillie, formerly MP for Inverness-shire. 
Already in 1860 Bass, as the firm was invariably known, was one of Britain's leading breweries, with an annual output of 340,000 barrels. By 1876 Bass's production was close on a million barrels. Three years later an article in the 'British Mercury' (6 June 1879) thought the firm 'a mercantile colossus that has o'erstrided every similar institution in England, if not the world... a monument to the energy of men'. Bass's pre-eminence as a market leader was undoubtedly the achievement of M. T. Bass, but his son was a capable and loyal deputy until his father's death in 1884. Then, for the next quarter of a century, in more difficult times for brewers, he kept the firm on course. 
While other brewers stumbled, caught out by a decelerating demand for beer, increasing competition among brewers, the headlong, expensive acquisition of public houses after the mid-1880s, and the temperance movement storm, Michael Bass ensured that Bass retained its supreme reputation for a quality product and sound management (only Guinness -- an Irish firm -- came to equal its standing in the brewing industry). This was a notable achievement for a third-generation businessman who was a prime exemplar of the richest type of late Victorian plutocrat. Michael Bass's business qualities were numerous: he possessed a sound understanding of brewing (especially of the hop trade); he was proud of his calling; he was genial, a respected manager of his departmental heads; even towards the end of his life he put in a six-hour day at the firm's offices in Burton. 
Bass entered parliament in 1865 as Liberal member for Stafford before representing East Staffordshire between 1868 and 1885, and the Burton division of Staffordshire in 1885-6. He proved a popular member of the house, and was a personal friend of W. E. Gladstone. His father having refused both a baronetcy and a peerage, Bass was made a baronet 'in vita patris' in 1882, with remainder to his brother, Hamar Alfred Bass, and his heirs male; Hamar Bass died in 1898, leaving his son, William Arthur Hamar Bass, heir to the baronetcy. Bass was opposed to Gladstone's home-rule policy in 1886, but on other great questions he remained for some time a consistent Liberal. He was raised to the peerage on Gladstone's recommendation on 13 August 1886 as Baron Burton of Rangemore and of Burton upon Trent, both in Staffordshire. 
The growing hostility of the Liberal Party to the brewing interest, as shown in their licensing policy, and the widening of the breach on the Irish question, led Lord Burton to a final secession from the Liberals in 1894, and he became a Liberal Unionist under Lord Hartington and Joseph Chamberlain. After 1903 he warmly supported Chamberlain's policy of tariff-reform, and, although in poor health, he initially led the opposition to Herbert Asquith's licensing bill in 1908, which was rejected by the House of Lords. 
Always outspoken and good-humoured, Burton was a personal friend of Edward VII, both before and after his accession. The king frequently visited him at his London residence, Chesterfield House, Mayfair, at his Scottish seat, Glen Quoich Lodge, and at Rangemore, his vast house near Burton. The king conferred upon him the decoration of KCVO when he visited Balmoral in 1904. He was a deputy lieutenant and a JP for Staffordshire, and a director of the South Eastern Railway Company. In his younger days he was an active freemason and remained a liberal contributor to masonic charities. An excellent shot and an expert deerstalker, he was long in command of the 2nd volunteer battalion of the North Staffordshire regiment, retiring in August 1881 with the rank of honorary colonel. He built and presented to the regiment the spacious drill hall at Burton, and gave for competition at Bisley the Bass charity vase and a cup for ambulance work. 
Burton's gifts and benefactions to the town of Burton were, like those of his father, munificent. Contemporaries compared them with George Peabody and Baroness Burdett-Coutts. When Burton died the 'Brewers' Gazette' (4 February 1909) reckoned the practical form of his munificence saved the ratepayers of Burton upon Trent 2's'. in the pound over many years. He and his father presented Burton with a town hall and municipal offices at a cost of over $65,000. Lord Burton gave club buildings to both the Liberal and Conservative parties in succession; he constructed, at a cost of about $20,000, the ferry bridge which spans the valley at the south end of Burton, and afterwards freed the bridge from tolls at a cost of $12,950, and in 1890 added an approach to it over the marshy ground, known as the Fleet Green Viaduct. As a loyal churchman, he generously contributed towards diocesan funds, but was most notably a builder of churches. St Paul's Church at Burton, built by him and his father, is a miniature late Victorian cathedral. It cost $120,000, with a further $40,000 provided for its endowment. Large sums in addition were given for improvements and embellishments, including $30,000 for a church institute. In addition, father and son built St Margaret's, Burton, and the church at Rangemore, and Lord Burton was in the middle of financing St Chad's, Burton, and the restoration of the old parish church, St Modwen's (at a cost of $20,000), when he died. Since both the Ratcliff and Gretton partners were also church builders in the Burton neighbourhoods, the brewery's patronage of church building -- beer and God in harness -- is a remarkable example of late Victorian philanthropy. 
Burton had a cultivated taste as an art collector, and Chesterfield House, his residence in Mayfair, was furnished in the style of the eighteenth century and contained a choice collection of pictures by English artists of that period which became widely known owing to his generosity in lending them to public exhibitions. Gainsborough, Reynolds, and Romney were especially well represented. His more modern pictures were at Rangemore, and included some of the best work of Stanfield, Creswick, and their contemporaries. At Rangemore he was reckoned to have spent as much as $200,000 on its improvement. 
Burton died at his London home, Chesterfield House, Mayfair, on 1 February 1909 after an operation for a kidney affliction and was buried on 5 February at Rangemore church. He was survived by his wife. The grand pallbearers at his funeral were good testimony to his popularity among the aristocracy and his standing in the brewing industry. In default of male heirs, the peerage, by a second patent of 29 November 1897, descended to his daughter and her heirs male. By his will he strictly entailed the bulk of his property to his wife for life, then to his daughter, then to her descendants; and Burton stipulated that every person and the husband of every person in the entail should assume the surname and arms of Bass, and reside at Rangemore for at least four months in every year. 


@@@@@


doc= 30635


Lowke, Wenman Joseph Bassett- (1877-1953), model-maker and businessman, was born Joseph Wenman Bassett Lowke at 13 Kingswell Street, Northampton, on 27 December 1877, the elder son of Joseph Tom Lowke, agricultural engineer, and Eliza Goodman. He was educated at Kingswell Street College and All Saints' Commercial School until the age of thirteen. He worked for his father in the firm of J. T. Lowke & Sons, engineers and boilermakers, of Northampton, founded as Bassett & Sons by his stepgrandfather in 1859. He soon left to work for an architect but, after eighteen months, returned to his father's firm. 
There, with Harry Franklin, the company's bookkeeper, Lowke took up model engineering, making small engines and boilers. He spent two years, 1898-1900, as a student apprentice with Crompton & Co. Ltd of Chelmsford; during that time, in 1899, he founded the firm of Bassett-Lowke & Co., so named to distinguish it from his father's firm. At the same time he adopted this as his own surname. Franklin helped to run the nascent company, a small, mail-order business selling component parts for model engines. In 1898 Bassett-Lowke had forged a relationship with Percival Marshall, editor of the new magazine 'Model Engineer and Amateur Electrician'. He was thus soon able to advertise regularly and reach a wide public. His first catalogue appeared in 1900, the year in which he made, at the Paris Exhibition, important contacts with Bing Brothers and Carette & Cie, both of Nuremberg, who were able to manufacture and supply steam engines of British railway design to a standard of precision not yet achieved in Britain. 
With works established in Northampton and with the supply of parts from abroad and from such home suppliers as Cornish and Claret, business flourished. Always a prolific writer, Bassett-Lowke, known to his friends as Whynne and to his employees as Mr Whynne, contributed articles to numerous magazines and produced many brochures. The first edition of 'Model Railway Handbook' which he edited appeared in 1906, and it passed through countless editions until 1953. Bassett-Lowke's first retail shop was opened in High Holborn in London in 1908, and others were subsequently opened in Edinburgh and Manchester. The business became a limited liability company in 1910 as it branched out from model railways and stationary engines into flying machines, electrical equipment, and, especially, ships. A miniature railway run at Blackpool from 1905 to 1910 was highly successful. From 1911 there were regular contracts with the Admiralty. Bassett-Lowke was able to anticipate trends and so to diversify and establish subsidiary companies to supply and market a vast range of products. He 'was like a magnet, drawing to him all the best craftsmen, engineers, draughtsmen and designers' (Fuller, 330). 
After the First World War the field of exhibition and industrial models was greatly expanded. Railway and shipping companies asked Bassett-Lowke to supply training models, and electricity in models was developed. His company, Narrow Gauge Railways Ltd, re-created and ran the Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway from 1915 to 1925. He lectured and broadcast, and the name Bassett-Lowke became renowned to museums, institutions, companies, and collectors across the world. In the Second World War Bassett-Lowke was called upon by the services to provide countless training models of vessels and models of Mulberry harbours, Bailey bridges, and landing equipment for vital operational planning purposes. 
In 1912 Bassett-Lowke, earlier a member of the Fabian Society, joined the Labour Party. George Bernard Shaw was a close friend who sometimes stayed with him in Northampton. Bassett-Lowke was a town councillor in Northampton from 1930 and an alderman from 1945. In 1948 he declined an invitation to be mayor, not wishing to sit on the bench and pass judgment on others. He served a number of committees and was successful in having the council build a modern public baths. He was a founder member of the town's Rotary Club, of which he was president in 1934, and founder director of its repertory theatre; he enjoyed taking part in amateur dramatics. Northampton Central Museum and Art Gallery has a three-view oil painting of him by John A. A. Berrie. 
On 21 March 1917 Bassett-Lowke married Florence Jane, daughter of shoe manufacturer Charles Jones. There were no children. Bassett-Lowke was a founder member of the Design and Industries Association and was always interested in architecture: he had Charles Rennie Mackintosh carry out alterations to his first marital home, and in 1926 his second was designed by Peter Behrens. As a young man he was interested in swimming and cycling. He had a lifelong interest in photography, both still and cine, becoming vice-president of the Institute of Amateur Cinematographers. Throughout his life he was a great traveller, both on business and for pleasure. In 1904 he became a member of the Junior Institution of Engineers and, in 1911, of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers. He was the first president of the Model Engineers' Trade Association. He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1946. In the last two years of his life Bassett-Lowke showed marked signs of senility. He died at St Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, on 21 October 1953 of broncho-pneumonia. He was buried at Billing Road cemetery, Northampton, on the 23rd. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30636


Bateman, Henry Mayo (1887-1970), cartoonist, was born on 15 February 1887, of English parents, at Moss Vale, Sutton Forest, New South Wales, Australia, the only son and the elder of two children of Henry Charles Bateman (1857-1940), then a farmer and later an export packager, and his wife, (Amelia) Rose Mayo, formerly Brooks (1865-1956). The family returned to England in 1888. 
Nicknamed Binks, Bateman was educated at Forest Hill House, which he left at the age of sixteen to study drawing and painting at Westminster School of Art, London, and then at Goldsmiths' College at New Cross, and for two or three years in the London studio of Charles van Havenmaet. In 1903 his first published drawing appeared in 'Scraps' and the tentative beginnings of his long association with 'The Tatler' magazine occurred the following year. He found it unusually difficult to choose between a career as a fine artist and one as a cartoonist but on his twenty-first birthday he decided to fulfil a childhood ambition 'to make people laugh', which correct choice of metier was nevertheless followed by a prolonged nervous breakdown. 
In 1909 the diffident, moody young Bateman, in his own words, 'went mad on paper' ('H. M. Bateman by Himself', 61). He began drawing people not as they looked but as they felt -- then an unusual concept. Among his earliest influences were Phil May and Tom Browne, but especially two artists of comic genius -- Henry Ospovat and, particularly, Emmanuel Poire (Caran d'Ache). In his introduction to 'Caran d'Ache the Supreme' (1933) Bateman described him as 'the greatest master of the art of telling a story in pictures'. Both artists provided the impetus towards Bateman's refreshing and occasionally disconcerting freedom of expression. The humour of his line was an intrinsic part of the cartoon. According to P. V. Bradshaw, 'If he seldom saw beauty in his subjects he always supplied it in his line' (Bradshaw, pt 16, p. 7). There was youthful cynicism in his humour and 'a certain suspicion of virulence' (ibid., 5). This was partly based on an awareness of convention and the grudging acceptance of its constraints rather than a rebellion against it. Bateman neither looked nor acted the part of the bohemian artist. He dressed conventionally, as many artists dressed in those days, even at the drawing-board. 
For the (glossy) 'Sketch', and billed as 'Our Untamed Artist', Bateman caricatured theatre personalities from life. He also sketched imaginary (and hilarious) but totally convincing pianists, singers, and music-hall performers, but above all he drew suburbia -- viewed at first hand from his home, Parkstone, 40 Nightingale Lane, Clapham, London. According to one contemporary observer, cited by Anderson, 'It is fair and reasonable to call Clapham the capital of Suburbia' (Anderson, 51). In his pre-First World War cartoons for 'London Opinion', 'The Sketch', and 'The Bystander' every nuance of gentility was noted and later brought together in his first collection of cartoons, 'Burlesques' (1916); others appeared in 'Suburbia' (1922). 
Bateman attempted to overcome shyness and to release pent-up energies by taking lessons in boxing and, incongruously, tap-dancing. After volunteering for military service in 1915 the far from robust cartoonist was hastily returned to civilian life where the ignominy of rejection accentuated a tendency towards depression which was partly assuaged by numerous fishing expeditions in the company of his closest friend, the author and gourmet William Caine. Until his sudden death in 1925, Caine was also the subject of many Bateman cartoons. 'Punch' began publishing his work in 1915, at a time when an increasing melancholy somehow transmogrified into an even livelier humour. He brought to perfection the strip without words, of which 'The Boy who Breathed on the Glass in the British Museum' (British Museum, London) is a classic example. Many of his best cartoons in this genre were reprinted in 'A Book of Drawings' (1921), with an introduction by G. K. Chesterton. His output was prodigious and highly paid. 
Bateman was an active if reserved member of the Chelsea Arts Club and the London Sketch Club, but even these amiable islands of male 'bonhomie' in a male-oriented world could not altogether cheer him up. After the First World War he moved from London to Reigate, Surrey, where for fourteen years he lived quietly but industriously. He was not entirely a recluse. On 29 September 1926, at St Mark's Church in Hamilton Terrace, Maida Vale, London, he married Brenda Mary Collison Weir (1903?-1988), the daughter of Octavius Weir, a country gentleman from Stratford St Mary, Suffolk; the couple had two daughters. Bateman and his wife were like chalk and cheese: at first the novelty of their differences wore well but not for long. He was at the height of his fame, yet his wife -- who adored his cartoons -- wistfully observed, 'I thought he'd be more funny than he was' (interview, 'The Man who Went Mad on Paper'). This lament lasted throughout their marriage. 
The genesis of a series which would in time bring Bateman worldwide fame began in 1912 with 'The Missed Putt', which he considered to be the first of 'The Man Who...' cartoons which illustrated social gaffes and clangers based on middle- and upper-middle-class aspirations, snobbery, manners, and etiquette. The first of the full-colour, double-page spreads in 'The Tatler' appeared in 1922 with 'The Guardsman who Dropped It' (Cavalry and Guards Club, London), soon followed by many more in similar vein, such as 'The Man who Lit his Cigar before the Royal Toast' and 'The Man who Asked for a Double Scotch in the Grand Pump Room at Bath' (Grand Pump Room, Bath). In most drawings, with humour strengthened by accurate observation, a serenely innocent figure, or someone crushed with embarrassment, is surrounded by a writhing assembly ululating with outrage. 
Further collections of Bateman's work appeared: 'Rebound' (1927), 'Brought Forward' (1931), and 'Considered Trifles' (1934). One-man exhibitions were held, beginning with one at the Brook Street Gallery, London, in 1911, followed by two at the Leicester Galleries, London, in 1919 and 1921, and another in Sydney, Australia, in 1938. As the Second World War began, a luxury edition of the best of 'The Man Who...' had to be abandoned when a bomb destroyed the plates. 'The Man Who...' was essentially formulaic and in time Bateman grew bored with the repetition; his style became 'tricksy' (his own word) and lost the zest of earlier works. Cartooning also took its toll of his 'straight' draughtsmanship, though his little volume 'The Art of Drawing' (1926) was and remains a classic exposition of basic skills. Apart from his autobiography ('H. M. Bateman by Himself', 1937) he wrote and illustrated several books, including 'The Evening Rise' (1960), and illustrated many more. Among his authors were Lewis Carroll, George Robey, William Caine, and A. P. Herbert. Advertisers bid for 'The Man Who...' to promote Shell, Colman's mustard, Guinness, the 'News Chronicle', and Kensitas, Lucky Strike, and Bar-One cigarettes, among many (perhaps too many) others. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War, as a highly paid cartoonist Bateman decided he could afford the luxury of semi-retirement. With advancing years his moroseness and some surprising meannesses increased and in 1947 he separated from his family, moving to Brook Cottage, Sampford Courtenay, Devon, where he lived from 1953 and indulged in and wrote about his lifelong recreation of trout fishing with the fly. The Inland Revenue, which had once provided him with some of his funniest cartoons, became the object of a sad, paranoiac obsession, resulting in (mostly unpublished) cartoons containing his virulence but not the beauty of line nor much of the humour of his earlier work. That bee-in-a-bonnet apart, he was in old age an upright figure, as clipped, neat, and peppery as the 'Colonels' (1924) he drew with relish and affection, and, when he chose, he could be an amiable host. An exhibition of his work was held at the Fine Art Society, London, in 1962. 
In the late 1960s, tired of a post-war Britain in which he felt totally alien, Bateman moved to the Maltese island of Gozo where, with the Royal Lady Hotel at Mgarr as his base, he painted landscape watercolours which failed to achieve the high standards he set himself. Humour was his forte. Thanks to the ubiquity of embarrassment his best cartoons, and there are many, will ring comically true as long as human nature persists. 
H. M. Bateman died of heart failure on 11 February 1970 while taking his usual solitary morning walk. He was buried in the English church on Malta. Posthumous exhibitions of his work were held at the Leicester Galleries, London, in 1974, and the Langton Gallery, London, in 1978, 1980, and 1981. Some of his drawings are in the collection of the Cartoon Art Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 30637


Bates, Cadwallader John (1853-1902), antiquary, was born at Kensington Gate, London, on 14 January 1853, the eldest son of Thomas Bates (1810-1882) and his first wife, Emily (died 1853), daughter of John Batten of Thorn Falcon, Somerset. His father, of Aydon White House and Heddon, Northumberland, was a barrister who had been a fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, from 1834 to 1849. The Bates family had been established in Northumberland since the fourteenth century, but through his mother Bates was a kinsman of Cadwallader, twelfth Lord Blayney of Gregynog (extinct 1874), after whom he was named. He was at Eton College from 1866 but left after two years because of weak eyesight, which was to trouble him throughout his life. In 1869 he proceeded to Jesus College, Cambridge, but poor sight led to his being awarded an 'aegrotat' in the moral sciences tripos of 1871. He proceeded MA in 1875. Between 1871 and 1882 he travelled much abroad, especially in Germany and Poland, where two of his uncles had lived for many years, in particular Edward Bates, who lived at Schloss Cloden, Brandenburg, Prussia. In 1882, having inherited this Prussian property, he succeeded to the family estates in Northumberland, to the family interest in the Heddon colliery, and to Kirklevington, near Yarm, Yorkshire. He invested in land in Silesia and had family interests in Wittenberg. Although his interests were mainly scholarly, he had a practical knowledge of farming and mastered the intricacies of the herd-book to rebuild partially the celebrated Kirklevington shorthorn herd, dispersed in 1850, of his great-uncle Thomas Bates, whose biography he published in 1897. 
In 1882 Cadwallader Bates bought Langley Castle, near Haydon Bridge, from the commissioners of the Greenwich Hospital estates and spent large sums on restoring it, using the Durham architect C. Hodgson Fowler. As magistrate and deputy lieutenant, Bates took his full share of county business in Northumberland, and was high sheriff in 1890. His enduring contribution to county life lay, however, in his historical work, especially on the medieval history of Northumbria. In 'Border Holds' (1891), the first but only volume published of a detailed study of Northumberland castles, he showed keen observation and documentary accuracy on a subject much burdened with legend. Twenty-seven castles and towers were discussed, but no sequel was published. A concise 'History of Northumberland' (1895), more popular in tone, raised standards in his day. Bates was active as a promoter of the collaborative 'History of Northumberland', and made contributions to its first six volumes (1893-1902). He was a vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne and, from 1880, a frequent contributor to 'Archaeologia Aeliana'. He was deeply read in Christian origins and medieval hagiography, and left some unfinished studies of St Patrick and St Gildas. Attracted by its difficulty, he took up the history of the Paschal controversy and likewise left several studies on the subject. 
In 1893, while on a visit to Austrian Poland, Bates was received into the Uniate Church. On 3 September 1895 he married Josephine (died 1933), second daughter of Francois Jacob d'Echarvine, of Tailloires, Savoy; there were no children. Bates's indefatigable historical labours told on his health, and he died at his home at Langley Castle of heart failure on 18 March 1902; he was buried in the castle grounds. A collection of his letters, spirited in expression and displaying wide learning in local antiquities, was published in 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 30638


Bates, Sir Percy Elly, fourth baronet (1879-1946), merchant and shipowner, was born at Beechenhurst, Wavertree, Liverpool, on 12 May 1879, the second of seven sons of Edward Percy Bates (1845-1899), who became second baronet, and his wife, Constance Elisabeth, daughter of Samuel Robert Graves, a former mayor of and member of parliament for Liverpool. 
Educated at Winchester College (1892-7), Bates then studied in Germany for a year. Apprenticeship with William Johnston & Co., shipowners, of Liverpool followed, but after his father's death Bates joined the family business of Edward Bates & Sons, merchants and shipowners, long established in Liverpool and India. In 1903 he succeeded his brother in the baronetcy and in 1910 began his connection with the Cunard Steam-Ship Company of which he became deputy chairman in 1922. In 1924 Bates became a director of the 'Morning Post', then in 1930 chairman. He held that position until the sale of the paper in 1937, and became a friend of fellow director, Rudyard Kipling, whom he greatly admired and often quoted. 
In the First World War, Bates joined the transport department of the Admiralty. When the Ministry of Shipping was created, he continued as director of commercial services, being concerned with the shipment of civilian supplies to Britain and her allies. In recognition of his war service Bates was appointed GBE in 1920. Nevertheless, he, in general, disliked government interference in commerce. During the Second World War he was a member both of the advisory council and of the liner committee of the Ministry of War Transport. 
In 1930 Bates became chairman of Cunard in succession to Sir Thomas Royden. He and his predecessor had together masterminded a scheme to provide a weekly transatlantic passenger service using two large, fast modern liners instead of the current three vessels. Before the end of 1930 Cunard had placed the order for the first of the 'big ships' with shipbuilders John Brown at Clydebank where the new vessel was given the yard number 534. The year 1930 also witnessed the collapse of the Royal Mail group, one of the biggest British shipping groups, and Cunard put in a bid for the transatlantic White Star Line which was one of the group's companies. The initial bid by Bates was unsuccessful, but attempts to obtain White Star were to become closely linked to the fortunes of the 'big ships' project over the next few years. 
The economic crisis of 1931 forced Cunard to suspend construction of no. 534 at the end of that year. Bates now sought government financial support to complete the 'big ships' project. The government was unenthusiastic, but suggested assistance might be available if Cunard merged with White Star on terms acceptable to the creditors of the latter company. Bates still wanted White Star, but intended to absorb it rather than agree to a merger. Eventually the government decided to provide financial support, confirmed by the 'North Atlantic Shipping Act' of 1934, and Bates accepted a merger with White Star. The new Cunard-White Star company was formed in 1934 with Bates as chairman. 
Work recommenced on no. 534 in 1934 and the ship was launched later in the year as the 'Queen Mary', entering transatlantic service in 1936. The second 'big ship', the 'Queen Elizabeth', was launched by John Brown in 1938, but did not enter commercial service before the outbreak of the Second World War. 
Although deeply committed to the 'big ships' project, Bates was not unaware of the beginnings of transatlantic air travel during the 1930s. He mistakenly believed that the aeroplane would not compete with the ocean liner, but would cater for a small and select passenger market. Between 1934 and his death, Bates made various efforts, all unsuccessful, to obtain a share for Cunard in transatlantic air travel. 
During the Second World War, the two 'Queens' served as troopships, initially east of Suez from 1940 to 1942, then on the north Atlantic run from 1942 to 1944. On the latter service they brought across many of the American troops who took part in the Normandy landings in 1944. Bates took great pride in the work of these ships and liked to believe that they shortened the war in Europe by a whole year. These great ships had unexpected ends: the 'Queen Elizabeth' was destroyed by fire in Hong Kong harbour in 1971 while being converted into a floating university; the 'Queen Mary' became a floating museum, berthed at Long Beach, California, from 1967. 
Bates was terse in speech and judgement: he never encumbered his talk with platitudes, or troubled to obscure the directness of his thought. Such characteristics, allied with a determined jaw, and, on occasion, an emphatic manner, made him formidable to those who did not know him well. However, he was always scrupulous in the use of power, ready for interchange of ideas and considerate and sensitive in personal relationships. He regarded himself as fortunate in having a group of brothers and other colleagues who looked to him for leadership and on whose support he relied. During his career he gave due time to those offices which fall to a leading shipowner; he was a member of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board (1908-10), chairman of the Liverpool Steamship Owners' Association (1911, 1945), president of the Institute of Marine Engineers (1939), and chairman of the General Council of British Shipping (1945). He was also high sheriff of Cheshire (1920-21), and a justice of the peace for the county. 
On 20 June 1907 Bates married Mary Ann (1880-1973), daughter of William Lefroy, dean of Norwich. They had one son, Edward Percy, a pilot officer in the Royal Air Force whose death in action over Germany in 1945, borne by his father with outward stoicism, was a deep wound. He found relaxation in golf and shooting, was enthusiastic about curling, and was a keen fisherman. Annual fishing trips to Ireland, Scotland, and Scandinavia were occasions when Bates and his brothers could all get together. 
Having presided as host on a short preliminary run of the 'Queen Elizabeth', Bates suffered a heart attack at his office in Liverpool on 14 October 1946. He died at his home, Hinderton Hall, Neston, Wirral, Cheshire, on 16 October 1946, on the very morning when he should have sailed on the 'Queen Elizabeth''s first voyage as an Atlantic passenger ship. He was buried at Childwall church, Wavertree, Liverpool, and was survived by his wife. 
Bates was succeeded as chairman of the Cunard Steam-Ship Company and Cunard-White Star by two younger brothers, first Frederic Alan Bates (1884-1957) and then Colonel Denis Haughton Bates (1886-1959). Born on 25 August 1886, the latter served with the duke of Lancaster's own yeomanry during the First World War and was mentioned in dispatches. On 12 December 1922 he married Aline Mary Crook (died 1974), daughter of Edward Tipping Crook of Woodlands Hall, Bridgnorth; they had a son and a daughter. He died on 13 September 1959. His only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 30639


Bateson, Sir Alexander Dingwall (1866-1935), judge, was born at Allerton, Liverpool, on 30 April 1866, the youngest of the six sons of William Gandy Bateson, a partner in a well-known firm of shipping solicitors in Liverpool, and his wife, Agnes Dingwall, daughter of Sir Thomas Blaikie, of Aberdeen. Like his elder brother Harold Dingwall Bateson, he was educated at Rugby School and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he took a third in classical moderations (1887) and graduated with a pass BA degree in 1888. He played rugby for the college but, unlike Harold, did not obtain a blue; as a cricketer he was an adventurous batsman and sound wicket-keeper. 
Having been called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1891, Bateson began his professional career in the chambers of Joseph Walton. With such backing and under such a mentor, as well as his family connections, he had conspicuous advantages: he quickly specialized in shipping work, mainly in salvage and collision cases in the Admiralty division, occasionally in the commercial court. His progress was steady, his practice substantial. With a pleasing voice, incisive in manner and speech, he was both a lucid and a businesslike advocate. In 1893 he married Isabel Mary (died 1919), fourth daughter of William Latham QC; they had four sons and two daughters. 
In 1909 Bateson was appointed junior counsel to the Admiralty for Admiralty division work, but did not hold that office for long: in 1910, with his friend, and principal rival in the Admiralty court, (Edward) Maurice Hill, he took silk, and thereafter there were few shipping cases in the Admiralty division, House of Lords, or privy council in which he was not on one side or the other. He secured the confidence of the maritime business community more by his attention to detail and capacity for decision than through any profound legal learning, such as his same rival who preceded him to the bench enjoyed. He was elected a bencher of his inn in 1920. 
Under the 'Administration of Justice Act' (1925) power was given to appoint an additional judge of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division, which had become congested: divorce-law reform increased divorce cases, while depression in shipping had not yet decreased shipping cases. With the universal approbation of the bar -- and in accordance with its universal expectation -- the lord chancellor (Viscount Cave) in May 1925 selected Bateson for appointment to the new post. He received the customary knighthood. The division in which he sat brought together in a single court quite disparate legal disciplines, and indeed from 1970 no longer survived in that form, the subjects being dispersed between the Queen's Bench (Admiralty), Chancery (Probate), and Family (Divorce) divisions. Bateson was entirely conversant with maritime law and practice; in the probate and matrimonial jurisdiction he lacked any previous expertise. Although he never wholly assimilated all the historical principles of the earlier ecclesiastical law, his sound common sense and humanity stood him in good stead. He appreciated that the duty of a judge in family matters is to give judgments, not to deliver sermons. He disliked anything which attracted public attention to himself, and made no gratuitous comments on manners or morals. Dignified, courteous, careful, and diligent, Bateson was a master of fact, not of law. He seldom reserved a judgment, yet his judgments were rarely reversed. He continued to show that supreme judicial qualification, the ability to reach a conclusion. As a result he gave full satisfaction not only to the shipping community but also to other litigants and the bar. 
During the First World War, Bateson had been a regular worker at the Kensington Red Cross depot, where he helped to make thousands of 'Thomas splints', rings of mild steel shaped to fit round the thigh. Bateson said to a colleague of this experience, 'the noise of the hammering prevents my hearing the bombs' ('The Times', 16 Jan 1935, 12). He had the English quality best captured by the French word 'sangfroid'. His outside interests included agriculture, forestry, and shooting, and for many years he farmed at Lotus, Beeswing by Dumfries, Kirkcudbrightshire, where he usually spent his vacations. He died at his home, 30 Phillimore Gardens, London, on 11 January 1935. His obituary in 'The Times' (12 January 1935) commented that 'the premature close of his judicial career must be regarded as a serious public loss'. Today a judge of his age would be compelled to retire. 


@@@@@


doc= 30640


Bateson, Mary (1865-1906), historian and suffragist, was born on 12 September 1865 at Ings House, Robin Hood's Bay, Yorkshire, the daughter of William Henry Bateson (1812-1881), master of St John's College, Cambridge, and his wife, Anna Aikin (1829-1918), a promoter of women's rights and liberal causes in Cambridge. William Bateson, the biologist, was her elder brother, and Margaret Heitland, the journalist and women's suffragist, was her elder sister. She attended the Misses Thornton's school in Cambridge in the mid-1870s before spending a year at the Institut Friedlander in Baden, Germany. Her command of German was substantial enough for her to be engaged as the German teacher at the Perse School for Girls at the same time as she was a pupil there (1881-4), preparing to enter Newnham College, Cambridge, of which her parents had been among the founders in 1871. She attended Newnham from 1884 to 1887, taking a first class in the historical tripos at Cambridge in 1887 and winning the historical essay prize at Newnham for a dissertation, 'Monastic civilisation in the fens'. 
Bateson remained a member of the Newnham community for the rest of her life as an associate, lecturer, and fellow of the college. She lectured in English constitutional history, served on the college council, and shared in the unsuccessful effort of 1895-7 to have women admitted to full membership of Cambridge University. Eleanor Sidgwick, second principal of Newnham, described Bateson, who recognized the connection between financial security and scholarly production, as the prime mover behind the foundation of Newnham's research fellowships. Bateson was awarded one of the first of these fellowships in 1903 from a fund to which she had contributed $250. Upon the expiry of her fellowship she gave the money back to the fund to assist other scholars. 
It is primarily for her medieval scholarship that Bateson is remembered outside Newnham. Under the mentorship of Cambridge colleagues Mandell Creighton and, later, F. W. Maitland, Bateson continued her studies of medieval culture, editing texts and publishing both scholarly and popular history. Her earlier work focused on monastic and religious history; her 'editio princeps' of AElfric's 'Letter to the Monks of Eynsham', which was published as appendix 7 in G. W. Kitchin (ed.), 'Compotus Rolls of the Obedientiares of St. Swithun's Priory, Winchester' (1892), remained the only available text of this important Benedictine reform document until 1984. Her essay 'Origin and early history of double monasteries' ('Transactions of the Royal Historical Society', new ser., 13, 1899, 137-98), is a foundational text in the history of women's religious communities. Using a wide range of primary sources, Bateson established a history and a precedent for 'double monasteries' -- houses for monks and nuns ruled by an abbess, usually of royal birth. 
In almost every year from 1890 to 1906 Bateson contributed an article or short edited text to the 'English Historical Review'; she collaborated with its editors (Maitland and R. L. Poole) to prepare 'The Charters of the Borough of Cambridge' (1901) and the 'Index Britanniae scriptorum' (1902). She also contributed 108 biographical articles to the original edition of the 'DNB'. The subjects of all these entries are men; they include saints, monks, and noblemen. Some date to the Anglo-Saxon or early modern periods; most cluster in the Anglo-Norman and high middle ages. 
By the mid-1890s Bateson's focus had changed from monasteries and cathedrals to boroughs and towns, and her later work tends to address the medieval history of municipal customs and laws. She edited the 'Records of the Borough of Leicester' (3 vols., 1899, 1901, and 1905) as well as the 'Cambridge Gild Records' (Cambridge Antiquarian Society, 1903). Her final and probably most important editorial work was the mammoth two-volume 'Borough Customs' (Selden Society, 1904 and 1906) that brought together tenth- to seventeenth-century texts such as charters, law codes, custumals, letters patent, patent rolls, council orders, and ordinance rolls to 'set out the rules which obtained in the borough-moots', as she notes in the introduction to volume 1. 
Bateson's essay 'The laws of Breteuil' ('English Historical Review', 15, 1900, 73-8, 302-18, 496-523, 754-7; and 16, 1901, 92-110, 332-45) is still an important text in the field of legal history, as it illustrates that the Norman town of Breteuil, not the English town of Bristol (as was previously believed), is the origin of many English borough laws and customs. Her substantial scholarly reputation was such that she was asked to be the prestigious Warburton lecturer at the University of Manchester in 1905; her two lectures were entitled 'Survivals of ancient customs in English borough law'. 
Bateson also wrote a large quantity of popular history. Her only book that is not a scholarly edition of a historical text, 'Mediaeval England', appeared in the popular Unwin history series 'The Story of the Nations' (1903). She contributed 'The French in America' to the 1903 edition of the 'Cambridge Modern History', and a number of social history essays to H. D. Traill's monumental historical encyclopaedia 'Social England' (1901-4), as well as a chapter, 'The borough of Peterborough', for the 'Victoria County History of Northampton' (1906). Bateson's skills as a writer for the general public were acknowledged when she was asked by Cambridge University Press to act as a general editor of the 'Cambridge Medieval History', a post which she was unable to take up before her untimely death at forty-one. 
Mary Bateson the historian was also Mary Bateson the suffragist and women's rights crusader, despite the disapproval of Creighton, her Newnham colleague Alice Gardner, and others. She served the Cambridge Women's Suffrage Association (an affiliate of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, the NUWSS) in a variety of capacities throughout the 1880s and 1890s: in a paid position as meeting organizer (1888), as executive committee member (1889), secretary of the association (1892-8), secretary to the special appeal (1894), and national conference delegate (1896). 
Bateson spoke as part of a suffrage deputation to the prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, on 19 May 1906, representing women graduates of universities in a group of 350 representatives from twenty-five different NUWSS affiliates. She made a brief speech and presented a petition signed by 1530 women university graduates 'who believe the disenfranchisement of one sex to be injurious to both, and a national wrong in a country which pretends to be governed on a representative system' (NUWSS, 11). 
Bateson also took the socially unusual step of moving out of her mother's house and into a home of her own on Huntingdon Road. It seems that she valued her peace and quiet over the custom of an adult, unmarried daughter living with her parents. She was remembered in obituaries as a gracious, compassionate woman with a sense of humour and a keen intellect. Gardner noted that any party was sure to succeed if Mary Bateson were on the guest list, and mentions Bateson's 'unexpected sallies of wit' at college meetings (Gardner, 'In memoriam', 34). Thomas Frederick Tout, the historian, stated that she 'was popular socially in circles that cared little for her personal [academic] distinction' and referred to her 'rare sense of humour... her deep, hearty laugh... [her] downright breezy good-fellowship' (Tout, 6). Bateson's Girton colleague Ellen A. McArthur recalled her as 'absolutely honest, independent, and fearless, full of commonsense, and endowed with a sense of humour' (McArthur, 1033). 
Bateson's death from a brain haemorrhage, at the Nursing Hostel, Thompsons Lane, Cambridge, on 30 November 1906 shocked all the communities of which she was a part. Bertrand Russell, for one, found her death 'very sad -- she will be a terrible loss to Newnham and to Cambridge... I respected and admired her very much indeed. She was the last person one would have thought of as likely to die' (Bertrand Russell to M. Llewellyn-Davies, 4 Dec 1906, McMaster University). She was buried in the Histon Road cemetery in Cambridge. She left her library and about $2500 to Newnham College, where she is commemorated by a named research fellowship. All the memorials refer to her good nature, her firm work ethic, and her enormous scholarly production. A bust of her, sculpted by her sister Edith Bateson, still stands at the old entrance to the Newnham College Library; it presents her, appropriately, reading a book. 


@@@@@


doc= 30641


Bateson, William (1861-1926), biologist, was born on 8 August 1861 in St Hilda's Terrace, Ruswarp, near Whitby, Yorkshire, the second of six children of William Henry Bateson (1812-1881), master of St John's College, Cambridge, and his wife, Anna Aikin (1829-1918), daughter of James Aikin (1792-1878), Liverpool shipping merchant. As the reformist master of St John's College, William Henry Bateson had achieved a reputation both in national educational circles and more especially in the politics of Cambridge University. There, freed from the rule of celibacy by his promotion from fellow to master, he had married the beautiful and spirited Anna Aikin, fond of the arts and a strong advocate for the rights of women. 
Both families owed their financial success to the previous generation of self-made vigorous men (Bateson's paternal grandfather, Richard Bateson ('b'. 1770), was a successful Liverpool cotton merchant). Their traditions were alike, Liberal, and the marriage of Bateson's parents in 1858 strengthened this political stance and perpetuated feminist aspirations. In the span of eight years William, his four sisters, and his brother Edward were born. Surrounded by these sisters William enjoyed much attention. Naturally he was affected by their feminist persuasion, and he was to take pride in the academic successes of his sisters Anna and Mary at Newnham College, Cambridge. Mary Bateson (1865-1906), went on to become a widely respected medievalist. Another sister, Margaret ['see 'Heitland, Margaret] became a journalist and social activist. 
William Bateson was a disappointment at school at Rugby (1875-9), but he redeemed the family reputation by winning a first in the natural sciences tripos at Cambridge, part one in 1882 and part two in 1883. There, at his father's college and as a member of the circle of enthusiasts who gathered around the zoologists Francis Maitland Balfour and Adam Sedgwick, Bateson imbibed the heady wine of comparative embryology -- the window through which to glimpse the evolutionary ancestry of animal species. This study of the lines of descent known as phylogeny was founded on the assumption that the embryo recapitulates in its development the evolutionary history of the species. Bateson's first success in research was his study of the acorn worm, 'Balanoglossus', carried out in the recapitulationist tradition. The fruit of two summers spent in Hampton, Virginia, under the zoologist W. K. Brooks, supported by funds from the Royal Society, was the first accurate account of the worm's embryology and anatomy. Bateson claimed it as an example of a primitive chordate, and thus an indicator of the line of descent of the vertebrates from the invertebrates. The implications of this research and the influence of Brooks led Bateson to make a radical shift, turning from embryology to the study of variation, first in the wild and in museum collections and subsequently in the experimental tradition of hybridization. This took him in 1886 to the salt lakes of the Russian steppes and in 1887 to the brackish water of Egypt before he settled down in Cambridge to make a systematic collection of examples of variation in the animal kingdom. The resulting book, 'Materials for the Study of Variation' (1894), attacked the recapitulationist research tradition of the British evolutionists but failed to impress them. Instead it increased its author's growing alienation from those who held power in Cambridge zoology. Consequently Bateson, who was especially attached to Cambridge, continued on college support -- he was elected a fellow of St John's College in 1885 on the strength of his 'Balanoglossus' work. To the stipend of his college fellowship he was able to add (in 1892) that of college steward in charge of the wine cellar, kitchen garden, and kitchens. These two sources constituted his salary for the next fifteen years. Support for his research came from the Balfour studentship in 1887 and a succession of annual grants (from 1900 to 1906) from the Royal Society, to which he had been elected fellow in 1894. 
In 1889 Bateson met (Caroline) Beatrice Durham (1870?-1941), the daughter of a senior surgeon at Guy's Hospital, Arthur Edward Durham (1834-1895). Their subsequent engagement was broken off and all correspondence intercepted due to disapproval of Bateson by Beatrice's mother. Seven years later, Beatrice's parents having died, they renewed their acquaintance and in 1896 they married. Of their three sons John was killed in the First World War in 1918, Martin committed suicide in 1922, but Gregory Bateson (1904-1980) had a distinguished career in social anthropology and psychology. The marriage thus had its deep sadnesses -- like that of many others whose sons were lost in the war -- but it was a good partnership. Bateson was aggressive, demanding, and at times domineering, but enthusiastic and playful. He would mock, tease, and humiliate Beatrice. She was reserved and unlike her formidable sisters she tended to belittle herself; her strength was her devotion to Bateson. Until 1903 she performed most of the menial tasks associated with her husband's experiments. After his death she gathered together his correspondence and published extracts in her 160-page memoir alongside a collection of his public lectures in 'William Bateson, F.R.S., Naturalist: his Essays and Addresses' (1928). The latter displays Bateson's oratorical powers and underlines his popularity as a lecturer. Published separately as 'Problems of Genetics' (1913) were his Silliman lectures of 1907. The memoir concentrates on the Cambridge years and makes only brief references to her husband's later career at the John Innes Horticultural Institute of which he became the architect and first director in 1910. These were years of dedication, frustration, and a feeling of exile from Cambridge, added to which came the sad events of the First World War. Peace established, leadership in genetics passed from England to the United States of America where T. H. Morgan was building a reputation with the chromosome theory of heredity, a theory opposed by Bateson until 1921. 
There were four concerns that prompted Bateson to question the Darwinian orthodoxy of continuity -- the view that evolution results from the cumulative action of natural selection upon slight variations in such fashion that over a long period of time progeny diverge significantly from their originating species. His first concern was his adherence to the belief that specific differences are real, not mere products of the taxonomist, in short that there are natural kinds among living organisms. Species were for Bateson more than mere populations with certain frequencies of characters. Second, the view of variation as continuous relied heavily on the principle of utility. Slight variations were preserved and accumulated only because each one which was preserved offered its possessor some advantage in the struggle for life. Despite his family background in liberal politics and trade, he was vehemently opposed to arguments from utility. Indeed, he seems to have turned against the commercial world to which both his and his wife's family owed the advantages they enjoyed. By a process of gentrification he came to identify with the aims and to admire the institutions of the academic elite. Thus he tried to discourage his sister Anna from entering the trade of market gardening. At the same time he opposed positive eugenics because he rejected the simplistic utilitarian basis upon which decisions would be made regarding who should breed with whom. Third, he came increasingly to admire those sciences that had achieved reliable knowledge based on the experimental method, where predictions could be tested and causal chains established. Those most relevant to biology, he judged, were chemistry and physiology. Thus he emphasized the aim of his genetic research as the study of the physiology of heredity. This alignment suggested the need for experiment rather than the mere descriptions and phylogenetic speculations of the morphological tradition, and it invited the search for discontinuities in biology analogous to those in chemistry that mark the chemical elements. 
The fourth source of Bateson's changed view was the influence of the Johns Hopkins professor, W. K. Brooks. When Bateson came to work with him in 1883 Brooks was just finishing his book 'The Law of Heredity: a Study of the Cause of Variation, and the Origin of Living Organisms' (1883), in which he stressed the inadequacy of natural selection acting on purely fortuitous small variations, the suggestion to explore the nature of variation as a phenomenon of the whole organism, and the need for a large programme of experimental hybridization. Brooks's rhetorical, aphoristic style of speech and writing appealed to the 22-year-old Cambridge student, fresh from his graduation. Nearly forty years later Bateson recalled that the 'notion on which [Brooks] used to expiate, that there was a special physiology of heredity capable of independent study, came as a new idea' (cited in Bateson, 'William Bateson', 390). 
Bateson's attention to variation was first aroused by his study of 'Balanoglossus'. It concerned the origin of the vertebrates: had they derived from a worm-like creature with segmentation and bilateral symmetry, a flatworm lacking segmentation, or a jellyfish-like radially symmetrical progenitor? All three choices presented problems involving major organizational features. Bateson suggested that some of these -- such as the presence or extent of segmentation and the type of symmetry -- did occur spontaneously in evolution and thus could overcome these problems. Thus 'Balanoglossus', with scarcely any evidence of segmentation, could have derived from a radially symmetrical progenitor. This proposal had the advantage that it obviated the need for a radical reorganization of the major organs, such as would be needed for a worm-like progenitor. He found such variations in symmetry, and in the number of parts, from the study of the symmetry changes in plants and from data he collected on the multiplication of like parts in animals. 
Bateson's first step had been to probe the relation between organisms and environment where environmental change was under way in the wild. Abandoning embryology he journeyed to the salt lakes of the steppes looking for changes in molluscs that showed adaptation to the increasing salt content of these waters. Both in Russia and in Egypt he did not find a continuity of variation in the molluscs paralleling the continuity of change in the environment. When he had returned to Cambridge he set about accumulating data on variation using as his model the approach Charles Darwin used in the material for his great work 'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication' (1868). Like Darwin, Bateson began accumulating a mountain of empirical evidence for variation, but unlike the former he concentrated on monstrosities, sports of nature, objects usually assigned to the subject of teratology. They spoke to him of a discontinuous form of variation which came from within the organism -- variations ready made which natural selection had either to reject or accept. Hence to answer the question 'What is the origin of species?' Bateson turned to these sports of nature. They were of two kinds: those involving the reproduction of parts and changes of symmetry he termed meristic and those in which there was a qualitative change as in the presence or absence of a chemical substance (albino forms) which he called substantive. 
Bateson's hybridization experiments date from 1895. They were aimed at demonstrating that discontinuous variations are not swamped by breeding with the normal type. At the Royal Horticultural Society's first international conference on plant hybridization held in London in 1899 both he and the Dutch botanist Huge De Vries described their experiments without drawing any Mendelian-like conclusions. The following spring Bateson read a paper by De Vries (the first paper in the series marking the rediscovery of Mendel's law) as he travelled to London to address the society. This paper contained no reference to the Moravian monk Gregor Mendel, whose account of what became known as the Mendelian theory had been published in 1866. Subsequent rediscovery papers gave credit to Mendel, and Bateson promptly turned to Mendel's text 'Versuche uber Pflanzenhybriden' and recognized its significance. It was the key he needed. It gave a causal explanation for the production of variation which was independent of the environment; it showed how hereditary differences were separated from hybrid mixture because of the purity of the germ cells. The theory offered an algorithm with which to predict the outcome of experiments in crossing. Eagerly he persuaded the society to have the paper translated into English and published in its 'Journal'. Aided by his contacts in the Royal Horticultural Society and his friends in the Royal Society, Bateson gained support for the programme of Mendelian experiments upon which he now embarked. 
In Cambridge University he continued the outsider to the biological community. Apart from serving as deputy to the ageing zoology professor and expert ornithologist, Alfred Newton, he received no university teaching appointment until the readership of zoology in the winter of 1907-8. Shortly thereafter he was offered the directorship of the new John Innes Horticultural Institute at Merton, close to London. The institution of the first chair of genetics in Britain at Cambridge University in 1912 came too late for him. By that time he had become deeply involved in the establishment of what was to become and has remained a research centre for genetics, the John Innes. 
Public opposition to the new experimental tradition came not from Cambridge but from the school of biometricians led by the statistician Karl Pearson and Bateson's former close friend at Cambridge W. F. R. Weldon. Weldon had begun to fall out with Bateson in 1890 following the latter's attacks on orthodox Darwinism. Then, too, they were rivals for academic appointments, and when Bateson joined the Royal Society's evolution committee he proceeded to take it over and soon after to appropriate its funds, which hitherto had supported Weldon's biometric research. The ensuing controversy between biometricians and Mendelians is notorious. Bateson heaped all the scorn and sarcasm he could muster on his opponents, who continued to support the ancestral theory of inheritance proposed by Francis Galton. At first Bateson allowed that heredity might be of two kinds -- ancestral for continuously varying characters but Mendelian for discontinuously varying ones. Later he inferred that the ancestral theory was just a special case of the fundamental theory, which was Mendelian. Weldon, on the other hand, attacked the Mendelian theory, but when he became convinced that it should have a place he modified it in order to accommodate it within the ancestral theory which he considered fundamental. 
Bateson was not just Mendel's apostle to the English speaking world. Nor was he merely 'defender of the faith'. His research with the devoted circle of supporters around him in Cambridge led to the discovery of what he called partial gametic coupling (since renamed linkage), of the interactions known as epistasis and hypostasis between hereditary determinants, of the Mendelian character of sex limited inheritance differences, and of Mendelian heredity in man. He also made a major contribution to the terminology of genetics -- allelomorph (now allele), homozygote, heterozygote, 'F'1, 'F'2, 'F'3 generation -- and last but not least he coined the word genetics, defining it as 'the elucidation of the phenomena of heredity and variation: in other words, to the physiology of descent, with implied bearings on the theoretical problems of the evolutionist and systematist, and applications to the practical problems of breeders, whether of animals or plants. (W. Bateson, 'The progress of genetic research', 'Report of the Third International Conference 1906 on Genetics', 1907, 91)' This passage occurs in his inaugural address to the third international conference on hybridization and plant breeding, which like the first of 1899 was held in London under the auspices of the Royal Horticultural Society. 
Bateson's persistent efforts to attract funding for establishing genetic research on a long-term basis at Cambridge eventually led to the endowment of the first chair in the subject. Bateson's vitriolic attack on the critics of Mendelism in his 'Mendel's Principles of Heredity: a Defence' (1902) was softened in the much expanded major text 'Mendel's Principles of Heredity' (1909), a work which quickly became the classic of the first phase of genetics. His campaign for the subject also played a part in the decision of the Lloyd George administration to include plant and animal breeding among the collection of research institutes to be established under the 'Development Act' of 1909. The John Innes Horticultural Institute was the result of a private benefaction which in Bateson's hands became the instrument for the continuation of most of his Cambridge research. Of the other lines of work which he instituted the most successful was the study of fruit. The resulting knowledge of the compatibility and incompatibility among varieties of apples, pears, cherries, and plums was perhaps the most valuable achievement of Bateson's years at the John Innes. 
Bateson is a striking example of the trend from descriptive to experimental tradition in biology which took place about the beginning of the twentieth century. Embryology had already established an experimental tradition in Germany. But the study of heredity had been largely in terms of pedigrees. The growing band of cytologists had also begun to speculate about heredity, but they did not produce a successful theory, and Bateson was particularly scornful of the leading cytological theory -- that of August Weismann. Nor was he attracted to statistical theories like those of the biometricians. They were actuarial: giving statements of probability. Was it not better, opined Bateson, to determine by experiment the hereditary constitution of organisms? The historiography of the controversy between Mendelians and biometricians which used to portray the former as right and the latter as wrong has been superseded by a more even-handed treatment. The use of this episode as a case history for the sociology of knowledge approach has led to a fruitful debate from which it is clear that there were deep-seated differences between the two sides not of a kind easily settled by experimental investigation. Inevitably the resolution of the controversy was the work not of the leaders but of their successors. Meanwhile Bateson had risen to a position of world fame despite his sceptical attitude to Darwinian evolution. In 1922 he accepted the request to become a trustee of the British Museum, but he declined the offer of a knighthood. The Royal Society had honoured him twice, with the Darwinian medal in 1904 and the Royal medal in 1920. In 1910 he received an honorary DSc from Sheffield University, and St John's College made him an honorary fellow. 
Bateson remained director of the John Innes Horticultural Institute until his death from heart failure at his home, Manor House, Watery Lane, Merton, Surrey, on 8 February 1926. He was cremated at Golders Green four days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30642


Bathurst, Charles, first Viscount Bledisloe (1867-1958), agriculturist and politician, was born in London on 21 September 1867, the second but first surviving son of the barrister Charles Bathurst (1836-1907), of Lydney Park, Gloucestershire, where he owned 4000 acres of land, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (died 1885), only daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Pasley Hay. He was educated at Sherborne School, at Eton College, and at University College, Oxford, where he obtained third classes in classical honour moderations in 1888 and in jurisprudence in 1890. In 1892 he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, and for a time practised in the Chancery Division as a conveyancing barrister. As heir to the family estate after the death of his elder brother in 1883 Bathurst attended the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, from 1893 to 1896 to equip himself for his inheritance and, as it turned out, for his career. At Cirencester he edited the college magazine, won the Ducie gold medal, and as one of the college's most famous old students was later chairman of its board of governors from 1919 to 1925; it became customary for estate management students to visit his Lydney estate to study its management and its farming. It is likely that while at Cirencester he formed the view that the one hope for the future of agriculture in Britain was for the landowners to become professional, businesslike, and efficient managers. This became his persistent message. On 17 December 1898 he married Bertha Susan (died 1926), fifth daughter of Henry Charles Lopes, first Baron Ludlow, himself the third son of a Devonshire landed magnate and a prominent judge; this marriage reflected Bathurst's alignment with the professional wing of the landed class. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Rather unexpectedly the crushing defeat of the Unionists in the 1906 election created the opening for Bathurst to enter politics. Walter Long, the Unionists' leading country gentleman, decided that one way of containing the anti-landlord effects of that defeat was to mobilize the landowners in an effective organization, and in 1907 he took the lead in forming the Central Land Association (CLA); he seems to have been responsible for recruiting Bathurst as the first honorary secretary of the CLA. He was very successful in this post, and steered membership of the new association to over 1000 by 1909, when he resigned. It also provided him with close contacts with leading tories, which helped him become MP for the Wilton division of Wiltshire in the January 1910 election. He wished to make the CLA into a non-party pressure group representing landowners of every political colour, but was frustrated by its domination by tories and by the hysterical anti-Liberalism of the CLA's allies in the Land Union. 
Enjoying the patronage of Milner and Steel-Maitland, Bathurst quickly established himself in alliance with Christopher Turnor as one of the Conservatives' leading agricultural reformers in the Commons and a key contributor to mounting a defence against Lloyd George's land campaign of 1912-14. He and Turnor, together with B. Peto and C. Mills, formed a group of radical agricultural reformers, at times acting as a private inquiry committee and at times as an agricultural policy subcommittee of the Unionist Social Reform Committee. They attempted, with no great success, to formulate a Conservative counter to the land campaign, which was perceived as threatening to undermine the Conservatives' rural vote. Unable to agree on any convincing riposte to the Liberals' promise of a minimum wage for agricultural labourers, the reform group did strongly advocate a grant-aided scheme for assisting tenant farmers to become owners. Although this did not find favour with either the old guard of tory landed grandees who regarded it as a recipe for dismantling the great estates, or with the traditional gentry who denied that their workers were badly paid, it did lead Henry Chaplin to hail Bathurst as the 'most promising ally of the agricultural interest that we have had in Parliament now for some time' (Fforde, 64). 
By 1914 Bathurst had achieved a high reputation, and some enemies, within the Conservative Party, but little in the way of agricultural advance. By 1915, as chairman of the central chamber of agriculture, he was recording his 'conviction that upon the well-being of Great Britain's oldest industry depend the ultimate economic welfare of her people, their physical and mental virility', and virtually welcoming the war, on the grounds that: 'the Great European War may -- and God grant that it will -- cause the nation at large to realise the wisdom, and the ultimate economy, if not the necessity, of making Britain more self-contained in the matter of food production for her teeming population. (A. H. H. Matthews, 'Preface' to 'Fifty Years of Agricultural Politics: the History of the Central Chamber of Agriculture', 1915, vii, x)' How far the war was good for British agriculture, as distinct from the incomes of British farmers, may be questionable, but it definitely helped Bathurst's career. In 1916 he became the spokesman in the Commons for the new Ministry of Food when he was appointed parliamentary secretary to the food controller, Lord Devenport, whom he succeeded as chairman of the royal commission on sugar supply in 1917, when he was also appointed KBE. He was director of sugar distribution from 1918 to 1919, and confirmed his position as a leading member alongside R. E. Prothero (Lord Ernle) of the official agricultural interest by serving from 1917 to 1920 as chairman of the federation of county war agricultural executive committees, the bodies which induced or cajoled farmers into applying agricultural policies at the farm level. 
In October 1918 Bathurst was rewarded for his war services with a peerage and took the title of Baron Bledisloe from the hundred in which the family seat of Lydney lies. With his experience and public standing he seemed an excellent choice for a post-war president in 1921-2 of the CLA (by then called the Central Landowners' Association), but raised hackles among the grandees by publicly calling, in 1922, for the larger landowners to renounce their passive and unenterprising attitudes of the previous sixty years, abandon their ineffective attachment to a property defence league which merely stimulated revolutionary propaganda, and place themselves at the head of the agricultural industry as professional managers of the resources of the land, co-operating with the farmers and farm workers. From the conventional landowner's point of view this was only slightly less subversive than the position of his friend and fellow landowner Turnor, who spoke at this time of sixty years of failure by government to grasp the importance of agriculture and of neglect by rich and complacent landowners who did not understand their own business. It was a precursor of Bledisloe's call in 1929 for permanent regulation of farm rents by compulsory valuation as the only alternative to land nationalization. He saw this as a way of removing the fundamental objection to all government aid to agriculture, that the benefits of such aid would ultimately go to the landlords who were not the wealth producers or employers. This radical outburst earned him a formal rebuke from the CLA. In politics also he steered an idiosyncratic and radical course. Initially, with his peerage, a Lloyd George adherent, he was reconciled to the Conservatives to the extent of becoming a member of the government's agricultural advisory committee in 1922, but did not fully rejoin the party until accepting office as parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture in Baldwin's second administration, 1924-8. In 1927 he served as chairman of the royal commission on land drainage, which recommended drastic rationalization of the 365 separate drainage authorities then responsible for the management of rivers in England and Wales. In the interval it had not been implausible for Ramsay MacDonald to consider inviting him to become minister of agriculture in the first Labour government, although in the event the approach was not made. 
In June 1929, however, Bledisloe accepted from MacDonald appointment as governor-general of New Zealand; he took up the post in March 1930 and 'proved to be perhaps the most popular representative of the Crown who has ever been appointed to the Dominion' ('The Times', 4 July 1958, 12). Aristocratic affability, seriously knowledgeable enthusiasm for farming, and a keen interest in livestock -- and his purchase and restoration of the neglected site of the signing of the Waitangi treaty in 1840, which he subsequently gave to the nation -- combined to this end. His first wife having died in 1926, on 16 April 1928 Bledisloe married Alina Kate Elaine (died 1956), younger daughter of John Jones Jenkins, the first Baron Glantawe, a south Wales tinplate manufacturer, and widow of Thomas Cooper Cooper-Smith. The charm of his second wife made an essential contribution to the success of his governorship. On its conclusion in June 1935 he received a step in the peerage, becoming Viscount Bledisloe. The concluding official activity of Bledisloe's career was to serve as chairman of the royal commission on the closer union of the two Rhodesias and Nyasaland, which reported in March 1939 in favour of a union. The report circumspectly added the qualification that, as the natives of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland had good reason to fear the application of the Southern Rhodesian pass laws, it was for the present impossible to contemplate 68,000 white people governing 4 million natives; the government which enacted the federation in 1953 was not so cautious. Bledisloe's sympathies, although he had gone out of his way to encourage Maori farmers during his time in New Zealand, were clearly with the white population, as he showed in his two goodwill tours in 1947 and 1948 of Australasia and of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia, which he made on behalf of the Royal Agricultural Society of England, of which he had been president in 1946. 
Bledisloe was also president or chairman of the British Dairy Farmers' Association, the Bath and West of England Agricultural Society, the Farmers' Club, and the Lawes Agricultural Trust, Rothamsted, but perhaps his strongest loyalty, after his attachment to the Lydney estate, was to the Forest of Dean, of which he was verderer from 1897 until his death on 3 July 1958, at Lydney Park; he was buried four days later at St Mary's, Lydney. He was succeeded by his elder son, Benjamin Ludlow (1899-1979). 


@@@@@


doc= 30643


Batsford, Henry George (1880-1951), publisher and author, was born at 37 Cold Harbour Lane, London, on 18 April 1880, the only son of Henry George Batsford ('b'. 1851), publisher and bookseller, who died two years later, and his wife, Matilda, daughter of William Ward. He was educated at Henley House School, Kilburn, London, where his science master was H. G. Wells, and at the City of London School. In 1897, after studying briefly in Germany, he entered the family bookselling and publishing business which had been founded fifty-four years earlier by his grandfather, Bradley Thomas Batsford. In 1917 he succeeded his uncle, Herbert Batsford, as chairman and managing director of B. T. Batsford Ltd, and he remained in that position until his death. 
In 1926 Harry Batsford's work as a publisher of books on the technique and history of architecture was recognized by his election as an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects. In the early thirties, responding to economic pressure and changing taste, Batsford widened the scope of his firm's activities: he initiated more than one series of books, fully illustrated by photographs, on the architecture and topography of Britain, which gave the term 'a Batsford book' a recognized significance. These series, of which the best-known were the 'British Heritage' and the 'Face of Britain', introduced to a new and wider public the beauties of Britain's landscape and ancient buildings and were not without influence in helping to preserve both from destruction. Batsford himself wrote, sometimes pseudonymously, or in collaboration with Charles Daniel Fry, a number of works, among them 'Homes and Gardens of England' (1932), 'The Landscape of England' (as Charles Bradley Ford, 1933), 'The Cathedrals of England' (1934), and 'The English Cottage' (1938). One of his authors, John Russell, recorded that of Batsford's 'passion for architecture there could never be any doubt; and in this, as in everything else, his inclination was always to put aside what was notorious and large in favour of what was plain, inviolate and true' ('Architectural Review', April 1952). 
Batsford published Gertrude Stein, Cecil Beaton, Sacheverell Sitwell, A. E. Richardson, and the popular series of social histories by Marjorie and C. H. B. Quennell. One Batsford book, James Pope-Hennessy's 'London Fabric', won the Hawthornden prize. In 1930 the firm moved from 94 High Holborn to an elegant Mayfair town house at 15 North Audley Street. During the Second World War, Batsford and some of his staff relocated to Malvern Wells. 
In 1928 Batsford married Rose Verene (died 1930), daughter of Francois Andre Sennwald, of Chaux de Milieux, Neuchatel, Switzerland; there were no children. In himself Batsford was vital, generous, and individualistic. He loved England and knew the country and its antiquities with exceptional intimacy, but he also felt himself a citizen of the world and had travelled enthusiastically in Europe and America. Apart from architecture, he had a keen amateur's knowledge of subjects as diverse as astronomy, natural history, geology, railway locomotives, and watches. He had a great fondness for animals, particularly for cats, for whose welfare he left a special legacy in his will. Batsford died at Paddington Hospital, London, on 20 December 1951, of barbiturate acid poisoning (self-administered); the coroner returned an open verdict on the circumstances of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 30644


Bauerman, Hilary (1835-1909), mineralogist and geologist, was born in London on 16 March 1835, the younger son in the family of two sons and one daughter of Hilary John Bauerman (1806/7-1888), merchant, and his wife, Anna Hudina Rosetta (1804/5-1874), daughter of Dr Wychers. His parents migrated from Emden, in Hesse, to London in August 1829. On 6 November 1851 Bauerman was entered as one of the seven original students of the Government School of Mines, later the Royal School of Mines, in Jermyn Street. At the change of name in 1862 the degree of associate of the Royal School of Mines was conferred on him. In 1853 he went to the 'Bergakademie' at Freiberg in Saxony to complete his studies, and on his return to England in 1855 he was appointed an assistant geologist to the Geological Survey of Great Britain. In 1858 he went to Canada as geologist to the North American boundary commission; from 1863, when this task was completed, he was intermittently engaged for many years in searching for mineral deposits and surveying mining properties in various parts of Europe, Asia, and America, mostly by private persons or by companies, but also by the Indian and Egyptian governments (1867-9). 
Apart from this fieldwork, Bauerman contributed to technical and scientific literature. His 'Treatise on the Metallurgy of Iron' (1868) reached its sixth and last edition in 1890, and was followed by his 'Text-Book of Systematic Mineralogy' (1881) and 'Text-Book of Descriptive Mineralogy' (1884). Lastly, in 1887, he assisted J. A. Phillips to revise and enlarge the latter's 'Elements of Metallurgy', which was originally published in 1874. 
In his later years Bauerman devoted himself mainly to teaching: in 1874 he first acted as an examiner for the Department of Science and Art; in 1883 he was lecturer in metallurgy at Firth College, Sheffield; and in 1888 he succeeded John Percy as professor of metallurgy at the Ordnance College, Woolwich. He retired from the post in 1906 but maintained until his death a keen interest in the developments of metallurgy and mining. He was a fellow, and for some time a vice-president, of the Geological Society; an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, by which he was awarded the Howard prize in 1897; an honorary member of the Iron and Steel Institute, and also of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, which awarded him its gold medal in 1906 in recognition of his many services in the advancement of metallurgical science. 
Despite partial deafness, which increased with his years, Bauerman's prodigious memory and his genial manner made him a highly successful teacher. He was an indefatigable and versatile worker, his favourite hobbies in later years being crystallography and geometry. He died, unmarried, at his home, 142 Cavendish Road, Balham, London, on 5 December 1909, and was cremated at Woking crematorium, after which his ashes were interred at Brookwood cemetery. He left a bequest to encourage the study of mineralogical science in connection with the Royal School of Mines. 


@@@@@


doc= 30645


Bax, Sir Arnold Edward Trevor (1883-1953), composer, was born on 8 November 1883 in Heath Villa, Angles Road, Streatham, London, the eldest son of Alfred Ridley Bax (1844-1918) and his wife, Charlotte Ellen Lea (1860-1940). His father was a barrister of the Middle Temple, though having a private income he never practised. His youngest brother, Clifford Lea Bax (1886-1962), in his day was a celebrated playwright and essayist. In 1896 the family moved to a Hampstead mansion, Ivy Bank, whose gardens and ambience coloured the teens and early twenties of the children. 
In his autobiography, 'Farewell, my Youth' (1943), Bax could not remember the time when he was not able to read music at the piano, and he showed an easy musical facility from an early age, encouraged by his mother. He attended the Hampstead Conservatoire (from 1898), and in September 1900 entered the Royal Academy of Music, where he remained until the summer of 1905. At the academy he was a composition pupil of Frederick Corder and a piano pupil of Tobias Matthay. He won the Battison Haynes prize (1902) and a Macfarren scholarship (1902). Later he won the Charles Lucas medal with his 'Variations for Orchestra' (1904), rehearsed at the Royal College of Music under the Patron's Fund scheme, in May 1905, an occasion vividly described in Bax's autobiography. The work was otherwise never performed, but survives. Later he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy of Music (1911) and a fellow (1927). 
In 1902 Bax discovered the poetry of W. B. Yeats, and under its influence explored the west of Ireland, where the remote Donegal coastal village of Glencolumcille became a constant refuge from the world. Here he learned the Irish language and wrote 'Celtic twilight' poetry, short stories, and plays, influenced by Yeats, J. M. Synge and A. E. (George Russell). Bax used a variety of Irish pseudonyms which evolved into 'Dermot O'Byrne', under which name he published such work from 1909 (and in the 'Irish Review' in 1913). 
Bax's financial independence freed him from ever taking a paid position, and he was able to travel. Soon he visited Germany, and at Dresden in 1906 attended an early performance of Richard Strauss's 'Salome'. His early travels, vividly evoked in his autobiography, ended when he visited St Petersburg and the Ukraine in the spring of 1910 in pursuit of a Ukrainian girl. But on 28 January 1911 he married Elsa Luisa Sobrino ('b'. 1885/6), daughter of a pianist, Carlos Sobrino, and his wife, Luisa, a well-known singer of the day; they set up house in a suburb of Dublin. They had two children, Dermot (1912-1976) and Maeve Astrid 
(later Rosenberg; 1913-1987)
. Here Bax became well known in literary circles, publishing vivid stories, verse, and a Synge-like play, all reflecting a first-hand knowledge of the language, customs, legends, and history of the west of Ireland. His particular friends were Padraig and Mary Colum, who had started the 'Irish Review' in 1912. 
Bax made his reputation with a succession of vivid orchestral tone poems, largely on Irish and nature themes, which first came to general notice when Sir Henry Wood conducted 'In the Faery Hills' at the Promenade Concerts in 1910. This had been preceded by a number of other similar orchestral scores. The first of these was 'Cathaleen-ni-Hoolihan', a student work first written as the slow movement of an early quartet in E, later reworked as a tone poem for two violins and piano, and then revised as an orchestral tone poem. It remained unperformed until 1970, but is now revealed as already exhibiting many of the elements of his later works in the form. 
In an autobiographical radio talk (recorded on 6 May 1949) Bax described the influence of Ireland in finding his style: he began 'using figures of a definitely Celtic curve, an idiom which in the end was... second nature to me' ('Farewell', 165). In his mid-twenties Bax tended to be a musical magpie, celebrating his latest discoveries in new compositions, in which his musical personality was so strong that any influences instantly became his own. Thus he assimilated Wagner, Strauss, the Russian 'Five' (Balakirev, Borodin, Cui, Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov), Glazunov, Debussy and Ravel, Sibelius and early Stravinsky. Many of these influences were probably first encountered at the keyboard: Bax was so commanding a pianist, fluently reading full scores on the keyboard at sight, that he was called in for piano rehearsals of all manner of new works, which were instantly grist to his mill. Along with many others, Bax was dazzled by the brilliance of the Diaghilev ballet, first seen in the summer of 1911. By the outbreak of war in August 1914 the music of Debussy, Ravel, and the young Stravinsky had provided the examples for a significant development of his musical language, first seen in the five-movement tone poem 'Spring Fire' (1913). 
In 1911, emulating what he had seen during Diaghilev's first London season, Bax had written his own Russian ballet, 'a little-Russian fairy tale in action and dance' which he called 'Tamara'. It survives only in piano score, and its thirty numbers would have run for about two hours. It was never orchestrated or produced, for when the summer ballet season of 1912 was announced, the appearance of Balakirev's 'Thamar' made all competitors redundant. However, the music was to inform other later scores, and a suite, orchestrated by Graham Parlett, demonstrates how at the time Bax had swallowed his Russian models whole. When after the war he wrote spoof Russian ballet music for J. M. Barrie's whimsical play 'The Truth about the Russian Dancers', as a vehicle for the ballerina Tamara Karsavina, he used some of the music of 'Tamara', including its most romantic tune. 
During the First World War, Bax was a non-combatant. A heart condition, which troubled him intermittently all his life, kept him from the trenches. This meant that at a time when many of his contemporaries were serving overseas, he was able to produce a remarkable body of music as he found his technical and artistic maturity in his early thirties. In addition to piano music, this included his large-scale piano quintet, two violin sonatas, songs, and orchestral tone poems such as 'The Garden of Fand', 'Nympholept', 'November Woods', 'Tintagel', and the fifty-minute 'Symphonic Variations' for piano and orchestra. 
While living in Dublin, Bax had many republican friends, and although he returned to England in August 1914, the Easter rising in April 1916 and the execution of the leaders on 3 May came as a tremendous shock. This event was reflected in a variety of Bax's music, most notably in the orchestral 'In Memoriam' ('In memoriam Padraig Pearse'), which remained largely unknown until recorded by Vernon Handley in 1998. More love song than elegy, this is a remarkably passionate piece, dominated by a tune which Bax later reused in his music for the 1948 film of 'Oliver Twist'; but this was not his only elegy for Irish friends. Various chamber works, such as the 'Elegiac Trio' for flute, viola, and harp (1916), the harp quintet (1919), and the sextet for cor anglais, harp, and strings called 'In Memoriam' (1917), were also elegiac. Other pieces which contemporary commentators viewed as 'war' works, such as the stormy first symphony, first performed in 1922, and the second, given four years later, should also appear in this category. 
As well as music reflecting the Irish tragedy, there was a pamphlet of verse written under the pseudonym Dermot O'Byrne, 'A Dublin Ballad and other Poems', that was banned by the British censor in Ireland. The middle verse of the poem 'Shells at Oranmore', dated April 1916, was later chosen by the Irish department of external affairs as the motto for the issue of its weekly bulletin marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Easter rising in 1966. 
After the First World War, Bax was able to write new works in rapid succession. He produced two piano sonatas; starting work on a third in 1921, he found he had conceived a symphony, and the work was orchestrated, and first performed in December 1922. The fiery character of the music seems to suggest conflict, and while contemporary commentators associated it with the First World War, it is now generally felt to reflect events in Ireland. A similarly epic second symphony followed and was in short score by October 1924, though not completed in full score until 1926. It was first performed in Boston in December 1929, but was not heard in London until May 1930, two months after the premiere of the third symphony. The fact that at one point it alludes to 'In Memoriam' of 1916 suggests that it too may have had an Irish genesis. 
Bax was at his musical peak for a comparatively short time, and his fame as a symphonist really dates from the 1930s, when his reputation was soon overtaken by Vaughan Williams and Walton. But in the 1920s he was widely considered the leading British composer of his generation, and between the wars he produced most of his mature works. In a magazine interview in 1928 he described himself as a 'brazen romantic'. Strangely enough he did not take the opportunity in the 1930s to bring forward what subsequently became known to be his large number of pre-war works, and they remained unperformed until after his death. 
Bax's third symphony was completed in 1929 and after its first performance in 1930 was championed as one of his most frequently heard major works; it was his first symphony to be recorded (1943). Four more symphonies followed: the fourth (1931, first performed in San Francisco in 1932), the fifth (1932, first performed in 1934), the sixth (1935), and the seventh (1939, but not performed in England until a broadcast in 1941 and a Promenade Concert in 1943). Other works written in the 1930s include the popular 'Overture to a Picaresque Comedy', a variety of chamber works for larger groups, including a nonet, a string quintet (1933), the third string quartet, and an octet for horn, piano, and strings. Bax's violin concerto was completed in 1938 but not performed until 1943, when Eda Kersey played the solo part. 
Bax was always indifferent to formal honours, but during the 1930s he received the gold medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society (1931), the Cobbett medal for chamber music (1931), and honorary doctorates from the universities of Oxford (1934) and Durham (1935) and the National University of Ireland (1947). He was knighted (June 1937) and appointed KCVO (1953). After the death of Walford Davies, he was appointed master of the king's music in 1942. 
During the First World War, Bax developed an increasingly passionate affair with the pianist Harriet Pearl Alice Cohen (1895-1967), and in 1918 he left his wife and children and found rooms at Swiss Cottage, London, where he lived until the onset of the Second World War. His relationship with Harriet Cohen cooled, though he wrote many works for her; her name remained coupled with his, and she became identified with his piano music during his lifetime. In 1926 Bax met Mary Gleaves (1904-1995), who although unmusical formed another emotional thread for the rest of his life; it was she who accompanied Bax in the 1930s to his winter retreat in Morar, Inverness-shire, where he orchestrated works written in London. Bax kept Mary's existence from Harriet Cohen, who found out only in 1948. 
At the outset of the Second World War, Bax stopped composing, moved to Sussex, and produced his autobiography, which presents his life only to the age of thirty. During the war he was persuaded to turn to film music and wrote the score for 'Malta, GC', from which extracts were promoted on the radio and in the concert hall. After the war he wrote a number of further works, including the popular music for David Lean's film 'Oliver Twist' (1948) and the short 'Morning Song' and concertante for piano (left hand) and orchestra, all three for Harriet Cohen. It was at this time that he wrote the concertante for three winds and orchestra, consisting of three movements that feature successively cor anglais, clarinet, and French horn, followed by a finale combining all three. 
Bax died on 3 October 1953 at Glen House, Ballyvolane, Cork, Ireland; he was there as a visiting examiner at the University of Cork. He was buried at St Finbarr's cemetery, Cork. After his death his reputation was kept alive by just one work, the orchestral tone poem 'Tintagel'. This neglect was compounded when his publisher, Chappell & Co., suffered a disastrous fire in 1964, which destroyed the printed stocks of most of his music. The gradual revival of Bax's music started with Vernon Handley's performances of the fourth symphony and other works at Guildford, and with the pioneering recordings by Lyrita Recorded Edition of the first, second, fifth, sixth, and seventh symphonies. This movement was developed with the exploration of the unknown and early orchestral works by the conductor Leslie Head in the 1970s and by the monographs by Colin Scott-Sutherland (1973) and Lewis Foreman (1983). The Bax centenary in 1983 was celebrated by twelve BBC programmes, which revealed to a wide audience the richness of the less well-known scores, and with the establishment of the Sir Arnold Bax Trust in 1985 the mechanism was in place for promoting the Chandos Records cycle of Bax's music conducted by Bryden Thomson, Vernon Handley, and Martyn Brabbins, which has promoted Bax to a world audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 30646


Baxter, Lucy (1837-1902), writer on art, was born at Dorchester on 21 January 1837, the third daughter of William Barnes (1801-1886), the Dorset poet and philologist, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Miles (1805-1852). Her childhood seems to have been a happy one, despite the family's straitened finances and her mother's death in 1852. Barnes was an affectionate father who believed in persuasion rather than punishment, and his multifarious literary, linguistic, antiquarian, and artistic interests no doubt influenced Lucy's tastes. He rescued old paintings from junk shops, cleaned them, and used them in the education of his children; in her 1887 biography of her father -- still the standard quarry for the Barnes scholar, despite the inadequacy of its treatment of his early life -- Lucy Baxter claimed that he had thus acquired a Ribera and a Gainsborough. 
From an early age, Lucy Barnes determined to pursue a literary career and, according to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', it was by writing stories and magazine articles that she earned enough money to visit Italy in the 1860s. Another account suggests that she went there as a governess to a family who were travelling on the continent. While in Italy, Lucy Barnes met and in 1867 married Samuel Thomas Baxter, whose family had long been established in Florence; they settled at Villa Bianca, at the foot of the hills near Vincigliata and Settignano. Mrs Baxter became a prominent figure in Anglo-Florentine and Italian literary and artistic circles in the city, and the Accademia di Belle Arti elected her an honorary member in 1882. 
Lucy Baxter's many publications appeared under the pseudonym of Leader Scott -- a combination of the maiden names of her grandmothers. She collaborated with John Temple Leader, probably a relative and also resident in Florence. Her works consisted of popularizations of scholarly work on Florentine art and artists, including 'Luca della Robbia' (1883), 'The Renaissance of Art in Italy' (1883), and 'Correggio' (1902), and more lightweight essays, which were often later collected and republished. The best-known of these collections was 'Echoes of Old Florence' (1894), but a typical example was 'Tuscan Studies and Sketches' (1887): half of this work was devoted to studies of Florentine art and architecture, derived from her researches in the Magliabecchiana and other Florentine libraries and archives, while the other half consisted of travel essays (describing, among others, visits to the seaside at Pisa and to the medieval town of San Gimignano) and accounts of Italian customs such as the festival of the dead. Her 'magnum opus' was 'The Cathedral Builders' (1899), a monumental work examining Romanesque architecture and the role of 'magistri comacini' in its creation. Although largely based on 'I maestri comacini' (1893), Giuseppe Merzario's work on the same subject, which she had originally hoped to translate into English, 'The Cathedral Builders' -- which was beautifully illustrated with both photographs and fine drawings -- did show her keen eye for architectural detail and involved some archival research. Her main arguments, however, were advanced with a boldness not justified by the evidence, which was scanty at best in the early medieval period. Her presentation of the 'magistri' as a fully organized and all-enveloping masonic guild from the sixth or seventh centuries AD is decidedly speculative; although her work was no doubt a useful introduction to the subject for the English-speaking reader, it was entirely ignored by twentieth-century scholars of Romanesque architecture. 
Lucy Baxter was much distressed by the death of a daughter in 1900; her grief seems to have damaged her health and she died at the Villa Bianca on 10 November 1902, survived by her husband, two daughters, and a son. Although the reigning matriarch of Anglo-Florentine society for many years (her place was now taken by the less erudite but more imposing Janet Ross), she had governed with a gentle hand; one contemporary recalled with affection the 'serene gentleness of [her] old-fashioned feminine presence' ('The Athenaeum'). 


@@@@@


doc= 30647


Bayley, Sir Steuart Colvin (1836-1925), administrator in India, youngest son of (William) Butterworth Bayley (1781-1860) of the Bengal civil service and his wife, Anne Augusta, daughter of William Jackson, registrar of the Calcutta supreme court, was born in London on 26 November 1836. He was educated at Eton College and the East India College, Haileybury, and arrived in India to take up a post in the Bengal civil service in March 1856. On 21 November 1860 he married, at Patna, Anna (died 1924), daughter of Robert Nesham Farquharson of the Indian Civil Service; they had thirteen children. 
Bayley spent most of his career in the provinces of Bengal and Bihar. From 1862 until 1867 he was attached to the secretariat of the government of Bengal, officiating while still relatively junior as chief secretary for short periods in 1865 and again in 1867. In January 1871 he was appointed commissioner of Chittagong and in March 1872 commissioner of Patna. For his efforts in coping with the famine of 1873-4 in that division he was made CSI. In 1877 he accompanied the viceroy, Lord Lytton, on his tour of southern India as his private secretary for famine affairs. Promoted KCSI in 1878, he was appointed in the same year chief commissioner of Assam. In 1881 he was made CIE and transferred to Hyderabad as resident, and in the following year he was appointed home member of the executive council. 
In April 1887 Bayley was appointed lieutenant-governor of Bengal. His administration was an unspectacular one in which he concentrated on damping down the racial animosity roused by the controversy over the 'Ilbert Bill' in 1883-4. He tried in a quiet, uninflammatory way to increase the participation of Indians in low-level public affairs by extending both the system of honorary magistrates and the application of the elective principle in local self-government. He also attempted to facilitate the advancement of Indians in government service, but again in a muted and gradual fashion. He was considered an accessible governor and a hard worker, but by his own admission he had aimed, internally at least, for a 'colourless', calming administration. Discontent on the margins of Bengal was not, however, treated in such a conciliatory fashion and in 1889-90 Bayley sent a punitive expedition to the frontier hill tracts of Chittagong to suppress uprisings and raids by the indigenous peoples there. In December 1890 he resigned as lieutenant-governor, having been appointed political secretary to the India Office. A statue was subsequently erected by the citizens of Calcutta in his memory. In 1895 Bayley became a member of the Council of India. He retired finally from the service in 1905, on the eve of Curzon's partition of Bengal, a radical step which he viewed with considerable misgiving. In 1911 he was promoted GCSI. 
Bayley served on the committee of the Athenaeum from 1900 to 1920 and was its chairman for five years. He was also chairman of the Royal Society of Arts from 1906 to 1908. He was a widely read man and an insightful and often humorous literary critic. By inclination a conservative, he was nevertheless realist enough to appreciate the growth of nationalist sentiment in India and to try to accommodate it, albeit in a limited and cautious way. He died at his home at 2 Cathcart Road, Kensington, London, on 3 June 1925 and was buried in Brompton cemetery. His wife had predeceased him, after sixty-four years of marriage, by only six months. 


@@@@@


doc= 30648


Baylis, Lilian Mary (1874-1937), theatre manager, was born at 19 Nottingham Street, Marylebone, London, on 9 May 1874, the eldest daughter of Edward William Baylis, an employee of Gillows furniture store in Oxford Street and a baritone singer (known as Newton Baylis), and his wife, Elizabeth Cons, a contralto singer and pianist. The eldest of ten children (five of whom survived infancy), Lilian was educated at home and later attended a convent school, St Augustine's in Kilburn, on alternate weeks. She also received tuition from the violinist and composer John Tiplady Carrodus. When Lilian was seventeen the family emigrated to south Africa, where they toured musical acts under the name of the Gipsy Revellers. After settling in Johannesburg, Lilian spent a five-year period managing an orchestra for women. 
In 1898, following a period of ill health in south Africa, Lilian returned to London for a visit. Rather than going back to her family, she stayed on in London to assist her aunt Emma Cons in running the Victoria Theatre, Waterloo Road, Lambeth, familiarly known as the Old Vic. As a pioneer of housing reform and many other social improvements to working-class lives, especially women's lives, Emma Cons had acquired the Victoria in 1880 with the specific purpose of transforming it from a rather unsavoury, run-down venue into an alcohol-free site of family entertainment. Running the Old Vic as a temperance hall, aunt and niece had always to find forms of entertainment that would compensate for the absence of alcohol. Their programme relied heavily on costume recitals and ballad concerts, and, in the interests of variety, they explored the possibilities of cinema, symphony concerts, military bands, and, like many of the music-halls, the performance of sketches and scenes from theatre. Their endeavours benefited at the turn of the century from the appointment of Charles Corri to the position of music director. Nevertheless, their hall ran into increasing financial difficulties -- not least because of the constant demands made by the London county council for improvements to health and safety aspects of the building. 
A major change came after Emma's death in July 1912, as Lilian succeeded her in management and began to steer the theatre on a different course. She obtained a theatre licence from the lord chamberlain so that she could start staging Shakespeare. The first two attempts to introduce Shakespeare to the Old Vic -- by the actress Rosina Filippi, who wanted to launch a people's theatre, and by the actor Shakespeare Stewart -- met with failure. Lilian herself pursued both the idea of a people's theatre and Shakespeare, and managed to succeed where the others had failed. Her success was due in part to the actor-manager Ben Greet, who, having recently returned from America, joined her as director in 1914. The first season of combined opera and Shakespeare ran from October 1914 until April 1915 and included sixteen operas and sixteen plays. Working to an extremely low budget, Greet's productions were plain, rather than spectacular, cut to suit the tastes of an ordinary audience and Lilian's demand for a curtain down at 10.30 p.m. Initially the box-office receipts from the opera had to subsidize the Shakespeare, but gradually Lilian's determination paid off: Shakespeare found an audience at the Old Vic -- an audience, moreover, that included schoolchildren for the new Shakespearian matinees. 
Through Greet came other contacts beneficial to the Old Vic, most notably the actress Sybil Thorndike, who joined the Vic in 1915 and, like Greet, stayed throughout the wartime years. 1915 also saw the inauguration of a new tradition at the Vic: the morality play 'Everyman', which remained in the repertory as an annual event at Lent. For Lilian, with her deeply religious outlook and her faith in God, whom she believed guided her in her work for the theatre (as did her lifelong spiritual adviser, Father Andrew, superior of a neo-Franciscan order), 'Everyman' held a special interest. As Sybil Thorndike explained, this was 'one of the few plays she watched through from start to finish' (Thorndike and Thorndike, 40-41). 
Lilian's theatrical management was always tempestuous. She was iron-willed and determined to put the theatre before all else. Her dedication to the theatre's survival meant that she offered permanently low wages and delayed costly improvements to the building. During wartime she insisted that the performers carry on, even through bombing raids. Because of her fierce temper, she was constantly rowing with (and, in consequence, losing) staff. Tired of his stormy relationship with Lilian, Greet left the Old Vic in 1918. She waited for the former member of the company Robert Aitkins to come back from the war to take his place. Aitkins overhauled the Shakespeare repertory in the interests of quality and stayed on as director until 1925. He was succeeded by Andrew Leigh (1925-9), Harcourt Williams (1929-33), and, thereafter, Tyrone Guthrie. 
Lilian's 1925-6 Shakespeare season at the Old Vic was very successful, not least because the West End star Edith Evans joined the theatre. Other West End performers were to follow over the years -- most notably John Gielgud and Laurence Olivier. The 1920s also brought Lilian personal success: in 1924 she was made an honorary MA of Oxford University in recognition for her work at the Old Vic, and in 1929 she was granted admission to the Order of the Companions of Honour (the only theatrical manager to be admitted at that time, and one of just a very few women to join the order). 
However, the 1920s also brought a major problem for her theatre. Under Emma Cons's management, the Old Vic had established an educational branch for its activities, Morley College, which for twenty-five years had operated out of the theatre. As both institutions grew, so it became necessary to separate them, and, in consequence, to rehouse the college and refurbish the Old Vic. Lilian had the exhausting task of raising funds to ensure a future for both ventures. As testimony to her enterprise, she not only played a key role in the reorganization of the theatre and the college, but she also undertook to raise funds to renovate a second venue, Sadler's Wells. Sadler's Wells opened on 6 January 1931 to become the venue for opera and ballet companies, with the ballet overseen by Ninette de Valois. Lilian kept up managerial involvement in both venues until her death. She died of a heart attack on 25 November 1937 at her home, 27 Stockwell Park Road, London, and was cremated at the end of the month. 
Lilian Baylis is chiefly remembered for her work in making the Old Vic the home of Shakespeare. The theatre teems with stories about her. Her bluntness was legendary, as when she brusquely explained why a singer, the daughter of a potential benefactor of Sadler's Wells, had never been offered a part: 'She hasn't got any voice' (Dent, 40). Sybil Thorndike, arriving at the last minute for a performance at the Old Vic during the First World War after crossing London during an air raid, found her fretting and fuming at the pit door, and not inclined to accept the explanation for her lateness: ''Raid', she snorted, 'What's a raid when my curtain's up'' (Thorndike and Thorndike, 58-9). Theatrical biographies variously describe her as 'a cockney cinderella who achieved a throne without a prince' (Findlater, 65) and as 'the most courageous woman that was ever associated with the Theatre' (Thorndike and Thorndike, 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 30649


Baylis, Thomas Henry (1817-1908), lawyer and author, was born in London on 22 June 1817, the second son of Edward Baylis, deputy lieutenant and JP for Middlesex. He was educated at Harrow School (1825-34) before matriculating in 1835 as a scholar at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1838 and MA in 1841. Although he entered as a student of the Inner Temple in 1834, he practised for some time as a special pleader. He was called to the bar in 1856, when he joined the northern circuit. He became QC in 1875, and two years later a bencher of the Inner Temple. From 1876 to 1903 he was judge of the court of passage at Liverpool, an ancient court of record with local jurisdiction wider than that of a county court. 
On 14 August 1841 Baylis married Louisa Lord (died 1900), the youngest daughter of John Ingle, deputy lieutenant and JP for Devon. They had several children, and their third son, Thomas Erskine, was called to the bar in 1874. 
Baylis was an officer in the Army Volunteer Reserve, retiring in 1882 with the volunteer decoration as lieutenant-colonel of the 18th Middlesex rifles. He was a vice-president of the Royal United Services Institution to which he presented an autograph letter from the signal officer on board the flagship 'Victory' at Trafalgar, explaining the substitution of 'expects' for 'confides' in Nelson's famous signal: 'England expects every man to do his duty.' In his pamphlet, 'The True Account of Nelson's Famous Signal' (1905), he discussed whether Nelson had permanently lost the sight of one eye. He was also one of the founders of the Egypt Exploration Fund, drafting the original articles of association. 
As a lawyer, Baylis was chiefly known for a treatise on domestic servants, 'The Rights, Duties, and Relations of Domestic Servants and their Masters and Mistresses' (1857). Other works included 'Fire Hints' (1884), 'Introductory Address on the Office of Reader or Lector and Lecture on Treasure Trove', delivered in the Inner Temple Hall, Michaelmas 1898 (1901), and 'Workmen's Compensation Act' (1902). Baylis also published 'The Temple Church and Chapel of St Anne', a guidebook to the Inner Temple Church (1893). He died on 4 October 1908 at Lucknow, Wellington Road, Bournemouth, and was buried in Bournemouth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30650


Bayliss, Sir William Maddock (1860-1924), physiologist, was born at Wolverhampton on 2 May 1860, the only son of Moses Bayliss, manufacturer of ironware, and his wife, Jane Maddock. After education at Mowbray House School, Wolverhampton, he had the opportunity of entering his father's business, but his interests lay in the direction of science and medicine. Nevertheless, he maintained a lifelong connection with the family business, of which he was a director. 
With the object of pursuing a career in medicine, Bayliss was apprenticed at the Wolverhampton Hospital, but he never finished his medical training. In 1880 he entered University College, London, gaining a medical entrance scholarship the following year, and coming under the influence of Edwin Ray Lankester and, especially, John Scott Burdon-Sanderson. In 1883 Burdon-Sanderson went to Oxford, as the first Waynflete professor of physiology. Bayliss, who took a BSc in physics and zoology, but failed the second MB examination at University College, followed him, entering Wadham College in 1885 with the intention of developing his career in physiology. He obtained a first-class degree in natural science (physiology) in 1888. 
For a time Bayliss participated in the teaching of physiology at Oxford, but in 1888 returned to University College, where a professorship of general physiology was created for him in 1912. Bayliss was elected to membership of the Physiological Society in 1890; he served as secretary from 1900 to 1922 and then as treasurer until 1924. He regularly attended the society's meetings, and in 1922, when summoned to Buckingham Palace to receive his knighthood, he refused the invitation because it coincided with a society meeting. 
Bayliss's scientific researches had begun before going to Oxford with a study of the electric currents developed in the salivary glands, done in collaboration with John Rose Bradford. In 1890 Bayliss met his future brother-in-law, Ernest Henry Starling, and the two men began a collaboration that lasted until Bayliss's death. In 1893 Bayliss married Gertrude Ellen Starling, daughter of Matthew Henry Starling, clerk of the crown, Bombay; they had three sons and one daughter. 
Bayliss's association with E. H. Starling produced several great advances in the knowledge of physiology. One of their earliest papers was on the electric currents of the mammalian heart, and their classic account of venous and capillary pressures appeared in 1894. In 1898-9 they published papers on the innervation of the intestine, which held the field until the use of X-ray methods shed new light on the subject. A particularly significant contribution came in 1902, when they discovered that the presence of acid in the duodenum stimulated pancreatic secretion. They showed that this was due to the release from the duodenum of a blood-borne factor, which they called secretin; and they coined the word 'hormone' to describe such chemical messengers. 
Throughout those years Bayliss pursued other investigations, mostly concerned with the vascular system, including studies on the circulation through the brain and on vasomotor reflexes. Much of this work was later summarized in 'The Vasomotor System' (1923). In 1903 Bayliss sued Stephen Coleridge, secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society, for libel, after allegations of cruelty to an experimental animal. Bayliss won the 'Brown Dog' case and $2000 in damages, which he donated to University College for the support of physiological research. 
Bayliss became particularly interested in the chemistry and physics of physiology. He was a founder member of the Biochemical Society, and chairman in 1914-15, and in 1919-20. He worked on enzyme action, and the properties of colloidal systems; his lectures on the subject formed the basis of 'The Nature of Enzyme Action' (1908). The most important form in which the interest was expressed was his 'Principles of General Physiology' (1915), which quickly became a standard authority. It was a monument of erudition and clear statement, and was a major contribution to twentieth-century physiology. Such was its popularity and influence that Bayliss also wrote 'An Introduction to General Physiology' (1919), and several American universities formed Bayliss Clubs to discuss his work. The 'Principles' went through four editions, and was revised after Bayliss's death by his son Leonard and A. V. Hill, the fifth edition appearing in 1959-60. 
During the First World War, Bayliss's principal contribution was his work on wound shock, which resulted in the use of gum-saline solutions to replace lost blood, a treatment which met with considerable success. In the summer of 1918 over 50,000 litres of gum-saline were sent out to the British forces in France. 
Bayliss was elected FRS in 1903 and knighted in 1922, and held many honorary degrees from British and foreign universities and academies. He was a member of the council of the Royal Society (1913-15), Croonian lecturer (1904), royal medallist (1911), and Copley medallist (1919). He received the Baly medal of the Royal College of Physicians (1917), and delivered the Oliver-Sharpey lectures (1918), the Sylvanus Thompson lectures (1919), and the Herter lectures (1922). Wadham College made him an honorary fellow in 1922. 
Bayliss, who entertained regularly, delighted in the society of other scientific men: not least that of young physiologists, many of whom gravitated to University College to work with Starling and himself. Bayliss possessed an honesty and a generosity of outlook, and a faculty of getting to the bottom of problems, which was coupled with great erudition. He died at his Hampstead home, St Cuthberts, West Heath Road, on 27 August 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 30651


Bayliss, Sir Wyke (1835-1906), painter and writer, was born at Madeley, Shropshire, on 21 October 1835, the second son of John Cox Bayliss of Prior's Leigh and Anne Wyke. His father was a railway engineer and a successful teacher of military and mathematical drawing. At an early age Bayliss showed an aptitude for drawing, and studied under his father, from whom he obtained the sound knowledge of perspective and architecture which influenced his later career as a painter. He was educated at Marlborough House, London, and later attended the Royal Academy Schools and the School of Design at Somerset House. 
On 30 June 1858 Bayliss married Elizabeth Letitia ('b'. 1835/6), daughter of a French protestant minister, Isaac Broade of Longton, Staffordshire; they had no children. From the first Bayliss's interest lay entirely in depicting architecture, and his whole life as an artist was spent in painting, in oil and watercolour, the interiors of cathedrals and churches. A very competent draughtsman and colourist, he defended himself against those who attacked his choice of subjects by saying that it is in the 'infinite variety of the aspect of a Cathedral interior that I find its infinite charm' (Bayliss, 18). He exhibited twice at the Royal Academy, sending 'La Sainte-Chapelle' in 1865 and 'Treves Cathedral' and 'Strasbourg Cathedral' in 1879. His best work was given to the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, of which he was elected a member in 1865. In 1888 he became president of the society in succession to James Abbott McNeill Whistler (with whom he had his disagreements) and until the close of his life he held this office, for which his geniality, ability as an orator, wide artistic sympathies, and energy were well adapted. He was notably supportive of women as professional artists, and believed that exhibitions of the Royal Society of British Artists should always 'include something new and strange', so as to avoid 'conventionalism, and smug contentment with past achievements' (ibid., 158). 
Bayliss was also renowned as an author. For his contemporaries the best-known of his books was 'Rex regum' (1898; rev. edn, 1902), an elaborate study of the traditional likenesses of Christ. The most enduring of his works, however, has proved to be 'Five Great Painters of the Victorian Era' (1902), in which he wrote on Frederic Leighton, John Everett Millais, Edward Burne-Jones, George Frederick Watts, and William Holman Hunt. In his 'Seven Angels of the Renascence' (1905), a blending of fact and sentiment, he gave his views upon seven selected great masters and their influence upon the art of the middle ages. Among his other publications were 'The Elements of Aerial Perspective' (1885); 'The Witness of Art' (1876; 2nd edn, 1878); and 'The Higher Life in Art' (1879; 2nd edn, 1888). Bayliss also published a short volume of poems entitled 'Saecula tria: an Allegory of Life' (1857); on occasion he wrote poetry to accompany his paintings. Before his death he completed 'Olives: the Reminiscences of a President', which was edited by his wife and published, with a preface by Frederick Wedmore, in 1906. 
Bayliss, who was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1870, was knighted by Queen Victoria in 1897. He was an accomplished chess player and keen cyclist. He died at his home, 7 North Road, Clapham Park, London, on 5 April 1906, and was buried at Streatham cemetery; his wife survived him. A memorial was placed in the church of Madeley, Shropshire, his birthplace. 


@@@@@


doc= 30652


Bayly, Ada Ellen (1857-1903), novelist, born at 5 Montpelier Villas, Brighton, Sussex, on 25 March 1857, was the youngest of the four daughters and a son of Robert Bayly, barrister of the Inner Temple, and his wife, Mary Winter. Her father died when she was eleven, and her mother three years later. A delicate child, she was first educated at home, then in the house of her uncle and guardian, T. B. Winter of Caterham, Surrey, and finally at private schools at Brighton. After leaving school Bayly lived successively with her three married sisters. Until 1880 she lived at Lincoln with her eldest sister, Mary Elizabeth, who had married John Henchman Crowfoot, canon of the cathedral. From 1880 until her death her home was with her third sister, Amy Agnes, wife of the Revd Hampden Gurney Jameson -- in London until 1881, in Lincoln from 1881 to 1884, and after 1884 at Eastbourne, where she devoted much time and money to charitable and religious causes. Bayly combined throughout her life strong religious feeling with an earnest faith in political and social liberalism. She was sometime president of the Eastbourne branch of the Women's Liberal Association, and a warm supporter of women's suffrage. 
Under the pseudonym of Edna Lyall, which she formed by transposing nine letters of her three names, in 1879 Bayly published her first book, 'Won by Waiting', a juvenile story of a girl's life, which initially attracted no attention, but was reissued, to her annoyance, in 1886, after she became known, and by 1894 was in a thirteenth edition. In 1882 her second novel, 'Donovan, a Modern Englishman', was published. It dealt with her religious beliefs and spiritual experiences, and had a redeemed agnostic, Donovan Farrant, as its hero. Although only 320 copies were sold, the book won the admiration of Gladstone, who wrote to Bayly in 1883 describing its first volume as 'a very delicate and refined work of art'. An intelligent review in the 'National Reformer' led to a correspondence with the freethinker Charles Bradlaugh, many of whose political convictions she shared. In spite of their religious differences, her liberal sentiments resented his exclusion on religious grounds from the House of Commons (1880-85). She subscribed three times to the fund for defraying his electoral expenses. After his death on 30 January 1891 she published an appeal for a memorial fund, and subscribed to it her royalties for the half-year, amounting to $200. With Bradlaugh's daughter, Hypatia Bradlaugh Bonner, she formed a lasting friendship. Bayly based her novel 'We Two' (1884), a sequel to 'Donovan', on some notes supplied by Bradlaugh. The secularist hero, Luke Raeburn, resembles Bradlaugh, although the novel centres on the conversion of his daughter to Christianity. With 'We Two' Bayly's reputation was established, although for the copyright of these two books she received no more than $50. But with the publication in 1885 of 'In the Golden Days', an able historical novel of the seventeenth century, her profits became substantial. 'In the Golden Days' was the last book read to Ruskin on his deathbed (W. G. Collingwood, 'Life of John Ruskin', 1900, 403). Contemporary opinion held 'Donovan', 'We Two', and 'In the Golden Days' to be Bayly's best books. 
In 1886 a stranger falsely claimed in public to be Edna Lyall, and a report also circulated that the author was in a lunatic asylum. Bayly met the falsehood by announcing her identity, and the experience suggested her 'Autobiography of a Slander' (1887), which enjoyed an immense vogue and was translated into French, German, and Norwegian. This was followed in 1889 by 'Derrick Vaughan: Novelist', which is partly autobiographical. 
Bayly's next novels primarily displayed her political convictions. An ardent home ruler, in 'Doreen' (1894) she presented the Irish revolutionary leader Michael Davitt in the guise of her hero, Donal Moore. Gladstone, writing to her on 25 November 1894, commended 'the singular courage with which you stake your wide public reputation upon the Irish cause'. She supported the Armenian cause in 'The Autobiography of a Truth' (1896), the profits of which she gave to the Armenian Relief Fund. Strongly opposed to the South African War, she spoke out with customary frankness in her last novel, 'The Hinderers' (1902). Also in 1902, Bayly published 'The Burges Letters', her autobiography. 
Slight in build and of medium height, with dark brown hair and dark grey-blue eyes, Bayly was fond of music and of travelling, and described her tours in vivacious letters. Contemporaries felt that her earnest political purpose prevented her mastery of the whole art of fiction, and her apolitical romances such as 'Wayfaring Men' (1897) and 'In Spite of All' (1901) were more to their taste. 
An attack of pericarditis in 1889 left permanent ill effects. Ada Ellen Bayly died on 8 February 1903 at her home, 6 College Road, Eastbourne. Following cremation, her ashes were buried at the foot of the old cross in Bosbury churchyard, near Bosbury Hill, Herefordshire, a place which figures in her novel 'In Spite of All', and of which her brother, the Revd R. Burges Bayly, was vicar. 
In 1906 a memorial window by Kempe was placed in St Peter's Church, Eastbourne (built 1896), where Bayly had worshipped and to which she had presented the seats. She had given to St Saviour's Church in 1887 a peal of three bells named Donovan, Erica, and Hugo, after leading characters in her three chief books. 


@@@@@


doc= 30653


Bayly, Sir Lewis (1857-1938), naval officer, was born at Woolwich on 28 September 1857, the third son of Captain Neville Bayly, Royal Horse Artillery, and his wife, Henrietta Charlotte, daughter of General Charles George Gordon, Royal Artillery, and great-great-nephew of Admiral Sir Richard Keats. He was educated in the 'Britannia', passing out in 1872 as a navigating cadet, but he was promoted sub-lieutenant for navigating duties in 1876, when the navigating branch was abolished, and changed over to the executive branch; he became lieutenant in 1881. He served in the Second Anglo-Asante War (1873-4) and in the Congo expedition (1875) in the 'Encounter', and in the 1882 Egyptian campaign. In 1883 he specialized in the use of torpedoes. He married in 1892 Yves Henrietta Stella, daughter of Henry Annesley Voysey; they had no children. Bayly was promoted commander in June 1894, and captain in December 1899. His first important appointment was as naval attache to the USA in June 1900; in the two years there he gained experience that was to stand him in good stead in his last appointment. 
In 1907, after commanding the cruiser 'Talbot' on the China station and the battleship 'Queen' in the Mediterranean, Bayly was selected to command the destroyer flotillas in the Home Fleet, with the rank of commodore, in the 'Attentive'. In Bayly's own words, 'destroyers were then a comparatively new arm, and their capabilities when working in flotillas were not very well understood' (Bayly, 120). A fine seaman and a hard taskmaster, he completed an immense programme of exercises during the next two years and laid solid foundations for the future handling and administration of flotillas. In 1908 he was appointed president of the War College, Portsmouth, and promoted to flag rank; he held the presidency until 1911 when he was given command of the 1st battle-cruiser squadron (flag in the 'Indomitable' and later in the 'Lion'), followed by the command of the 3rd battle squadron (1913-14, flag in the 'King Edward VII'), and, in 1914, by that of the 1st battle squadron (flag in the 'Marlborough'). This squadron was part of the Grand Fleet assembled at Scapa Flow on the outbreak of war in August 1914. In September Bayly was promoted vice-admiral. In December he was appointed to command the recently strengthened Channel Fleet (flag in the 'Lord Nelson'), in preparation for offensive operations on the Belgian coast, but a few days later was relieved of his command because, during exercises, one of his battleships, the 'Formidable', was sunk by torpedo submarine with the loss of 547 lives. Bayly had ignored the threat of submarines and failed to take even the elementary precautions then in force, especially that of steaming a zigzag course. He was informed that he had lost their lordships' confidence. He asked for a court martial, but this was refused, and he was appointed president of the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. With that appointment his active career appeared to have ended, but his greatest work still lay ahead of him. In July 1915 he was appointed to command the western approaches with base at Queenstown and in the beginning of 1916 was raised to the position of commander-in-chief. The German U-boat campaign was at its height and the frequent sinkings in the western approaches could only be checked by extremely vigorous defence measures and by exploiting new methods of attacking the submarines. Bayly had all the qualities for conducting the anti-submarine campaign, but for the first two years he never had sufficient ships for the large area for which he was responsible, until, in 1917, welcome reinforcements from the USA began to arrive. 
Bayly, who had been promoted admiral in 1917, proved the ideal commander of a mixed Anglo-American force. He made the senior American officer (Captain Joel Roberts Poinsett Pringle, afterwards vice-admiral) his chief of staff, the first foreign naval officer to hold such an appointment, and he mixed the ships of the two navies in his flotillas and squadrons so that after a few months they were all one navy. Although in his own service his reputation was that of a hard taskmaster with a brusque, intolerant manner, the American navy discovered a human side which led him to be known to most American sailors as Uncle Lewis. By the end of the war, he was as well known in the USA as in Britain. It was the joint practice of naval warfare that broadened and deepened into a sympathetic understanding between Bayly and Pringle and those who served under them, and this understanding spread further and helped increase friendship between the two English-speaking countries. 
In 1921 Bayly, who had retired in July 1919, visited the USA as the guest of the Queenstown Association, a club formed by officers who had served under him from 1915 to 1918, and of which he was vice-president. In 1934 he was again the guest of the American navy when, at the naval academy at Annapolis, he unveiled a memorial, which the secretary of the navy had granted him permission to erect, to his American chief of staff, Vice-Admiral Pringle. 
Bayly was appointed CVO in 1907, CB in 1912, KCB in 1914, and KCMG in 1918. He received the grand cross of the Dannebrog in 1912 and the American DSO. He died at his home, 68 Arlington House, St James's, London, on 16 May 1938. His volume of memoirs, 'Pull Together!', was published in 1939. A hard taskmaster, Bayly drove himself even harder than he drove his subordinates. His work with the Americans at Queenstown was an outstanding example of allied command in war, revealing the human side of a man the Americans referred to as 'Old Frozen Face' (Marder, 5.121-2). 


@@@@@


doc= 30654


Baynes, Norman Hepburn (1877-1961), historian, was born at Putney, London, on 29 May 1877, the elder child and only son of Alfred Henry Baynes (1838-1914), general secretary of the Baptist Missionary Society, and his wife, Emma Katherine Bigwood (died 1935). He lived in London, then in Eastbourne, moving to Northwood in Middlesex on his father's retirement in 1906. He never married and after his father's death in 1914 he continued to live in Northwood with his mother until she died in 1935, when he eventually settled in London. Brought up in a close-knit and devoted family circle, he enjoyed a sheltered and happy childhood and at the same time had instilled into him a strong sense of public duty and Christian purpose. He went to Eastbourne College for which, despite his intense dislike of organized games, he retained throughout his life a strong affection, though his surviving papers and later personal recollections indicated that the formative influence in his life was his family circle. 
Baynes's diaries contain a wealth of factual detail on family holidays and later, as a young man, travel abroad, particularly a visit to Constantinople where he and his father met Sir Edwin Pears. He spent some months in Tubingen gaining considerable mastery of the German language. At New College, Oxford, he took a first class in classical honour moderations (1898), but a second in 'literae humaniores' (1900). He was bitterly disappointed at not getting a first, though the more mature judgement of later years admitted that this had been a fair assessment, for he recognized that he was no philosopher. His powers as a historian were, however, shown by his success in winning the Lothian prize (1901) and the Arnold essay prize (1903). In both cases the subject (Heraclius, and then the military reforms of Diocletian and Constantine), as well as entries in his diaries, indicated his growing interest in East Rome. But he first chose as his profession the bar, studying in the chambers of R. J. Parker (later Lord Parker of Waddington); he was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1903; and until 1916 he was a tutor under the Law Society. 
During the First World War, Baynes worked on intelligence matters at Watergate House. It was at this time that he finally decided to abandon the law and turn to the teaching of history. He had already refused an invitation to stand for a Liberal seat in the London area, and in 1913 he had forged his first link with University College, London, when he was appointed assistant in the department of history. After the war he refused an invitation to return as a don to his Oxford college. Indeed he always prided himself on being a cockney and a member of the University of London. In 1919 he became a reader in the history of the Roman empire in the University of London and from 1931 he held a personal chair of Byzantine history; in 1936 he was elected a fellow of University College; from 1937 he gave up all duties in ancient history and was reappointed to an honorary professorship of Byzantine history and institutions. On his retirement in 1942 he was given the title of emeritus professor by the university and was presented by his friends with an 'Address and Bibliography' of his writings (privately printed). 
During the last years of his academic career Baynes worked in Oxford in the foreign research and press service, for he found it impossible to concentrate on academic work during a time of world crisis. Therefore from 1939 to 1945 he used his historical training in the field of modern German history and produced two large, fully annotated volumes of Hitler's pre-war speeches (1942). The depth of his involvement in the national struggle was demonstrated by his choice of subject for his Romanes lecture in Oxford in June 1942: 'Intellectual liberty and totalitarian claims'; its delivery was said to have been a brilliant caricature of the oratory of the Fuhrer on whose speeches he had been working. In 1945 he returned to London and to Byzantine studies. On his seventieth birthday the 'Journal of Roman Studies' (vol. 37, 1947, with a bibliography of his writings) was dedicated to him. He spent much time editing in his own impeccable way a volume of essays on Byzantium (1948), planned more than twenty years earlier, and he collaborated with E. A. S. Dawes to translate the lives of three early Byzantine saints (1948). But he did little of the major work planned, notably a social history of East Rome, because of increasing illness, finally culminating in several years of complete helplessness. 
Baynes's interests as a scholar covered a wide range from biblical history to the early middle ages, but he came increasingly to concentrate on the late Roman and early Byzantine periods and is perhaps best known for his work on Constantine I (Raleigh lecture, 1929) and the 'Historia Augusta' (1926). He contributed chapters on the sixth- and seventh-century Byzantine emperors to the 'Cambridge Medieval History' (vols. 1 and 2) and was one of the editors of the 'Cambridge Ancient History' (vol. 12), as well as a contributor on Constantine. Much of his work took the form of reviews or bibliographical notes (many for the 'Byzantinische Zeitschrift'), often subjected to ruthless editorial pruning. He was never afraid to combine his exact scholarship with imaginative reconstruction, unlike J. B. Bury, whom he knew and admired, although he realized Bury's inadequacies, as he showed in the perceptive appraisal in his memoir of him ('Dictionary of National Biography', 1929). In contrast to Bury, Baynes had the power of vivid reconstruction, bringing Byzantium to life for the uninitiated, as his masterly short study of the 'Byzantine Empire' (1925) well illustrates. His published work in the academic field was often controversial, but always stimulating and marked by intellectual integrity. The full extent of his activities can best be realized from his continuous stream of correspondence with contemporary scholars, including names such as Delehaye, Ensslin, Stein, Bidez, Gregoire, and Dolger. He was almost over-fastidious in his approach and often put as much work into his letters, or his reviews and biographical notes, as others put into an article or chapter of a book. But in all he did or said he remained essentially a Victorian individualist to whom the elimination of 'alternatives' was unthinkable. 
Baynes's influence can never be fully assessed. Above all he valued friendship and he had a genius for making contacts in every walk of life. He had an extensive circle of friends ranging from his non-graduate evening students and his Ancient History Circle to the more severely academic dons invited to the weekend meetings of his Near East Group. Surviving correspondence and press cuttings illustrate the range of lectures, social evenings, discussions, and play-readings which flourished in the stimulating atmosphere he created. From an early age he had been a gifted performer as a comedian and he was always ready to improvise his unrivalled comic turns, whether in his family circle, or in aid of charities, or to amuse soldiers in wartime hospitals. He had a magnificent presence and was a master of Victorian oratory as well as of exact scholarship. In later years he rarely left England, but on his infrequent visits to congresses abroad he created such an impression that he was long remembered not only as a scholar but as a splendid critic and fierce opponent in debate who could yet remain 'an English gentleman'. 
Baynes was elected FBA in 1930, an honorary fellow of Westfield College, London (1937), and of New College, Oxford (1947), a corresponding member of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences (1937), and later of the Belgian (1952) and Serbian (1959) academies. He was doctor 'honoris causa' of the universities of St Andrews (1934), Oxford (1942), Durham (1946), Cambridge (1949), and London (1951). He died at his home, 4B Abercorn Place, St John's Wood, London, on 12 February 1961. 
J. M. Hussey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30655


Beale, Dorothea (1831-1906), headmistress, was born in London on 21 March 1831 at 41 Bishopsgate Street Within, the fourth child and third daughter of the eleven children of Miles Beale (died 1862) and Dorothea Margaret Complin (died 1881). 
Miles Beale came from a Gloucestershire family but spent most of his life as a doctor in London. His high-church views made a deep and lasting impression on Dorothea as did his love of English literature, particularly of Shakespeare, a subject on which he delivered lectures at Crosby Hall, Chelsea, which she attended. He was also probably responsible for the business competence which was so noticeable in her later career. Miles was concerned that his daughters receive the best education then available for women and was an interested and enthusiastic supporter both of his daughter's later aspirations and of the improvement in women's education in general. Four of his daughters became teachers. 
Dorothea Beale's mother, who was descended from a French Huguenot family, was a cousin of the feminist Caroline Cornwallis, whose views were influential in the Beale family. Consequently, when Dorothea showed an early interest in books and study she was encouraged to develop it. Mrs Beale took pains to find a competent governess, no easy task at that time, and subsequently a school with a reputation above the average, even though in later years her daughter remembered chiefly its limited syllabus and the rote learning. She left the school at thirteen and for the next three years educated herself at home, drawing on the libraries of the London Institute and Crosby Hall, and what she learned from her mother's sister. Inspired by reading the life of Pascal she set herself to reading Euclid in the original Greek, an experience which she later claimed made her realize the value of original research and of systematic teaching. In 1847 Dorothea and her two elder sisters were sent to Mrs Bray's school for English girls in Paris. She felt that the quality of her study at home was much superior and she hated the rigid routine. The experience was short-lived as the girls were brought home on the outbreak of the 1848 revolution. In the same year, the Governesses' Benevolent Institution extended its activities by opening Queen's College, Harley Street, London. Dorothea and her sisters were among the first to attend lectures there. Over the next few years she received diplomas certifying her ability to teach most of the subjects learned by girls at that time. Within a year she was herself teaching mathematics there. She also continued her study of Greek, a language which she loved for its association with both the 'New Testament' and the philosophy of Plato. 
In 1854 Dorothea Beale was asked to teach Latin to the junior class at Queen's College and accepted the post of head teacher of the preparatory school. She was only twenty-three, so the appointment is both a measure of her talents and of the lack of well-trained, experienced teachers. During this period she visited schools in Germany and Switzerland, adopting methods of teaching mathematics which she observed there. She also published an account of the activities of the deaconesses at Kaiserwerth. At the end of 1856 she resigned from Queen's, unhappy with the management of the school, which was in the hands of the dean, Charles Grenfell Nicolay, of whose educational policies she did not approve. Immediately she accepted the post of head teacher in the Clergy Daughters' School at Casterton, Westmorland, the model for Charlotte Bronte's Lowood. This was a mistake and she left after barely a year, being out of sympathy with the strict Calvinistic regime and unable to bear the strain of teaching a wide syllabus to her usual high standard. In the first half of 1858 she wrote 'The Student's Text-Book of English and General History' (6th edn, 1862), intended for the use of teachers. It was written in response to an outcry over the alleged Romanizing tendencies in the new edition of Henry Ince's standard school textbook and to meet the need for something other than the catechisms and abridgements so common in girls' schools. Together with her subsequent 'The Student's Chronological Maps' (1863) it enjoyed great popularity until superseded by more up-to-date works. It set a new standard in the teaching of the subject by placing the important facts of English history in a coherent order and in the context of European history. It extended the notion of history to cover events up to the mid-nineteenth century, although subsequent editions were not updated. While considering her future, Dorothea Beale was also teaching at a school in Barnes run by her sister Eliza and Miss Elwall. Although careers in social work were suggested to her, there was no doubt in her mind that her life should be devoted to teaching girls and she applied for several headships. 
In June 1858 Dorothea Beale was elected principal of Cheltenham Ladies' College, a post which she held until her death. The college had been founded in 1854 by a group of Cheltenham residents wishing to provide, at a reasonable price, an education that did not sacrifice learning to accomplishments and would fit its pupils for their later domestic roles. Founded on the same proprietary system as Cheltenham College it was, and remained for some years, primarily a day school, socially exclusive, taking children from the age of five, initially including small boys. From the start it was envisaged that there would be some form of external examination annually and strict discipline in the classroom, reinforced by a rule of silence. When Dorothea Beale took up her post the school was on the verge of collapse, with a falling roll, little money, and leasehold premises available only for the next two years. The school survived only by the exercise of the strictest economy and reorganization of its finances in 1860. It was hard to find properly qualified staff, a problem which persisted until pupils trained in the school were available for employment. 
Parental prejudices had to be taken into account and Miss Beale, always moderate and diplomatic in her approach to changes, initially accepted that mathematics should not be part of the syllabus because parents objected to their girls learning boys' subjects. Much scientific knowledge had to be smuggled into the syllabus through physical geography and more emphasis was placed on 'accomplishments' than she would have liked. Latin was replaced by German, which Miss Beale considered to be equal in value as a mental training, quite apart from her conviction that Latin literature was unsuitable for young girls. For many years she did much of the teaching herself, her particular strengths being history, English, and, when it was finally introduced in 1868, mathematics. History and English literature were taught with what has been described as a puritan regard for the moral lessons to be learned from the deeds of particular role models. Her 'Great Englishmen: Short Lives' published in 1881 is a series of such moral portraits. Many of her lectures on Dante, a particular love of hers, Chaucer, Spenser, and other writers were essays concentrating on the moral and spiritual virtues of Beatrice, Britomart, or Griselda, who were held up as examples to the girls. When she reduced her teaching duties, giving way to younger teachers educated with different priorities, she continued to express her views through religious instruction, which she never gave up and which replaced the sermons of boys' schools' headmasters, and through a steady stream of papers and articles, mainly published in the college magazine, which she edited for many years. 
Whatever the initial limitations of the syllabus, Dorothea Beale's methods ensured that her pupils were successful. She insisted on regular testing to ensure that information had been properly learned and understood. All work had to be marked and initialled by teachers, the pupils then correcting their errors on a fresh page. Although she was not in favour of competitive examinations for girls on the pattern of those then taken by boys, she ensured from the first that there were annual examinations on their work by external examiners, many of them Oxford dons, to ensure that high standards were maintained and, incidentally, that the school's successful programme was broadcast throughout the educational world. Her strong personality, sense of purpose, and deeply held faith impressed both girls and parents. Numbers rose steadily, and within ten years of her appointment the school was well launched. 
Beale's success commanded attention and on 19 April 1866 she gave evidence before the schools inquiry commission (the Taunton commission) as one of a few leading women educationists, mobilized by Emily Davies, to appear as witnesses before the commissioners. The publication of the commission's report (December 1867) was a turning point both for the education of girls and for Dorothea Beale. For the first time the gross inadequacies of most girls' schools were exposed in reports written by men, who included Liberal young dons, such as James Bryce and T. H. Green, committed to the extension of high quality education for both sexes. The climate of opinion engendered by the commission encouraged Dorothea Beale to publish articles expounding her own views on the education of middle-class girls. In 1865 she read a paper at the Bristol Social Science Congress explaining the proprietary school arrangements of the college. This was followed by an article in 'Fraser's Magazine' (October 1866) in which she tackled the question of the medical fitness of girls to study and sit exams in the same way as their brothers. She also arranged for the sections on women's education in the Taunton commission report to be published separately (1869), at her own expense, prefaced by her analysis of the problems and their solutions. Here she argued for the release of middle-class girls from 'the tyranny of custom' which forced them to enter either 'a daily round of unceasing visiting and frivolous busy-ness' or to 'cast off the yoke, not of these alone, but of wholesome custom, of lawful authority'. Women had been freed from the drudgery of household tasks by the progress of modern science and technology, so they should be properly taught, using modern textbooks, to use and cultivate their minds in order to become civilized and spiritually enriched. She countered the arguments used by parents and doctors that such study was in any way morally or physically harmful and then outlined in some detail a programme of study based upon her own experiences and achievements at Cheltenham. 
In the next fifteen years the college expanded and prospered. During this period Miss Beale provided new, permanent accommodation for the school with proper boarding facilities, and improved both staffing and syllabus. By 1880 Cheltenham Ladies' College was teaching a full syllabus including mathematics and classics. It was to continue growing in size and in functions throughout the decade. Miss Beale had long recognized the need for properly trained teachers. Her solution was to encourage capable pupils to enter the teaching profession and to found in 1876 a small boarding-house for pupil teachers who could not afford the Cheltenham fees. In 1885 this was reconstituted as St Hilda's College, Cheltenham. She had hoped that the guild of old girls would fund this project, but it chose instead to start a settlement in the East End of London, a scheme in which she took little interest. St Hilda's College, Cheltenham, provided many of the teachers for the college, who were encouraged, when it became possible, to study for London University degrees. She also revived the preparatory section, which had not long survived the original foundation of the college. Organized on the principles of Pestalozzi and Froebel, it was instituted in 1883, one of the first of its kind in the country. By the end of the century it was possible to spend one's entire life at Cheltenham from the age of five through to retirement from the staff. The school had become a community of over 1000, linked to many other schools at home and abroad, and teaching children from preparatory level right through to university degrees. Her methods were encapsulated in 'Work and Play in Girls' Schools' (1898), to which Miss Soulsby and Miss Dove, headmistresses who had taught at Cheltenham, contributed sections on the moral aspects of education and on sport respectively. Dorothea never took much interest in sport, while recognizing the need for 'rational' exercise of some kind. But, always open to well-argued proposals and aware that in some respects her own views were increasingly regarded as conservative, even out of date, she made provision for it in the 1890s. 
The basic principles and aims of Miss Beale's educational system remained, at the end of her life, much the same as they had been at the beginning. For her education was a means to personal fulfilment without the object of earning a living. It had a deeply religious content and motivation; it was the way towards a fuller understanding of God and his works, in itself justification enough for its pursuit. She believed that everybody had talents which it was their duty to develop as far as they were able and then to use to their best ability. In most cases this would be within the context of family life, but for the exceptionally able or for those who had to earn their living it would be in the teaching profession and other fields which were opening up to women as the century progressed. The fully developed syllabus catered for the middle-class girl destined for marriage and motherhood, but also for the talented scholar. The main point was that all should be able to do their duty to the best of their ability and not waste time on frivolous, unprofitable pursuits, summed up in the one dismissive word 'accomplishments'. But, unlike some of her contemporaries, Miss Beale always assumed that most of her girls would not have to earn a living and she was therefore never in favour of placing girls on the same footing as boys. Consequently, she was always opposed to competitive examinations but she did not stop able girls from sitting them. She encouraged her girls to pursue higher education through the college, in preference to Oxford and Cambridge, where women were fighting for equal treatment with men. But she did not discourage the ablest women from going to Oxford and Cambridge. She was always ready to recognize and nurture exceptional talent; her ground rules were designed for the majority who were not so gifted. 
Despite her preference for St Hilda's College, Cheltenham, Dorothea Beale already had plans for a college in Oxford in the 1880s. Her intention was that it should be for Cheltenham girls and staff who wished to spend a year pursuing leisurely research and reading without necessarily taking any examinations. The scheme was vigorously resisted by the heads of the other women's colleges, who felt it would devalue their efforts to establish the right of women to take degrees. But in 1893 St Hilda's Hall was opened. Miss Beale's original intentions were soon forgotten, most of the students taking examinations. After the first few years she took little part in the academic affairs of the college but maintained strict financial control, for she had personally provided the funds for its establishment in much the same way as she had for many of the Ladies' College boarding-houses. She never fully understood or sympathized with the aspirations of the heads of the other women's colleges. St Hilda's College, Oxford, never had for her the same importance as Cheltenham Ladies' College. On her death she left it only its furnishings, paid for by herself, and $500, leaving the bulk of her estate, $55,000, to the Ladies' College. 
As the reputation of the Ladies' College spread Miss Beale became involved in the development of women's education more generally. She was one of the founder members of the Association of Head Mistresses, which began with a membership of eight in 1874 but had over 230 members by the end of her life. She took an increasingly active part in educational conferences in England, Europe, and the United States, developing contacts throughout the world. She was approached for help and advice in setting up and staffing girls' schools elsewhere. Although she confined her energies largely to educational matters she had contacts in the women's movement. She was a member of the Kensington Society and she supported both women's suffrage and Josephine Butler's campaign against child prostitution. Her achievements were recognized by a request to give evidence to the royal commission on secondary education (the Bryce commission) in 1894, by numerous invitations to attend conferences and public functions, and, in 1902, by the award of an LLD at Edinburgh University. 
Dorothea Beale had, as a headmistress, the same status and role in girls' education as Arnold of Rugby or Thring of Uppingham had in that of boys. At the start of her career, as she often said, education for girls was superficial and inadequate. Middle-class girls were more ignorant than working-class girls who attended state-funded elementary schools. Her generation had to fight for the right to study 'boys' subjects' and to sit examinations. They also had to establish the governess as a respected, professional teacher. In both these endeavours she played a leading and distinctive role. In the development of the Ladies' College as an institution she demonstrated an exceptional capacity for financial management and control which enabled her to weather bad times and to extend the college buildings from one modest house to a large Gothic pile architecturally much influenced by Ruskin, whom she admired and who approved her aspirations. But her administrative skills were accompanied by a personality expressing ideals and aspirations which deeply impressed her pupils. She liked her pupils to talk of her 'marriage' to the college, as if she were a nun, and at one time contemplated setting up a secular religious teaching order. Her faith was central to her life even when, in middle age, she suffered from doubts. Her scripture lessons, conducted amid absolute silence, were remembered with awe as much for the beauty of her speaking voice as for the emotional charge she imparted to her teaching. Though in later years her teaching role decreased, she never permitted anything to diminish her pastoral role. She had the knack of knowing what was going on and a presence in the classroom which was felt even if she was not there. Her manner of dealing with the lawbreaker was quiet but devastating. 'You must never let a child have the satisfaction of holding out against you', she advised young teachers. She sometimes spoke her mind with a frankness bordering on brutality. Personally reserved, austere, small in stature, and dignified, she was in later life often likened to Queen Victoria. But despite her shyness, she developed some strong friendships with former pupils and in times of trouble could always be relied on for practical or spiritual help and much kindness. 
Dorothea Beale died on 9 November 1906 in a nursing home at 5 Royal Parade, Cheltenham, following an operation for cancer. After cremation in Birmingham, her ashes were interred on 16 November in Gloucester Cathedral at a ceremony attended by virtually the whole college. 


@@@@@


doc= 30656


Beale, Lionel Smith (1828-1906), physician and microscopist, was born on 5 February 1828 at Bedford Street, Covent Garden, London, the only son of Lionel John Beale (1796-1871), surgeon and first medical officer of health for St Martin-in-the-Fields, and Frances Smith Beale (1800-1849), the third daughter of James Frost Sheppard. Of his three sisters, one was the artist Sarah Sophia Beale, and another, Ellen Brooker (1831-1900), was married to the Shakespearian scholar William Watkiss Lloyd. After attending a private school in Highgate, Beale entered King's College School, London, at the age of nine, and began an association that lasted for almost the whole of his career. Apprenticed to an apothecary and surgeon in Islington at thirteen, Beale matriculated at the University of London with honours in chemistry and zoology in 1847; he then worked for two years as assistant to Henry Wentworth Acland in the Anatomical Museum at Oxford. He obtained his licence of the Society of Apothecaries in 1849 and in the same year was an inspector for the Board of Health, monitoring the cholera epidemic in Windsor. In 1850-51 he was resident physician at King's College Hospital, and he graduated MB (London) in 1851. In 1859 he married Frances (died 1892), only daughter of the Revd Peyton Blakiston MD FRS of St Leonards. 
In 1852 Beale established a private laboratory in Carey Street and taught medical students physiological chemistry and normal and morbid anatomy, with special emphasis on the use of the microscope. In 1853, at the age of twenty-five, he succeeded Robert Bentley Todd as professor of physiology at King's College, being preferred to Thomas Henry Huxley among other candidates. For the first two years Beale shared the post with William Bowman (1816-1892), who had been Todd's assistant, but he was subsequently sole professor until he resigned the post in 1869. He was then made physician to King's College Hospital and promoted to professor of medicine in 1876. He held both positions until ill health prompted his retirement in 1896, though he retained his links with King's, being nominated emeritus professor and honorary consulting physician. His lectures did not prepare students for passing examinations, but were valued for their scientific merit, and he was also highly regarded as a clinician, especially for speed and intuition in diagnosis. This skill was no doubt honed in the many examinations he made as medical adviser to the Clerical and Medical Assurance Company. He also acted from 1891 to 1904 as physician to the pensions commutation board and as government medical referee for England. 
Beale's name became well known in medicine from the 1850s as a result of the popularity of his books on the clinical uses of microscopy. In 1854 he published 'The Microscope and its Application to Clinical Medicine', which set out the procedures of microscopy and showed clinicians how to use the instrument in diagnosis through the examination of urine, blood, tumours, and parasites. This manual went through four editions, the last of which was published in 1878. A companion volume, 'How to Work with the Microscope', was first published in 1857 and appeared in its fifth and final edition in 1880. Beale was ahead of his time as a pioneer of clinical pathology, as this medical specialism was not formally established in Britain until the 1920s. 
Beale was a tireless researcher and a prolific writer on microscopy, histology, and chemical pathology. Initially he worked with William Bowman on the histology of renal structures and muscle fibres, but his range of interests soon grew, as is evident from his publications: 'On some Points of the Anatomy of the Liver of Man and Vertebrate Animals' (1856), 'On Urine, Urinary Deposits and Calculi, their Microscopical and Chemical Examination' (1861, and later editions with amended titles in 1863, 1869, and 1885). He edited the journal 'Archives of Medicine' from 1857 to 1870. His last major work on clinical medicine appeared in 1880, entitled 'On Slight Ailments, their Nature and Treatment'. In this volume, first delivered as a lecture series at King's College, Beale demonstrated his diagnostic acumen and therapeutic knowledge, including many of the wrinkles he had learnt from the previous generation of great clinicians. 
To facilitate the differentiation of the component parts of cells and tissues, Beale developed various techniques of staining and fixing, most notably with his carmine solution. He also pioneered the practice of fixing tissues by injections to prevent alterations after death, and the use of high-power, oil-immersion magnification. Notable among his many novel observations was his identification of the pyriform nerve ganglion cells, now called 'Beale's cells'. Beale never shied away from controversy in any field, as was evident in his long dispute with the German histologists Wilhelm Kuhne and Rudolf von Kolliker over how nerve endings terminated in voluntary muscle. He illustrated all of his publications with his own excellent drawings, many of which were coloured. In the early 1860s his work on differential staining led him to distinguish two fundamentally different types of protoplasm -- 'germinal' and 'formed' matter -- and his ideas were first published as 'On the Structure of the Simple Tissues of the Human Body', in 1861. The German translation published in the following year caused controversy because of Beale's apparent departure from the dogma of cell theory. Much of the material was then reworked, though with more philosophical reflections, in a series of lectures at King's College in 1865, and published as 'On the Structure and Growth of the Tissues, and on Life' (1865). 
Beale undoubtedly did more than any other medical scientist of his generation to diffuse the new techniques and approaches of laboratory medicine, especially microscopy, to English-speaking audiences on both sides of the Atlantic. Indeed, this aspect of his work was more influential than his original research and hypotheses on germ theories of disease, the nature of life, and the relations between science and religion. 
In 1866 Beale's standing as a researcher led to an invitation from the royal commission on the cattle plague to make investigations of the histology of the epizootic disease that was decimating British livestock. In his report he claimed to have found the 'germs' of the disease. However, he was unable to convince his peers of the truth of his observations, or of the explanation of the disease he proposed. Beale developed a germ theory of disease, in which the causative agents of disease were elements of degraded protoplasm not independent micro-organisms. His 'disease-germs' were composed of what he called 'bioplasm', which he saw as elements of protoplasm that were more like fundamental units of life than cells. He argued that disease-germs arose within the human body, and he opposed the germ theories of Pasteur and others who implicated ferments, fungi, bacteria, parasites, and other 'external' agents. His ideas on disease and germs were set out in his Radcliffe lectures at Oxford in 1868-9, and published in two volumes in 1870: 'Disease Germs, their Supposed Nature' and 'Disease Germs, their Real Nature, an Original Investigation'. Both works were reissued in 1872 in a single volume, 'Disease Germs, their Nature and Origin'. In the same year he published 'Bioplasm, an Introduction to the Study of Physiology and Medicine'. Although soon regarded as misguided, Beale's objections to the eventually all-conquering bacterial germ theory were well grounded and in the early 1870s were widely cited by those who were opposed to Pasteur, Lister, Tyndall, and their followers. 
Concurrent with his writing on germs Beale produced a cluster of linked publications, both biological and philosophical, on the nature of life. In 1870 he published 'Protoplasm, or, Life Force and Matter', and 'The Mystery of Life', in which he replied to the attack on vitalism mounted by Sir William Gull (1815-1890) in the Harveian oration of that year. The religious influences on Beale's ideas and work were revealed in 'Life Theories: their Influence on Religious Thought' (1871). All these publications advanced the claims of vitalism against what Beale saw as the growing influence of mechanistic materialism in biology, in medicine, and in culture more generally. Polemics against those who sought to reduce biology to physics and chemistry, and to deny that there was an absolute difference between living and non-living matter, became the major theme of Beale's writing. The boldness of his views stemmed from his conviction that modern biological knowledge supported the existence of a vital force in living organisms. Beale's standing in medical science and his prolific output should have made him a major figure in the nineteenth-century debate on science and religion, but he largely failed to engage his peers, despite the production of pamphlets with provocative titles such as 'The New Materialism: Dictatorial Scientific Utterances and the Decline of Thought' (1885). In large part this was because the issue of materialism versus vitalism was seen to be largely metaphysical, it not having the same immediacy as, for example, the question of evolution had for relations between humankind and animals. Beale was convinced that there was no necessary conflict between science and faith, and set out the basis of his views in 1887 in a long essay, 'Our Morality, and the Moral Question, Chiefly from the Medical Aspect'. After retirement Beale's convictions and penchant for polemics remained as strong as ever and he continued to rail against atheism, materialism agnosticism, monism, and free thought. His series of essays entitled 'Vitality' (1898, 1899, and 1900) had more recognition and impact than his earlier writings. 
Beale had two sons, the elder of whom died while the family was visiting Beale's lifelong friend Edward Thring (1821-1887), headmaster of Uppingham School. This death deepened Beale's already close friendship with Thring, whose ideas were a major influence on Beale. The second son, Peyton Todd Bowman Beale MRCS, shared his father's interests in microscopy and publishing. An indefatigable worker, Beale took no real holiday after 1858. He eschewed alcohol and ate little meat. He was of moderate height and of sturdy build, with remarkable, abundant hair that remained brown until he was seventy. An enthusiastic gardener, he made his country home in Surrey at Weybridge, where he grew palms and Japanese plants, while in a small greenhouse at 61 Grosvenor Street, where he lived for forty-five years, he successfully grew orchids and other hothouse plants. In 1904 he left Weybridge, where he had taken a cottage in 1885 because of his wife's ill health, and moved to the house of his surviving son, 6 Bentinck Street, London. He died there on 28 March 1906 and was buried at Weybridge cemetery three days later. 
Beale was elected a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1856 and became a fellow in 1859; he was a frequent examiner, a member of its council in 1877 and 1878, censor in 1881 and 1882, and curator of the museum from 1876 to 1888. In 1871 he was awarded the Baly gold medal for his physiological work and in 1875 he delivered the Lumleian lectures. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1857, Beale was Croonian lecturer in 1865; his address was entitled, 'The ultimate nerve fibres distributed to the muscles and some other tissues'. He joined the Royal Microscopical Society in 1852, and was president in 1879 and 1880 and treasurer from 1881 to 1890. 
Beale was a key figure in the development and diffusion of medical laboratory techniques in Britain from the 1850s and was a leading London physician for half a century. In the last quarter of the nineteenth century his ideas and commitments, especially his robust defence of vitalism, distanced him from his scientific peers and made him a focus of Christian opposition to scientific materialism. 


@@@@@


doc= 30657


Beardmore, William, Baron Invernairn (1856-1936), engineer and shipbuilder, was born on 16 October 1856 at Deptford, the eldest son of William Beardmore and his wife, Sophia Louisa Halkman. His father was assistant manager of the Deptford works of the General Steam Navigation Company, but subsequently moved to Glasgow in 1861 as a partner in the Parkhead forge. William junior was educated at Glasgow high school and Ayr Academy and when he was fifteen he was apprenticed at the forge, attending evening classes at Anderson's University. At the end of his time, in 1877, he enrolled at the Royal School of Mines in South Kensington, taking courses in metallurgy and chemistry. 
Although Beardmore's father died in 1877 leaving him his share in the business, he completed his education and returned to Glasgow in 1879 to be his uncle Isaac's junior partner. He immediately persuaded his uncle to begin making open-hearth steel and to install a steel foundry; and following his uncle's retirement in 1886, William became sole partner. Two years later he diversified into armour plate production and in 1889 began making plates for high pressure Scotch boilers. Other investments quickly followed, including a 12,000 ton press in 1895 to make American Harveyized armour plate. At the turn of the century Beardmore embarked on a massive extension to the works: these included a new office block, a gun factory, and additional armour plate capacity. By late 1899 he was also contemplating building a large naval shipyard at Dalmuir on the lower Clyde, and he managed to acquire the goodwill of the insolvent shipbuilding business of Robert Napier & Sons. Work began on the new yard in 1900. At the same time he joined a syndicate that bought J. I. Thornycroft & Co. of Chiswick, the torpedo boat builders; and Beardmore was subsequently appointed chairman. 
This concentrated activity drained Beardmore of credit. He was forced to form the business into a limited liability company early in 1902, exchanging almost 60 per cent of the capital with Vickers, Son, and Maxim for an equivalent stake in that company and a seat on the board. During 1902 Beardmore also became the major shareholder in the motor car building business of Arrol Johnston. In the same year he married Elspeth, daughter of John Tullis, owner of the St Ann's leatherworks in Bridgeton, Glasgow. They had no children. Shortly after his marriage Beardmore purchased Flichity House with a 3000 acre sporting estate in Inverness-shire. 
Vickers encouraged Beardmore, who was appointed chairman of the new company, to continue his expansion plans. Although Vickers had told Armstrong Whitworth that it would prevent Beardmore from making gun mountings, the company installed a gun plant in 1902 and joined the 'gun pool', in effect, a cartel of all manufacturers. The additions and extensions to Parkhead were completed in 1904; and the Dalmuir naval construction works, the most modern and best-equipped shipyard on the Clyde, was inaugurated during 1906. During 1905 William Beardmore & Co. purchased the Mossend steel works from the Summerlee and Mossend Iron and Steel Company to secure supplies of ship plates and angles. Work began at once on the reconstruction of the plant, with the installation of a new three-high plate mill. During 1903/4 Beardmore, in co-operation with Vickers, established the Glasgow Electric Crane and Hoist Company, which was sold in 1906. The relationship with J. I. Thornycroft & Co. did not prove to be a happy one for Beardmore, and he resigned as chairman in 1907. 
During 1907 Vickers became openly dissatisfied with its investment in William Beardmore & Co., which was becoming illiquid and in need of financial support. Vickers took stiff measures to control Beardmore's activities, appointing a nominee as joint managing director. Although the company's financial strength improved, Vickers unsuccessfully tried to offload part of its investment to Armstrong Whitworth. During 1910 the company's financial health recovered, following the order for the dreadnought HMS 'Conqueror', and Vickers again encouraged Beardmore to invest in new armour plate rolling plant. By 1913 Vickers' nominees had resigned and Beardmore had regained full executive control of the firm. He immediately took the opportunity to diversify into aircraft manufacture. In 1914 he was created a baronet. 
On the outbreak of war, Beardmore was immediately called on to supply huge quantities of war material, from field guns to ships and aeroplanes. During the war the company turned out 3500 field guns, 69 vessels totalling 118,089 tons, including the battleship HMS 'Ramilles' and the first through-deck aircraft-carrier, HMS 'Argus', 650 planes, two airships, and all the steel helmets for the British army. Beardmore also co-operated in the development of the tank, and his company made all the pedrail shoes for the tracks of every tank built. The firm's plant was greatly extended, with new buildings at Dalmuir to manufacture aeroplanes, field guns, and airship parts. The Mossend steel works were completely rebuilt and factories for munitions work purchased in Paisley and Coatbridge. 
In the early part of the war the company's plants were the focus of labour unrest on the Clyde over the issues of rent increases, dilution, and restrictive practices. This resulted in a massive confrontation between Sir William and his workforce led by David Kirkwood. In March 1916, however, after government intervention and Kirkwood's arrest, the strife subsided. Beardmore extended the company's interests during the war, buying Alley and MacLellan Ltd, owners of the Sentinel works at Polmadie, Glasgow, and a steam-wagon factory at Shrewsbury. On his own account he purchased a majority holding in the Sheffield steelmakers, Dunford and Elliott Ltd. 
With the coming of peace, Beardmore was convinced that trade would expand. He planned to manufacture passenger vessels, tankers, and steam locomotives at Dalmuir, marine steam and oil engines at the Coatbridge works, buses and lorries on part of the Parkhead site, and taxis at Paisley. He opened a civil aviation department, developing a series of unsuccessful aeroplanes. The company continued to manage the wartime airship works at Renfrew, completing the R34 in 1919 and the R36 in 1921, when the plant closed. He won control of Dunford and Elliott, encouraging the firm to diversify away from steel into the manufacture of motorcycles and cars. He directed Arrol Johnston to tool up its works for the production of heavy motor cars. In 1921 he was created Baron Invernairn of Strathnairn, taking his title from his Inverness-shire home. 
Unfortunately, Invernairn's strategy for peacetime trading miscarried, for after 1920 nearly all the departments and subsidiaries of his firm began to lose money. By now in his late sixties, Invernairn was incapable of meeting the crisis. His recipe was to borrow more and instruct his heads of department to exercise economy. During 1926 Vickers sold him its shareholding. Later in the year the accountant Sir William McLintock scrutinized the company's affairs, producing a devastating indictment of Invernairn's lack of management. The following year under the supervision of Montagu Norman of the Bank of England a committee of investigation was appointed. In 1928 Invernairn, whom Norman had unkindly dubbed Beardless, was ousted and over the next two years much of his extensive empire was closed down. In enforced retirement, Invernairn witnessed the collapse of many of his other interests, including Arrol Johnston. He died on 9 April 1936 at his home, Flichity House, Strathnairn, Inverness-shire, where he was buried. He was survived by his wife. 
Invernairn's style of doing business was totally autocratic. In many of his investment decisions, he lacked judgement and refused to listen to advice. Despite the scale of his enterprises, which during the First World War employed over 50,000 people, none of them can be said to have been a success. He helped to promote the Industrial Welfare Society in 1918 and was its first chairman. The Beardmore glacier in Antarctica, the largest glacier in the world, was named after him by Ernest Shackleton, whose Antarctic expedition of 1907-9 he had funded. 


@@@@@


doc= 30658


Beatrice, Princess (1857-1944), the fifth daughter and youngest child of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, was born Beatrice Mary Victoria Feodore at Buckingham Palace on 14 April 1857. Unlike her elder brothers and sisters, she was treated with indulgence by her parents and in her infancy was a lively child. After Albert's death, Queen Victoria found solace in her daughter, being over-protective of her 'Baby' until she was well into adult life. The princess was never the play-friend or confidante of any of her brothers or sisters, for the poor health of Leopold, the closest to her in age, ruled out normal childish play and, deprived of the companionship of other children, she grew up shy and reserved. She was, at maturity, an attractive and well-educated young woman of some musical ability. It appeared, however, that her role was to be 'the prop, comfort and companion of her widowed mother to old age' (Rose, 30). Such was the queen's reliance on her daughter that it seemed unlikely that she would ever marry. Queen Victoria was, however, sympathetic to Beatrice's fondness for the prince imperial (killed in the Anglo-Zulu War in 1879) and promoted the idea of marriage to the grand duke of Hesse and by Rhine, the widower of Beatrice's sister, Alice. In 1884 Princess Beatrice attended the wedding of her niece, Victoria Alice of Hesse, to Prince Louis of Battenberg (later Mountbatten) and, on her return, told the queen that she wished to marry Prince Louis's brother. 


Queen Victoria was fond of Prince Henry and made him governor of the Isle of Wight but he grew restless in the quiet world of Osborne House. When he slipped away for a jaunt to Corsica with his brother Louis Alexander, the queen sent a warship to bring him back. In 1895 he volunteered for service in the Asante expedition and contracted fever from which he died, on the way home, on 20 January 1896. Princess Henry was given her husband's governorship and continued to be the queen's close companion and unofficial private secretary. 
After Victoria's death, the princess lived in Osborne Cottage until 1912 when she moved into the governor's house at Carisbrooke Castle. The marriage of her daughter, Princess Ena (1887-1969), to King Alfonso XIII of Spain in 1906 caused some controversy as it entailed her conversion to Catholicism, a step of which Edward VII disapproved. This marriage was to transmit the haemophilia (of which Beatrice was a carrier and from which her second son, Leopold Henry (1889-1922), suffered) to the Spanish dynasty. Prince Maurice ('b'. 1891), Beatrice's youngest son, was killed in action in 1914. In 1917, in accordance with George V's policy of divesting the royal family of its German associations, the family name of Battenberg was changed to Mountbatten, the princess resuming her former style of Princess Beatrice, and her eldest son, Alexander (1886-1960), becoming marquess of Carisbrooke. 
Princess Beatrice was bequeathed all the queen's private journals, with instructions to modify or destroy any passages which appeared unsuitable for posterity. Although she survived her mother by forty-three years, she continued to be her loyal assistant and fulfilled her instructions all too faithfully. She also translated extracts from the diary of Queen Victoria's maternal grandmother, Augusta, duchess of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, published in 1941 as 'In Napoleonic Days'. 
Her life was saddened by untimely deaths but she lived, a stout and kindly person, until she was eighty-seven, dying at her last home, Brantridge Park, Balcombe, Sussex, on 26 October 1944. Her funeral was at St George's Chapel, Windsor, and she was buried beside her husband at Whippingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 30659


Brown, William Beattie (1831-1909), landscape painter, was born in the parish of Haddington, near Edinburgh, on 9 November 1831, the son of Adam Brown, farmer, and his wife, Ann Beattie. When he was still young the family moved to Leith, then a separate burgh outside Edinburgh, and he was educated at Leith high school. He was then apprenticed as a glass-stainer to the firm of Messrs James Ballantine & Son in Edinburgh. Very soon he showed considerable artistic talent and before his apprenticeship was completed he was accepted as a student at the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh under the directorship of Robert Scott Lauder. His skill and accuracy as a draughtsman led to his employment as an illustrator for medical works. Early in his career he was also employed as a picture restorer by Henry Doig, an Edinburgh art dealer, carver, and gilder. On 23 December 1858 he married his employer's daughter, Esther Love Doig ('c'.1838-1904); they had three sons and six daughters. 
Beattie Brown first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1852 and from then on became a regular and prolific exhibitor for the rest of his life. He also exhibited at the Royal Academy in London periodically from 1863 to 1899. In 1871 he was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy and in 1884 a full academician. He specialized in landscape painting, in the early years particularly of the Edinburgh area, the lowlands, and the Scottish borders. Gradually he was increasingly drawn to the attractions of the wilder parts of Scotland further north, and it is by these works that he is best remembered. For example, his diploma work in the Royal Scottish Academy, 'Coire-na-Faireamh' (1883), set in Applecross deer forest in Ross-shire, is a dramatic representation of one of the steepest passes in the north-west highlands. Painted remarkably freely in dark, heavy colours, and with strong contrasts of the highlights of light on water, it evokes very forcefully the idea of a remote and deserted wilderness. The directness of such paintings is a result of his fondness for working 'en plein air', a practice for which he was an early enthusiast. These works, often characterized by an overall brown tone, brought him much popularity in his lifetime. 
Like many others of his contemporaries from the east of Scotland, Beattie Brown also studied in the Low Countries, working particularly in watercolour when away from home. In the late 1880s and early 1890s he exhibited a number of quieter landscapes of the scenery around Dordrecht in the Netherlands and further south in Belgium. He also produced a certain amount of work in the English home counties and Yorkshire. Towards the end of his life his colours became lighter and brighter, reflecting the influence of higher-keyed paintings by, for example, the Glasgow Boys and other younger artists. William Beattie Brown died at his home at 15 St Bernard's Crescent, Edinburgh, on 31 March 1909 and was buried in Warriston cemetery in that city on 3 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 30660


Beatty, Sir (Alfred) Chester (1875-1968), mining engineer and art collector, was born on 7 February 1875 in New York city, the youngest of the three sons of John Cuming Beatty, banker, of New York city, and his wife, Hetty, daughter of William Gedney Bull. He was educated at Westminster School, Dobbs Ferry, New York, at Princeton University, and then at Columbia University (school of mines), where he came top in every subject except geology, in which he came second. He went to Denver, Colorado, in search of work, and rose rapidly from labourer to manager of a small gold mine. He then established himself as a reputable consultant, and in 1903 he became consulting engineer and assistant general manager of the Guggenheim Exploration Company, working alongside the renowned engineer John Hays Hammond. Together they acquired and developed many of Guggenheim's best mines, including silver mines in Mexico, and copper mines in the western states of the USA, as well as various prospecting concessions in the Belgian Congo (later Zaire). 
On 18 April 1900 Beatty married Grace Madeline (died 1911), known as Ninette, daughter of Alfred Rickard, a mining engineer of Denver, with whom he worked. They raised a daughter, Ninette (1901-1958), and a son, Alfred Chester Beatty (1907-1983), in New York. Ninette Beatty was taken ill in 1910, and though she recovered from an operation she died of typhoid fever on 28 March 1911. Beatty himself suffered from lung problems at this time, and afterwards sought winter sunshine. Within two weeks of the funeral, he sailed for England with his children, his brother (William) Gedney Beatty, an architect, and his servants. 
On 21 June 1913 Beatty married the divorcee Edith Stone ('c'.1886-1952), daughter of John Dunn of New York. He acquired as his London home Baroda House, Kensington Palace Gardens, which he turned over to the government for use as a military hospital during the war. In 1914 the Beattys made the first of many visits to Egypt, where he subsequently spent many winters and built himself a house, on the outskirts of Cairo. 
Also in 1913 Beatty founded Selection Trust Ltd. This remained a small company until after the First World War, when Beatty embarked on the development, finance, and administration of mining businesses throughout the world. In this way he developed zinc and lead mines at Tetiuhe in Siberia, diamond mines on the west coast of Africa, and lead and zinc mines in Serbia. His greatest achievement, however, was the part he played in the development of the copperbelt in Northern Rhodesia (later Zambia), where he formed the great mines of Roan Antelope and Mufulira. 
The extraordinary feature of Beatty's work in these territories is that, as far as is known, apart from Trepca, in Serbia, he never visited any of these countries. He assembled a team of expert geologists and mining engineers whom he sent to these places with very specific instructions about where they should explore. Based on his own experience and backed by his unerring flair for potential mining areas, his judgement was seldom proved wrong, and in these four territories great and successful mining enterprises were established. In the subsequent fifty years one by one these were nationalized, first in Siberia and then in Yugoslavia. The last of the nationalizations was in Zambia in 1970. In the meantime, however, Selection Trust had acquired valuable interests in other mines around the world, including in Australia, Canada, South Africa, and South-West Africa (Namibia), as well as interests in the North Sea and the UK. 
In 1933 Beatty became a British subject and during the Second World War he gave valuable service to government departments active in his own field. During the war he became estranged from his wife. They lived apart for some ten years, until her death at Baroda House in 1952. By this time Beatty had retired, and, disliking what he considered to be the over-regulation of life in post-war England, he had moved in 1950 to Ireland, the land of his Beatty ancestors, settling at 10 Ailesbury Road, Dublin. 
Between the time that he retired from Guggenheim and his arrival in Britain, Beatty spent much time in the Middle and Near East exploring the art treasures of that part of the world. He built up a unique collection of Indian and Persian miniatures and manuscripts and early bibles, including parts of a 'New Testament' which was two centuries older than the 'Codex Sinaiticus'; he also acquired the earliest known copy of the 'Rubaiyat' of 'Umar Khayyam. Later he turned his attention to Impressionist art, in which he built up one of the most valuable private collections in the world. He also collected French and Russian gold snuff-boxes, watches from the eighteenth century, clocks, stamps, and a library of rare books which were said to number 9000 and which weighed 35 tons. On retiring to Ireland he gave more than eighty of his Impressionist pictures to the national gallery in Dublin and in 1955 he handed over to the Irish nation a thirteenth-century book of hours which had previously been on loan to the British Museum. 
In the philanthropic field he is best known for his interest in cancer research. In the 1930s he purchased the old Freemasons' Hospital in the Fulham Road and converted it into the Chester Beatty Research Institute (later the Institute of Cancer Research: Royal Cancer Hospital). 
Beatty was a man of great and bountiful disposition, generous to a fault, not only in his national benefactions but to individuals as well. Cast in a heroic mould, he had a Churchillian sweep and a supreme contempt of every kind of socialist bureaucracy. His endearing mannerisms included a total dislike of smoking in any room in which he was present, and a horror of draughts and cold, which was obvious from the impressive cloak which he wore, often on the warmest days. 
In his professional life Beatty received many honours, including the gold medal of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, which he was awarded in 1935, and the Serbian 'grand cordon' of the order of St Sava, which he received on the occasion of the opening of the Trepca mines. He was knighted in 1954, and he later became the first honorary citizen of the Irish republic under the 'Irish Nationality and Citizenship Act' of 1956. 
Beatty died in hospital in Monte Carlo, Monaco, on 19 January 1968, and was buried in Ireland, being given a state funeral at St Patrick's Anglican Cathedral. His estate in Ireland was valued at over $7 million, his English estate being relatively insignificant. Alfred Chester Beatty junior succeeded his father as chairman of Selection Trust in 1950 and remained in office until 1978, two years before BP paid $412 million for the Selection Trust shares, the most expensive takeover the City had known. 


@@@@@


doc= 30661


Beatty, David, first Earl Beatty (1871-1936), naval officer, was born on 17 January 1871 at Howbeck Lodge, Stapeley, Nantwich, Cheshire, the second of four sons of Captain David Longfield Beatty (1841-1904), of the 4th hussars, and his first wife, Katherine Edith (died 1896), daughter of Nicholas Sadleir of Dunboyne Castle, co. Meath, Ireland. 
David's brothers all served in the army, and his one sister, Kathleen, known as Trot, married Colonel Miles Courage, of the brewing family, who became master of the Hampshire hunt. David inherited his family's love of hunting, horsemanship, and all country sports, but as a young boy showed such interest in ships and the sea that his parents had him prepared for the navy. In January 1884, at thirteen, the normal age for officer entry, he passed into the 'Britannia', the training establishment on the Dart, tenth out of ninety-nine candidates. He passed out in January 1886, eighteenth of his term of thirty-three. He was not amenable to the punitive discipline and rigid routine of 'Britannia', the training ship, and so was never chosen as a cadet captain. He described himself as 'essentially Irish', and perhaps his high spirits and generally attractive personality were seen as redeeming features. On the other hand he had 'interest', that established factor in furthering a successful naval career. His mother, relying on their shared Irishness, personally appealed to Charles Beresford and had his original appointment to the China station changed to one on 'Alexandra', the flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet, where the commander-in-chief, Queen Victoria's second son, the duke of Edinburgh, gained a sound professional reputation. 
Such a ship attracted an unusual number of officers who subsequently achieved high rank, among them Colin Keppel and Stanley Colville, who could provide valuable role models for the cadets and midshipmen. Beatty's companions in the gun room included Walter Cowan, Richard Phillimore, and Reginald Tyrwhitt, who later served under him as flag officers in the North Sea. Others of his seniors became influential in court circles during the reigns of Queen Victoria's successors. In the meantime his manners, cheerfulness, and good looks made him popular with the royal and other highly placed visitors to the flagship, while his skills as a horseman gained him additional friends and admirers. 'Alexandra' was typical of the capital ships of the day: fully rigged for sail, but equipped for steam propulsion and strongly armoured, it mounted heavy, muzzle loading guns and carried Whitehead torpedoes. 
Beatty was rated midshipman on 15 May 1886, was promoted sub-lieutenant on 14 May 1890, and began scientific and technical courses at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and specialist establishments in Portsmouth in September. In contrast to these he had three periods of sea service under sail in the corvette 'Ruby'. The last of these followed his promotion to lieutenant on 25 August 1892; he had not been attracted by the six months' accelerated advancement gained by high performance in the courses and achieved a first-class pass only in torpedoes. 
More directly relevant to the newer navy was Beatty's appointment to the battleship 'Camperdown' in October 1893, when he entered the world of steam tactics. In 1895 he joined the battleship 'Trafalgar', whose executive officer Stanley Colville had formed a high opinion of his potential during their time in 'Alexandra'. This led to promotion and distinction, which enabled Beatty to out-distance his contemporaries for the rest of his career. When Colville was appointed to command the gunboats supporting General Sir Herbert Kitchener's Sudan expedition of 1896 he selected his protege to command one of his craft. 
Beatty did not disappoint him. When Colville was wounded by shore fire, he assumed command of the whole flotilla in its hazardous passage through the cataracts of the Nile, showing exemplary initiative, leadership, and courage under fire. On 22 September 1896 the British forces reached Dongola, and Kitchener halted his advance. At Kitchener's personal request he rejoined for the 1897 completion of the campaign. 
The new flotilla under the command of Colin Keppel, another former 'Alexandra' man, also performed well. Beatty's exploits gained him wider recognition, including the DSO, while Kitchener in his dispatch of 1898 substantially contributed to his special promotion to commander on 15 November. Aged twenty-seven, and with only six years' service as lieutenant rather than the normal eleven or twelve, he was now well ahead of his contemporaries on the ladder of promotion. He had shown exceptional boldness and also became known to Winston Churchill, another participant in the Sudan expedition. 
Beatty was appointed executive officer of the battleship 'Barfleur', flagship of the second in command of the China station, in April 1899. Her captain, Stanley Colville, had again asked for him. Initially he concentrated on the internal working of the ship to ensure the smartness in appearance and drills on which a commander's promotion traditionally depended. But wider events gave him opportunity for more exciting activity and professional advancement. China was in the grip of an uprising by the Boxer nationalist movement, which was opposed to external influence and threatened foreign nationals in Beijing. In subsequent land operations around Tientsin (Tianjin), Beatty played a prominent part, but he was seriously wounded in his left arm. Also wounded was Captain John Jellicoe, Admiral Seymour's flag captain. Beatty's gallantry and leadership were duly noted, and on 9 November 1900 he received one of four special promotions to captain. He was now twenty-nine, compared with the normal age for that promotion of forty-two, and thus further ahead than ever in the race to qualifying for flag rank. It was not however until 2 June 1902 and after prolonged medical treatment that Beatty assumed his first captain's command. 
On home leave in 1899 Beatty met his future wife, Ethel (died 1932), daughter of Marshall Field, the Chicago millionaire and chain-store proprietor. They met in the hunting field, where her hard, almost reckless, riding gave them common ground. A strong mutual attraction developed. On his return from China with an enhanced reputation, her interest increased, and he remained entranced by her complex personality. He was well aware of the advantages of her great wealth, but she was a married woman, although separated from her American husband, Arthur M. Tree. Beatty's career could have suffered as a result of an illicit relationship, and they had to assume complete discretion in their conduct and correspondence. However, Tree obtained a divorce in America on the grounds of his wife's desertion, and despite objections from both families they married at Hanover Square register office in London on 22 May 1901, only ten days after Ethel's divorce was publicized. 
Beatty's appointment as captain of the cruiser 'Juno' (launched 1895, 5600 tons) on 2 June 1902 inaugurated a critical period in his career. His qualities of leadership were well established, but his ability to master the problems arising from changing propulsion, weaponry, and communications systems had yet to be tested. The Mediterranean Fleet, in which he was to serve, had been trained by Sir John (Jacky) Fisher, its commander-in-chief from 1899 to 1902, to a high pitch of readiness for war, based on speedy manoeuvring and offensive action. Captains and admirals were tested in regular fleet manoeuvres in which the advent of wireless telegraphy introduced new complications. Beatty's command of 'Juno' began with a short attachment to the Channel Fleet under the command of Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson, renowned for his skills in the tactical handling of fleets and squadrons and for the heavy demands he made on his subordinates. In his letters to his wife Beatty admitted to losing his temper with his own officers, who did not match up to the standards he required in the highly competitive rivalry between ships to meet his admiral's requirements. He also reacted more positively, not only by entertaining his officers in the traditional way but also by trying to lead them into discussions designed to bring out the lessons to be learned from exercises and manoeuvres. Also, and very characteristically, in his letters to his wife he strongly criticized his superiors for not following suit. He was particularly critical of his last commander-in-chief, Lord Charles Beresford, for imposing too much detailed control over his subordinates, while skilful in avoiding involvement in Beresford's quarrel with Fisher, which was splitting the higher ranks of the navy. He became increasingly critical of the repetitive nature of fleet exercises, and especially of the favourite one of blockading the 'enemy' fleet in its own harbour without recognizing that the development of effective torpedoes had made this a risky operation. That his overall performance satisfied his superiors was demonstrated when he was given command of the new cruiser 'Suffolk' (9800 tons) on 25 October 1904 for his last eleven months in the Mediterranean. 
Long periods of separation had always been resented by naval wives, and Ethel was no exception. She became jealous of David's deep involvement in his professional and social life in Malta, and he, in turn, became critical of the frivolity of her life in London society and of the carping tone of her letters. Their relationship was never easy, but it never lacked vitality and affection. Eventually she joined him in Malta, where they lived in great style; on 22 February 1905 she gave birth to their first son, David Field (later second Earl Beatty). Their second son, Peter, was born on 2 April 1910. 
The couple returned to England towards the end of 1905, and after a period on half pay Beatty became naval adviser to the Army Council on 21 December 1906. He was involved in planning the movement of the expeditionary force to France. Owing to Fisher's refusal to disclose his war plans, joint operations were not formally discussed with the military. 
Beatty moved towards fulfilling the remaining requirement for flag rank by his successful command of the battleship 'Queen' (completed 1904, 15,000 tons), serving in the Atlantic Fleet under Prince Louis of Battenberg as part of Fisher's concentration against the German high seas fleet. He exempted his new commander-in-chief from his condemnation of British admirals for their lack of imagination on the nature of future warfare, and the consequent unrealism of their training exercises. In general he approved of Fisher's wholesale reforms but disliked his devious methods of introducing them. His own captaincy of 'Queen' was highly commended by Battenberg, and his promotion was promulgated on 1 January 1910 after an order in council had waived the regulation which stipulated that advancement to flag rank should be preceded by six years of sea command. Save for attendance at the war college in spring 1911, he was not employed until January 1912, largely owing to his refusing the Admiralty's offer of an appointment as second in command of the Atlantic Fleet instead of the Home Fleet, which he preferred, judging it to be most important in a future German war. In view of his comparative youth for flag rank, this was perceived as arrogance; along with his wealth, this provoked criticism and jealousy. 
Beatty was rescued from this impasse by Winston Churchill's becoming first lord of the Admiralty in 1911. Advised by Fisher to exercise particular care in his choice of naval secretary, Churchill selected Beatty after an interview in which he demonstrated 'the profound sagacity of his comments expressed in language free from technical jargon' (R. Churchill, 550). 
In the absence of an organized naval staff, an able and determined naval secretary could exercise considerable influence over his political master. Beatty used the opportunity to the full, and despite his earlier suspicion began to appreciate Churchill's genuine enthusiasm for the navy and his ability in cabinet to further its interests. A paper that he addressed to Churchill in April 1912 on naval dispositions in a German war shows the maturity and perceptiveness of Beatty's contributions to their discussions ('Beatty Papers', 1.36-45). 
The practical result of Churchill's approbation led to Beatty's taking temporary command of an armoured cruiser squadron, with his flag in 'Aboukir' for the fleet manoeuvres of July 1912. His success in bringing his command to fighting efficiency must have reminded his critics of his high leadership qualities. It certainly justified Churchill's decision to award him command of the battlecruiser squadron. 
As always, difficulties in his marriage accentuated the problems of Beatty's naval career. Ethel seemed to take his successes for granted and did not offer the constant emotional support he expected. Her wealth opened the doors of London society and great country houses, but her divorced status prevented formal presentation at court and led to unrealistic arguments about his seeking another profession. 
Ethel was determined to maintain her standard of living, and in July 1905 she had negotiated with her father a permanent financial settlement on which -- as she triumphantly told her husband -- they could live happily without getting into debt or needing to worry any more about money matters ('Beatty Papers', 1.15-16). They certainly spent lavishly, with outgoings on houses bought or rented in London and the country, Ethel's extravagant holidays on the continent, horses, gambling, and eventually a steam yacht, 'Sheelah', which seemed to offer relief from her frenetic restlessness. 
Beatty's appointment to the battlecruiser squadron did arouse some doubts. He was fourteen years younger than his predecessor and without fleet command experience, but he had the backing of Fisher, Churchill, and influential sections of the press. His temperament seemed ideally matched with the unique speed and hitting power of the force designed to locate the German fleet and prevent it from evading the stronger Grand Fleet. 
In the months following his appointment Beatty defined the squadron's role: it should be the essential element in scouting sweeps through enemy waters in a strength that could be countered only by equivalent capital ships, and thus precipitating the desired fleet action. As the contact developed it would directly support the Grand Fleet by defending its scouting forces and then forming the leading division of the whole line of battle. For such complex tasks the battlecruisers' crews had to display specific qualities of leadership, discipline, and fighting spirit. Captains had to be ready to take the initiative and not wait for detailed orders from Beatty when the circumstances of battle limited his knowledge of a rapidly changing situation, as long as they acted in accordance with his central aim, the annihilation of the enemy. He expected his officers to train their crews accordingly. Throughout the war Beatty consciously designed his visits to ships to inspire his men with his own offensive spirit and his confidence in victory. 
At the beginning of war Beatty was confident of the readiness of his command and of the competence of his new commander-in-chief, Jellicoe, and of the Admiralty's ability to exercise overall control. The first months of hostilities soon made him realize that the navy's aim of early victory through a decisive fleet action would be far more difficult to achieve than he and the nation at large had foreseen. The enemy's realistic decision not to risk such an action, together with his own increasing awareness of the inhibition cast by mines and torpedoes on freedom of strategic and tactical mobility, along with the vagaries of weather and visibility in the North Sea, combined to obstruct the fleet's hopes. The Admiralty soon found it difficult to assess enemy intentions correctly and to convey clear information to the fleet, with a consequent growth of distrust among the sea commanders. Beatty faced the prospect of a future characterized by fruitless searches for an elusive enemy, each one followed by a return to base, the exhausting labour of coaling, and a wait for the next alarm, all leading to an increase in frustration throughout the squadron. 
The action in the Heligoland Bight on 28 August 1914 was a positive relief. It established Beatty's force's readiness for combat and his own capacity to take responsibility in risking offensive action. His sweep into enemy waters in support of light forces resulted in the destruction of three enemy light cruisers and one destroyer; this was set against one British light cruiser seriously damaged and correspondingly fewer human casualties. Beatty's decision to withdraw his whole force without encountering enemy capital ships demonstrated his grasp of strategic priorities. But investigations after the event revealed omens for the future, prominent among them a weakness in reporting enemy movements, and inaccurate gunnery owing to the battlecruisers' speed and frequent changes of course. The most significant result of the battle was Beatty's disgust at the Admiralty's failure to co-ordinate the elements it had added to his command. This loss of trust in the Admiralty's competence was reinforced by the defeat of Admiral Christopher Craddock at Coronel, and, directly related to Beatty's own responsibilities, the enemy battlecruisers' success in evading interception after mining and bombardment raids on England's north-east coast in November and December 1914. The latter provided opportunity for fleet action, as the high seas fleet sailed in support of the battlecruisers. The Admiralty's intelligence organization directed the battlecruisers' movements, and Beatty -- supported by a battleship squadron -- was directed towards a good position for interception. But the sailing of the enemy battle fleet was not detected, and Jellicoe did not realize the urgency of approaching the combat area. Beatty's force never engaged his rival Franz von Hipper, largely because of repeated failures in reporting by his scouting cruisers -- a situation made worse by Beatty and his signals staff, who caused the cruisers to lose contact with the enemy in the appalling weather which dominated the whole action. In turn, the German fleet commander, von Ingenohl, missed the opportunity to destroy Beatty's battlecruisers with his overwhelming force. On learning of the desultory encounter with light cruisers he decided that the Grand Fleet was approaching and returned to base. 
After the failure to intercept the raid of December 1914 the Admiralty reshaped the Grand Fleet's organization and command structure. The battlecruiser base was moved from Cromarty to Rosyth. Jellicoe remained in overall fleet command, but on the first report of German fleet activity the Admiralty would take control of Beatty's squadron and the submarine, cruiser, and destroyer forces at Harwich and order them to an appropriate rendezvous. Once Jellicoe was at sea and in communication, he would assume operational control of the whole fleet. The battlecruisers were at sea on Christmas day 1914 in support of a seaplane raid against Cuxhaven and again on 18-19 January 1915 in support of a sweep by Commodore Tyrwhitt's Harwich force. No battlecruiser contacts were made, and the German commander-in-chief became confident that further sweeps could be repulsed by battlecruisers without support from the high seas fleet. The Admiralty, warned by the activity of Hipper's battlecruisers on 23 January, planned to cut them off from their base. Beatty was ordered to rendezvous with Tyrwhitt 30 miles off Dogger Bank. A battleship squadron and an armoured cruiser were ordered to positions 40 miles north-west to prevent any German breakaway, and the Grand Fleet was to move south from Scapa to confront any move by the high seas fleet. This plan succeeded when contact was made at 8 a.m. on 24 January, and Beatty, with superior force, stood between Hipper and his base. 'Lion', 'Tiger', 'Princess Royal', 'New Zealand', and 'Indomitable' should have overwhelmed 'Seydlitz', 'Moltke', 'Derfflinger', and the armoured cruiser 'Blucher'. Hipper turned for home as soon as he identified his enemy's battlecruisers, and Beatty followed in pursuit. 'Blucher' and 'Seydlitz' (the flagship) were both severely damaged, but events then turned against Beatty. His fire distribution orders were misinterpreted; 'Moltke', being free from attack by a British battlecruiser, concentrated its fire on 'Lion', which was hit repeatedly. Her speed was reduced, and at 10.50 a.m. she lost all electrical power, leaving only flag signals for communicating Beatty's orders. 'Princess Royal', 'Tiger', and 'New Zealand' overhauled 'Lion', but their close pursuit was delayed by Beatty's ordering a change of course; he claimed that he had seen an enemy submarine, but the claim was never confirmed. Rear-Admiral Archibald Moore in 'New Zealand', wrongly influenced by an ambiguous signal from Beatty, concentrated his fire to sink the crippled 'Blucher', thus allowing the battlecruisers to escape. When Beatty transferred to 'Princess Royal' and resumed command he decided that it was too late to steam further into German waters and at 12.54 p.m. turned for home. 
Modern research has stressed the poor performance of the British battlecruisers' gunnery; aside from the original shooting against 'Blucher', they achieved only six hits but received twenty in return. The bad shooting was due to smoke and the absence of effective director control (or range-finding apparatus) from all but 'Tiger', whose equipment failed during the action. Beatty's signalling difficulties ultimately led him to have the traditional signal 'engage the enemy more closely' reintroduced, and although he reluctantly admitted that the incompetence of his flag lieutenant had been partly responsible for his communication failures, he did not replace him. 
The failure to crush his enemy counterparts was Beatty's responsibility. The Admiralty's plan was sound, the weather was neutral, and it was inevitable that after the event his inquiries and actions should be thorough. His most important practical conclusion was that the most favourable range for future engagements was 12,000-14,000 yards. Hitting could be effective at this distance; and it would be outside the reach of enemy secondary armament and surface-launched torpedoes. He was satisfied by the battlecruisers' ability to maintain their top speed, their chief defence against enemy attack, especially as their armour protection was inadequate against German armour-piercing shells. In any future battle, main and secondary armament firing should be as heavy as possible, and supplemented by cruiser and destroyer gunnery and torpedo attacks in a concentrated offensive, which itself was the best form of defence. 
Beatty placed the responsibility for failure mainly on Rear-Admiral Archibald Moore, commanding the 2nd battlecruiser squadron in 'New Zealand', for not showing attacking initiative when his superior had to give up command, and on Captain Henry Pelly of 'Tiger' for concentrating his fire on 'Blucher' instead of 'Moltke'. Both had failed to grasp that the objective was 'the complete destruction of the enemy... My signals and Standing Orders are intended for guidance as I have often stated, and not for rigid obedience if they tend to hinder the destruction of the enemy' ('Beatty Papers', 1.247). 
In a revision of his standing orders on 18 February 1915 Beatty developed his thought on the battlecruisers' role when working in close support of the battle fleet. They should avoid obstructing the vision or manoeuvring freedom of the heavier ships, and 'they should not come within range of enemy 'Dreadnoughts' until our own Battle Fleet is engaged' ('Beatty Papers', 1.254). They should then open fire immediately. 
After Dogger Bank, Beatty's frustration increased with his inability to achieve a fleet action and with the navy's failure to find a solution to the enemy's submarine campaign. Moreover his relations with Jellicoe became increasingly delicate, although he continued to hold him in genuine respect and agreed with him on major strategic issues, particularly in thinking that the Grand Fleet's prime task was the negation of its German rival and that no risks must be taken with its precarious superiority. Beatty particularly feared the enemy's increasing strength in torpedo craft, submarines, and the unique reconnaissance capability of Zeppelins; he thought that Jellicoe was not strong enough in his complaints to the Admiralty on these and other shortcomings. He admitted that the whole naval situation left him strained in temper and prone to minor ailments. 
The Dogger Bank failure did not break Churchill's or Fisher's confidence in Beatty. In February 1915 Beatty's command was retitled the Battle-Cruiser Fleet and divided into three squadrons, each of three battlecruisers, with 'Lion' as fleet flagship in addition. They were to be supported by three light cruiser squadrons, totalling thirteen ships and sixteen modern destroyers, all based at Rosyth. Beatty still agreed with Jellicoe that Scapa was the safer base for the Grand Fleet. What he did press for was greater community of thought with the Admiralty and for opportunities for discussion. His meeting with Jellicoe on 3 February 1916 was the first for five months, and he followed it up with increasing pressures on his commander-in-chief by passing on to him recommendations by two of his squadron commanders, Osmond de Brock and William Pakenham, that the Battle-Cruiser Fleet should be strengthened to balance the new more powerful vessels that were about to join the enemy fleet. 
Beatty embodied these views in his own submission to the Admiralty, suggesting that the appropriate answer was to add the fast 5th battleship squadron to his force at Rosyth. Jellicoe argued that the battleships lacked the speed that Beatty claimed, but perhaps his main fear was that Beatty, so strengthened, would be tempted to fight a prolonged action with the high seas fleet rather than concentrate on his primary duty to lead it towards the superior Grand Fleet. This suspicion was probably unjustified, but it reflected the growing gulf between the two men and Jellicoe's resentment at his subordinate's direct correspondence with the Admiralty. 
Alongside his professional burdens, Beatty's marriage brought additional strains. Ethel had persuaded the Admiralty to take up her yacht 'Sheelah' as a hospital ship. Her genuine interest in the ship gave her grounds to rent Aberdour House, which was near enough to Rosyth for her husband to pay brief visits when the naval situation permitted. These were marked by mutual lack of sympathy and understanding. 
Beatty's command on 31 May 1916 included six battlecruisers, with 'Lion' as flagship; the 5th battle squadron of four fast ships under Rear-Admiral Hugh Evan-Thomas in 'Barham'; twelve light cruisers; twenty-seven destroyers, plus three light cruisers as flotilla leaders; and the seaplane carrier 'Engadine'. The battleships were there as a temporary replacement for three 'Invincible' class battlecruisers detached to Scapa Flow for gunnery practice. 
The battle of Jutland originated in a plan by the new German fleet commander, Rheinhard Scheer, to cut off Beatty's force without engaging the Grand Fleet. The Admiralty were alerted by enemy radio activity on 30 May and ordered Jellicoe and Beatty to sea. The benefits of this early warning were reduced by a lack of co-operation between the uniformed naval staff and the largely 'amateur' analysts of Room 40 in naval intelligence. Jellicoe was given an overestimate of German battleship strength and, more importantly, was told that it was still in port after it had sailed. This resulted in his moving south slowly and in Beatty's being unaware, when he intercepted the enemy, that he was soon to face not only the five battlecruisers but also the main German battle fleet. His confidence in the naval staff was permanently undermined. 
When Beatty's battlecruisers opened fire at 3.48 p.m. on 31 May he failed to co-ordinate his attack with Evan-Thomas's battleships, which did not engage until twenty minutes later. He was totally unaware of the presence of the high seas fleet, but soon realized the destructive power of the German battlecruisers' gunnery; 'Lion' was hit on her midship's turret. Worse was to come when 'Indefatigable' and 'Queen Mary' exploded before his eyes, with the loss of 1283 officers and men. This was the occasion of Beatty's often quoted remark to Chatfield, 'There seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today' (Roskill, 160). His battleships were now in effective action; he ordered a destroyer attack against what he saw as a fleeing enemy, and seemed on the point of achieving his decisive victory despite his heavy losses. But the arrival of the high seas fleet reversed the situation, and he turned to lead the enemy into the jaws of Jellicoe's Grand Fleet, which unknown to the Germans was approaching the battle area. Beatty was later criticized for the inadequacy of his reporting of the situation, which caused Jellicoe to signal to him twice, 'Where is the enemy's Battle Fleet?' (ibid., 169), and for having to make his fundamental decision on deploying his own fleet to block the enemy retreat to its home ports without knowing its exact location and course. At 6.07 p.m. Beatty took up his allotted position ahead of the Grand Fleet. From then on he had to conform to the fleet's movements. But at 7.47 p.m., apprehensive that Jellicoe's pursuit was lagging, he signalled to him, 'Submit that van of battleships follows battle-cruisers. We can then cut off the whole of the enemy's battle fleet' (ibid., 177). Surprisingly, in view of his distaste for any independent movement by divisions of his fleet, Jellicoe agreed. However, Vice-Admiral Sir Martyn Jerram, commanding the leading division, claimed that he was unable to gain close contact with the battlecruisers, much to Beatty's suspicion and anger. This was an opportunity missed. Beatty did sight and engage the already seriously damaged 'Seydlitz' and 'Derfflinger' and a squadron of old battleships which, with Jerram's support, could well have been overcome. Beatty played no distinctive part in the confused night action, which ended in Sheer's escape. On 2 June he returned to Rosyth to join the gloom and controversy that followed. 
Beatty's early correspondence with Jellicoe was free from rancour and full of sorrow for the heavy losses of ships and men, as well as frustration at the enemy's escape. He did share, however, in the fleet's general anger with the Admiralty's unduly alarmist releases to the press. He also reacted angrily at an Admiralty meeting with Jellicoe when the first sea lord, Sir Henry Jackson, criticized his failure to keep the 5th battle squadron in line with Jellicoe at the opening of the action. Beatty responded that if his earlier request for the battleships to be put under his command had been approved, Rear-Admiral Evan-Thomas and his ships would have absorbed the battlecruisers' combat procedures, and the delay in coming into action would never have occurred. This was a warning of future disputes, as was his wife's contribution to London gossip on Jellicoe's conduct of the battle. Despite its losses, the Grand Fleet was ready for action almost immediately, in numbers superior to those of a high seas fleet so seriously damaged in the battle that it never sought fleet action until October 1918 when, in desperation at Germany's plunge into defeat, the high command ordered it to do so and its crews mutinied. 
When Jellicoe was appointed first sea lord in November 1916 to revitalize the anti-submarine campaign, there was no realistic alternative to Beatty to succeed to the command of the Grand Fleet. He hoisted his flag on board 'Iron duke' on 28 November, having been promoted acting admiral on the previous day. Some doubted his ability to handle and administer so huge a force; it had twenty-four battleships, three battlecruisers, nineteen cruisers, and fifty destroyers under direct command at Scapa Flow, in addition to the battlecruiser force at Rosyth now under his friend William Pakenham. The Grand Fleet itself comprised some 35,000 officers and men afloat, including three vice-admirals and six rear-admirals. 
Beatty had prepared himself for this gigantic responsibility under the shadow of Jutland, determined that the failures of that day should not be repeated. The technical problems he left to his senior subordinates and his personal staff, but for tactical and strategic doctrine and above all for leadership he drew on his own resources. First was his confidence that victory could be gained, and second was his ability to convey this confidence to his subordinates, from flag officers to stokers. He cultivated decisiveness of speech, eccentricities of uniform, and as much personal contact as possible. 'The first thing that strikes you about him are his penetrating eyes. He has a phenomenally quick brain and he can take in all he wants to know in one glance... and decisions are given without a moment's hesitation' (Roskill, 148). 
Beatty's experience since 1914 had increased his awareness of the uncertainties of sea warfare and hardened his insistence that decisive victory could come only from commitment to the offensive and to personal initiative at all levels of command. His display of self-confidence won over the most critical of his senior subordinates, sustained the loyalty of his personal staff, and maintained the fighting spirit of his men throughout the years of frustration that lay ahead. Hence his Nelsonic reputation. His grasp of strategic realities and the need to avoid unnecessary risks has been less clearly appreciated. Despite his hopes for a second Jutland, he accepted that a superior Grand Fleet, vigilant and informed by an efficient Admiralty intelligence system, would provide the essential basis of both a devastating economic blockade and the eventual defeat of the enemy's submarine campaign. He would not agree to any weakening of the fleet to deal with the unlikely danger of invasion. Sufficient deterrence could be provided by the light and submarine forces at Harwich, supported by a squadron of older battleships in the Thames estuary. Connected with this was his conviction, shared with the Admiralty and Jellicoe, of the dangers of any section of the fleet being deployed for battle in the southern North Sea; there German strength in submarines and mines and her Zeppelin reconnaissance might enable her to weaken his force so that it could no longer discharge its fundamental strategic roles. 
Although his analysis of grand strategy was realistic, Beatty's hopes always focused on the achievements of the decisive battle which would compensate for the shortcoming of Jutland. His 'Grand fleet battle instructions', promulgated in 1916-18 ('Beatty Papers', 1.456-506), replaced Jellicoe's 'Battle orders' and embodied his basic demands on his subordinates. They should always concentrate on annihilating the enemy without waiting for detailed orders. To achieve this they should attack with every available means: guns, underwater weapons, and aircraft. The last were to be used both in reconnaissance and in attack with bombs, torpedoes, and machine-guns. A retreating enemy must be hotly pursued by day and night. To avoid torpedo attack, ships should turn towards the enemy rather than away (as had happened at Jutland). The spirit of these instructions was instilled in all ranks by training and exercises. Beatty produced a visible demonstration of this commitment when in February 1917 he transferred his flag from 'Iron duke' to 'Queen Elizabeth', which had a design speed of 25 instead of 21 knots. Even more significant were the removal of the Grand Fleet's base from Scapa Flow to the Firth of Forth in July 1917 and Beatty's pressure on the Admiralty to authorize aircraft-carrier strikes on the enemy fleet in harbour. 
Events showed that even an imaginative combat doctrine and greater fighting resources could not overcome the uncertainties of sea warfare or individual failures of judgement. In October and December 1917 two lightly defended Scandinavian merchant convoys sustained heavy losses, and on 17 November an unsuccessful sweep by Pakenham's battlecruisers had missed an opportunity to inflict heavy losses. 
The likelihood of Beatty's second Jutland receded, and 23 April 1918 was the last time on which he took his entire fleet to sea. In the following months the morale of the high seas fleet, already shaken by protests against poor conditions and harsh repression in August 1917, was hastened by signs of the breakdown of the imperial government and general social discontent caused by the economic blockade. Although Hipper, now commander-in-chief, repeated his readiness to seek action, his ability to do so declined, and with it Beatty's opportunity for battle. 
This drawn-out disappointment at failure to secure his objective added to Beatty's exasperation with what he saw as the Admiralty's failure to counter the dangers to the alliance's war effort from the submarine campaign against merchant shipping. Although long aware of the threat of submerged weapons, he had never expected the type of unrestricted operations implemented by Germany in 1917. He never fully appreciated the technical and scientific difficulties of submarine detection and destruction, and denounced the Admiralty for not organizing offensive hunting operations. He was prevented from extreme denunciation of the lack of success only by the apprehension that he might be ordered to the Admiralty to give this leadership himself. He afterwards claimed to be an early advocate of the convoy system, which proved to be a solution to the problems, but he supported it only after deciding that all else had failed. And later he actually released some of his Grand Fleet destroyers for merchant convoy duties. 
Perhaps Beatty's most important contribution was to use a meeting with Lloyd George to tackle the Admiralty on its opposition to convoy. In addition, however, he used his position as the allies' leading naval commander to intervene in political and diplomatic issues. He approached these with supreme self-confidence in correspondence and personal interviews with ministers, other influential politicians, and the king. 
After the United States entered the war in April 1917 she put six battleships under Rear-Admiral Hugh Rodman at Beatty's disposal. A close professional accord developed between the two, and Beatty was soon reporting that the new ally was enthusiastically accepting his tactical doctrine and command style. But he never allowed himself to be overawed by America's wealth and power. He remained sceptical of her great technical contribution, the North Sea mine barrage. He also persuaded the minister for blockade, Robert Cecil, to modify his strong pressures on Norway, which he thought incompatible with the allies' claim to fight for the freedom of small nations. 
Beatty's most significant political impact was made on the armistice of 1918. He insisted that the German fleet should surrender unconditionally to the Royal Navy, while the entire U-boat force should also be handed over. He personally staged the arrival in the Firth of Forth of the German fleet on 21 November so that they moved as prisoners between the lines of the Grand Fleet to receive his unauthorized signal: 'The German flag will be hauled down at sunset today, Thursday, and will not be hoisted again without permission' (Roskill, 279). The symbolism of the surrender was completed on 24 November when the enemy ships moved out of the Firth of Forth to be interned at Scapa Flow, escorted by the 1st battlecruiser squadron, his former command. 
Two of Beatty's political objectives were not achieved. First, despite his arguments before the war cabinet, his case for depriving Germany of Heligoland was not pursued. Second, his claim that in the final peace terms the bulk of Germany's most modern capital ships should be allotted to Britain, rather than to her allies, foundered on 21 June 1919 when the ships were scuttled by their crews at Scapa Flow. By then Beatty, having been promoted admiral of the fleet (the youngest ever) on 3 April, had hauled down his flag on 7 April, avoiding responsibility for this ironic achievement of his victory over the high seas fleet. 
The period from the immediate aftermath of Jutland to the end of the war was the most testing time of Beatty's career. It also coincided with occasional meetings with his wife that were full of mutual misunderstanding. However, he wrote to her almost daily: sometimes apologizing for his fits of bad temper; more often taking her into his confidence over his professional difficulties and his uninhibited criticisms of his naval and political colleagues. He was to find consolation in his increasingly close relationship with Eugenie Godfrey-Faussett, the wife of Captain Bryan Godfrey-Faussett, an equerry and friend of George V. She was a beautiful woman well known in London society for her wit and gaiety. Beatty at first reacted cautiously to her letters of admiration for the hero of Jutland, but soon responded with increasing warmth. Public scandal had to be avoided, but they probably became lovers during his visit to London in April 1917 and met again during her visits to Scotland. When he became first sea lord more opportunities arose, but the need to maintain secrecy and Beatty's continuing loyalty to Ethel, as her mental instability became more apparent, meant that the relationship with Eugenie was never free from strain. 
Beatty's failure to invite Fisher and Jellicoe to witness the German surrender was typical of the arrogance that characterized the end of his sea service and delayed his appointment as first sea lord until September 1919. He took his succession for granted, argued that his views on future policy were being ignored, and proposed a change in his title, substituting 'commander of his majesty's fleet' for 'chief of the naval staff'. He also quarrelled with the current first sea lord, Sir Rosslyn Wemyss, who had always treated him with consideration. The Northcliffe press strongly argued for Beatty's immediate appointment. In contrast, Churchill, now secretary for war and air in Lloyd George's coalition government, warned that it was necessary to wait for the present Admiralty board to accept deep cuts in naval expenditure before Beatty arrived to provide effective opposition. When the position was formally offered, Beatty accepted it on the traditional terms and soon enjoyed excellent relations with the first lord, Walter Long, who had been exasperated by his previous cantankerous attitude. 
As professional head of the navy, Beatty considered that his primary duty was to ensure that Britain maintained the predominance at sea essential to her security, imperial power, and maritime trade. This depended on his ability to secure adequate funding from governments under strong pressures for economic and social reform and conscious of a widespread public abhorrence of preparations for war after the horrors and waste of 1914-18. This entailed working closely with politicians of all parties, fostering support from the press and organizations influential with public opinion. His impact on policy depended on the ability of his political superior, the first lord, to overcome the opposition of the Treasury, headed by the chancellor of the exchequer. Four of the five first lords under whom he served, Walter Long (who suffered from chronic ill health), Leopold Amery, Viscount Chelmsford, and William Bridgeman, respected his professional judgement and his genuine attempts to increase efficiency. They were equally impressed by his powers of argument in presenting the naval case in committee, relying on him to lead in all meetings except those of the cabinet. Occasionally the smooth relationship worked in reverse. During the struggle by the Admiralty in 1922-3 to regain control of naval aviation, Amery supported Beatty's arguments in cabinet, but persuaded him not to lead a resignation of all the naval members of the Admiralty board when the final decision went against him. 
The one exception to Beatty's successful partnerships with his first lords was his relationship with Lord Lee of Fareham, who led the British delegation to the Washington conference. Beatty appealed to Arthur Balfour, the foreign secretary and a former first lord. Balfour agreed with Beatty that the American policy for an immediate 'holiday' for capital ship construction harmed Britain, but accepted his cabinet colleagues' decision that close political agreement with the Americans was the greater priority. 
Beatty also showed considerable skill throughout his long term in office at cultivating political support for his naval policies: notably from Winston Churchill before he became chancellor of the exchequer; from Lord Curzon, foreign secretary; and from Lord Birkenhead, successively lord chancellor and secretary for India. He even found allies in the Labour government of 1924: J. H. Thomas, colonial secretary, Stephen Walsh, war secretary, and the lord chancellor, Haldane. He was pleasantly surprised by the active support given by the politically neutral Viscount Chelmsford, who accepted office as first lord only on the understanding that he would support Beatty's construction programme and the development of the Singapore base. 
Convinced that his major role was to be on the political stage, Beatty ensured that he was freed from detailed administrative labours by a trusted naval staff. These included Osmond de Brock, his former chief of staff, who had been deputy chief of naval staff since August 1919; Chatfield, his flag captain throughout the war, became assistant chief of naval staff in 1920 and controller in 1925. Roger Keyes, a close friend and admirer, succeeded de Brock in 1921, and he himself was succeeded by Frederick Field, whose professionalism Beatty highly respected. Personally close was the fleet paymaster Frank Spickernell, his secretary since his command of the battlecruiser squadron. These men supplied him with the technical information and draft policy papers which he needed to persuade cabinets, imperial conferences, and other influential bodies and occasions. He accepted that America's demand for naval parity could not be denied, but insisted that Britain's dependence on sea use necessitated superiority in cruisers. 
It was inevitable that Beatty's most prominent political opponents were the successive chancellors of the exchequer, who were all equally convinced that drastic reductions in government expenditure were required to redress the vast expenditure and destruction of the war. The preparation of the annual naval estimates and the interdepartmental negotiations, and the ensuing parliamentary debates and final discussion with ministers to reach acceptable compromises, were at the centre of Beatty's attention. 
Even before Beatty's arrival at the Admiralty, the board had warned the government that without immediately replacing battleships Britain would become the second naval power, with the battle cruiser 'Hood' the only unit equal to the USA's capital ships after 1914. By 1920 the government was demanding a reduction of the 1920/21 naval estimates from $75 to $60 million, and set up a cabinet committee in December under Bonar Law, the leading Conservative in Lloyd George's coalition. Owing to Long's ill health, Beatty acted as a full member of the committee. This enabled him not only to present the Admiralty's case but also to select witnesses and cross-examine those hostile to his arguments. These included some senior officers, Herbert Richmond among them, who alleged that the advent of submarine and air weapons could threaten the supremacy of the battleship. The committee agreed that their case had not been established, but split on the need for immediate construction. Beatty correctly stressed that the expertise of the British battleship-building industry would be dissipated, and this proved a major impediment to naval rearmament in the 1930s. Further deliberations were superseded by the Washington conference of 1921, and it was within its limitation of numbers and size of capital ships that the Royal Navy had to develop for the remainder of Beatty's term of office. 
Feeling that he could play no decisive part in the closing stages at Washington, Beatty had no hesitation in returning to London to counter a more serious threat to the navy's future. This was the 'Geddes Axe': 'The Interim Report on National Expenditure' (1922), which recommended cuts in all elements of public expenditure. The naval estimates of 1922/3 were to be reduced from $81 million to $60 million, involving cuts in the numbers of officers and men. In his determination to limit the damage, Beatty received strong support from Churchill and Lord Birkenhead. The former was favourably impressed by the economies Beatty had already made, but the heavy reductions still remained, causing anger and bitterness in the service. The final result was a compromise, with estimates of just under $65 million being presented to parliament. The breakup of the coalition government and the Conservative administrations from October 1922 to January 1924 brought no respite. Disagreement over the estimates for 1924/5 was particularly fierce. Beatty decided to introduce a long-term building programme for cruisers, destroyers, aircraft-carriers, and submarines, estimated to cost $32.5 million over five years. This was opposed by Neville Chamberlain, the chancellor, but Leopold Amery, as first lord, secured estimates of $62 million, enabling the cruiser programme to begin. However, the fall of Baldwin and the succession of Ramsay MacDonald with a Labour minority government in January 1924 presented Beatty with an ideologically hostile cabinet, while Chancellor Philip Snowden was a particularly strong advocate of national economy. Beatty confronted them with a building programme of $260 million over nineteen years which would give Britain a 25 per cent superiority over Japan in cruisers and destroyers, as well as providing eighty submarines and four aircraft-carriers. A cabinet committee under J. R. Clynes (lord privy seal) considered Snowden's rejection of the expenditure involved. Beatty's performance in committee was highly impressive, and he gained parliamentary approval for his cruiser construction programme. 
With the succession of Baldwin's second administration (December 1924-June 1929) Beatty might well have expected a more peaceful existence, but Winston Churchill, having rejoined the Conservatives, was determined to show himself a strong defender of the national purse against the spending departments. He used all his knowledge of the Admiralty's workings in the prolonged discussions of the 1925/6 estimates. He gradually shifted his attacks away from technical and financial matters to challenge Beatty's anticipation of Japan's likely hostility and naval capabilities over the next ten years. He proposed estimates of $60.5 million in reply to Beatty's proposed amounts, $65 million plus an additional sum for construction. A cabinet committee, this time under Lord Birkenhead, approved a programme of $58 million but extended it over seven years rather than the five favoured by Beatty. 
Equally prominent in the continuous struggle for financial resources was Beatty's view of how to maintain Britain's position in the post-war world. He accepted that war with America was inconceivable. In Europe, after the defeat of Germany and the immersion of Russia in post-revolutionary chaos, a major war was improbable. The Far East was much more threatening. Japan was tending towards militaristic expansionism, and the likelihood that China would disintegrate, added to the spread of anti-colonialism throughout the area, would threaten the white dominions and India as well as Britain's vast commercial interests. America was unlikely to give active support, and the only possible defence should be provided by the presence of a British fleet to match Japan's naval potential. Such a fleet would require a base at Singapore to supply and maintain a force sent from European waters. This added greatly to the expense, and Beatty sought to persuade the overseas possessions to contribute to their own defence by joining an imperial navy under the Admiralty's strategic direction. This last requirement aroused strong suspicion from the increasingly independent dominions. 
In 1917 Beatty had welcomed the new Air Ministry and Royal Air Force as institutions likely to produce more effective maritime air power than the contemporary Admiralty could. He was therefore willing to accept the proposal of the first chief of the air staff, Sir Hugh Trenchard, that the army and navy should refrain from controversy until the RAF had completed its organization. His own commitment to air power was fully illustrated during his command of the Grand Fleet and was shared by his predecessor as first sea lord, Rosslyn Wemyss. As soon as he entered the Admiralty, however, he decided that the existing arrangements with the Air Ministry were unsatisfactory and must be ended. Maurice Hankey, secretary of the committee of imperial defence, advised that this inter-service dispute demanded a high-level inquiry. This was established in 1923 under Balfour. Beatty skilfully narrowed his presentation to the committee to the demand that the navy should have its own small air arm, in the interests of both efficiency and economy. The existing arrangements produced a shortage of naval officers among aircrew, which would increase as more aircraft-carriers appeared. He argued that a sea commander must have confidence in air officers, whom he had himself trained, manning the planes, which were as much a part of the fleet as the guns of the ships. Despite the force of his advocacy, Beatty failed to convince the committee, who suspected that his ultimate aim was to weaken the Air Ministry. However, discussion in 1924 between Trenchard and Keyes, as deputy chief of naval staff, under the guidance of Haldane, decided that all future observers and ratings on the new carriers should be navally entered and trained. It was not until 1937 that full Admiralty control was established. The validity of Beatty's aim was demonstrated during the Second World War, when the Japanese and American navies, which had retained their own air forces, made such decisive use of air power in the war at sea. 
As the construction of the Singapore base proceeded, the question of its defence raised a new dispute between the navy and the air force. Beatty's argument was that the base must be available by 1931, when navies would be free from the Washington limitations. He was sure that Japan would take advantage of this, and that only the completion and security of the naval base could provide a deterrent or actual defence. By 1924 the Admiralty planned to send a powerful fleet from home waters through the Mediterranean to Singapore. The most likely enemy attack would be by naval gunfire from Japan's fleet. Beatty argued that this should be provided in the time available by the mounting of heavy guns, which would keep Japan's fleet out of bombarding range. When the fleet had arrived and replenished itself and the base depots, it would move out to destroy the Imperial Japanese Navy. However, Trenchard and his supporters maintained that, given the government's belief in the unlikelihood of major war within ten years, the RAF should be equipped with torpedo bombers and fighter escorts capable of winning any naval action. This was 'substitution' in its starkest form, and Beatty fiercely resisted, particularly in the new forum of the chiefs of staff committee inaugurated in 1923. He was appointed chairman and was strongly supported by two successive chiefs of the imperial general staff, Lord Cavan and Sir George Milne, on this and other disputes with Trenchard. 
Despite the continuing dispute over air power, Beatty's conduct of the business of the chiefs of staff committee showed a broadening of his views on inter-service relationships. In 1925 he initiated the chiefs' production of an annual review of defence policy. This was supplemented by increased attention to the quality of joint staff training and the preparation of war plans. He also took the lead in the organization and syllabus of the new imperial defence college, which studied problems forwarded by the chiefs. He was even willing to consider the creation of a Ministry of Defence, provided that the three single service ministers disappeared and the chiefs of staff were made directly responsible only to a secretary of state for defence. 
The post-war analysis of Jutland proved controversial. The technological novelty of the battle, the impact on the guns' effectiveness of frequent changes in visibility, and the difficulties of keeping accurate records all combined to produce widely differing views on what had actually happened. The controversy in Britain was bound to be particularly bitter because her numerically superior fleet, positioned between the enemy and his base, failed to bring about the decisive action expected by the nation and the navy. Was it due to errors in command judgement, gunnery skill, or defective ammunition? The popular press took sides in the disputes which broke out in the service. 
Jellicoe led the way with 'The Grand Fleet' (1919), which tended to under-represent the achievement of the battlecruiser force. Beatty's response was more bitter and prolonged. Year by year he became increasingly convinced that a decisive victory could have been won but for Jellicoe's lack of offensive spirit and willingness to take risks. This was a valid criticism. Less acceptable was the use of his personal authority to draw a contrast in all Admiralty publications between the battlecruisers' success in achieving their mission of leading the enemy into Jellicoe's grasp and the battle fleet's failure to seize the opportunity offered it. He never admitted any failures on his own part. Above all, he never produced a convincing answer to Jellicoe's complaint at his failure to report the enemy's exact position and course; the commander-in-chief needed this to guide his crucial decision on how to deploy the Grand Fleet in such a way as to cut off the enemy from its home ports. On the contrary, he ordered Captain J. E. T. Harper, the principal author of the 'Official Record of the Battle of Jutland', to alter diagrams and text to reinforce his interpretations. Although Harper's work was completed in 1920, it was not published in full until 1927 because of irreconcilable disagreements with Jellicoe and his supporters. Beatty also backed 'The naval staff appreciation of Jutland', written by Commander A. C. Dewar and Captain K. G. B. Dewar as a confidential book; completed in 1922, it was never authorized for issue in full because of its partisan interpretations and criticism of Jellicoe. It was never officially issued, and Beatty's immediate successor, Charles Madden, ordered it to be destroyed in an attempt to end the harmful effects of the dispute. Beatty's copy survives in his papers in the National Maritime Museum. The material was sent to Sir Julian Corbett, author of 'The History of the Great War: Naval Operations', but this did not protect him from the Admiralty's insertion of disclaimers of his judgements in general and from its rejection in volume 3, dealing with Jutland specifically, of his tendency to dilute the operational primacy of the decisive battle. The bitter denunciations between contemporary supporters of Beatty and Jellicoe inevitably died away, but the controversy about what happened at Jutland, and why, retains its inexhaustible fascination for naval historians. 
The 1926 review of defence policy, reiterated in Beatty's address to the imperial conference and supported by Sir George Milne (chief of imperial general staff), pointed to a basic degree of tri-service thinking. Politicians agreed that British interests demanded global military capability, and that this depended on freedom of sea passage, without which any system of imperial defence would collapse. This could be provided only by a fleet built to Washington standards, including battleships and aircraft-carriers, and, because aircraft would be used in the security of sea passage, air developments should be carefully watched. 
At Beatty's death ten years later the international scene had changed for the worse. But Britain's relative weakness was due more to lack of political will and inadequate provision for defence than to naval conservatism. In his farewell letter Hankey described him as the only first sea lord of the twentieth century 'who could really talk on even terms to the highest cabinet ministers, and stand up to them in argument. Fisher is an exception, but Fisher was a crank, and even he didn't really state a case clearly... you have tremendous achievements to your name but your successful piloting of the COS Committee through its early days... will be one of your great contributions to the Empire's welfare. ('Beatty Papers', 2.349)' 

Retiring in his fifty-seventh year, Beatty could well have expected many years with adequate time and money for the country pursuits which meant so much to him. He could also look back with satisfaction on the outstanding marks of distinction awarded to him in 1919: the earldom, with its well-chosen courtesy title, baron of the North Sea, the parliamentary grant of $100,000, and the Order of Merit. Wider recognition had come from the universities, with their honorary doctorates, and from the acclamation of the press. Similar recognition was given to other war leaders, including Jellicoe, but none shared Beatty's popularity on the lower deck. 
On his retirement on 29 July 1927 Beatty was sworn of the privy council, which facilitated his continuing membership of the committee of imperial defence, and in the following years he used his membership of the House of Lords to speak on naval matters. He spoke from the cross-benches to mark his freedom from party allegiance, and his major speeches were praised for their conciseness and clarity. He was rightly famous for his bravery and spirit; his capacity for mature thought and judgement should equally be recognized. 
Despite these official opportunities to further the navy's interests, extended as they were by supporting many voluntary organizations such as the Navy League, there were clouds over the future. Beatty's personal bitterness about Jutland, and the continuing dispute between his and Jellicoe's more extreme partisans, did no credit to the service. The flames of controversy were fanned among his supporters by political memoirs such as Churchill's 'The World Crisis' (1923-31) and Lloyd George's 'War Memoirs' (1933-6). 
At a personal level, Beatty's peace of mind was constantly disturbed by his wife's mental instability. From 1919 she resumed the continental excursions which had relieved her chronic restlessness, now more significantly seeking a 'cure'. Once back in Britain she became increasingly subject to varying periods of eccentric behaviour and depression. Despite her frequent charges of lack of sympathy, her husband was remarkably tolerant for one who had long admitted to a bad temper. He refused to seek separation or divorce, and persuaded his close friends, including Eugenie, to give her companionship and diversion, and himself gave her constant support in the deepening melancholia in which she died at home on 17 July 1932. 
By this time Beatty's own physical weakness was becoming apparent. A motoring accident in 1922 had fractured his breastbone, and this led to recurrent problems. In the 1930s a series of riding accidents resulted in a broken arm and a shattered jaw, which required immobility for three months. Recovery was followed by a further fall, resulting in more broken ribs. By 1935 this catalogue of accidents resulted in breathing difficulties and heart strain. He was the last man to accept medical advice for complete rest when it conflicted with his sense of duty. He insisted on acting as a pallbearer at Jellicoe's funeral in November 1935 and on attending George V's funeral in January 1936. After this he did rest, but it was too late, and he died of heart failure at his London home, 17 Grosvenor Square, on 12 March 1936. At his own funeral procession four days later his coffin was draped with the union flag, which he had so proudly flown as admiral of the fleet on 'Queen Elizabeth' in April 1919. He was buried on 16 March in the crypt of St Paul's, close to Nelson and to Jellicoe. On 5 May 1936 Baldwin's motion for a memorial was carried in the Commons. However, it was not until 21 October 1948 that memorial busts to Jellicoe and himself were unveiled in Trafalgar Square. 
Although best known as the gallant battlecruiser commander of 1914-16, Beatty proved himself as a highly effective fleet commander-in-chief, first sea lord, and chief of defence staff. The ability to meet new challenges demanded deep professional commitment and mental toughness, and he demonstrated possession of these qualities heroically throughout an exceptionally long career of high responsibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 30662


Beatty, Sir Edward Wentworth (1877-1943), railway entrepreneur in Canada, was born at Thorold, Ontario, on 16 October 1877, the third son and fourth child of Henry Beatty, shipowner, and his wife, Harriett M. Powell. He was educated at Upper Canada College and at the Harbord Collegiate and Parkdale Collegiate Institute (now the University of Toronto). 
After studying at Osgoode Hall law school, Beatty was called to the bar of Ontario in 1901, when he joined the legal department of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR), almost twenty years after his father had sold his Great Lakes shipping company to the railway, and where he remained as general shipping manager afterwards. Beatty moved rapidly through the ranks becoming general counsel for the railway in 1913, vice-president in 1914, and a director in 1916. Two years later the outgoing CPR president, Sir Thomas Shaughnessy, chose Beatty as his successor in preference to older and more experienced officials. Beatty's youth, as well as his lack of practical railway experience, made this one of the most controversial decisions of the day, and throughout the inter-war years the CPR's profitability fell in the face of vigorous competition from the newly nationalized Canadian National Railway (CNR) and the emerging highway trucking systems. Beatty was blamed by many for CPR's problems, and he was little helped by unsympathetic comparisons to his chief rival, Henry Thornton, the charismatic and outgoing president of the CNR. 
Beatty always resented what he viewed as wasteful and unfair competition from the state-backed CNR. He laboured to end it through a merger of the two systems, free from direct state control, and it was a bitter blow to him when a royal commission permanently blocked his attempt at a Canadian railway monopoly in 1932. On the more positive side, Beatty tried to improve CPR's profitability by cutting railway expenses, expanding its more remunerative shipping operations, and moving into passenger airline services. The CPR was in fact beginning to recover when Beatty suffered a massive stroke in 1941, forcing him to retire from the presidency a year later. 
A life-long bachelor, Beatty volunteered much of his time, abilities, and money to various causes. He served as chancellor of Queen's University (1919-23). As chancellor of McGill University (1921-43), he did not hesitate to use his position to remove prominent leftist academics from the faculty as part of his ongoing battle against socialism and state ownership. He was also chairman of the Rhodes scholarship committee for the province of Quebec, trustee and president of the Royal Victoria Hospital in Montreal, president of the Boy Scout Association of Canada, and president and chief financial mainstay of the Boys' Farm and Training School at Shawbridge, Quebec. In 1935 he was appointed GBE and made an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple. He became a Dominion KC in 1915 and received honorary degrees from twelve universities. 
Beatty died at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Montreal on 23 March 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 30663


Beaver, Sir Hugh Eyre Campbell (1890-1967), brewer and civil engineer, was born in Johannesburg on 4 May 1890, the eldest of three sons of Hugh Edward Campbell Beaver, landowner of Montgomeryshire, and his wife, Cerise, daughter of John Eyre, who was of Anglo-Irish extraction. Beaver's father died when he was two years old and the family returned to England to settle in Penn Street, Buckinghamshire. In 1904 he won a scholarship to Wellington College, Berkshire. During his final year in 1910 he was head boy and was awarded the king's medal. Beaver tried unsuccessfully for an open scholarship to Oxford, but took first place in the examination for entry to the Indian police. From 1910 to 1922 he served with the Indian police, where he was engaged mainly in administrative and intelligence work. 
Beaver returned to England in 1922, where he met his mother's neighbour, Sir Alexander Gibb, a well-known contractor and engineer then in the process of setting up a new type of consulting engineering practice to cater for the needs of modern factory production. Beaver joined the firm as Gibb's personal assistant, rapidly gaining experience in a wide range of industrial projects. In 1931 he undertook a national survey of Canadian ports and, in addition, the rebuilding in five months of the port of Saint John, New Brunswick, following its destruction by fire. Beaver's report on the Canadian ports was published in 1932 and subsequently implemented. He became company secretary in 1931 and, a year later, a partner of Sir Alexander Gibb & Partners. During the 1930s, two further commissions were of particular note. First, Beaver was responsible for the design and construction of the new Guinness brewery at Park Royal, London, between 1932 and 1936. He impressed the company with his far-sighted decision to acquire additional land for future development and was invited by the managing director, C. J. Newbold, to join the Guinness board. On this occasion the offer was refused. Second, he produced a series of reports for the special areas commission, which provided the basis of the government's relief programme for the distressed areas of the north-east and south Wales. Beaver married in 1925 his second cousin, Jean Atwood, daughter of Major Robert Atwood Beaver MD; they had two daughters before her early death in 1933. 
With the approach of war, Beaver was asked by the government to design and commission three ordnance factories. In 1940 he was appointed director-general of the Ministry of Works, where he remained for the duration of the war. In this key position, Beaver was responsible for the planning and execution of the entire wartime programme of construction, and for the supply of building materials. In 1940 he was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers under an 'eminence clause', and in 1943 was knighted for his services. 
Immediately after the war, Beaver was invited by Lord Iveagh to join Guinness as assistant managing director. He took over as managing director in 1946 after the sudden death of Newbold. His specific task was to modernize the company, and over the next five years he introduced modern management methods and a policy of diversification, inspired more effective research, saw through a notable growth of exports, and encouraged the development of young managers. Beaver remained at Guinness until his retirement in 1960, during this time demonstrating his outstanding ability as an administrator and manager. He was responsible for its major reorganization into two separate trading companies, Guinness Ireland and Guinness UK. He introduced Harp lager into Ireland, and subsequently into Britain: it rapidly became the leading brand of lager. He also initiated the 'Guinness Book of Records'. Beaver took a central role in the brewers' post-war campaign to prevent state purchase of the licensed trade and was prospective chairman of the Brewers' Society in 1959, when ill health forced him to withdraw. He became a vice-president of the society the following year. 
After the war Beaver resumed his public service with his appointment to the new towns committee chaired by Lord Reith, and to Stafford Cripps's working party on the building industry. In 1951 he became chairman of the British Institute of Management and deputy chairman of the Colonial Development Corporation. The following year he was chairman of the committee on power stations and in 1953 chaired the committee on air pollution (known as the Beaver committee), whose recommendations were embodied in the 1956 'Clean Air Act'. In 1954-6 Beaver was also chairman of the advisory council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. He was made a KBE in 1956 for his services to the nation. 
Beaver had an unflagging capacity for work. He was an extremely effective chairman and had a great ability to absorb and understand new problems. This was particularly evident during his presidency of the Federation of British Industries between 1957 and 1959. He conducted with great skill the critical council meetings at which the position of British industry to the treaty of Rome was determined. The same was true of the talks in Paris, Stockholm, and London which preceded the formation of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). He was also chairman of the Industrial Fund for the Advancement of Scientific Education in Schools and of Ashridge College, president of the Institution of Chemical Engineers and of the Royal Statistical Society. In 1956 he joined the council of the Tavistock Institute of Human Relations and served as chairman from 1957 until 1966. A governor of the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, he continued as its honorary treasurer until 1966. He received honorary degrees from Cambridge University, Trinity College, Dublin, and the National University of Ireland. 
Although poor health caused him to retire from full-time work in 1960, Beaver remained a keen amateur archaeologist and a fine shot. He was also able to devote more time to his garden and his picture collection. He continued his public work, however, often in an unofficial capacity. He undertook the treasurership of the University of Sussex and the chairmanship of the British Council for the Rehabilitation of the Disabled. His active role at the Federation of British Industries continued long after his presidency, and in the early 1960s he played a leading part in the formation of the National Economic Development Council. Beaver died at his home, Luxford, Crowborough, Sussex, on 16 January 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 30664


Beazley, Sir John Davidson (1885-1970), classical archaeologist, was born in Glasgow on 13 September 1885, the elder son of Mark John Murray Beazley (died 1940), interior decorator, of London, and his wife, Mary Catherine (died 1918), daughter of John Davidson, of Glasgow. He went to King Edward VI School, Southampton, and as a scholar to Christ's Hospital and to Balliol College, Oxford, where he took firsts in both classical moderations (1905) and 'literae humaniores' (1907), and was Ireland scholar and Craven scholar (1904), Hertford scholar (1905), and Derby scholar in 1907. His entry for the Gaisford prize for Greek prose (1907), 'Herodotus at the Zoo', an enchanting work, was reprinted in 1911 and in a collection of classical parodies produced in Switzerland in 1968. He became a close friend of James Elroy Flecker, who addressed his poem 'Invitation' to Beazley ('a young but learned friend to abandon archaeology for the moment, and play once more with his neglected Muse'). It warned Beazley that his 'broken vases widowed of their wine' might 'brand you pedant while you stand divine'. Beazley himself at this time wrote poetry, but abandoned it with the growth of his total dedication to scholarship. T. E. Lawrence was to comment to Sydney Cockerell, 'If it hadn't been for that accursed Greek art, he'd [sc. Beazley] have been a very fine poet' (Ashmole, 'Beazley', 445). His exact contemporary at Balliol was William Compton, who as sixth marquess of Northampton was later to invite Beazley to publish his collection of Greek vases at Castle Ashby, which appeared in the 'Papers of the British School at Rome' (1929). 
After a year at the British School at Athens, where the director was Richard McGillivray Dawkins, Beazley returned to Oxford and in 1908 he was made student of Christ Church and tutor in classics. This position was held, except for a period of war service as a lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve at Room 40 of naval intelligence at the Admiralty in London, until 1925. In 1919 Beazley married Marie, daughter of Bernard Bloomfield and widow of David Ezra (with whom she had a daughter who married Louis MacNeice). In the early years of their marriage they kept a goose at Christ Church which Marie used to exercise in Tom quad. Marie devoted her powerful personality entirely to serving Beazley and his work. She learned to photograph vases, took over the practical side of his life completely, and was his guardian dragon. Russell Meiggs was to recall about their later home, 'At 100 Holywell a knock at the door was followed by the opening of a shutter. One faced a glittering eye, before entry was allowed; and the door was not always opened' (Meiggs, 10). Beazley could not have done without her, and he adored her, never recovering from her death in 1967. They had no children. 
In 1925 Beazley succeeded Percy Gardner as Lincoln professor of classical archaeology. Gardner himself is thought to have distrusted Beazley's 'scientific' approach to Greek pottery. Long before this, however, although a fine classical scholar and an able and conscientious tutor, he had established his life's work as devoted to Greek art and in particular to Attic vase-painting. Greek vase-painting, by virtue of its quality and in the all but total loss of other painting from Greece, is of peculiar importance in the history of art. Its study is now on an entirely different footing from what it was at the beginning of the twentieth century; and that is Beazley's work. Among Beazley's first students for the study of vase-painting were Joan Evans, stepsister of Sir Arthur Evans, and Gordon Childe. The former was to recall her first tutorial with Beazley: 'an essay in appreciation of a delightful little red-figured unguent pot, with a peroration on the folly of the Englishwoman in not using more make-up' (Evans, 74). 
Beazley's first article, published in the year of his appointment to Christ Church, is on vases, but is untypical, being concerned mainly with iconography and hardly at all with style. He was already beginning, however, the minute stylistic study of individual vases in all the museums he could visit, the first-fruits of which were the seminal articles which appeared from 1910 in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' and elsewhere, on individual painters of Attic red-figure. Essays in this direction had already been made by the great German scholars whom Beazley always revered as his masters, Hartwig, Hauser, and Furtwangler; but their work had two serious limitations. They tended to start from signatures, haphazard in application and still more so in survival; and they only concerned themselves with good work. Beazley never underestimated the master and the masterpiece, but he saw that for the study to be properly based he must survey the whole field. He loved and knew well painting of many times and places, and he took his method from Morelli's studies of the Italian masters: minute observation of individual mannerisms of drawing, controlled by a deep sensitivity to style. The Berlin Painter, to whom he devoted the first of many studies in 1911, is a great draughtsman whose style is now as familiar as Durer's or Utamaro's. Most of the vases first grouped under the name had long been known, but their relation had not been observed and the artistic personality was lost. By recognizing a whole range of such personalities, from the best to the worst, colleagues or rivals, masters and pupils over many generations, Beazley left the subject, which he had found more or less chaotic, an organized field of study comparable to a school of painting in a documented age. 
He began by concentrating on red-figure (and the related white-ground) in the first hundred years or so of its existence, from the later sixth century. Afterwards he pushed forwards to the fourth century and backwards to black-figure. The first phase of his work is summed up in 'Attic Red-Figure Vases in American Museums' (1918), where a history of the art is given through an account of artists and their relations, lists of their works being interspersed in the text. 'Attische Vasemaler des rotfigurigen Stils' (1925) is lists alone, greatly expanded in number and length. He continued to build up these lists throughout his life: in 'Attic Red-Figure Vase-Painters' (1942) and its second (three-volume) edition (1963), the parallel 'Attic Black-Figure Vase-Painters' (1956), and 'Paralipomena' which supplements and corrects these and was posthumously published (1971). These are the backbone of his work; but it is fleshed out in innumerable articles and many books, wide-ranging and beautifully written: 'Greek Vases in Poland' (1928); 'Der Berliner Maler' (1930), 'Der Panmaler' (1931), and 'Der Kleophradesmaler' (1933; the English texts of these three monographs were published in 1974); 'Attic Vase-Paintings in Boston' (with L. D. Caskey, 1931-63); 'Campana Fragments in Florence' (1933; the most spectacular display of Beazley's astounding visual memory, a gift basic to his work); 'Attic White Lekythoi' (1938); 'La Raccolta Guglielmi' (with F. Magi, 1939); 'Potter and Painter in Ancient Athens' (1945); 'The Development of Attic Black-Figure' (1951; lectures given as Sather professor at the University of California, 1949); 'The Berlin Painter' (1964); as well as two Oxford fascicles for the 'Corpus vasorum antiquorum' (1927 and 1931, the second with E. R. Price and Humfry Payne, his best pupil). 'Greek Sculpture and Painting' (with B. Ashmole, 1932) was for many years considered the best short introduction to the subject, and he did important work in other fields: 'The Lewes House Collection of Ancient Gems' (1920) and 'Etruscan Vase-Painting' (1947); but it is his work on Attic vase-painters which is, in the historiography of Greek art, strictly epoch-making. 
Beazley was elected FBA in 1927, knighted in 1949, appointed CH in 1959, and held honorary degrees from Oxford, Cambridge, Glasgow, Durham, Reading, Paris, Lyons, Marburg, and Salonika. He was an honorary fellow of Balliol and Lincoln, and honorary student of Christ Church and the British School at Athens. He was honorary vice-president of the Greek Archaeological Society, honorary fellow of the Metropolitan Museum, New York, and a foreign member of many learned societies. He was awarded the Petrie medal in 1937, the British Academy's Kenyon medal in 1957 (the first award), and the Antonio Feltrinelli Foundation prize in 1965. He retired from his Oxford chair in 1956 and was succeeded by his former pupil Bernard Ashmole. In 1964 the University of Oxford purchased Beazley's collection of photographs, drawings, and notes which now forms the Beazley Archive. After his wife's death in 1967, Beazley moved into the Holywell Hotel, and he died in Oxford on 6 May 1970. 
Beazley was a person of wide culture, interested in and knowledgeable about the arts (and several of the literatures) of Europe, though he did not care to look much beyond those bounds. He had great charm, and could be an amusing and delightful companion; but as he grew older his total deafness and his increasing absorption in his work combined to cut him off to some degree from other people. He was modest, and took immense trouble with the guidance of his pupils, treating them as equals and winning their devoted affection. He was completely generous in communicating his knowledge, not only to these but to all who consulted him, as in increasing numbers scholars, collectors, and dealers constantly did. In appearance he was somewhat under medium height, slight but well made, with striking blue eyes and fair hair (white in age), and fine rather ascetic features which suggested to many a fifteenth-century Flemish portrait, a Van Eyck or a Van der Weyden. He was never professionally painted, but his wife, a talented untaught artist, drew several heads of him in coloured chalks which are preserved in Oxford, at Balliol, Christ Church, and Lincoln. 


@@@@@


doc= 30665


Beckett, Edmund, first Baron Grimthorpe (1816-1905), ecclesiastical controversialist, architect, and horologist, was born at Carlton Hall, near Newark, on 12 May 1816, the eldest son of Sir Edmund Beckett, fourth baronet (1787-1874), later MP for the West Riding, and his wife, Maria (died 27 March 1874), daughter of William Beverley and great-niece and heir of Anne Denison, widow of Sir Thomas Denison. His father had assumed the additional surname of Denison in 1816 but reverted to his original surname on succeeding to the baronetcy in 1872. His brothers included the banker William Beckett ['see under 'Beckett, Rupert Evelyn]. 
Beckett Denison was educated at Doncaster grammar school, Eton College, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1834 and graduated BA in 1838 (MA 1841, LLD 1863). He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1841, became a QC in 1854, a bencher of his inn in the same year, and its treasurer in 1876. On 7 October 1845 he married Fanny Catherine Lonsdale (died 1901), daughter of John Lonsdale, bishop of Lichfield, of whom he wrote a biography (1868). He soon acquired a large practice chiefly in connection with railway bills. Advancing rapidly in his profession, by 1860 he was recognized as the leader of the parliamentary bar, as a result more of his assertive manner than of his knowledge of law. He accumulated a large fortune and ceased to practise regularly after 1880. On his father's death on 24 May 1874, he succeeded to the baronetcy and followed his father's example in discarding the second surname. As Sir Edmund Beckett he was appointed chancellor and vicar-general of the province of York in 1877, an office which he held until 1900. In recognition of his activity in ecclesiastical matters, as well as his architectural and mechanical contributions, Beckett was created a peer by the title of Baron Grimthorpe of Grimthorpe, Yorkshire, on 17 February 1886. 
Beckett had many interests outside the law and was a vigorous and acrimonious controversialist on ecclesiastical, architectural, scientific, and other topics. Among his earliest causes was a measure of relaxation in the law surrounding marriage with a deceased wife's sister. He was a strong advocate of reform in church discipline, giving evidence before the royal commission on ecclesiastical courts of 1883 and drafting a disciplinary bill of his own with racy notes which he sent to the commissioners. He took exception to the revised version of the 'New Testament', publishing in 1882 'Should the Revised New Testament be Authorized?' Alarmed by the spread of ritualism in the Church of England, he became president of the Protestant Churchmen's Alliance, which held its inaugural meeting in Exeter Hall in 1889. Archbishop Benson's judgment in 1890 in the trial of the bishop of Lincoln for ritual offences stirred him to write what Benson called a 'furious letter', entitled 'A review of the Lambeth judgment in 'Read' v. 'Bishop of Lincoln''. On occasions his involvement in ecclesiastical affairs was helpful: his assistance with the 'Church Patronages Bill' of 1893, for example, was welcomed. But at other times he was spiteful and vituperative: he made a startling attack on the archbishop of York in 1895 while opposing in the Lords a divorce bill amending the act by which the clergy were compelled to lend their churches for the remarriage of those guiltily divorced. His standpoint through all his disputes was strongly Erastian and orthodox, as he understood orthodoxy. In 1883, for the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, he published 'A Review of Hume and Huxley on Miracles', which Bishop Harold Browne considered one of the best books in defence of Christianity. 
Architecture, especially on its ecclesiastical side, was another of Beckett's interests, and he published widely on this subject between 1855 and 1876. One of the projects with which he was involved, the rebuilding of St George's Church at Doncaster, led the architect Sir George Gilbert Scott to acknowledge Beckett's generosity but also to remark upon his 'unpleasant way of doing things' (G. G. Scott, 'Personal and Professional Recollections', 1877, 173). Beckett claimed to have 'substantially designed' many buildings, including the church of St James, Doncaster; St Chad's Church, Headingley; Cliffe parish church in the East Riding; St Paul's, Burton upon Trent; the tower top of Worcester Cathedral; Doncaster grammar school; and the extension of Lincoln's Inn Library. His influence is also to be traced in the poorly received restoration of Lincoln's Inn chapel in 1882, but his contemplated demolition of Sir Thomas Lovell's gatehouse in Chancery Lane was happily frustrated. 
Living in a house at Batch Wood, St Albans, Hertfordshire, designed by himself ('the only architect with whom I have never quarrelled'), he was interested in the unsound condition of St Albans Abbey, and the attempts of the St Albans reparation committee to fit it for cathedral and parochial service. He subscribed generously to the funds, contributing, from first to last, some $30,000, and interfered freely with Scott, the architect. 'The leader among those who wish me to do what I ought not to do is Sir Edmund Beckett', Scott wrote in 1877 (G. G. Scott, 'Personal and Professional Recollections', 1877, 357). In 1880 various parts of the building were in danger of falling down, and the committee was $3000 in debt. Beckett obtained permission to restore the church at his own expense. He set to work with characteristic zeal, and by 1885 the nave was finished. But his arbitrary architectural decisions excited fierce criticism, and he entered into arguments with both George Edmund Street, architect, and Henry Hucks Gibbs who had obtained concurrent permission to restore the high altar screen. This conflict of authority came before Sir Francis Jeune, chancellor of the diocese, in 1889, Beckett conducting his own case. Neither side was completely successful. Beckett described his part in the St Albans controversies in 'St Albans Cathedral and its Restoration' (1885), which, though purporting to be a guidebook, is also a somewhat vehement review of the old arguments. 
Through his long life Beckett worked on mechanical inventions and was a keen horologist. In 1850 he published 'A Rudimentary Treatise on Clock and Watchmaking' which passed through eight editions, in the preface to the last of which he claimed to have designed over forty clocks, in churches, cathedrals, railway stations, and town halls, including some in the colonies. He contributed articles on clocks, watches, and bells to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He designed the great clock for the Great Exhibition of 1851, made by Edward John Dent, which was later installed at King's Cross railway station. In the same year he undertook, in conjunction with George Biddell Airy and Dent, the construction of the great clock for the clock tower in the Houses of Parliament, Westminster. The design was Beckett's, as an inscription records, and it included a new gravity escapement designed by him. Beckett also prepared the specifications for the bell commonly called Big Ben, after Sir Benjamin Hall, commissioner of public works. The clock and Big Ben, like most of Beckett's undertakings, involved him in fierce controversies. He antagonized the respected horologist B. L. Vulliamy by ridiculing his design for the clock. Vulliamy was effectively ousted by Beckett from involvement in the project. Airy, too, felt forced to withdraw. And Barry suffered sixteen years of disputes. Beckett was elected president of the Horological Institute in 1868, on condition that he should not attend dinners, and was annually re-elected, though not always without opposition. 
Although a man of arrogance and bile, Beckett was capable of generosity, strong friendships, and kindness towards people in need of help. He was tall and stern looking and remained faithful to early Victorian dress. He died at Batch Wood, St Albans, on 29 April 1905, after a short illness, aggravated by a fall, and was buried by his wife's side in the burial-ground of St Albans Cathedral. His personal estate was valued at $1,562,500, and he left a complicated will with many codicils which was the cause of prolonged litigation. Having no children, he was succeeded in his titles by a nephew, Ernest William Beckett. 


@@@@@


doc= 30666


Beddoe, John (1826-1911), physician and anthropologist, was born in Bewdley, Worcestershire, on 21 September 1826, the son of John Beddoe JP, a merchant, and Emma, daughter of Henry Barrer Child of Bewdley. Educated at Bridgnorth School, he studied medicine at University College, London, graduating in 1851. He then studied at Edinburgh University where he received an MD in 1853 and became house physician at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. In 1846 Beddoe began observations on hair and eye colours in the west of England, and continued these in Orkney (1852). During the Crimean War he was assistant physician at a civil hospital at Renkioi. After completing his medical training at Vienna, Beddoe made an extended continental tour. In 1857 he began practising as a physician at Clifton in Bristol. On 15 September 1858 in Foulden, Berwickshire, he married Agnes Montgomerie ('b'. 1828/9), daughter of the Revd Alexander Christison and his wife, Helen, and niece of Sir Robert Christison. They had one son and one daughter. Beddoe was physician to the Bristol Royal Infirmary (1862-73) and consulting physician to the children's hospital there (1866-1911). 
Beddoe began active research in ethnology during his early travels in Europe scanning bodies 'ready to hand in streets and market places' (Beddoe, 'Races', 2), and became an authority on the physical characteristics of living European races. He was to have an important influence on the development of anthropology in both Britain and continental Europe, leaving an inheritance of great taxonomic subtlety as he strove to compile, county by county, a detailed physical anthropological account of the races of Britain before the railway confused older patterns of distribution. Beddoe devised three categories for eye colour: the first consisted of blue and light grey, the second of dark grey and very light hazel or yellow, the third of brown, hazel, and black. In England he found the 'British Bronze race' (ibid., 270), a 'richly endowed' breed, was preserved in its greatest purity in those with blue eyes and light hair, while the artisan class was 'generally darker' and increasing disproportionately through 'rapid multiplication' (ibid.). His empirical observations were influenced by racialist ideas which emerged through his choice of language, with terms such as 'purity' and 'rapid multiplication' betraying his prejudices and alignments. Beddoe's observations on colour and race hierarchy had already been endorsed by the renowned ethnologist James Cowles Prichard, who argued that the lighter varieties of the human race were analogous to 'the finer, and more delicate specimens in other kinds' which are often endowed with 'a more beautiful appearance' (ibid., 169); these ideas were soon taken up and developed by Francis Galton, founder of eugenics. Beddoe and Galton corresponded and exchanged research: for example, in 1887 Beddoe sent Galton his 'promised paper on the stature of the older races of England, as deduced from their long bones' (Beddoe to Galton, 26 April 1887, UCL, Galton MS, 199). Evidently, the class and race based statistics Beddoe had accumulated were useful for Galton's own researches into heredity and population. 
The cluster of ideas informing Beddoe's researches directly influenced the work of the late nineteenth-century sexologist Havelock Ellis. Ellis took up the pattern of sexual difference at work in Beddoe's observations on colour, observing in 'Man and Woman: a Study of Human Sexual Secondary Characters' (1894): 'women have darker hair than men, and decidedly darker eyes' (pp. 314-15). He noted that the question of the proportion of brown eyes among women in a given population 'was fully studied in the first place by the late Dr. Beddoe' (ibid., 309) and declared himself 'indebted to Dr. Beddoe for a series of figures showing the sexual differences in various parts of Great Britain' (ibid.). Charles Darwin drew on Beddoe's work in 'The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex' (1871), arguing: 'Dr Beddoe has lately proved that, with the inhabitants of Britain, residence in towns and certain occupations have a deteriorating influence on height; and he infers that the result is to a certain extent inherited, as is likewise the case in the United States. Dr Beddoe further believes that wherever a 'race attains its maximum of physical development, it rises highest in energy and moral vigour'. (Darwin, 115)' Beddoe emphasized 'the theory of a hereditary and progressive physical degeneration in certain classes of the inhabitants of towns', selecting Cornwall as one of the few places in Britain 'which produce the finest and largest men'. These men 'yield more than their share of ability and energy for the national benefit' (Beddoe, 'Stature', 566-7). His research was underpinned by ideas of social and racial hierarchy and national worth, ideas which reached full fruition in Galton's theories of 'civic worth' in the late nineteenth century. Beddoe's interest in the relationships among physical appearance, moral qualities, and social position was part of the enthusiasm for a biological basis for hierarchy which came to birth in the nineteenth century. 
In 1853 Beddoe published 'Contributions to Scottish ethnology' and in 1908, in 'A last contribution to Scottish ethnology', he surveyed intervening developments in the field. In 1867 he received from the Welsh national eisteddfod a prize of 100 guineas for the best essay on the origin of the English nation; this became part of 'The Races of Britain: a Contribution to the Anthropology of Western Europe' (1885). Beddoe's racial data 'On the stature and bulk of man in the British Isles' appeared in 1870 in 'Memoirs Read before the Anthropological Society of London'. In 1903 he published a paper in 'L'Anthropologie', 'De l'evaluation et de la signification de la capacite cranienne', which was received with hostility by Karl Pearson, professor of applied mathematics and mechanics at University College, London, from 1884, and founder of biometrics, and M. A. Lewenz, in a joint paper in 'Biometrica' in 1904. They accused him of showing 'a complete ignorance of the nature of modern statistical theory', namely correlation -- the mathematical process of finding the best linear relation between the known value of one character and the most probable value of a second -- and the regression curve; it was, they emphasized, only with such methods that 'we can hope to render anthropometry in all its branches a real science. The day for the old methods is once and for ever gone' (Lewenz and Pearson, 367-8). Conceding that Beddoe had 'done good service in widening the field of anthropometric interest in this country', they stressed that 'statistical enquiry is not a field for guesswork and elementary arithmetic; there is a mathematical science of statistics which must be learnt, and papers dealing numerically with anthropometric and craniometric data which do not now apply this theory are simply outside the field of science.' They also emphasized that in addition to method in statistical reduction a craniologist should distinguish between 'what holds for a local race of man, and what may be applied to mankind as a whole', and criticized Beddoe for drawing no distinction here, or between the sexes. 'Dr Beddoe makes no attempt to deduce intra-racial formulae from fairly homogeneous racial series by recognised statistical methods; he does not then compare these among themselves and see whether an inter-racial one can be deduced from them. He simply makes a guess, tries it on a most heterogeneous series, and if it does not fit makes another guess... This is not science; it is the dilettantism which in the past has made anthropometry and craniometry impossible subjects for academic study. (ibid., 396-7)' Beddoe replied in the 'Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute' (34, 1904). 
Beddoe was a founding member of the Ethnological Society, president of the Anthropological Society (1869-70) and of the Anthropological Institute (1889-91). In 1905 he delivered the Huxley lecture of the Anthropological Institute, 'Colour and race', and received the Huxley memorial medal. He served on the council of the British Association, 1870-75, and co-authored its 'Anthropological instructions for travellers'. In 1890 he was made Officier (premiere classe) de l'Instruction Publique, France; he was a member of a number of European anthropological societies. He was elected FRCP in 1873 and after retiring from practice in Bristol in 1891 he moved to Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire. In the same year the University of Edinburgh conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD and in 1908 the University of Bristol elected him honorary professor of anthropology. A founder member of the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society (established in 1875), Beddoe became its president in 1890, and in 1909 was president of the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society. At the time of his death he was president of the British Kyrle Society. Beddoe died on 19 July 1911 at his home, The Chantry, Bradford-on-Avon, as a result of a prostatic haemorrhage. 


@@@@@


doc= 30667


Bedford, William Kirkpatrick Riland (1826-1905), antiquary and genealogist, born at Sutton Coldfield rectory on 12 July 1826, was the eldest of five sons of William Riland Bedford (1794/5-1843), rector of Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, and his wife, Grace Campbell, daughter of Charles Sharpe of Hoddam, Dumfriesshire. Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe, a Scottish antiquarian, was his maternal uncle. After education at Sutton Coldfield grammar school, Bedford won a Queen's scholarship at Westminster School in 1840, and qualified for a studentship at Christ Church, Oxford. An attack of scarlet fever prevented him from taking up the studentship, and on 5 June 1844 he matriculated as a commoner at Brasenose College. In 1847 he was secretary of the Oxford Union. He graduated BA in 1848 and proceeded MA in 1852. In 1849 he became curate of Southwell, Nottinghamshire, and in 1850 he was ordained priest and succeeded an uncle, Dr Williamson, as rector of Sutton Coldfield. He held the post for forty-two years, and was rural dean for twenty-five. He was also chaplain of the grand lodge of freemasons in 1861. 
On 18 September 1851 Bedford married Maria Amy, the youngest daughter of Joseph Houson (died 1890) of Southwell, Nottinghamshire. They had seven sons and three daughters. His second marriage was to Margaret ('b'. 1871/2), daughter of Denis Browne, and took place on 27 November 1900. 
Bedford was an acknowledged authority on the antiquities of Sutton Coldfield, which he described in 'Three Hundred Years of a Family Living, being a History of the Rilands of Sutton Coldfield' (1889) and 'The Manor of Sutton, Feudal and Municipal' (1901). He was well versed in heraldry and genealogies, and was a frequent contributor to 'Notes and Queries'. From 1878 to 1902 he was chaplain of the order of St John of Jerusalem and in his capacity of official genealogist, he compiled many works dealing with the history and regulations of the knights hospitallers, including 'Malta and the Knights' (1870; 2nd edn, 1894), 'Notes on the Old Hospitals of the Order of St John of Jerusalem' (1881), and a history of the English hospitallers (1902), in collaboration with R. Holbeche. 
Bedford was a keen cricketer in the early days of the game. On 20 July 1856 he founded the Free Foresters, an amateur wandering club with headquarters at Sutton Coldfield, and he recorded the fortunes of the club in his 'Annals of the Free Foresters from 1856' (1895). He was also an expert archer and in 1849 joined the Woodmen of Arden at Meriden, Warwickshire, where he frequently attended meetings, and won the Arden medal on 16 July 1857. In 1885 he published 'Records of the Woodmen of Arden from 1785', and he later contributed to the volume on 'Archery' in the 'Badminton Library' series (1894). In addition to the works already mentioned, his chief publications were a 'Memoir of C. K. Sharpe', his uncle, written from family papers (1888), 'The Blazon of Episcopacy', his first work, published in 1858, and 'Outcomes of Old Oxford' (1899). 
Bedford died at his home, 209 Fordwych Road, Cricklewood, on 23 January 1905; his ashes were buried after cremation at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 30668


Bedson, Sir Samuel Phillips (1886-1969), bacteriologist, was born on 1 December 1886 at Newcastle upon Tyne, the second son of Peter Phillips Bedson, professor of chemistry in the Durham College of Science, and his wife, Annie, daughter of Samuel Hodgkinson, cotton spinner, of Marple, Cheshire. He was educated at Abbotsholme School, Derbyshire. Before he left school he had decided on a medical career, but he was persuaded by his father to take a degree in science first. He graduated BSc with distinction in 1907. From 1907 to 1912 he studied medicine at Durham University and graduated with honours in 1912. Influenced by the teaching of H. J. Hutchens, he decided to specialize in bacteriology and went to the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where he studied under brilliant French microbiologists, among them P. P. E. Roux, A. Borrel, C. L. A. Laveran, A. Besredka, and I. Mechnikov. The research work which he carried out in M. Weinberg's laboratory at this time on the toxic substances obtained from parasitic worms was embodied in a thesis which gained him the MD (1914) and gold medal of Durham University. 
In 1913 Bedson returned to England where he worked as British medical scholar at the Lister Institute in London under John Ledingham. Their experimental work on blood platelets and purpura was interrupted by the outbreak of war in 1914. Refused a commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps, which had no vacancies for doctors trained in research, Bedson joined the Northumberland Fusiliers as a combatant officer and went with the 8th battalion to Gallipoli in 1915. In August of that year he suffered a severe chest wound and was evacuated to England. He was later sent to France, where in 1916 he was transferred to the Royal Army Medical Corps. From then until his demobilization in 1919 he served as a pathologist in various laboratories in France and became adviser in pathology to the Fifth Army (France). For two years after the war he was lecturer in bacteriology at the medical school in Durham. He returned in 1921 to the Lister Institute, where he continued his work on the origin and disposal of blood platelets and their role in the production of purpura. The conclusions he reached on the basis of his experimental studies were confirmed by the subsequent work of others. 
In 1924 Bedson was seconded to work on foot-and-mouth disease at the Lister Institute under the supervision of Joseph Arkwright, and thus began his research on virus disease, then largely an unexplored field. The work by Bedson and his colleagues both on the causal virus of foot-and-mouth disease and on immunity to it provided a sound basis for subsequent advances in the knowledge of virus diseases. 
In 1926 Bedson married Dorothea Annie Hoffert, a research assistant at the Lister Institute, and elder daughter of Henry Herman Hoffert, senior inspector of schools. There were three sons, the second of whom, Henry Samuel Bedson, became reader in virology at Birmingham University. In the same year as his marriage Bedson was appointed to a Freedom research fellowship at the London Hospital, where his eight years as fellow were to prove the most productive of his scientific career. He published several important papers on the nature of viruses, using the viruses of vaccinia and herpes simplex in his experiments. In 1929 there occurred the pandemic of human psittacosis infection. Bedson discovered and described the causal agent of the disease and much of his subsequent work was devoted to the study of this and related micro-organisms. This group of infective agents became commonly referred to as the bedsoniae. While Bedson was a pioneer investigator in virology, his international reputation was associated mainly with his work on the micro-organisms of the psittacosis-lymphogranuloma group, which was summarized in his Harben lectures (1959). He was elected FRS in 1935. 
In 1934 Bedson succeeded William Bulloch as professor of bacteriology at the London Hospital medical college. Although his teaching and administrative duties lessened the time he could spend in the laboratory he enjoyed contact with the students. He was a good lecturer and took a keen interest in the welfare and subsequent careers of his pupils. From 1939 to 1944 he was pathologist to metropolitan region 5 of the Emergency Medical Service, with his headquarters at Billericay in Essex. He returned to the London Hospital in 1944 and in 1946 succeeded Philip Panton as director of the division of pathology, thus adding to his responsibilities in the medical college. In 1949 he followed Panton as consultant adviser in pathology to the Ministry of Health, an office which he held until 1960. When he retired from the chair at the London Hospital in 1952 he took charge of the British Empire Campaign virus unit in the Middlesex Hospital, where he continued his research for the next ten years. 
Bedson was a member of the governing body of the Foot-and-Mouth Disease Research Institute at Pirbright (1950-55), the council of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (1942-55), the army pathological advisory committee (1937-62), the governing body of the Lister Institute (1944-54), the Public Health Laboratory Service Board (1950-57), the Medical Research Council (1941-5), and the council of the Royal Society (1937-8 and 1941-2). He was awarded the Conway Evans prize in 1952. The honorary degree of DSc was conferred on him by the Queen's University of Belfast in 1937 and by the University of Durham in 1946. He was elected FRCP in 1945 and knighted in 1956. 
Bedson was slim and of less than average height. He almost invariably wore a bow-tie. He was neat and orderly in all he did. He was a very skilful technician and preferred to do all his own experiments which were devised with care and precision. His opinions were tenaciously held and would be abandoned only if convincing evidence were forthcoming. He was regarded with great affection and respect by his colleagues and pupils, and in private life he was a delightful companion and host. His favourite hobby was trout-fishing. Bedson died in Hove, Sussex, on 11 May 1969, and his widow died later in the same year. 
A. W. Downie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30669


Beecham, Thomas (1820-1907), manufacturer of patent medicines, was born at Curbridge, Oxfordshire, on 3 December 1820, the eldest of three sons and four daughters of Joseph Beecham, an agricultural labourer, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of James Hunt. He received a year's schooling before becoming a shepherd's boy at the age of eight. For the next twelve years as a shepherd, he educated himself and acquired herbal lore. From 1840 onwards he undertook casual work at Kidlington, where for a time he acted as village postman and sold in nearby markets some pills of his own invention, whose main constituents were powdered aloes and powdered ginger and which acted as a mild purgative. 
In 1847 Beecham migrated to Liverpool, where, on 26 May of that year, he married Jane Evans (1811/12-1872) from Bangor, north Wales, who was eight years his senior. They had two sons and two daughters. Shortly after the marriage they settled in Wigan, where he made and marketed his pills. After his chemist's shop failed, the family moved to St Helens in 1859. In time, a combination of pertinacity and persuasiveness brought Beecham success. Using the slogan 'Worth a guinea a box', he began to advertise his pills in the local press, and gradually created a network of wholesale agents, mainly in London and towns in Lancashire and Yorkshire. In 1865, having set up a small workshop, and with the help of his elder son, Joseph, he achieved an annual turnover of $2500. Within fifteen years he had multiplied this to $23,000 and was completing his first purpose-built factory. 
In contrast to his single-mindedness in business, in his private life Beecham was a persistent philanderer; he callously inscribed the name of an illegitimate daughter ('b'. 1862) in the family 'Bible'. After not a few publicly aired rows and scandals, his wife left him; she died of drink in 1872. In January of the following year he married Sarah, daughter of Henry Pemberton, a London labourer; although she was thirty years younger than Beecham, she died in 1877. In September 1879 Beecham married 28-year-old Mary Sawell, daughter of James Putt, contractor, and already three times widowed. Having been brought up in Canterbury, she detested St Helens, and coerced Beecham into moving in 1881 to Mursley Hall, Buckinghamshire. There at first he relished the novelty of country-house life, but discord soon erupted, and relations collapsed after his wife accused him of having tried to poison her. An acrimonious separation followed, and in 1884 he returned to St Helens. 
By this time, Beecham's son, Joseph Beecham, was very much in control of the firm, and in 1886 opened a grand new factory. Thomas occupied himself in writing letters to the press which yielded valuable free publicity. In 1893, having visited the world fair in Chicago, he retired to a newly built villa at Southport. Living alone with a Welsh housekeeper, Jane Roberts, in 1895 he was presented by her with a daughter. That year he handed over the whole business to Joseph. He died at his home, Wychwood, 2 Norwood Avenue, Southport, of pulmonary congestion, on 6 April 1907; he was buried at Dent Green cemetery, St Helens. His estate was valued at $86,680 gross. 
Short, squat, and with a shock of white hair, unkempt beard, and piercing blue eyes, Beecham customarily wore an antique frock coat, paper collar, and hard round hat. His grandson, Sir Thomas Beecham, remembered with awe his voluminous trousers hitched well up to the chest, many-hued, and of rough, thick material. Beecham's manners were as off-putting as his rustic appearance. Seldom if ever going into society and entirely unselfconscious, he scandalized his genteel daughter-in-law with his coarse eating habits, yet few women could resist his powerful sexual magnetism. He gave idiosyncratically to good causes. In later life he became a Congregationalist. As a founding entrepreneur, he lacked the largeness of vision to create a giant business: this task he left to his son Joseph. 


@@@@@


doc= 30670


Beecham, Sir Thomas, second baronet (1879-1961), conductor, was born on 29 April 1879 in Westfield Street, St Helens, Lancashire, the elder son and second child of Sir Joseph Beecham, first baronet (1848-1916), manufacturing chemist, and his wife, Josephine Burnett, 'nee' Dickins (1850-1934). The family's prosperity began with Thomas Beecham's grandfather, the first Thomas Beecham (1820-1907), who invented, advertised, and sold huge quantities of the digestive pills bearing his name. The young Thomas Beecham had a better relationship with his grandfather than with his father -- from whom, nevertheless, he inherited a deep love of music. From the boy's first piano lesson it was all-consuming, while his pungent use of words, and the ease with which he memorized huge chunks of prose, was another extraordinary gift. 
Beecham attended Rossall School, Fleetwood, Lancashire (1892-7), where he cultivated a passion for cricket and football, and then went up to Wadham College, Oxford. His truancies in Dresden and Berlin to hear opera had been noticed, so he opted to leave in 1898 to avoid being sent down. Half a century later he received Oxford's honorary degree of DMus. Beecham had already practised conducting with the amateur St Helens Musical Society but, in 1899 and at short notice, when Dr Hans Richter cancelled, he successfully took over a local concert with the Halle Orchestra. 
Joseph Beecham had split his family by committing his wife to an asylum. This incensed Thomas, who went to London and eventually obtained his mother's release through the High Court. While there he studied composition with Charles Wood and Frederic Austin, lodging in South Kensington with Charles Stuart Welles, the American embassy's doctor. On 27 July 1903 Beecham married Welles's daughter Utica Celestina (1881-1977). Her 'dowry' was a loan of $50,000 repayable in full at the groom's death. An injury to his wrist in 1904 destroyed Beecham's chances of being a concert pianist. 
The newly-weds spent their honeymoon in Europe, where Beecham bought large quantities of French operatic scores and Utica fascinated Giacomo Puccini. This was an unhappy marriage: their two sons went to live with Utica in Boreham Wood and later in St John's Wood, but their father was seldom there. He formed a chamber orchestra which he first conducted in 1906, then brought up to strength as the New Symphony Orchestra. It was engaged by Frederick Delius in 1907 for a concert of his music that marked the beginning of Beecham's lifelong devotion to the composer and his works. In 1908 Beecham presented several works by his new friend, with whom he went on holiday. In 1909 Beecham formed the Beecham Symphony Orchestra (also known as the 'Fireworks Orchestra' because of the members' pranks on tour), and he made it the most talked-of band in Britain; it included such young players as Albert Sammons, Lionel Tertis, and Eric Coates. After only three months he had trained it to give the first performance of Delius's 'A Mass of Life' at the Queen's Hall. 
A preliminary excursion into opera with Ethel Smyth's 'The Wreckers' brought about a complete reconciliation between father and son, and Joseph was now prepared to underwrite his son's operatic plans for three London seasons in 1910. They included two at Covent Garden, including Richard Strauss's advanced operas 'Elektra' and 'Salome', as well as a summer season of little-known Mozart and French operas. In 1911, coronation year, Thomas Beecham sponsored Serge Diaghilev with Vaslav Nijinsky and Tamara Karsavina in the sensational Imperial Russian Ballet's first visit to Covent Garden. The Russian Ballet returned in 1912 when Beecham conducted two ballets new to London, and Beecham's orchestra was booked by Diaghilev for his Berlin tour, becoming the first English orchestra to go there. These lavish seasons continued in 1913 at Drury Lane when Beecham brought over Fyodor Chalyapin (as well as giving the first London performance of Richard Strauss's 'Der Rosenkavalier'). Beecham put on Russian operas and finally gave Sir Joseph Beecham's Drury Lane season of 1914 (his father had recently been created a baronet). Meanwhile, he incorporated the ailing Denhof Grand Opera Company into his enterprise so as to form the Beecham Opera Company. 
In 1909 or early 1910 Beecham began a love affair with Lady Maud Alice (known as Emerald) Cunard (1872-1948). Although they never lived together, it continued -- despite other relationships on his part -- until his remarriage in 1943. During the 1920s and 1930s he also had an affair with Dora Strang 
(Labbette; 1898-1984)
, a soprano known as Lisa Perli, with whom he had a son. 
With the outbreak of war in 1914 Covent Garden was closed, but Beecham set himself the task of keeping music going in England. He declared to the Halle Orchestra, 'Command me! I place myself unreservedly at your disposal', and in October conducted the first of many wartime concerts with it. He also supported the Royal Philharmonic Society at the Queen's Hall and was created knight in January 1916. Sir Joseph, meanwhile, had bought the Covent Garden estate from the duke of Bedford for $250,000, intending to sell it at a profit but to keep Covent Garden and Drury Lane theatres for his son, who was taking the Beecham Opera Company up and down the country giving performances at cinema prices, then conducting London seasons at the Shaftesbury and Aldwych theatres and at Drury Lane in 1917 during the Zeppelin raids. The sudden death of Sir Joseph in October 1916, one day before his will was proved, coupled with inevitable wartime restrictions, started the reversal of the family fortune. Until 1920 Beecham battled on with opera seasons, financially helped by Lady Emerald Cunard. He was made bankrupt, the opera company and its orchestra collapsed, and Beecham was forced to retire from the musical scene for three years while he became a businessman, showing great commercial ability by gradually selling off the millstone of his father's Covent Garden estate. 
Beecham first reappeared on the rostrum with the Halle at Manchester in March 1923, then in London with the combined Royal Albert Hall Orchestra (the renamed New Symphony Orchestra) and London Symphony Orchestra (LSO) with Clara Butt in April 1924. Elements of the Beecham Opera Company, renamed the British National Opera Company, had been reconstituted as a self-governing body in 1922 and were playing at His Majesty's Theatre in 1924 when in came Sir Thomas Beecham, bt, to give a single, rousing, and packed performance of Wagner's 'The Mastersingers' to remind them of the past. A single concert with the LSO in the following year convinced him that without his own orchestra he might as well leave England, so he went to the USA and, despite few personal funds, he characteristically stayed at the New York Ritz. Soon he quietly returned home and began flirtations with English orchestras. The need for an independent and first-class London orchestra was in the air, and Beecham's sights were on the LSO between March and December 1928. His overtures to the BBC were met with 'Keep Beecham out!' Concentrating on the 1929 Delius festival in London at the end of 1929 with the composer present, and twice using the BBC Symphony Orchestra for broadcasts, he continued to puzzle the musical world as to his real intentions. 
In 1931 Beecham conducted Borodin's 'Prince Igor' and his own Handelian score 'The Gods Go a-Begging' in a special season of Russian dancers and singers at the Lyceum Theatre. He had been quietly vetting individual members of the orchestra whom he had raised for this season and effectively concealed the real reason for his recent return to Covent Garden, in partnership with Colonel Eustace Blois, managing director of the syndicate. 
On 7 October 1932 another new Beecham orchestra, the London Philharmonic (LPO), was born in the Queen's Hall and immediately showed itself to be the finest in Britain, if not in Europe. Despite outstanding debts to former players of the Fireworks Orchestra, the members were only too glad to come back and play for 'Tommy' Beecham because he could guarantee them work from concerts, recordings, and every summer season in the Covent Garden pit until 1939. Beecham was himself again. Sometimes he conducted the Halle, but neither the LSO nor the BBC enjoyed such successes as he had with the LPO. In 1934 he gave his services to the Royal College of Music with three enchanting student performances of Delius's 'A Village Romeo and Juliet'. Delius had died only a few days before, and was buried in a small Surrey churchyard where Beecham, an equivocal believer in Delius's atheism, delivered a passionate oration. In 1936 Beecham took his orchestra to Nazi Germany. His secretary, Berta Geissmar, documented the evening when Beecham refused to precede Adolf Hitler into the concert hall, thus avoiding having to salute the arrival of the Fuhrer. 
Britain was at war again in September 1939, and Beecham put all his vigour into keeping music going in England. During the war his reputation as a wit and a raconteur grew as rapidly as his stature as a conductor. When the Queen's Hall was gutted by incendiary bombs in May 1941 most of the LPO's instruments were destroyed, but the players begged and borrowed others and gave their concert, undefeated, at the Royal Albert Hall. With call-up and a complete change in orchestral life, Beecham again felt himself redundant and returned to the USA. He gave typical concerts there and conducted the Metropolitan Opera in New York. Between 1941 and 1943 he took over the Seattle Orchestra. 
Beecham had seen nothing of the first Lady Beecham since the First World War, and he wished to marry again. He did not even refer to her as Lady Beecham but as Dame Beecham or Mrs Beecham, because she had played no part in his life after his knighthood and baronetcy. She would not consent to a divorce, however, remained faithful to him from their marriage in 1903 onwards, and outlived him. To overcome this impasse Beecham filed a suit for divorce in Idaho City, USA, on 4 October 1942. After arrival from England of a deposition from Mrs Beecham that carried no weight in the USA, the divorce was granted by the district judge of Idaho City. Beecham married (Margaret) Betty Humby (1908-1958) on 23 February 1943. A pianist, Betty was the daughter of Daniel Morgan Humby, a London surgeon. She had previously secured a divorce in Idaho from her first husband, an English clergyman, but on 7 September 1944 she and Beecham went through a second marriage ceremony in New York, 'to assure compliance with technicalities of the English law'. 
Beecham returned home to a utilitarian, post-war England but, in spite of the fact that a new recording orchestra called the Philharmonia was being formed, he prepared to raise yet another. 'You'll never do it!' went up the cry; 'I always get the best players!' he retorted, and he was right. On 15 September 1946 his last orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic (RPO), lifted the roof of the Davis Theatre, Croydon. He proudly paraded it round the country, and a month later its London debut at the Royal Albert Hall began another Delius festival. Then came a celebration at Drury Lane to help the rehabilitation of his 83-year-old friend Richard Strauss. Strenuous RPO tours followed through the USA and South Africa. 
Beecham never got over the indignity of being denied a role at Covent Garden in 1946. For the first time it had a government subsidy, but his known profligacy was at odds with Labour Britain. Nor was he invited to conduct in the opening series of concerts at the Royal Festival Hall in 1951 ('that biscuit box'); in spite of swearing never to set foot in it, however, he became used to taking the RPO there. He was likewise persuaded to return and conduct opera at Covent Garden. A short run of Michael Balfe's Victorian opera 'The Bohemian Girl' (with tongue in cheek) was followed by an uncut 'Die Meistersinger' in German. 
In 1953 at Oxford, Beecham presented the world premiere of Delius's first opera, 'Irmelin', and his own last, staged performances were in 1955 at Bath, with A.-E.-M. Gretry's 'Zemire et Azor'. He was made a Companion of Honour in 1957, an event which was clouded for him by the death of his second wife, Betty, on 2 September 1958. Nevertheless, he married his secretary, Jean (known as Shirley) Hudson ('b'. 1932), in Zurich on 10 March 1959. 
Indulging his fondness for Berlioz at concerts with the larger choral works, Beecham was set to achieve a long ambition to conduct 'Les Troyens' at Covent Garden, as well as making his Glyndebourne debut in opera with 'Die Zauberflote', but his declining health prevented both. At the Portsmouth Guildhall, after a very short morning rehearsal of the RPO, Beecham and the RPO sat and watched the 1960 cup final on television. The concert that night was his last. Nursed by the third Lady Beecham (who survived him), he struggled against the odds of all those years and died of a thrombosis at his home, 21 Harley House, Marylebone Road, London, on 8 March 1961; he was buried two days later in Brookwood cemetery, Surrey. His sense of humour might well have been tickled by the fact that, owing to changes at Brookwood, he could not stay there. His mortal remains were taken in 1991 to lie in peace beside those of Frederick Delius in St Peter's churchyard, Limpsfield, Surrey. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his elder son, Adrian Welles Beecham. 
Thomas Beecham is best remembered as a portly figure with short legs, an imposingly jutting beard, and penetrating eyes, the key to a personal hypnotism which his players acknowledged; while his verbal drawl, with a Lancastrian tinge, was couched in impeccable Edwardian English. His musical abilities and achievements were unsurpassed by any Englishman in the twentieth century, but to foreigners he remained an enigma: by flouting convention, he was often making innocent fun of them. 


@@@@@


doc= 30671


Beeching, Henry Charles (1859-1919), dean of Norwich and author, was born on 15 May 1859 at 16 Dorset Street, London. He was the second son of James Plumer George Beeching, and came from a Sussex family of shipowners and bankers who had long held land at Bexhill. His mother was Harriet, daughter of William Skaife, of Knaresborough, whose family had lived for many generations near Pateley Bridge, Yorkshire. In 1875 he went to the City of London School, where he came under the influence of Dr Edwin A. Abbott, who became his mentor. In October 1878 he went up to Balliol College, Oxford, as an open exhibitioner, and soon became one of a circle which included J. W. Mackail, J. St Loe Strachey, Clinton Dawkins, Rennell Rodd, and Sidney Lee. His enthusiasm for English literature, and more especially for English poetry, was stimulated by his Balliol friendships, and his own gift for writing verse was soon apparent. He contributed to an undergraduate periodical, 'Waifs and Strays', and in 1879 published, with J. W. Mackail and J. B. B. Nichols, a small volume of poems entitled 'Mensae secundae'; this was followed by 'Love in Idleness' (1883) and 'Love's Looking-Glass' (1891), both written with the same collaborators. He graduated BA in 1883. 
In 1882 Beeching was ordained deacon, and became curate of St Matthew's, Mossley Hill, Liverpool, where he remained until 1885, when he moved to the living of Yattendon, Berkshire. In 1890 he married Mary, daughter of the Revd A. J. Plow and niece of Robert Bridges, the poet. They had three daughters. In his country parish, Beeching devoted himself to literary work, particularly the study of the English poets. In 1895 he published his best-known volume of verse, 'Love in a Garden and other Poems'. In 1896 he began to contribute anonymously to the 'Cornhill Magazine', of which his friend St Loe Strachey was then editor. These contributions were published in book form, also anonymously, in 1898, as 'Pages from a Private Diary'; the second edition (1903) bore the pseudonym Urbanus Sylvan. In 1900 his edition of Milton was published by the Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
In 1900 Beeching gave up his work as a country clergyman, and became chaplain of Lincoln's Inn and professor of pastoral theology at King's College, London. In 1902 he was appointed canon of Westminster, a most congenial post for a man of his tastes. He was select preacher at Oxford in 1896-7 and again in 1912-13; at Cambridge in 1903, 1909, and 1912; and at Dublin in 1905. In 1906 he published 'Provincial Letters and other Papers', and in 1909 a life of Francis Atterbury. During this London period he also produced several volumes of sermons and lectures, including 'Religio laici' (1902), 'The Bible Doctrine of Atonement' (1907), and 'William Shakespeare... a Reply to Mr George Greenwood, MP' (1908). He also edited two volumes of sermons and lectures by his friend Alfred Ainger. 
In 1911 Beeching was appointed dean of Norwich. He became keenly interested in the history and services of his cathedral, and took an active part in the life of the city. His health began to fail in 1918, and on 25 February 1919 he died at the deanery, Norwich, from heart failure. His ashes were buried in Norwich Cathedral on 3 March. His wife survived him. 
Beeching was eminent both as churchman and man of letters. A man of wide sympathies and varied interests, he was beloved and successful alike as country rector, canon of Westminster, and dean of Norwich. As a preacher he showed learning and eloquence. He was a liberal churchman, but no controversialist, and he had a deep love for the ritual and liturgy of the Church of England. He was an essayist and critic who was 'sound rather than brilliant' (A. Ralli, 'History of Shakespeare Criticism', 3, 1932, 269, 371-3). His own poetry, though slender in volume, is marked by technical skill, polished wit, and the verbal dexterity which made his epigrams famous. 


@@@@@


doc= 30672


Beerbohm, Sir Henry Maximilian (1872-1956), caricaturist and writer, was born at 57 Palace Gardens Terrace, London, on 24 August 1872 and was baptized on 16 October at the church of All Saints, Kensington. His father, Julius Ewald Edward Beerbohm (1810-1892), of Dutch, Lithuanian, and German origin, had come to England about 1830 and set up as a prosperous corn merchant. He married an Englishwoman, Constantia Draper, and the couple had four children. When Constantia died, Beerbohm married her sister, Eliza (died 1918), with whom he had five children, three of whom survived. Max was their youngest child. 
From 1881 to 1885 Max -- he was always called simply Max and it is thus that he signed his drawings -- attended the day school of a Mr Wilkinson in Orme Square. Mr Wilkinson, Max said, 'gave me my love of Latin and thereby enabled me to write English' (Rothenstein, 370-71). Mrs Wilkinson taught drawing to the students, the only lessons Max ever had in the subject. In 1885 he entered Charterhouse School, where, in spite of his aversion to athletics, he seems to have been reasonably happy, even though he later wrote: 'My delight in having been at Charterhouse was far greater than my delight in being there... I always longed to be grown-up!' (Beerbohm, 'Mainly on the Air', 151, 154). At Charterhouse he found pleasure and escape in reading, especially Thackeray (who had himself gone to Charterhouse and was also an illustrator). And he took to drawing caricatures, of other boys, of the schoolmasters, and of public figures, especially the prince of Wales, later Edward VII. 
In 1890 Max went up to Merton College, Oxford, to study classics. He loved Oxford. 'Undergraduates,' he wrote, 'owe their happiness chiefly to the consciousness that they are no longer at school. The nonsense which was knocked out of them at school is all put gently back at Oxford or Cambridge' (Beerbohm, 'More', 156). Max found 'this little city of learning and laughter' the perfect place for the development of his dandyism, his aestheticism, his distinctive spectator persona. At Merton, Max came to know the man who was to be his dearest friend, the novelist Reggie Turner. Through Turner, Max became friends with Oscar Wilde and his inner circle, which comprised art critic Robert Ross, Lord Alfred Douglas, and Turner. In Max's third year at university, the artist William Rothenstein arrived from Paris to draw portraits of Oxford 'characters' (eventually including Max among them). Rothenstein became another close and life-long friend. 
Max's career as a professional caricaturist began when he was twenty: in 1892 the 'Strand' magazine published a series of his drawings of 'club types' -- thirty-six in all. Their publication dealt, Max said, 'a great, an almost mortal blow to my modesty' (M. Beerbohm, 'When 9 was nineteen', 'Strand Magazine', October 1946, 51). In 1893 Rothenstein introduced him to the publisher John Lane, who was about to launch 'The Yellow Book'. Max contributed essays to its first and later volumes. He also wrote for other publications, and he drew caricatures for 'The Yellow Book', 'Pick-Me-Up', 'Sketch', and the 'Pall Mall Budget'. Then in 1896 he published, under the imprint of John Lane, a collection of essays, disarmingly named 'The Works of Max Beerbohm', and, under the imprint of Leonard Smithers, a collection of drawings, 'Caricatures of Twenty-Five Gentlemen'. He was famous at twenty-four. 
Max never made much money. A freelance writer and artist, he held only one regular job in his lifetime: from 1898 to 1910 he was drama critic for the 'Saturday Review', on the recommendation of his predecessor, George Bernard Shaw. Max's first column explained with nice irony how unfit he was for the position: although from his very cradle he had been at the fringe of the theatre world because of his elder half-brother, Herbert Beerbohm Tree, one of London's foremost actor-managers, he himself had no great love for drama. He consoled himself with the thought that other callings, such as that of porter in the underground railway, were more uncomfortable and dispiriting than that of theatre critic: 'Whenever I feel myself sinking under the stress of my labours, I shall say to myself, I am not a porter on the Underground Railway' (Beerbohm, 'Around Theatres', 4). But in time he grew into an able, discerning, and demanding critic of the London theatre. 
Max's personal life was peculiar. For a time in 1893 he had a sentimental crush on a happily unobtainable fifteen-year-old music-hall star, Cissie Loftus. In 1895 he became vaguely attached to Grace Connover, an actress in his brother's theatre company (Max nicknamed her Kilseen, for killing scenes on stage). The 'engagement' lingered for eight years before dying out. Next, in 1903, he became briefly engaged to another actress, Constance Collier, a successful, glamorous leading lady, again from his brother's theatre company; she broke off the engagement after a few months. In 1904 he met and became much taken with an American actress, Florence Kahn (died 1951), the only daughter of a Jewish family from Memphis, Tennessee. By 1908 they were engaged. On 4 May 1910 Max and Florence were married at the Paddington register office; he quit his post at the 'Saturday Review', and went to live the rest of his life in the Villino Chiaro, a small house on the coast road overlooking the Mediterranean at Rapallo, Italy. Max and his wife seem to have had a thoroughly happy life together. There has been speculation that he was a non-active homosexual, that his marriage was never consummated, that he was a 'natural celibate' (Hall, 'Max Beerbohm: a Kind of Life', 120-21). The fact is, not much is known of Max's private life. 
By the time Max had married, retired from London, and settled in Italy, his position as one of England's foremost essayists was firmly in place. As early as 1898 Shaw had, famously, pronounced Max 'incomparable' (G. B. Shaw, 'Our Theatres in the Nineties', 1931, 25.407). As a writer he had progressed towards a relaxed natural style. The early influence of Oscar Wilde on his prose, the constant paradoxes, the showiness, the over-cleverness had for the most part disappeared. By the turn of the century Max had found a surer, more distinctive voice, a prose distinguished by clarity and grace. The essays collected as 'Yet Again' (1909) exemplified this style. But Max's writing attained even greater success with his next four books: in 1911 he published to great critical acclaim his only novel, 'Zuleika Dobson'. This fantasy about the beautiful young woman whose visit to Oxford occasions the suicide of all the undergraduates has proved his most popular prose work; it has been the most continuously in print of all his books. An expanded edition, 'The Illustrated Zuleika Dobson', appeared in 1985. 'Zuleika Dobson' was included in the 1998 controversial 'Modern Library' list of '100 best novels' of the twentieth century, ranking fifty-ninth ('New York Times', 20 July 1998). In 1912 Max published a collection of seventeen parodies of contemporary writers, 'A Christmas Garland' (new edn 1993), and again the critical reception was impressive: Filson Young, for example, writing in the 'Saturday Review', said: 'He has not only parodied the style of his Authors, but their minds also' (9 Nov 1912, 578-9); and the 'New York Times' proclaimed: 'Max has reached the Olympian heights of great satire' (25 Jan 1913, 32). In 1919 he published 'Seven Men', his collection of short stories or 'memories', including 'Enoch Soames'. (The title character, a decadent 'Catholic Diabolist' poet of the 1890s, sells his soul to the Devil in exchange for the privilege of visiting the British Museum reading room 100 years later, at which time he hoped to find that posterity had been kind to his reputation. His eagerly awaited 'appearance' on 3 June 1997 caused a stir in the London press.) In 1920 Max's last book of collected familiar essays, 'And even now', crowned his work in his favourite genre; it included such frequently anthologized titles as 'No. 2 The Pines' (on visiting Swinburne in the poet's old age), 'Hosts and Guests', 'A Clergyman' (on a minor figure in Boswell's 'Life' of Samuel Johnson), and 'Laughter'. Among the encomiums heaped upon him as essayist, Virginia Woolf's is representative: Max is the 'prince of his profession', someone who brought 'personality' into that genre for the first time since Montaigne and Charles Lamb (V. Woolf, 'The Common Reader', 1925, 216). Privately, she wrote to Max: 'If you knew how I had pored over your essays -- how they fill me with marvel -- how I can't conceive what it would be like to write as you do!' ('Letters', 29 Jan 1928, 167). 
Max's reputation as a caricaturist was if anything higher than that as an essayist. In the late 1890s his drawing had also developed: it became more subtle, more intricate, more understated, the general softening of tone owing much to the addition of light colour washes, something Will Rothenstein had urged on him. Max himself remarked that as he got older (on into his late twenties) he found that his two arts -- his 'two dissimilar sisters' -- were growing more like each other: his drawing had become 'more delicate and artful... losing something of its pristine boldness and savagery', while his writing, 'though it never will be bold or savage, is easier in style, less ornate, than it used to be' (typescript, Merton College, Oxford). Max's was one of those rare talents equally distinguished in two arts. His sister arts sometimes come together in those of his drawings with more or less lengthy captions. A drawing, for example, of a clowning and self-satisfied G. B. Shaw bears the legend: 'Magnetic, he has the power to infect almost everyone with the delight he takes in himself.' Another, 'London in November and Mr Henry James in London', shows James, enveloped in a London fog, holding his hand up in front of his face; the legend, an adroit parody of the Master's style, reads: 'It was, therefore, not without something of a shock that he, in this to him so very congenial atmosphere, now perceived that a vision of the hand which he had, at a venture, held up within an inch or so of his eyes was, with an almost awful clarity being adumbrated...' Max once described caricature as 'the delicious art of exaggerating, without fear or favour, the peculiarities of this or that human body, for the mere sake of exaggeration' (Beerbohm, 'A Variety', 119). He admitted privately that he hoped also to get at the 'soul' of a man, but through the body: 'When I draw a man, I am concerned simply and solely with the physical aspect of him... [But] I see him in a peculiar way: I see all his salient points exaggerated (points of face, figure, port, gesture and vesture), and all his insignificant points proportionately diminished... In the salient points a man's soul does reveal itself, more or less faintly... It is... when (and only when) my caricatures hit exactly the exteriors of their subjects that they open the interiors, too. ('Letters', 35-6)' The perfect caricature, Max explained, must be 'the exaggeration of the whole creature, from top to toe.... The whole man must be melted down, as in a crucible, and then, as from the solution, be fashioned anew. He must emerge with not one particle of himself lost, yet with not a particle of himself as it was before. (Beerbohm, 'A Variety', 127-8)' Moreover, the caricaturist does not exaggerate this or that salient point deliberately: he 'exaggerates instinctively, unconsciously' (ibid., 124). Accordingly, Max believed that the caricaturist should never draw from the life because he would be 'bound by the realities of it' (ibid., 128). His own manner of operation was to stare at a person for a few moments and draw him later -- that evening, or many evenings, or even years, later. 
Max's first public showing had been at the Fine Art Society's exhibition in 1896, 'A century and a half of English humorous art, from Hogarth to the present day', to which he contributed six caricatures. His first one-man show was at the Carfax Gallery in 1901. By 1904, the year of his second published book of caricatures, 'The Poets' Corner', and of his second one-man exhibition at the Carfax Gallery, the 'Athenaeum' was calling him 'our one and only caricaturist' (28 May 1904, 695). After two more Carfax exhibitions, in 1907 and 1908, Max contributed to four group shows at the New English Art Club, 1909-11. Thereafter, he exhibited his work exclusively at the Leicester Galleries, first in 1911. By the time of the second such show, in 1913, 'The Times' confidently acclaimed Max 'the greatest of English comic artists' (12 April 1913, 6). Six more Leicester Galleries exhibitions followed during his lifetime, in 1921, 1923, 1925, 1928, 1945, and 1952. Almost the only complaint heard among the reviewers was the occasional one that he was not a draughtsman, but the objection was almost always followed by a retreat. One reviewer in 1913 said: 'There is, of course, a negligible sense in which [Max] is no draughtsman. He does not, perhaps cannot, and probably does not care to make his figures stand on their feet, or sit in their chairs; yet he is a master of expressive line. (Edward Marsh, 'Blue Review', June 1913, 145)' In 1926 another reviewer wrote: 'In terms of aesthetics Mr Beerbohm is not a draughtsman at all; he has a delicate sense of color, decorative felicity... but he has never learned to draw... For his own purposes, however, his drawing is consummate... He has a genius for likenesses; better than anyone else he understands how to convey the attitudes of his subjects... Add to these humor without venom and refined imagination and you have lifted caricature into the realm of art. ('New York Herald Tribune', 'Books', 7 Feb 1926, 2)' In 1954 Edmund Wilson judged Max 'the greatest caricaturist of the kind -- that is, portrayer of personalities -- in the history of art' (Behrman, 262). This assertion, in regard to quantity, certainly, was to find support in the figures set forth in the 1972 Hart-Davis 'Catalogue of the Caricatures of Max Beerbohm': in more than 2000 formal caricatures the artist drew almost 800 'real people'. 
Many of the people Max drew he knew personally, and, with a few exceptions -- Kipling for one -- those he knew he liked, and they liked him. His subjects, or 'targets', included many well-known figures: Oscar Wilde, Thomas Hardy, Henry James, G. B. Shaw, W. B. Yeats, Joseph Conrad, Lytton Strachey, J. A. M. Whistler, Aubrey Beardsley, John Singer Sargent, Augustus John. A few of his subjects he never met: W. E. Gladstone, Benjamin Disraeli, Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, and royalty, including Queen Victoria (Max seldom caricatured women, though he drew the queen at least nine times), Edward VII, George V, Edward VIII. Max also drew innumerable lawyers, musicians, financiers, professors, restaurateurs, sportsmen, newspaper magnates, dandies, tailors, industrialists, landowners. Hundreds of these individuals would be utterly forgotten today, had not Max 'got' them. It is noteworthy, too, that Max often caricatured himself. The Hart-Davis 'Catalogue' lists ninety-seven self-caricatures, more entries than for any other subject, Edward VII and George Bernard Shaw being the closest, with seventy-two and sixty-two entries, respectively. 
None the less, although most of Max's caricatures are of his contemporaries, he made two major ventures into the past, working from old portraits, drawings, and photographs. The result was some of his most enduring work, and the two most popular of his ten published books of caricatures, 'The Poets' Corner' (1904) with subjects ranging from Dante and Shakespeare to Wordsworth and Coleridge and Tennyson and Browning; and 'Rossetti and his Circle' (1922, new edn 1987), which offers such notables as A. C. Swinburne, John Ruskin, George Meredith, and William Morris in the company of Max's favourite nineteenth-century personality, the painter/poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti. 
Major collections of Max Beerbohm's caricatures are to be found in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; the Tate collection; the Victoria and Albert Museum; Charterhouse, Godalming; the Clark Library, University of California; and the Lilly Library, University of Indiana, Bloomington; depositories of both caricatures and archival material include Merton College Library, Oxford; the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin; the Robert H. Taylor collection, Princeton University Library; the Houghton Library, Harvard University; and the privately owned Mark Samuels Lasner collection. 
After 1910 Max lived contentedly in Rapallo, as a reclusive English gentleman (he never took the trouble to learn Italian). He returned to England only during the two world wars, and occasionally on personal business, chiefly to arrange exhibitions with the Leicester Galleries. Around 1930 he gave up caricaturing: 'I found that my caricatures were becoming likenesses. I seem to have mislaid my gift for dispraise. Pity crept in. So I gave up caricaturing, except privately' (Behrman, 140). 
In 1935 Max began broadcasting for the BBC, reading essays, always as 'an interesting link with the past' (Beerbohm, 'Mainly on the Air', 34). He continued to make fourteen broadcasts in all, right through to the year of his death. Rebecca West said, 'I felt... that I was listening to the voice of the last civilized man on earth. Max's broadcasts justify the entire invention of broadcasting' (Behrman, 265). But Max wanted no part of television. In 1955 the National Broadcasting Company in New York offered him considerable money to do a series of television talks. A representative of the company visited him in Rapallo: 'You see, Sir Max, it will all be very simple. Our people will come and arrange everything. You will sit, if you like, where you are sitting now. You will simply say, 'My dear friends, I am very happy to be here addressing you.' Max replied, 'Do you wish me to start with a lie?' (Cecil, 491)' In 1939 George VI offered him a knighthood, and Max, who had so satirized the royal family, gratefully accepted. The irony of it pleased him. Always the dandy, he took special care with his dress. After the ceremony, he wrote to a friend, 'My costume yesterday was quite all right... Indeed, I was (or so I thought, as I looked around me) the best-dressed of the Knights, and quite on a level with the Grooms of the Chamber and other palace officials. I'm not sure that I wasn't as presentable as the King himself -- 'very' charming though he looked. (typescript, Merton College, Oxford)' In 1942 Max received an honorary degree from his alma mater, Oxford, and in 1945 his old college, Merton, made him an honorary fellow. 
In many ways Max, in the latter part of his life, was out of step with the times; he remained a voice from the past. The works of D. H. Lawrence, for example, gave him little pleasure. Although willing to admit Lawrence's 'unquestionable genius', Max thought his prose style 'slovenly' and the man himself 'afflicted with Messiahdom' (Cecil, 483). When shown a copy of Joyce's 'Finnegans Wake' shortly before being made Sir Max Beerbohm, he leafed through it and remarked, 'I don't think he will get a knighthood for that!' (ibid., 443). When Edward Marsh wrote to Max to ask if he would allow the Contemporary Art Society to commission Graham Sutherland to paint his portrait, Max declined, telling Marsh that although he had in his time been 'a ruthless monstrifier of men', he was, like the proverbial bully, a coward ('Letters', 219). Privately, he told Samuel Behrman that in Sutherland's portrait of Somerset Maugham -- which Marsh in his letter had held up as a masterpiece -- 'Maugham looks... as if he had died of torture' (Behrman, 148-9). Max would have nothing to do with modern psychology or the theories of Freud: 'I adored my father and mother and I adored my brothers and sisters. What kind of complex would they find me the victim of?... They were a tense and peculiar family, the Oedipuses, weren't they?' (Bacigalupo, 29). 
After the death of Max's wife, Florence, in 1951, Elisabeth Jungmann, formerly the personal secretary of the German writer Gerhart Hauptmann, became Max's secretary and companion. On 20 April 1956 Max, from what was to be his deathbed, married her, to ensure that under Italian law she would inherit all his possessions. Max Beerbohm died at Rapallo on 20 May 1956. His body was cremated at Genoa, and the ashes taken to London, where they were interred in St Paul's Cathedral on 29 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 30673


Beevor, Charles Edward (1854-1908), neurologist, born in London on 12 June 1854, was the eldest son of Charles Beevor FRCS, and Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Burrell. He received his early education at Blackheath proprietary school and afterwards studied medicine at University College, London. He became MRCS in 1878, and graduated MB in 1879, and MD in 1881. He became MRCP in 1882 and FRCP in 1888. On 7 February 1882 he married Blanche Adine, daughter of Dr Thomas Robinson Leadam. After holding the appointments of house physician at University College Hospital, and resident medical officer at the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic, Queen Square, he went abroad in 1882-3, and studied under Heinrich Obersteiner, Carl Weigert, Julius Cohnheim, and Wilhelm Heinrich Erb, at Vienna, Leipzig, Berlin, and Paris. On his return in 1883 he was appointed assistant physician to the National Hospital, Queen Square, and to the Great Northern Central Hospital (later the Royal Northern Central Hospital) in 1885. In the course of time he became full physician to both institutions, offices which he held until his death. 
From 1883 to 1887 Beevor was engaged with Victor Horsley in experimental research on the localization of cerebral functions, especially with regard to the course and origin of the motor tracts. This work confirmed results obtained by previous investigators and established the reputation of the authors ('PTRS', 181B, 1890; also 1887-9). In 1903 Beevor delivered the Croonian lectures before the Royal College of Physicians, on muscular movements and their representation in the central nervous system (published in 1904), and in 1907 he delivered the Lettsomian lectures entitled 'The diagnosis and localization of cerebral tumours' before the Medical Society of London. He contributed many papers on subjects connected with neurology to 'Brain' and other medical journals, and his 'Handbook on Diseases of the Nervous System' (1898) became a leading textbook. His most important work was 'On the distribution of the different arteries supplying the brain', which was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (200B, 1909, 1-56) and was the first published work to contain an accurate description of the cerebral arterial circulation. Beevor succeeded in injecting simultaneously the five arteries of the brain with different coloured substances held in solution in gelatin and by this means he determined exactly the blood supply to different parts of the brain. The importance of Beevor's discovery was not only from the anatomical side but also from the pathological, for it enabled the physician to know the exact portions of the brain which are liable to undergo softening when any particular artery is blocked by a clot of blood. 
In May 1908 Beevor went to America, where his lectures were received with enthusiasm by the members of the American Neurological Society, and by the American Medical Association at its fifty-ninth annual session. In 1907-8 he was president of the Neurological Society of London, and on its amalgamation with the Royal Society of Medicine he became the first president of the society's corresponding section, and died in office. For ten years he was honorary secretary to the Association for the Advancement of Medicine by Research. 
Beevor ranks among the great authorities on the anatomy and diseases of the nervous system. He possessed great intellectual power, energy, and industry, and was unsurpassed in his accuracy of observation and recording of facts. He was however cautious in publishing his own observations when they seemed at variance with tradition and accepted teaching. Beevor died from sudden cardiac failure on 5 December 1908 at his residence, 135 Harley Street, and was buried at Hampstead cemetery on 9 December. He was survived by his wife and a son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 30674


Begin, Louis-Nazaire (1840-1925), cardinal and archbishop of Quebec, born at La Pointe-Levis in French Canada on 10 January 1840, was the son of Charles Begin, farmer, and his wife, Luce Paradis. His parents came of farming stock of French descent. He began his education at the Levis model school, whence he proceeded to the commercial college, St Michel, and entered the archdiocesan seminary at Quebec in 1857. After graduating BA from Laval University, Quebec, he was sent to Rome in 1863 in order to complete his theological studies at the French College and at the Gregorian University. He was ordained priest at Rome in 1865, and received the degree of DD from the University of Innsbruck two years later. On returning to Canada in 1868 Begin was appointed professor of theology and church history at Laval University, and he held the chair until 1884 when he was appointed principal of the Laval normal school. 
Begin was raised to the episcopate as bishop of Chicoutimi, one of the suffragan sees of the province of Quebec, in 1888, and three years later he returned to the city of Quebec as coadjutor to Cardinal Taschereau and titular archbishop of Cyrene. Owing to the state of the cardinal's health Begin was appointed administrator of the archdiocese in 1894, and he succeeded Taschereau as archbishop of Quebec in 1898. While teaching at Laval, Begin had published papers on the primacy and infallibility of the sovereign pontiffs and on scripture and the rule of faith. During his episcopate he published 'La chronologie de l'histoire des Etats Unis d'Amerique' (1895) and a 'Catechisme de controverse' (1902). His tenure of the see of Quebec was marked by the formation of many new parishes, the introduction of fresh religious communities, and, above all, by a campaign of social action. As bishop of Chicoutimi he had joined the other members of the Canadian hierarchy in their protests against the Manitoba school law of 1890. In 1907 he founded the organization known as L'Action Sociale Catholique, with its publication 'L'Action Sociale'. He was greatly assisted in this work by Monseigneur Paul Eugene Roy who, at Begin's request, was appointed titular bishop of Eleutheropolis in 1908. During the archbishop's later years much of the administrative work of the archdiocese of Quebec was undertaken by Monseigneur Roy, who became titular archbishop of Seleucia in 1914 and coadjutor with right of succession in 1920. Meanwhile, in May 1914, Archbishop Begin had been created cardinal priest by Pope Pius X, with the titular church of San Vitale. He lived to the age of eighty-five, and was survived by only a few months by his coadjutor, who was already suffering from an incurable disease at his succession. Cardinal Begin died at Quebec on 18 July 1925 and was buried in the crypt of his cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 30675


Beilby, Sir George Thomas (1850-1924), industrial chemist, was born in Edinburgh on 17 November 1850, the youngest son of George Thomas Beilby MD and his wife, Rachel, daughter of the Revd Jonathan Watson, minister of Dublin Street Baptist Church, Edinburgh. He was educated at private schools and at Edinburgh University. In 1869 he joined the Oakbank Oil Company as a chemist and began his association with the Scottish paraffin shale industry. With William Young he improved the process of distillation of shale and greatly increased the recovery of ammonia (in great demand for agricultural purposes as guano reserves became exhausted); the process using continuous retorts, introduced by Beilby and Young in 1881, brought about a large increase in the yield of paraffin and ammonia. 
In 1890 Beilby turned his attention to the production of cyanides, to meet the new demand prompted by the invention of the McArthur-Forrest process for the treatment of gold ores. He devised a process which involved the action of ammonia on a mixture of potassium carbonate and carbon, sufficient cyanide always being present to keep the mass fluid. The Cassel Gold Extracting Company, later called the Cassel Cyanide Company (of which Beilby became a director), used this process until 1906, when Beilby introduced a new process invented by Hamilton Castner, in which metallic sodium was employed. Beilby's association with Castner led him to become a director of the Castner-Kellner Alkali Company, which manufactured sodium at Runcorn and now set up new works for the production of sodium at Newcastle upon Tyne. Beilby remained closely connected with these branches of the chemical industry for the rest of his life. 
Beilby observed the rapid destruction of metals by ammonia at high temperature during the course of his manufacturing operations. He began a detailed series of private investigations into the flow of solids. As a result of elegant experiments with the microscope, carried out with simple laboratory equipment, he concluded that when a metal is caused to flow, for example during polishing, the normal crystalline structure is partly broken down, and a vitreous layer is formed. This theory seemed to explain the hardening of metals by cold working, with the vitreous layer forming on crystal slip-planes, thus resisting further flow along these planes and hardening the metal. Beilby's theory, expressed in his only book, 'Aggregation and Flow of Solids' (1921), enjoyed support from British and American chemists but was less popular with continental scientists. Subsequent X-ray analysis suggested the formation of a vitreous layer to be much rarer than Beilby first thought. 
Beilby's manufacturing experience led him to take great interest in the economical use of fuel, and in his presidential address to the Society of Chemical Industry in 1899 he reviewed the subject and gave a detailed breakdown of national coal consumption. He made a report to the royal commission on coal supplies (1902-4), and he was a member of the royal commission on fuel oil engines for the navy (1912-13). In 1906 he made a series of important experiments in the low-temperature carbonization of coal, and later he carried out microscope studies on the cell structure and properties of coke. He was actively involved in directing scientific research during the First World War, and in 1917 he became the first chairman and director of the Fuel Research Board. It was under his direction that the fuel research station at East Greenwich was designed and erected, and in the six years that he was director of the research board attention was directed mainly to the production of oil from coal by carbonization and to a survey of British coal reserves. Beilby also introduced the term 'therm' as a unit for measuring gas consumption in towns. 
Beilby was a modest man of high character. In 1877 he married Emma Clarke, daughter of the Revd Samuel Newman; they had one son and one daughter. He was keenly interested in educational matters, and from 1907 until 1923 he was chairman of the governing body of the Royal Technical College, Glasgow, to which he was also a generous benefactor. He was president of the Institute of Chemistry from 1909 to 1912 and of the Institute of Metals from 1916 to 1918. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow and Birmingham, and he was president of the chemical section of the British Association at its meeting in South Africa in 1905. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1906 and knighted in 1916. 
Beilby died at his home, 29 Kidderpore Avenue, Hampstead, London, on 1 August 1924. He was survived by Lady Beilby. 


@@@@@


doc= 30676


Beit, Alfred (1853-1906), mining magnate and philanthropist, born at Hamburg on 15 February 1853, was the eldest son of Siegfried and Laura Beit. His father was a merchant belonging to a well-known Hamburg family descended from Portuguese Jews, and Lutheran by religion. Beit was educated privately, and at eighteen entered the Amsterdam office of Messrs Robinow, diamond merchants, after which he joined the Cape Colony branch of D. Lippert & Co., to whom he was related. Early in September 1875 he sailed for Cape Town, and, proceeding to the diamond mining centre of Kimberley by wagon, was one of Lippert's representatives there until 1878, when he revisited Hamburg. His Amsterdam training enabled him to see that Cape diamonds, so far from deserving their reputation of being an inferior product, were generally as good as any in the world, and were being sold in Africa at a price far below their worth in Europe. Accordingly borrowing $2000 from his father by way of capital, he returned to Kimberley in the same year, and set up under his own name as a diamond merchant. Foreseeing the growth of Kimberley, he is said to have invested most of his capital in purchasing ground on which he put up a number of corrugated iron offices. For twelve of these the rent ultimately received by him was estimated at $1800 a month, and later he is believed to have sold the ground for $260,000. 
In 1882 Beit became associated in the diamond business at Kimberley with J. Porges and Julius Wernher. In 1884 Porges and Wernher returned to England and constituted the London firm of J. Porges & Co., dealing in diamonds and diamond shares, and after 1888 in goldmines as well. Beit was sole representative of this firm at Kimberley until 1889, when he made London his headquarters, although his subsequent visits to Africa were frequent. On 1 January 1890 the firm of Wernher, Beit & Co. replaced J. Porges & Co. in the same line of business. 
When settled at Kimberley, Beit made the acquaintance of Cecil John Rhodes, and close business relations followed. Yielding to the force of Rhodes's personality, he became his intimate friend, accepting his ideas and aspirations with enthusiasm. He soon joined Rhodes on the board of the original De Beers Diamond Company (founded in 1880) and played an important part in Rhodes's great scheme for the amalgamation of the chief diamond mines of Kimberley as De Beers Consolidated Mines. The scheme took effect in 1888 after Beit had advanced to Rhodes without security a sum of $250,000. 
By this time goldmining activity in the Transvaal republic, which first began at Barberton in 1884, had spread to the conglomerate formation of Witwatersrand, familiarly known as the Rand. The Rand was declared a public goldfield on 20 September 1886. Early in 1888 Beit paid it a visit, and before leaving Kimberley he arranged provisionally that Hermann Eckstein should establish a branch of his firm on the Rand, trading as H. Eckstein -- later H. Eckstein & Co. Perceiving the possibilities of the area, Beit acquired a large interest in the best of the outcrop mines, which soon became valuable properties. But his chief stroke was made several years later, when he revisited South Africa and illustrated his characteristic perception of possibilities. Adopting the suggestion, in face of much expert scepticism, that it might be possible not only to work the outcrop but to strike the slanting reef by deep level shafts, at some distance away from the outcrop, he evolved, and devoted capital to testing, the deep levels of the Rand. Beit was the first to recognize the importance of employing first-class mining engineers, and with their aid he proved the scheme to be practicable. In the whole deep level system Beit's firm were forerunners and creators; other firms, including Rhodes's Consolidated Goldfields, followed in their footsteps. 
Beit, who had become a naturalized British subject, was deeply interested in Rhodes's scheme of northern expansion. On the formation of the chartered British South Africa Company in 1889 for the conquest of the extensive territory afterwards known as Southern and Northern Rhodesia (and later as Zimbabwe and Zambia), Beit became an original director. He first visited the country in 1891. He later joined the boards of the various Rhodesian railway companies. But when extensive prospecting failed to locate goldfields of any significance between the Limpopo and Zambezi rivers, Beit's interest in the Rand redoubled. Like a number of Randlords, Beit was impatient with the rule of President Kruger. Rhodes and Beit together placed Starr Jameson with an armed force on the Transvaal border (December 1895). After nebulous intrigue with Johannesburg there followed the raid into the Transvaal. Beit's share in this blunder cost him $200,000. Censured for his part in the affair by the British South Africa committee of the House of Commons in 1897, he resigned his directorship of the chartered company. During the South African War of 1899-1902 he spent immense sums on the Imperial light horse and on the equipment of the Imperial yeomanry, and before and after the war he poured money into land settlement, immigration, and kindred schemes for the development of South Africa. 
Beit pursued interests other than politics and commerce. With a genuine love of beautiful things he formed from 1888 onwards, under the guidance of Dr Bode, director of the Berlin Museum, a fine collection of pictures and works of art, including Italian Renaissance bronzes. He finally housed these treasures in a mansion in Park Lane, which the architect Eustace Balfour built for him in 1895. He had a thorough knowledge of painting, and among his pictures were the 'Prodigal Son' series of Murillo, six pictures acquired from Lord Dudley's Gallery, and many of the finest examples of the Dutch and English schools. 
On Rhodes's death in March 1902 Beit succeeded to much of his friend's position. He became the chief figure on the boards of the De Beers Company and of the chartered company, which he rejoined in that year. Beit was also one of Rhodes's trustees under his will. But his health had long been poor, and in the autumn of 1903, when he visited southern Africa for the purpose of examining the administration of Rhodesia, he suffered a stroke near Salisbury. Attended by Dr Jameson, he rallied but never fully recovered. His interests, however, were unslackened. Beit identified himself with the movements for a better understanding with Germany and for tariff reform. He bore witness to his colonial interests by founding at Oxford in 1905 the Beit professorship of colonial history and the Beit assistant lectureship in colonial history, besides giving a sum of money to the Bodleian Library for additions to its collections of books on colonial history. In the early spring of 1906 he was sent to Wiesbaden on account of heart trouble, but by his own wish he was brought home to England, a dying man, and passed away at his country residence, Tewin Water, Welwyn, Hertfordshire, on 16 July 1906. He was buried in the churchyard there. 
Beit, who was unmarried, was survived by his mother, two sisters, and his younger brother Sir Otto Beit (1865-1930); while providing liberally for various relatives and friends he left the residue of his fortune to his brother. At the same time his public benefactions, amounting in value to $2,000,000, were impressive alike by their generosity to England and Germany, and by their breadth of view. To the Imperial College of Technology, London, he left $50,000 in cash and De Beers shares, valued at the testator's death at $84,843 15's'. To Rhodesia, for purposes of education and charity, $200,000 was bequeathed to be administered by trustees. King Edward's Hospital Fund and the trustees of Guy's Hospital were left $20,000 each. Rhodes University at Grahamstown received $25,000, Rhodes Memorial Fund $10,000, and the Union Jack Club, London, $10,000. Funds for benefactions in the Transvaal, in Kimberley, and Cape Colony were also established. Two sums of $20,000 were left to his executors for distribution to the charities of London and Hamburg respectively. Finally $1,200,000 passed to trustees for the extension of railway and telegraph communication in South Africa, with a view to forwarding the enterprise known as the Cape to Cairo railway. Beit made his public bequests elastic. Thus, while bequeathing an estate at Hamburg as a pleasure ground to the people of that city, he provided that twenty years later Hamburg might realize the estate and apply the proceeds to such other public objects as might seem desirable. Two of the bequests -- $200,000 for a university at Johannesburg and $50,000 destined for an Institute of Medical Sciences -- lapsed into the residuary estate owing to the schemes in question being abandoned, but Otto Beit intimated his intention of devoting the $200,000 to university education in South Africa, and the $50,000 was made by him the nucleus of a fund of $215,000, with which he founded in 1909 thirty Alfred Beit fellowships for medical research in memory of the testator. Beit also left parts of his art collections to the National Gallery in London, to the Kaiserliche Museum in Berlin, and to the Hamburg Museum. 
A wealthy financier of abnormal intuition and power of memory, combined with thoroughness of method, Beit was an extraordinarily successful mining magnate. While the full extent of his speculative interests have yet to be established, his investments in the Rand decisively influenced key money markets. Shy and retiring to excess, he was devoid of social ambition, and was little known beyond a small circle of intimates who included men in high positions such as Lord Rosebery and Lord Haldane. An ardent belief in the great causes of his day led him to distribute vast sums of money, but his benefactions were always made privately with rare self-effacement. Because of his close association with Rhodes, he was the target through life for much abuse, some deserved, some not. 


@@@@@


doc= 30677


Beit, Sir Otto John, first baronet (1865-1930), financier, philanthropist, and art connoisseur, was born on 7 December 1865 in Hamburg, Germany, twelve years after his brother Alfred Beit. He was the third son of Siegfried Beit (1818-1881), silk merchant, and his wife, Laura Caroline Hahn ('b'. 1819). The Beits, who were of Sephardic Jewish descent, had settled in Hamburg in the seventeenth century. After completing his education Otto joined in 1888 the London branch of Jules Porges & Co., which in 1890 became Wernher, Beit & Co. He was first sent to Kimberley to learn the diamond business and then to Wernher Beit's Johannesburg branch, H. Eckstein & Co. ('the Corner House'), to handle the firm's share business. He was a member of the Johannesburg stock exchange and was elected its deputy chairman in March 1896. 
On his return to London the same year, Beit acquired British citizenship and became a partner in the stockbroking firm L. Hirsch & Co. which represented Wernher Beit on the Paris bourse. Surprisingly, he never became a partner in his brother's company nor a director of its successor, the Central Mining and Investment Corporation Ltd, despite being a major shareholder. In 1897 he married Lilian (died 1946), daughter of the American Thomas Lane Carter, manager of one of the Corner House mines, and niece of Hamilton Smith, a well-known mining engineer on the Witwatersrand. Like his brother Alfred, Beit was a staunch supporter of Cecil John Rhodes and a close friend of Leander Starr Jameson. However, he was not implicated in the Jameson raid which, coincidentally, occurred while he was staying at Groote Schuur with Rhodes, whom he accompanied to England in 1896. He succeeded his brother as a Rhodes trustee as well as director of the British South Africa Company and of Rhodesia Railways Ltd. He succeeded Lord Milner as chairman of the Rhodes Trust. 
After Alfred Beit's death on 16 July 1906 Otto Beit retired from active business to administer the Beit Trust and its endowment of $1,200,000; this had doubled by 1927 when the trust, established mainly to promote education, transport, and communication in central and southern Africa, came of age. Alfred had nominated three trustees: his brother Otto, who knew him better than anyone else and possessed all the desirable qualities for the position, his former partner Sir Julius Charles Wernher (1906-1912), and Bourchier Francis Hawksley (1906-1915), legal adviser to the British South Africa Company. But Otto Beit was the dominant spirit and mainly responsible for the bridge building programme, the first being the Beit Memorial Bridge linking Rhodesia and South Africa, which was opened on 31 August 1929. Having completed the bridge building programme, the trustees turned to education, mainly bursaries, scholarships, and training. Alfred Beit's bequest of $200,000 to the University of Johannesburg, which was diverted to Cape Town, was augmented by $250,000 from Sir Julius Wernher and $50,000 from Otto, who in 1920 received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Cape Town and Edinburgh. Otto Beit was a benefactor of the Imperial College of Science and Technology in London and in 1909 established the Beit memorial fellowship for medical research and became FRC. His philanthropic work earned him a knighthood in 1920 and a baronetcy in 1924. 
Beit was an unassuming and reserved man who lived quietly and unostentatiously in his house full of great treasures at 49 Belgrave Square and at Tewin Water, Welwyn, Hertfordshire, where his brother Alfred's art collection and part of his own collection were housed. He contributed $10,000 to the Johannesburg Art Gallery and presented the Otto Beit Convalescent Home to Johannesburg in March 1914. His health declined rapidly in his fifties and he died of pernicious anaemia at 49 Belgrave Square on 7 December 1930, his sixty-fifth birthday, leaving his wife, two daughters, and a son. Their elder son, Theodore Hamilton, had died on 27 January 1917. 
Their younger son, 
After serving with the RAF as a squadron leader during the Second World War, Beit and his wife settled in Cape Town, South Africa, in 1945. However, in 1952 the Beits, who were opposed to the Nationalist government's racial policies, left South Africa to live at Russborough, co. Wicklow, Ireland. The restored Palladian mansion was a suitable setting for one of the world's greatest private art collections and was the headquarters of the Alfred Beit Foundation from 1976. In 1986, after the house was burgled a second time -- the first burglary had occurred in 1974 -- Beit donated seventeen old masterpieces to the National Gallery of Ireland, and the rest of the collection was given to the foundation in 1987. The Irish government awarded Sir Alfred and Lady Beit honorary citizenship on 11 May 1993, and in the same year Beit received an honorary fellowship from the Imperial College for Science, Technology and Medicine. 
Tall and fair, Beit was a charming and generous man with wide interests, a lover of art and music, and founder of the Wexford operatic festival. He predeceased his wife, dying at Mount Carmel Hospital, Churchtown, Ireland, on 12 May 1994, aged ninety-one. As he had no children, the baronetcy became extinct. A funeral service was held at Christ Church in Dublin on 16 May 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 30678


Beith, John Hay (1876-1952), writer, was born on 17 April 1876 in Manchester, the third son and sixth child of John Alexander Beith (died 1896), cotton merchant and magistrate, and his wife, Janet, daughter of David Fleming, also a merchant in Manchester. He was the grandson of Alexander Beith, one of the founders of the Free Church of Scotland in 1843. Educated at Fettes College, Edinburgh, and then at St John's College, Cambridge, Beith obtained in 1898 a second class degree in classics, and distinguished himself at rowing. He showed early interest in the theatre, writing reviews for the popular press. 
In 1901 Beith taught at Fettes before returning to Cambridge for a short period to study science. In 1902 as a junior science master he joined Durham School, where he also coached the rugby teams and river crews. A charming companion, with a developed social sense, he was extremely popular. Durham featured in one of his best books, 'Housemaster' (1936). 
In 1906 Beith returned to Fettes. While sharing largely in school life, he spent most of his leisure time in writing. He was a resourceful if unconventional teacher, knew public-school boys instinctively, and enjoyed schoolmastering. When in 1912 he left Fettes to make writing his career his decision was generally regretted, perhaps even eventually by himself. 
Beith's first novel, 'Pip' (1907), coloured by early Manchester schooldays, was a best-seller and was followed by other equally light comic novels, among them 'The Right Stuff' (1908) and 'A Man's Man' (1909). With the publication in 1914 of 'A Knight on Wheels' and 'The Lighter Side of School Life', which owes much to Fettes, his career as a writer was assured. His humour, gift for story-telling, shrewd observation, sentimentality, and truly 'English' talent for sympathetically conveying eccentric characters perfectly suited the age. 
In the First World War Beith served first with the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, then transferred to the machine-gun corps. In 1915 he married Helen Margaret Speirs; they had no children. Also in 1915 he reached the rank of captain and was mentioned in dispatches; he was awarded the MC in 1916. Meanwhile his best-known book, 'The First Hundred Thousand', was published in 1915. Written in billets at home and in France, it 'impressed upon a notoriously unmilitarist public the lighter side of Kitchener's army' ('The Times'). First serialized in 'Blackwood's Magazine', it became one of the most popular books of the period, running to multiple editions in Britain and America, and being translated into French. Beith followed this success with 'Carrying on' (1917) and 'The Last Million' (1918). Earlier employed in recruiting, Beith spent 1916-18 in America with the information bureau of the British War Mission, where his energy and success were rewarded by a CBE (1918) and promotion to the rank of major. 
In 1919 Beith turned to the theatre, living from then on in London, absorbed in its social and theatrical life. He was particularly successful in translating his own novels into plays, among them 'A Safety Match' (1921), 'Housemaster' (1936), and, perhaps his most successful play, 'Tilly of Bloomsbury' (1919, based on his novel 'Happy-Go-Lucky', 1913). 'Tilly of Bloomsbury' was adapted for film, as was 'The Middle Watch' (1929). Beith's wit, romanticism, decorous mind, and exceptional theatrical sense kept his plays popular. He proved an excellent collaborator with other writers, among them Seymour Hicks ('Good Luck', 1923); Stephen King-Hall ('The Middle Watch', 1929, and others); A. E. W. Mason ('A Present from Margate', 1933); and P. G. Wodehouse ('A Damsel in Distress', 1928, 'Leave it to Psmith', 1930, and others). 
Although Beith's theatrical flair was unfaltering, through some curious change in emphasis his later novels never achieved his pre-war success. He failed to adjust, and his last works were poorly received. 'The King's Service' (1938), an informal history of the army, may have helped him to the directorship of War Office public relations (1938-41) and the rank of major-general, but this and the war cut him off from his public. 'The Times' described him as 'turning resolutely, perhaps too resolutely, away from the brutal face of the war', and his tribute to Malta, 'The Unconquered Isle' (1943), an attempt at a second 'Hundred Thousand', misjudged the mood of a people who with their own experience of bombing resented his cheerful glossing. 
On the lapse of his directorship Beith returned to work in America. After 1945 he wrote semi-official histories, which met with little success; his one serious play, 'Hattie Stowe' (1947), about Harriet Beecher Stowe, failed, possibly only through an over-large cast. 
Beith apparently enjoyed his London years. He travelled, was chairman of the Society of Authors (1921-4, 1935-9), a member of the council of the League of British Dramatists from 1933, and president of the Dramatists Club from 1937. He was an officer of the order of St John of Jerusalem, for long a governor of Guy's Hospital, and gave his services also to St Dunstan's. Skilled at archery, he was a member of the queen's bodyguard for Scotland (Royal Company of Archers), a history of which he wrote in 1951. He was noted for charm, striking personality, equable temperament, after-dinner speeches, and personal austerity. Some observers, however, thought they detected an inner unhappiness; perhaps his essential Calvinism evoked a sense of regret discernible in his own reported remark, bitter though humorously offered, that all his life he had lived on his wits. 
Beith died in the Hillbrow Nursing Home, in Liss, Hampshire, on 22 September 1952. There is a portrait at the Garrick Club by T. C. Dugdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 30679


Belcher, John (1841-1913), architect, was born on 10 July 1841 at 3 Montague Terrace, Trinity Square, London, the eldest of the ten children of John Belcher (1816/17-1890), architect, and his first wife, Anne Woollett, a descendant of Philip Woollett, father of the engraver William Woollett (1735-1785). The family were members of the Catholic Apostolic church, in which Belcher was a minister throughout his life. He was educated at private schools and at Luxembourg, and after spending a few months in Paris as an architectural student (1862-3) he became a partner in his father's architectural practice in 1865. On 8 June that year he married Florence, daughter of Matthew Parker, a minister, of Dublin. They had no children. 
After his father's retirement in 1875 Belcher was joined by James W. James until 1882, and from 1885 to 1897 was in partnership with Arthur Beresford Pite. Together they had a strong influence on the development of the grand manner in late nineteenth-century architecture, not only through their executed work, but also through their unsuccessful competition entry for the Victoria and Albert Museum (1891), which was widely discussed within the profession. 
Belcher was also sympathetic to arts and crafts ideas; indeed, he took the chair at the first meeting of the Art-Workers' Guild, an organization devoted to raising the status of the decorative arts. He compared the architect to the conductor of an orchestra, 'leading and directing the executants in the interpretation of a work of his own composition' ('RIBA Journal', 3rd ser., 21, 1913, 77). He was particularly keen that the sculptor should work with the architect from the early days of a commission as 'the most perfect achievement can be attained by their joint action' ('Transactions of the RIBA', new ser., 8, 1892, 49). But he rejected the insistence on taking vernacular buildings as the source of a new style. 
Instead, Genoese baroque -- an enthusiasm Belcher developed on a trip to Italy -- seemed to offer a model for the incorporation of sculpture and painting in the service of architecture, while allowing a free treatment of the classical tradition. There is evidence of this at the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Moorgate Place, London (1890-93), a building with a complex programme of exterior sculpture by Harry Bates and Hamo Thornycroft, an old family friend. If Belcher claimed that every detail of this building had been worked out by himself, other contemporary sources make it clear that it was jointly designed with Pite. Some recent writers have tended to downplay Belcher's role, seeing him as the business-minded front man to Pite the designer, but it seems more likely to have been a real design partnership. Yet Pite, who wrote Belcher's entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', mentioned neither himself nor John James Joass, who worked in the office as assistant from 1897 and partner from 1905, and was equally influential on the later work of the firm. 
Belcher's Colchester town hall (1898-1902) shows that he was capable of producing good work independently. He cannot have received any help from Pite, who entered the competition separately, and the real impact of Joass in the office had yet to be felt. Indeed, the last building which can be said to be more Belcher than Joass was the Ashton memorial, Williamson Park, Lancaster (designed 1904, built 1907-9), a gargantuan folly paid for by Lord Ashton as a memorial to his family, where English sources were now stronger. In 1901 he had published, with Mervyn Macartney, 'Later Renaissance Architecture in England', a close study that served as a visual textbook for the developing English classical revival. 
In later work the hand of Joass became more dominant as illness restricted Belcher's contribution. Mappin House, 158-62 Oxford Street, London (1906-8), the former Royal Insurance building at the corner of St James's and Piccadilly (1907-8), Whiteley's stores, Bayswater (1910-12), and Holy Trinity Church, Kingsway (1910-12), all show the bolder touch of a designer trained to detail for Glasgow masons. 
Joass wrote that Belcher 'was endowed with a most receptive and inquiring type of mind', and that 'new ideas appealed to him irresistibly' ('RIBA Journal', 3rd ser., 22, 1915, 125). This helps to explain the stylistic variety of his work, from red brick Gothic influenced by William Burges in the Mappin and Webb building, Queen Victoria Street, London (1870-72, dem.), to Norman Shaw 'Queen Anne' in the aptly named Queen Anne Chambers, 1 Poultry, London (1875, dem.), or Stowell Park, Gloucestershire (1886), for the earl of Eldon. It explains also the strong influence of his much younger partners. 
Belcher's friends remarked upon his unassuming modesty, which, combined with a 'quiet insistence and determination', made him an ideal president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (1904-6) at a time of division within the profession. He was awarded the 1907 royal gold medal for architecture, and in the same year published 'Essentials in Architecture', a primer aimed at the architectural student. The other great interest in his life was music: he performed publicly as a solo bass singer, and lectured the Royal Institute of British Architects on church organs, and on the musical requirements of church planning. He also published a 'History of Ecclesiastical Music' (1872). 
Belcher was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1900 and Royal Academician in 1909. He died on 8 November 1913 at his home, Redholm, Champion Hill, Surrey, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30680


Bell, Alexander Graham (1847-1922), teacher of deaf people and inventor of the telephone, was born on 3 March 1847 at 16 South Charlotte Street, Edinburgh, the second of three sons of Alexander Melville Bell (1819-1905), speech therapist and elocutionist, and his first wife, Eliza Grace, daughter of Samuel Symonds, surgeon in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Mary. Bell was educated initially at home and then at James Maclaren's Hamilton Place Academy, Edinburgh (1857-8), and at the Royal High School, Calton Hill, Edinburgh, from 1858. In 1862, at the age of fifteen, he left Edinburgh to stay in London with his grandfather, Alexander Bell (1790-1865), who was a well-known elocutionist, and author of 'The Practical Elocutionist' and 'Stammering, and other Impediments of Speech'. 
From 1863 to 1864 Bell was a pupil teacher at Weston House, Elgin, Moray, where he taught both music and elocution and received instruction in Latin and Greek. These disciplines were further studied at the University of Edinburgh from 1864 to 1865. He returned to Weston House as an assistant master in 1865, and in 1866 became a master at Somerset College, Bath. In 1867 he joined, as an assistant, his father, who was continuing his own father's work in London and who was also a notable elocutionist; he had written 'A New Elucidation of the Principles of Speech and Elocution' (1849), and 'Principles of Speech' (1863). 
Bell became adept at teaching deaf people. He matriculated at the University of London in 1868 and attended physiology and anatomy classes from October of that year. In 1870 he and his parents emigrated to Brantford, Ontario, Canada. He continued his work for deaf people in the USA, in Boston and Northampton, Massachusetts, and in Hartford, Connecticut, and he was appointed professor of vocal physiology and elocution at Boston University in 1873. He became a naturalized American citizen in 1874. 
Bell's early experimental work was influenced by A. J. Ellis, a phonetician, who had been converted to A. M. Bell's system of 'visible speech'. In 1866 he introduced Bell to the work of Helmholtz and his electric tuning-fork apparatus, which could produce composite vowel-like sounds. Ellis suggested that Bell should repeat Helmholtz's experiments. Bell soon conceived the notion of a multiple, or harmonic, telegraph, using tuned reeds, which would permit a number of telegraph messages to be sent simultaneously over a single wire by means of interrupted tones of different frequencies. He worked intermittently on such a scheme for several years. 
In 1874 Bell saw demonstrations of Koenig's manometric flame apparatus and Scott's phonautograph, which produced visual images of sounds. Both apparatus used membrane diaphragms. P. Reis's 'telephone' of 1861, which was well known by 1874, also employed a membrane diaphragm at the transmitter. Soon afterwards, about October 1874, Bell produced his ear phonautograph, which utilized a human ear (with its eardrum). This had been suggested by Dr C. J. Blake, who became a renowned American otologist. During the autumn and winter of 1874, and subsequently, Bell, with his young assistant, Thomas A. Watson, spent more and more time on his experimental work. Their efforts were rewarded when, on 2 June 1875, Bell's first membrane diaphragm telephone transmitter produced speech sounds. Watson told Bell: 'I could hear your voice plainly. I could almost make out what you said.' In January 1876 Bell set up a workshop at 5 Exeter Place, Boston. On the evening of 10 March Watson, with a tuned reed receiver operated from a liquid transmitter, distinctly heard Bell's voice say: 'Mr Watson, come here. I want you.' Subsequently, on 25 June, using his membrane transmitters and membrane receiver, Bell showed that intelligible speech could be transmitted over wires. His patents of 7 March 1876 and 30 January 1877 became the fundamental telephone patents. Over a period of eighteen years they were tested in around 600 separate actions. 
While Bell was working on his telegraph system, T. Sanders, a leather merchant and friend, made Bell a verbal offer of help to finance his endeavours, in return for a share in whatever patent rights might accrue. Soon afterwards, Gardiner G. Hubbard, a Boston attorney and Bell's future father-in-law, made a similar offer. These offers were accepted, and on 27 February 1875 the Bell Patent Association was formed. This organization became, in several stages, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (incorporated on 3 March 1885). Bell married Mabel Gardiner, daughter of G. G. Hubbard, on 11 July 1877. She had been deaf from early childhood. They had two daughters, Elsie and Marian. 
By early 1880, Bell had abandoned business matters relating to the telephone, and was engaged with Charles Sumner Tainter, in developing the photophone. This was an invention which enabled speech signals to be transmitted from one place to another by means of a light beam. The invention utilized a selenium cell, in which the photoconductive property of selenium (discovered in 1873) was used. Bell in 1898 was of the opinion that the photophone was his greatest invention, and in 1921 he stated his view that 'in the implementation of the principles involved' the invention was 'greater than [that of] the telephone'. However, the rapid development of radio and the very limited range of the photophone were not conducive to its general application. 
Until his death in 1922, Bell's fertile imagination and interests ranged over many topics. Apart from multiple telegraphy, the telephone, and the photophone, his experimental activities embraced, among others, spectrophones, phonographs, telephonic probes, kites, aeroplanes, hydrofoil boats, and air conditioning, and he took a keen interest in sheep breeding, longevity, eugenics, and the National Geographic Society of America. 'There cannot be mental atrophy', he wrote, 'in any person who continues to observe, to remember what he observes, and to seek answers for his unceasing hows and whys about things' (Bruce, 486-7). 
Bell was greatly honoured during his lifetime. He received twelve honorary doctorates, and was the recipient of the Volta prize of the French government (1880), the Hughes medal of the Royal Society (1913), the freedom of the city of Edinburgh (1920), and honorary fellowship of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (1913). He suffered from diabetes and died, on 2 August 1922, at his house, Beinn Bhreagh (beautiful mountain), Baddeck, Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, Canada. He was buried at the top of Beinn Bhreagh on the 4th and, at the time of the burial, 6.25 p.m., all the telephone traffic throughout the United States was stopped for one minute. 


@@@@@


doc= 30681


Bell, (Arthur) Clive Heward (1881-1964), art critic and writer, was born on 16 September 1881 at East Shefford, Berkshire, the second son of William Heward Bell (1849-1927), civil engineer, and his wife, Hannah Taylor Cory (1850-1942). In the words of his son Quentin, he came from a 'family that drew its wealth from Welsh mines and expended it upon the destruction of wild animals' (Q. Bell, 'Bloomsbury', 23). Their home, Cleeve House at Seend in Wiltshire, was a Regency villa rebuilt as a mock Jacobean mansion and decorated throughout with sporting trophies: growing up there filled Bell with a lifelong horror of vulgarity and a disdain of philistinism. He was educated at Marlborough College (1895-9), where he professed to have been miserable, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, which he entered in the same term (October 1899) as Thoby Stephen, Lytton Strachey, Saxon Sydney-Turner, and Leonard Woolf. The reading society which these freshmen founded in their first year was always claimed by Bell to have laid the foundations of the so-called Bloomsbury group. Like Thoby Stephen, he combined a love of hunting and the outdoors with intellectual curiosity -- and in his case an early interest in visual art. Although thought by his fellow undergraduates too worldly for membership of the select Cambridge Conversazione Society (known as the Apostles), Bell anyway fell under the sway of that secret brotherhood's presiding spirit, the philosopher G. E. Moore, whom he later said was 'the dominant influence in all our lives' (C. Bell, 28). Despite obtaining only a second class in both parts of the historical tripos, he was awarded an Earl of Derby studentship in 1902. He went to Paris in 1904, ostensibly to pursue historical research, but in fact wasted his time profitably acquainting himself with the work of the old masters and of modern French painters, and acquiring a taste for cafe life and the company of artists. 
On his return to London, Bell was prominent in the group of friends who met on Thursday evenings at 46 Gordon Square in Bloomsbury, the house shared by the four children of Sir Leslie Stephen (1832-1904), the eminent Victorian man of letters and first editor of the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Following the early death of Thoby Stephen, Bell married, on 7 February 1907, Thoby's elder sister Vanessa (1879-1961) ['see 'Bell, Vanessa]. Clive and Vanessa Bell had two sons: Julian Heward Bell (1908-1937), a poet who was killed in the Spanish Civil War, and Quentin Bell (1910-1996), an artist, teacher, and writer. The marriage ceased to exist in anything but name before the First World War, partly because of Bell's flirtation with his sister-in-law Virginia (1882-1941) ['see 'Woolf, (Adeline) Virginia] who in 1912 married Leonard Woolf. Thereafter Bell was free to enjoy a succession of love affairs, while remaining on the best of terms with Vanessa, who from 1915 lived with her artistic collaborator, Duncan Grant. Angelica Bell (1918-2012) ['see 'Garnett, Angelica], whose father was Grant and who later married David Garnett, was brought up as Clive Bell's daughter. 
A chance meeting in 1910 with Roger Fry, in a railway carriage between Cambridge and London, altered the whole tenor of Bell's life. Fry was considerably older, and was already well known as an authority on the early Italian Renaissance; but his new interest in contemporary French painting coincided with Bell's. Bell was Fry's eager lieutenant in the organization of the first Post-Impressionist Exhibition at the Grafton Galleries in London that autumn; for the second show, in 1912, he selected an 'English Group'. His huge admiration for Cezanne -- whom he called 'the Christopher Columbus of a new continent of form' (C. Bell, 'Art', 1914, 207) -- was advertised in the book for which he is chiefly remembered, 'Art', published in 1914. Here he put forward his famous theory of 'significant form', the proposition that the quality common to all works of art, from the Byzantines to the cubists, consists of 'relations and combinations of lines and colours' (ibid., 8). The representational elements in a picture were, he believed, irrelevant to aesthetic contemplation: in a much-quoted passage he declared that 'to appreciate a work of art we need bring with us nothing from life, no knowledge of its ideas and affairs, no familiarity with its emotions' (ibid., 25). There is much that is tautologous in Bell's argument, and a good deal that is absurd -- see, for instance, his insistence that 'The bulk... of those who flourished between the High Renaissance and the contemporary movement may be divided into two classes, virtuosi and dunces' (ibid., 40) -- and his central thesis has been widely discounted; but it should be allowed that he is much less dogmatic than is usually supposed. 'Art' owed much to the writings of Fry, as well as to Moore's 'Principia ethica' (1903); it is best read, however, in the context of its time, as a manifesto for post-impressionism. Bell's polemical style was ideally suited to his demolition of canonical aesthetic values, and his book had an enormously liberating effect on a generation of artists and viewers. 
Later Bell abandoned theory almost entirely, but he continued to wield considerable influence as a critic, and his exhibition reviews for 'The Nation' and later the 'New Statesman' between 1913 and 1944 were compulsory reading for a wide audience. If he was rather too prone to denigrate English art in favour of French, and was sometimes guilty of over-praising his friends, he was surely right in 1920 to recognize Picasso and Matisse as the two giants of the modern movement. He also encouraged younger painters such as Ivon Hitchens and Victor Pasmore; but he never came to terms with abstractionism, which his earlier writings had anticipated. His books of criticism, mostly comprising articles for newspapers and periodicals, included 'Pot-Boilers' (1918), 'Since Cezanne' (1922), 'Landmarks in Nineteenth-Century Painting' (1927), 'An Account of French Painting' (1931), and 'Enjoying Pictures' (1934). 
Bell was an unwavering pacifist in both world wars. He spent much of the first at Garsington, the Oxfordshire home of Philip and Lady Ottoline Morrell, where he undertook desultory employment as a farmworker. His pamphlet 'Peace at Once' (1915), in which he courageously argued for a negotiated settlement with Germany, was seized by the police, became the subject of a court case, and was destroyed. In a little-known essay entitled 'On British Freedom' (1923) he made a spirited attack on the modern state's interference in matters of censorship, prohibition, and sexuality. He returned to political themes in 'Civilization: an Essay' (1928), in which he characteristically upheld the superiority of spiritual values over material needs. However, his belief that these could flourish under the rule of dictators presaged his support for appeasement in the 1930s. 'Civilized' was Bell's highest term of praise, and he maintained that it was best exemplified by the societies of Periclean Athens, fifteenth-century Florence, and France during the 'grand siecle'; but Virginia Woolf maliciously remarked of his book that 'in the end it turns out that civilization is a lunch party at No. 50 Gordon Square' (Q. Bell, 'Bloomsbury', 88). 
During the 1920s Bell was frequently in Paris, often accompanied by his mistress at that time, the stylish hostess, patron, and writer Mary Hutchinson, 'nee' Barnes (1889-1977). He relished his contact there with artists -- especially Picasso and Andre Derain, the leading exponent of fauvism -- musicians, and writers, and he was a witness at some of the great set piece occasions of that decade, such as the famous party given to celebrate the premiere of Diaghilev's production of 'Renard' in 1922 at which Stravinsky, Picasso, Proust, and James Joyce were among the guests. Between the wars he was the best-informed English commentator on the Parisian scene, which he brought alive in the pages of a number of journals, including the 'New Republic' in America and 'Vogue' in Britain. He always preferred the literature of France (particularly of the eighteenth century) to that of his own country; and his sympathetic study 'Proust' (1928) was the first book in English on that author. Bell's Francophilia was sometimes a joke to his friends -- his speech and his letters were larded with French phrases -- and it was reported that he celebrated his appointment as a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1936 by addressing a bemused audience at Oxford in French. 
In 1939 Bell gave up his London home at 50 Gordon Square and based himself at Charleston, the Sussex farmhouse which he shared with Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant. Thereafter he travelled regularly to France, where he renewed his friendships with Picasso and Matisse; and in 1950 he was invited to undertake a lecture tour of America. For the last twenty years of his life his devoted companion was Barbara Bagenal, 'nee' Hiles (1891-1984). In 1956 he published a collection of memoirs, 'Old Friends', which celebrated his friendships with the leading figures of his time on both sides of the channel, among them Walter Sickert, Maynard Keynes, T. S. Eliot, and Jean Cocteau. It was Bell's immense enthusiasm and passionate engagement with life that endeared him to his many friends. He was a noted host -- to David Garnett he seemed 'an almost perfect example of James Mill's Utilitarian theory that a man cannot become rich without enriching his neighbours' (Garnett, 24) -- and a welcome guest at a variety of salons. More sociable than most in his immediate circle, he never allowed his society to become exclusive or dull; his comparative wealth (which meant that he never had to earn a living) also ensured that it never lacked comfort. His talent for gossip, however, often got him into trouble; so too did his barely concealed snobbery. He was equally at home entertaining in London restaurants as he was tramping through the Sussex countryside in threadbare tweeds with his dog and a gun. But he was not without vanity, and his comic habits included 'the anxious rearrangement of the thick carroty hair that grew on only part of his cranium, and had a way of getting out of place, much to his agitation' (Partridge, 80). The portrait of him painted by Virginia Woolf in her diaries, in which he is often likened to a flamboyant and voluble parakeet, highlights his absurdities: and in the rehabilitation of Bloomsbury which occurred after his death his reputation alone did not flourish. Bell died at Fitzroy House Nursing Home, Fitzroy Square, London, on 17 September 1964, from cancer, and was cremated four days later at the West London crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 30682


Bell, Sir Charles Alfred (1870-1945), administrator in India and Tibetologist, was born in Fort William, Calcutta, on 31 October 1870, the third son of Henry Bell, of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Anne, daughter of George Dumbell, of Douglas, Isle of Man. From Winchester Bell passed the Indian Civil Service examinations of 1889 and, after two years at New College, Oxford, went to Bengal in 1891. For nine years he worked in the plains, but in 1900, after a run of bad health, he was transferred to the gentler climate of Darjeeling. 
Darjeeling introduced Bell to the culture of Tibet, which fascinated him. In 1904 he was given charge of the Chumbi valley, temporarily ceded by Tibet as a result of Francis Younghusband's controversial mission to Lhasa, and in 1905 he published 'A Manual of Colloquial Tibetan'. In 1908 he was appointed political officer in Sikkim, which made him additionally the diplomatic agent for Bhutan and Tibet. He remained in this post until 1919, marrying, on 15 January 1912, Cashie Kerr (1876/7-1935), daughter of David Fernie, shipowner, of Liverpool and Blundellsands, Lancashire. 
In Sikkim Bell restored internal autonomy to the local ruler and, wary of the potential for ethnic conflict, attempted to limit the influence of Marwari traders from the plains. Similarly, in Bhutan he negotiated a treaty (1910) whereby the king retained autonomy in internal matters but handed over foreign affairs to the British, in effect establishing Bhutan as a British protectorate. In Tibet, however, Bell was forced to watch Britain reverse Younghusband's forward policy and allow the Chinese to occupy the country, although he in part compensated for Britain's apathy by befriending the thirteenth Dalai Lama, who sought sanctuary in Darjeeling in 1910. Bell was himself a religious man, slightly built, with delicate features and an unassuming demeanour, and the Dalai Lama warmed to him, thereafter treating him as a friend and trusted adviser. 
After the revolution of 1911-12 in China, during which the Tibetans repulsed the Chinese, Bell finally convinced his superiors that they should confront the power vacuum in Tibet. In 1913, the Chinese were brought, somewhat truculently, to a tripartite convention at Simla, which Bell attended as adviser to the British plenipotentiary, Sir Henry McMahon. McMahon won initial agreement to an accord which recognized Tibet's symbolic subordination to China while actually subjecting her to British influence, but the Chinese refused to ratify it, justly accusing Bell of telling the Tibetan plenipotentiary what to say in the negotiations. Bell's influence with the Tibetan plenipotentiary, the Lonchen Shatra, went further. He persuaded him that in return for Britain undertaking to shield Tibet from China, Tibet should allow goods from British India to enter duty-free and agree to shift the Indo-Tibetan border from the foothills to the crest of the Himalayas, giving India the fertile territory of Tawang (now Arunachal Pradesh) and establishing a new frontier known as the McMahon line. Bell was created CMG for his work with McMahon, but again he saw Britain squander its potential for influence. Several times during the First World War the Dalai Lama begged him to persuade the Indian government to allow Tibet to purchase modern weaponry and to levy duties on British Indian imports to pay for military expansion. Embarrassed by the tepidity of Britain's performance as an ally, Bell wholeheartedly endorsed these requests but was repeatedly rebuffed by the government. 
In 1919 Bell retired, but he stayed on in Darjeeling to research Tibetan culture. He was thus on hand to be recalled in October 1920 to undertake a mission to Lhasa, a move triggered by the news that China had dispatched a new mission there. For Bell it was a wonderful personal opportunity, but the recent Montagu-Chelmsford reforms forced him to modify his previously hawkish stance. He had never liked Indian interference in the region and, now that Britain had signalled its eventual departure from Asia, he began to push for meaningful Tibetan independence rather than the satellite status he had advanced earlier. He knew that independence depended on bureaucratic reform and a bigger army, but Lhasa's three great monasteries opposed any extension of military authority and exhibited a militancy throughout his mission which brought Tibet to the verge of civil war. When posters appeared in Lhasa calling for his death, Bell was moved to tone down his advice to the Dalai Lama, suggesting that he proceed cautiously with reform. As a result of his mission the arms embargo was lifted and Britain agreed to deal directly with Tibet without reference to the Chinese, measures which were sufficient to establish an Anglo-Tibetan cordiality that survived until 1947. 
Bell retired permanently in 1921. He had been made CIE in 1919 and in 1922 was promoted to KCIE. He devoted the rest of his life to making Tibet intelligible to the wider world, and in 1924 published 'Tibet Past and Present', followed by 'The People of Tibet' (1928) and 'The Religion of Tibet' (1931). His final work, 'Portrait of the Dalai Lama' (1946), was completed only a few days before his death. In researching it he revisited Tibet in 1934 and travelled on to Mongolia, Siberia, Manchuria, and China. He was accompanied throughout by his wife, but she died of cerebral meningitis in Peking (Beijing) in September 1935, after which he returned home. No longer constrained as an official, he had on this trip advised his Tibetan friends to seek an accommodation with China while their bargaining position was still strong. He saw little hope of lasting independence. 
In 1939, with war in Europe imminent, Bell uprooted himself from his Berkshire home and went to British Columbia to finish his book. He died there, at his residence, the Old Charming Inn, Oak Bay, Victoria, on 8 March 1945. He was survived by a son, Major Arthur Fernie Bell ('b'. 1912), and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30683


Bell, Charles Frederic Moberly (1847-1911), journalist and newspaper manager, was born on 2 April 1847 in Alexandria, youngest of six children of Thomas Bell (died 1859), merchant, and his first wife, Hester Louisa Dodd, 'nee' David, widow of a naval chaplain. Following his wife's premature death, Thomas Bell sent his children to England into the care of a relation by marriage; he remarried in 1853. After attending a local day school in south London, Bell was enrolled at a school in Wallasey, Cheshire, kept by the Revd William Clayton Greene, who remembered his pupil 'Charlie Bell' with affection and pride. The offer of a clerkship in his father's old firm, Peel & Co., brought Bell back to Alexandria in 1865. He soon approached 'The Times' to propose speedier arrangements for transmitting news. With the lists of materials forwarded (part of the documentation for cargoes shipped to Britain) Bell enclosed reports on events he thought of public interest, showing an instinct for journalism that led to his appointment as Egyptian correspondent in 1867. Bell's work for Peel & Co. was eventually rewarded by a partnership and most departments were placed under his general management. His standing in the local business community was reflected in an appointment to one of the Egyptian mixed courts. 
In 1874 Bell met Ethel Chataway, a cousin of his brother-in-law, Edmund Carver, and eldest daughter of the Revd James Chataway. They were married, at Rotherwick, Southampton, on 5 August 1875. It was a happy marriage, from which Bell derived much comfort and support. Two sons and four daughters resulted; one daughter predeceased her father. On the eve of the wedding, Bell was informed of his dismissal from Peel & Co. In November 1875 the Bells were back in Egypt. An agency for a Belgian trader was soon supplemented by other employments. From 1876 Bell resumed his connection with 'The Times' as an occasional correspondent, being reappointed Egyptian correspondent in 1882. Bell's descriptions of events following from Arabi Pasha's revolt, including the bombardment of Alexandria, were masterpieces of reporting, earning him a reputation as an ideal correspondent. In 1880 Bell, with others, founded the 'Egyptian Gazette', though he severed his connection in 1882 when legislation threatened to suppress independent journalism in Egypt. Bell's exceptional knowledge of Egyptian affairs and personalities was displayed in three books published between 1884 and 1888, and subsequently in letters in 'The Times' signed by 'A twenty years resident in Egypt'. In September 1884 Bell sustained a severe ankle injury, which left him permanently lame. A bone had to be removed, and Bell had this mounted in a stick, declaring it should yet help him walk. While convalescing he visited London and met members of the Walter family. Arthur Walter, nominally joint manager of 'The Times' alongside John Cameron MacDonald, was much impressed by Bell's energy and capabilities. In February 1890, after MacDonald's death, Walter asked Bell to 'come over here for a few months'. He arrived in March, and his appointment was soon made permanent. Since Arthur Walter played little part in the paper's management, Bell was 'de facto' in charge. 

'The Times' had lost money and reputation through its publication of the Pigott forgeries of C. S. Parnell's letters in 1887. Bell immediately set out to repair the damage. His prime interest was in the paper's standing as an organ of influence in public life. He strengthened the foreign news service by establishing a foreign department in Printing House Square. Bell also succeeded, by subtle means, in appointing Flora Shaw as 'The Times' colonial expert within the hitherto entirely masculine editorial preserve. His political interests -- he described himself as a radical with imperialistic leanings -- led Bell to maintain direct contact with certain overseas correspondents, while at home he cultivated a personal network of influential contacts, entertaining them at his own expense and gaining a reputation for absolute discretion. Bell was continually seeking ways of increasing circulation, but realized that 'The Times' needed a subsidy from other sources. He launched several profitable publishing sideshows. With Messrs Hooper and Jackson, American publishers, Bell negotiated favourable terms for further ventures, culminating in 1905 with the Times Book Club. The club's practice of selling nearly new books at discount prices led to a 'book war' with the publishers, which Bell waged with customary vigour. By 1908 the proprietors of 'The Times' were pressing for a financial reconstruction. Bell learned from a news item received for publication that 'The Times' was to be reorganized under C. Arthur Pearson's direction. Convinced that this arrangement would be detrimental to the paper, Bell acted independently to find an alternative. Through an intermediary a meeting was set up with Lord Northcliffe, and plans were made to establish The Times Publishing Co. Ltd with leading members of 'The Times' staff as directors and Bell as managing director. Bell sought guarantees for the paper's character and editorial independence, but was obliged to agree to carry out Northcliffe's absolute instructions. At first things went well under the new ownership; Bell was credited with having saved 'The Times'. Northcliffe respected 'old Bell', but increasingly found him an obstacle in the way of change. Bell saw himself as the sole protector of the 'status quo', and continued to be a restraining influence in spite of failing health. 
Bell was a large man, with a strong face and dark complexion, which suggested to some opponents a Jewish ancestry (a family tradition among the Montefiores identified Sir Moses as his father). Able to work long hours at high pressure and full speed, he was often impatient and confrontational, though always ready to admit his mistakes. At home he was a genial family man; his sense of humour emerged in conversation -- talking was his sport -- and in correspondence. Bell's constant motivation was the well-being of 'The Times', and his disregard for self-interest earned him great respect. His working methods were old-fashioned, and he never learned to delegate. He particularly enjoyed letter writing, and it was as he ended a paragraph in a typically witty letter on newspaper copyright that he succumbed to a heart attack in his office at Printing House Square on 5 April 1911; he was buried in Brompton cemetery on 8 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 30684


Bell, Sir Francis Henry Dillon (1851-1936), lawyer and prime minister of New Zealand, was born in Nelson, New Zealand, on 31 March 1851, the eldest of the six sons (he had one sister) of Sir Francis Dillon Bell (1821/2-1898) and his wife, Margaret (died 1892), who was the daughter of a leading Wellington Jewish merchant, Abraham Hort. Bell senior had been winding up the affairs of the New Zealand Company and was to become a significant politician, administrator, and diplomat. He was descended from the Quaker apologist Robert Barclay of Ury, and was therefore related to Edward Gibbon Wakefield and Elizabeth Fry. 
After early years in Lower Hutt, young Harry Bell was educated at the Church of England grammar school in Auckland and between 1864 and 1868 at the High School of Otago (later Otago Boys' High School), where he was dux every year and also became head boy. In 1869 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1873, bracketed as eighth senior optime in the mathematical tripos. He worked for a solicitor and was then admitted to the chambers of a family friend, John Gorst. He was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in June 1874, after which he went on a court circuit with John Holker. The following year he returned to New Zealand, where his father had arranged that he enter into legal practice in Wellington under the leading lawyer C. B. Izard. The firm was to evolve into one of New Zealand's leading law practices. 
On 24 April 1878, in St John's Church in Christchurch, Bell married Caroline (Carrie) Robinson (1853-1935), the third daughter of the wealthy Cheviot Hills run-holder and legislative councillor William (Ready Money) Robinson. Of their four sons and four daughters, three sons died in tragic circumstances. On his father-in-law's death in 1889 Bell became head trustee for the huge Robinson estate. From 1892, 'unexpectedly paving the way for a new era in state land settlement' ('DNZB'), he began negotiating to sell Cheviot Hills to the crown. 
Bell's legal impact upon the colony was enormous and varied. In his first year of practice he and others initiated New Zealand law reporting with the 'Colonial Law Journal', and he later worked on systematizing and expanding such reporting. He served as crown solicitor in Wellington from 1877 to 1890 and again from 1902 to 1910. He quickly became 'a leading light in the Wellington bar' (Millen, 68) and was made a senior partner in 1886. He twice declined a judgeship in the 1880s, and on Sir Robert Stout's appointment as chief justice in 1899 he became the acknowledged leader of the New Zealand bar. 
Bell's pronouncements were lucid and intelligible, and one of his specialties lay in law relating to Maori resources. His conduct of significant appeals to the privy council won praise from lords Haldane and Macnaghten, and eventually he became 'famous for his winning record' in the council (Millen, 140). A founder of the Wellington District Law Society (and president, 1888-9), he went on to be a prime mover in establishing the New Zealand Law Society and then to dominate it as president from 1902 to 1918. He was frequently involved in law reform and in the drafting of new statutes, for which he was renowned, and he was among the first batch of king's counsellors appointed within the country in 1907. 
Throughout a busy life Bell engaged in many disparate activities. He headed a number of sporting organizations, including New Zealand's rowing and amateur athletic associations, the New Zealand Rugby Union, and Wellington boating, rugby, racing, and cricket organizations, the last for forty-three years. He was variously a member of the Victoria University council, the first president of the Wellesley Club (from 1891), and consul for Denmark, and later he headed public institutions such as the League of Nations Union. More than six decades of active freemasonry included a spell as grand master in 1894-5. 
Bell's political career began in municipal affairs. As mayor of Wellington in 1891-3 and again in 1896-7 he presided over significant initiatives, especially the securing of proper drainage and refuse services; between these years he was also twice a member of the harbour board. Abortive attempts to enter parliament in 1890 and 1892 had been followed by his election in 1893 as member of the house of representatives for Wellington City. 
A virulent campaign by the populist tabloid 'Fair Play' to brand Bell as a fake liberal, essentially dedicated to self-interest, led to a libel case that he won only nominally. This was one of several factors which made political life uncongenial, and he stood down in 1896. An enduring legacy of his term was a close friendship with William Massey. When Massey's conservative Reform ministry took office in 1912 Bell was persuaded not only to accept an appointment to the legislative council but also to be its leader -- as well as minister for internal affairs and immigration. He was the first New Zealand-born European to sit respectively in both parliamentary chambers. 
Bell had agreed to become a legislative councillor in order to help carry out an election promise he had enjoined upon Reform: to make the second chamber elective, in order to prevent any future progressive government 'stacking' it with radicals. Ironically, it took so long to get sufficient nominees to ensure the passage of such a measure through the council that it lapsed amid the negotiations surrounding the formation of the wartime coalition (National) government in 1915. As a long-time councillor, however, he ably guided the chamber in its role as a revising body, frequently detecting anomalies and flaws in legislation sent up by the house of representatives. 
Bell's dominating intellect and personality enabled him to exercise great influence within the Reform government of 1912-15 (often referred to as the Massey-Bell regime), the subsequent wartime coalition -- which retained him in the immigration portfolio and made him attorney-general in 1918 -- and the post-war Massey government (1918-25). In the last, in which his attorney-general's portfolio was at various times supplemented by eight other responsibilities, the truism of the times was that Bell was 'in regard to all important matters of legislation or Cabinet action, the real power behind the throne' ('Otago Daily Times', 14 March 1936). Massey often sought his advice, and he was acting prime minister in 1921, 1923, and 1925. With the prime minister's decline in health from late 1924 he was virtually the leader of the dominion, and when Massey died he became the first New Zealand-born prime minister -- albeit only between 14 and 30 May 1925. He felt that he was too old to hold the office permanently, despite his party's wishes. However, he served in the ministry of his successor, J. G. Coates, until its fall in late 1928. 
During the First World War, with the solicitor-general, Sir John Salmond, Bell drafted much intricate special legislation; after the war he oversaw its dismantling. As first commissioner of state forests (1918-22) he was able to indulge his interests in conservation, minimizing native forest destruction and other timber wastage and establishing a regulated system of state forestry, thus becoming known as 'the Father of Forestry' in the country (Stewart, 195). He negotiated the Rotorua Lakes settlement with Te Arawa in 1922, and in the following year he initiated the rationalization of New Zealand land law. 
Bell drafted the legislation for New Zealand's assumption of the League of Nations mandate in Western Samoa, and as minister for external affairs (1923-6) he presided over that responsibility. While he was far more enthusiastic over the league than most of his political colleagues, as his country's representative at its third assembly he attacked the right of the (unelected) permanent mandates' commission to criticize New Zealand's actions in Samoa (in this case, on the matter of indentured Chinese labour). His greatest international commitment was to a British empire led firmly by the mother country, and he consistently opposed the drift of the dominions from Britain. 
Bell remained an active legislative councillor until his death, but his later years were focused on his legal work and on external affairs -- especially on the promotion of imperial unity, but also on global issues such as the creation of the International Court of Justice at The Hague. It was a fittingly statesmanlike ending to a full politico-legal life. Along the way he had been appointed KCMG in 1915, GCMG in 1923, and a privy councillor in 1926. Lady Bell died on 8 September 1935 and Sir Francis himself on 13 March 1936, at their home, Taumaru, in Lowry Bay, Wellington. He was buried in Karori cemetery after a state funeral. 
A Labour parliamentarian had in 1921 acknowledged Bell to be 'the uncrowned king of New Zealand' as well as 'one of the ablest men in the southern hemisphere' ('Otago Daily Times', 14 March 1936). He was undoubtedly one of the ablest conservative leaders of a country where conservative leadership has generally been in the ascendancy. Along with some other such politicians he was not afraid to propound liberal views. Hence he gained support in the 1890s from such disparate forces as land reformers, prohibitionists, and suffragist women, and courted unpopularity in the First World War by introducing into the conscription legislation a clause to exempt religious objectors. Indeed he would even -- when expounding, say, on welfare -- call himself a socialist, although a 'tory radical' might be a closer description, and 'Fair Play' and other commentators would not have gone even that far. 
During his long and varied career Bell was highly influential in his country. Politically he was content to remain largely behind the scenes, despite a domineering personality which could veer towards bullying in the face of opposition. 'It is difficult to find a parallel to so many-sided a man in New Zealand public life' concluded the author of his biography in 'DNZB'. Although he left his legacy in a number of significant ways, his relative political self-effacement has meant that his name is now little known. 


@@@@@


doc= 30685


Bell, George Kennedy Allen (1883-1958), bishop of Chichester, was born at the vicarage, Hayling Island, within sight of the spire of Chichester Cathedral, on 4 February 1883, the eldest child of James Allen Bell, the vicar of Hayling Island, and his wife, Sarah Georgina Megaw. The Bells were a family of farmers and businessmen; the Megaws were bankers from the north of Ireland. It was the kind of secure, comfortable, middle-class clerical home that produced many of the bishops of the church in the twentieth century. When, in his student days, George Bell was asked why he was a Christian, he replied, 'First, I was born one' (Jasper, 17). The Bells moved by stages northwards, first to Southampton, then to Pershore in Worcestershire, and then to Balsall Heath in Birmingham. In 1903 they moved again to Wimbledon in London. Throughout his boyhood George Bell endured a succession of schools, but in 1896 he was awarded a place at Westminster School. This placed him in the heart of the London of power and eminence the school represented. 
In 1901 Bell went with a number of peers to study at Christ Church, Oxford. At first his religious beliefs were, in his own words, 'suspended' (Jasper, 17). He was not a man of abstractions and doctrines; he was drawn by the holiness of great souls. The essentially humane quality of his intelligence was confirmed and matured. He secured a first class in classical moderations in 1903, but two years later missed another in Greats. He liked poetry above all, editing five anthologies for the publishing house Routledge (newly acquired by the father of a friend), and winning the Newdigate prize for a poem entitled 'Delphi'. 
In April 1906 Bell went to Wells Theological College for a year, and here he discovered ecumenism. Soon he led weekly services to pray for the unity of the church. He was ordained deacon in Ripon Cathedral in 1907 and then priest a year later in Leeds parish church. It was in Leeds that he served his curacy, encountering the austerities of urban working-class life and labour and sharing them, even to the cost of his own health. Although he returned to Christ Church, first as a tutor and lecturer, and then as a student, Leeds had left its mark. Every now and then he disappeared with groups of students up to Leeds and Liverpool. His commitment to social justice grew in the company of Albert Mansbridge, Henry Scott Holland (by now also at Christ Church), and a brilliant young fellow of Queen's, William Temple. Bell lectured for the university extension movement and supported a number of socially concerned local bodies. His room, above the junior common room, became a centre for vigorous discussion, 'as living a 'cell'', recorded a friend, provocatively, 'as would have contented the reddest communist' (Jasper, 13). Theological disputes, of which there were many in the Oxford of his day, did not much draw him. 'Christianity', he simply responded, 'is a life before it is a system and to lay too much stress on the system destroys the life' (ibid., 17). 
By 1914 two of the great commitments of Bell's life had become explicit: the young ecumenical movement and the work of the church in a world of political and social injustice. In that year Archbishop Davidson required a new domestic chaplain, and he chose Bell. With characteristic caution Bell hesitated, sought advice, and accepted. It was a turning point. This new role he made his own, growing in confidence and watching the world of institutional responsibility sensitively and minutely in what became almost at once an age of international conflict. Davidson was not obviously one to inspire the idealist, but Bell's loyalty to him contained an element of devotion and in time he became his respectful biographer. The Davidson of that epic, two-volume work was a Christian statesman who played an active and influential role in the life of the state, both sustaining and condemning government policies in peace and wartime. At Lambeth, Bell's ecumenical concerns also flourished. In 1919 he went to Oud Wassenar in Holland to view the beginning of the new, post-war World Alliance for International Friendship through the Churches. There he met Archbishop Soderblom, its leading light, and was fired by his vision (Soderblom was equally impressed by Bell). At the 1920 Lambeth conference he worked hard on the famous 'Appeal to all Christian people', at once regarded as the defining statement of that gathering. 
A Lambeth chaplaincy was often in the twentieth century seen to be a strong foundation for an eminent career in the Church of England, and Bell's abilities were both confirmed and extended by his role there. On 8 January 1918 he married Henrietta Millicent Grace (died 1968), daughter of Canon R. J. Livingstone and sister of Sir Richard Livingstone. There were no children. In 1924 Ramsay MacDonald offered Bell the deanery of Canterbury and he accepted it. He was now forty-one. His predecessor had been eighty-seven. To Canterbury he brought change, encouraging visitors, writing guides, and abolishing fees. The broadcasting of services was encouraged and became regular. Visiting preachers from different traditions appeared in the pulpit. His sense of Christian worship was reverent, orderly, and beautiful in language. He took advice from choirboys on the length of services and confronted those who resisted change with a quiet tenacity. 
Responsible for the life of a great church, Bell also found that he was able to put his love of literature and art to good effect. In 1928 John Masefield's play 'The Coming of Christ' was performed in the cathedral; it was widely judged to be the first dramatic performance to take place in an English cathedral since the middle ages. In time he encouraged the contributions of young writers whose work would be seen to characterize the culture of the period: Charles Williams, Dorothy Sayers, Christopher Hassall, and Christopher Fry. After 1929, when he was consecrated bishop of Chichester, he continued to develop a relationship with the arts, and not always in his new diocese. From T. S. Eliot he commissioned 'Murder in the Cathedral' for the Canterbury festival in 1935. He also commissioned the work of artists in the diocese. Bell was a strong and committed diocesan bishop. At Chichester itself he worked successfully and respectfully with two impressive deans, A. S. Duncan-Jones, who shared his commitment to German affairs, and Walter Hussey, who proved a bold partner in the commissioning of new art. 
Bell was a member of the 1935 commission on church and state, a body set up in response to the prayer book crisis of 1927-8. Although its report subsequently sank without trace, it confirmed Bell's reputation as a bishop concerned with the outward life of the Church of England and with its relationship with the political society it inhabited. By now his ecumenism was primarily international, and it was increasingly defined by the political dangers of the period. In 1928-30 he fostered three series of theological discussions between leading British and German theologians of the day. These produced a succession of articles which did something to build a bridge between the thinkers of two very different protestant communities. He became a leading light in the new life and work movement, an ecumenical body devoted to the relationship between Christian faith and public life. Between 1932 and 1934 he was chairman of its council and subsequently chaired its administrative committee until 1938. 

'Murder in the Cathedral' was, in part, a response to the stark realities of national socialism in Germany. Bell's participation in the German crisis after Hitler came to power in January 1933 became increasingly intense. He worked as an ally of those he perceived to be withstanding the onslaught of tyranny and also as a friend of those who were the victims of National Socialist policy. His vision of Christian mission and responsibility was marked by a new urgency and breadth. He spent numberless hours reading reports from Germany and discussing the situation with ecumenical contacts. In 1934 he became a close friend of the young German pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer, then responsible for the German congregation in Sydenham. He devised plans to settle refugees in his diocese and across Great Britain. Advised that those defined as non-Aryan Christians in Germany needed support still more than Jews or Christians he campaigned for them vigorously, organizing a succession of national campaigns. His maiden speech in the House of Lords in 1938 was on their behalf. In these matters he was deftly supported by a sympathetic archbishop, Cosmo Gordon Lang. Meanwhile, Bell's personal diplomacy showed an astute, even creative, ability to draw on the privileges of his status and to place them at the service of those who might seem marginal or powerless. 'What would suit me best of all', he once wrote to Bonhoeffer, 'would be if you could come and have breakfast with me at the Athenaeum at 9 o' clock on Thursday morning. Is that too outrageous?' (Bell MSS, vol. 42, fol. 18, 24 Feb 1934). 
Bell was an unlikely campaigner. His was not a striking public presence; his voice was gentle and rather high. He had little feel for the pungent generalizations of rhetoric. More important to him were the intricate facts that lay behind complicated issues. In a world of propaganda and confrontation he perceived that credibility and influence grew above all out of exactitude. Denunciations were rarely, to his mind, influential, though his language became increasingly condemnatory as the decade unfolded and the international situation deteriorated. Like most church leaders, he supported the appeasement policy of Chamberlain because he believed that only peace could bring change while war must bring only destruction. Thereafter, his belief that war would do more to justify and sustain Hitler in power than peace was more unusual. 
It was during the war against Germany that Bell acquired a reputation for provocation and controversy. He acted as an emissary for Germans dedicated to the removal of the Hitler regime in June 1942, after meeting for the last time his friend Bonhoeffer in neutral Sweden. The foreign secretary, Anthony Eden, sarcastically referred to him as 'this pestilent priest', and suspected him of pacifism. For its determined refusal to offer explicit encouragement to resistance circles in Germany Bell never forgave the British government, holding it partly responsible for the calamitous failure of the coup attempt of 20 July 1944. That a Christian bishop could effectively work on behalf of a political conspiracy to assassinate the head of a European state remains a striking fact. Meanwhile, in the House of Lords he did all he could to combat the words of Lord Vansittart, who argued that national socialism was the expression of German character and that any distinction between the Nazis and the Germans was simple foolishness. But there was more. The development of British air policy during the war alarmed him. In February 1944 he attacked the government in the House of Lords in a speech which combined military insight (he was advised by the military historian Sir Basil Liddell Hart) with moral force. But he was more and more to be seen in sympathy not with the main body of opinion, but on the fringe. It was not difficult to find Christians who denied the weight of such views -- Archbishop William Temple, for one. 
That he did not become archbishop of Canterbury on Temple's death in 1944 has occasioned some debate, but the roots of this lay not merely in Bell's political controversialism in wartime, but in his commitment to issues that were not so much institutional as humanitarian. In this sense Geoffrey Fisher's appointment in succession to Temple foreshadowed a growing tendency in the church to concentrate primarily on its own affairs and to organize its structures more efficiently. 
After the destruction of national socialism Bell visited Germany and inspired a number of German pastors to write what became known as the Stuttgart declaration of guilt. He protested publicly against the explosion of the first atomic bomb and remained a critic of nuclear weapons in the new cold war. He was elected moderator of the central committee of the new World Council of Churches at its first assembly in Amsterdam in August-September 1948. In 1954 Bell became a president of the organization. His reputation among Christians in many countries grew impressively, and he was a committed friend of the new Church of South India. He remained bishop of Chichester until announcing his retirement on 4 June 1957, and died soon afterwards, at 1 Starrs House, The Precincts, Canterbury, on 3 October 1958. The burdens of the age weighed heavily upon Bell to the end. 'I cannot grieve for his going', his widow told a young friend, 'he felt so much for all that was happening in the world' (Chandler, 459). George Bell's ashes were interred by St Richard's altar in Chichester Cathedral, a week after his death. The location is nicely suggestive: at the very centre of the great church, but unobtrusive, and rarely noticed by the passing eye. 
The significance of Bell's contribution to the Church of England, to the ecumenical movement, and to the age he inhabited is inevitably difficult to judge. The conviction that Christianity required a commitment to political affairs, an enduring characteristic of British Christian experience in the twentieth century, was certainly fortified by his vision. His written works retain some power. 'Christianity and World Order' (1940) was the first theological book to be written expressly for publication as a paperback and it sold more than 80,000 copies. This and an edition of his wartime speeches, 'The Church and Humanity' (1946), bring together the best, the most urgent, of his moral prophecy. 


@@@@@


doc= 30686


Bell, Gertrude Margaret Lowthian (1868-1926), traveller, archaeologist, and diplomatist, was born at Washington Hall, co. Durham, on 14 July 1868, the elder child and only daughter of (Thomas) Hugh Bell (1844-1931), an ironmaster, who succeeded his father as second baronet in 1904, and his first wife, Mary 
(or Maria; 1844-1871)
, daughter of John Shield of Newcastle. 
Gertrude Bell is often described as a 'favoured child of fortune' (Graham-Brown, vi), brought up amid the wealth accumulated by her industrialist grandfather, Sir (Isaac) Lowthian Bell, first baronet. She was also favoured by an enlightened upbringing, at Red Barns, the family home near Redcar. Mary Bell's death in 1871, after giving birth to Gertrude's younger brother, Maurice, brought much pain to young Gertrude, a physically restless and intellectually gifted child. The loss of her mother also increased Gertrude's sense of independence and self-reliance; these early years fashioned her into a strong-willed adolescent, whose determination, however, concealed great sensibility and a certain vulnerability. 
The special relationship that developed between Gertrude and her father during these formative years continued during her later life. Hugh Bell's dedication to the children of his first marriage was unaffected by his marriage to Florence Olliffe ['see 'Bell, Florence Eveleen Eleanore, Lady Bell], in 1876. Florence managed to win the hearts of young Gertrude and Maurice, filling the void left by the death of their mother, though the births of her own children -- Hugh (Hugo) Lowthian Bell (1878-1926), Florence Elsa (1880-1971), who married Admiral Sir Herbert William Richmond, and Mary (Molly) Katharine ['see 'Trevelyan, Mary Katharine] -- inevitably altered the family's dynamic. As the eldest of the five, Gertrude affirmed her leadership by excelling in all sorts of intellectual and athletic activities, displaying an immense drive and great readiness to measure up to challenges. 
Brilliant, opinionated, and quick at light repartee, Gertrude projected a sense of inner strength unmatched by other young women in her circle. These qualities, together with her aptitude for work, turned her into an outstanding pupil at Queen's College, Harley Street, London, a leading girls' school, and at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, which she entered in April 1886, not yet eighteen, 'half child, half woman, rather untidy' (Courtney, 57). Contemporaries were impressed by her athletic accomplishments -- she could swim, fence, row, play tennis and hockey -- as well as her breadth of reading and considerable self-confidence. Through solid study, seven hours per day, and after only two years, she gained a first in modern history in 1888. At Oxford she formed long-standing friendships with Janet Hogarth (later Courtney), Edith Langridge, and Mary Talbot (later Burrows). 
After completing her studies, Gertrude was sent by her family on a European tour, staying in Bucharest during 1888-9 with her stepmother's sister, Mary, and her husband, Sir Frank Lascelles, who was then British minister to Romania. Her encounters there with Valentine Chirol ('Domnul' in her letters), the 'Times' correspondent in eastern Europe, familiarized her with developments in great power diplomacy and led to important introductions, notably to Charles Hardinge, later Lord Hardinge of Penhurst who, as India's viceroy, later enabled her to play one of the most influential roles in the post-First World War Middle East. She visited Constantinople early in 1889, returning to England later that year. The following three years were divided between the family home in Redcar and London. In Redcar she tutored her younger sisters and assisted her stepmother in philanthropic work among working people employed in the family's ironworks and collieries at Clarence in the Cleveland Hills and later at Middlesbrough. Summers were spent attending the London social season, where she acquired a lifelong habit of cigarette smoking. Without corresponding to the beauty standards of her time, she had become an attractive young woman in her way. She was slender and erect, with fine features, piercing greenish eyes, and a mass of thick light auburn hair usually assembled on the top of her head. Gertrude's attractiveness drew much from her vivacity, physical fitness, and constant, sometimes excessive, preoccupation with clothes. The round of balls and entertainments failed, however, to culminate in marriage. 
A visit during 1892 to Persia, where Lascelles had become British minister, led to a formative romantic experience and also to the earliest manifestation of her outstanding literary and linguistic skills. Her stay was abruptly curtailed when her parents refused permission for her intended engagement to the embassy's first secretary, Henry George Gerald Cadogan (1859-1893), grandson of the third Earl Cadogan. Cadogan, who died not long after her departure from Tehran, was known to lack financial means to support a wife and was believed to have contracted gambling debts. His death reinforced Bell's personal impressions of the East as the domain of the emotional and it became for her a constant refuge from hard-hearted, sometimes unfulfilling, personal relations in the West. On her return to England she was persuaded to publish, anonymously, a series of her travel sketches adapted from her letters, 'Safar Nameh: Persian Pictures' (1894), notable for their 'vision of Persia as a land with a heroic past' and her depictions of the Persians as 'kindly, hospitable, gifted people' (Arberry, 5). Having studied Persian with the oriental scholar Sandford Arthur Strong during the winter prior to her journey, she embarked on a verse translation of the mystical poet Hafiz ('Poems from the Divan of Hafiz', 1897), to which she brought an insightful interpretation of the East's cultural depth and of the underlying ambiguities of Hafiz's poems. Her translation received a favourable critical reception on its publication and was long regarded as the best free-verse translation into English (Ross, 29). 
During the 1890s Gertrude undertook many travels with family and friends to France, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland. She made a world tour by steamship with her brother, Maurice, in 1897-8, while on a further such voyage with her half-brother, Hugo, during 1902-3, Gertrude, who had become atheistic in her beliefs, attempted without success to undermine his religious faith (he subsequently became a clergyman). In the summers of 1899-1904, with the brothers Ulrich and Heinrich Fuhrer as guides, she undertook a series of expeditions in the Alps, where her determination, bravery, physical strength, and endurance became evident. She tackled the Meije in August 1899 and Mont Blanc in the following summer. During the seasons of 1901 and 1902 she systematically explored the Engelhorner group in the Bernese Oberland, achieving in August-September 1901 ten new routes or first ascents. An attempt in 1902 on the north-east face of Finsteraarhorn ended in failure, but was remarkable for the terrifying ordeal which she and her two guides underwent when the weather broke and they were caught in appalling conditions on the mountainside for two nights, roped together, during lightning storms and blizzards. Her ascent of the Matterhorn in August 1904 marked the end of her alpinism. 
Gertrude Bell's attraction to the East grew with the frequency of her visits to the area. A visit to Jerusalem early in 1900, at the invitation of Friedrich Rosen, the German consul, was an opportunity to improve her Arabic. Travels on horseback to Petra, Palmyra, and Baalbek were the first of a series of desert journeys, and aroused an interest in Syrian archaeology. She returned to Jerusalem in January 1905 and embarked on a journey through the Syrian desert to Konia in Asia Minor, where she pursued her interest in the Byzantine churches of Anatolia. After meeting the archaeologist Sir William Ramsay, she agreed to revisit the area to make further investigations, in the meantime publishing her preliminary findings in the 'Revue Archeologique' (1906, 1907). Her account of the Syrian portion of her journey, 'The Desert and the Sown' (1907), became a classic of pre-First World War travel literature. Politically, it described the heavy Ottoman presence in the Arab towns and cities (the 'sown' areas) but practical absence from the desert areas where the Bedouin tribes were the effective rulers; personally, it revealed her perception of travel in the Middle East as an escape from the restrictions of Western domestic life. 
In December 1906 Bell set out to resume her architectural and archaeological researches in Anatolia. She joined Ramsay in May 1907 and they explored the Hittite and Byzantine site of Bin-bir-kilisse in Turkey. Her particular contribution was in establishing the chronology of Byzantine churches in the region. More practical than the absent-minded Ramsay, she directed the team of Turkish diggers. Returning to Britain in August 1907 she and Ramsay published their results in 'The Thousand and One Churches' (1909), to which she contributed the greater part, writing the chapters on the buildings and ecclesiastical architecture. 
Gertrude Bell's next expedition, in 1909, was to survey the Roman and Byzantine fortresses on the banks of the Euphrates in Mesopotamia. This has been regarded as her most important journey of exploration, covering territory previously unfamiliar to westerners. Starting from Aleppo she reached the palace of Ukhaidir in March 1909, returning by way of Baghdad and Mosul to Asia Minor. Her account of her journey, 'Amurath to Amurath' (1911), one of her most famous books, was dedicated to Evelyn Baring, first earl of Cromer, British agent and consul-general in Egypt until 1907. She described it as 'the attempt to record the daily life, the speech of those who had inherited the empty ground where empires had risen and expired'. It is most notable for its account of the changes that had taken place in the Arab provinces of the Ottoman empire after the Young Turks' rise to power in 1908 and the dissemination of their ideas in the empire's provinces: among other promising changes, foreign books and papers had become available, and greater freedom of speech and liberty of movement (also for the non-Muslim minorities) had been registered. Describing how she had witnessed 'the confused beginnings [that] were a translation of a generous ideal into the terms of human imperfection' (1924 edn, preface, p. ix), she urged Cromer to help her raise sympathy in England for the Young Turks' movement. 
A further expedition to Mesopotamia in 1911 enabled Bell to undertake a fuller survey of the palace of Ukhaidir (the 'little green palace'), completing her initial sketches and drafts while exchanging notes with a German archaeological team. Belonging either to the Sasanian (or even Lakhmid) pre-Muhammadan types of construction with vestiges of buildings belonging to later periods, including Abbasid (after AD 750), the palace on the west bank of the Euphrates, some 120 miles south-west of Baghdad, remains one of the finest surviving examples of early Islamic architecture. Ukhaidir had not been scientifically explored until 1908-9 when Louis Massignon published some preliminary notes in the 'Bulletin de l'Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres' (March 1909) and in the 'Gazette des Beaux-Arts' (April 1909), and later in his 'Mission en Mesopotamie' (1910). Her own findings were initially published in the 'Hellenic Journal' (1910, pt 1, p. 69), a preliminary to her most important contribution to archaeology, a scholarly monograph, 'The Palace and Mosque of Ukhaidir: a Study in Early Mohammadan Architecture' (1914). Ukhaidir was presented by Bell in her letters as a national symbol representing the historical continuity linking ancient Mesopotamia to modern Iraq. 
The results of Bell's archaeological excursions in 1909 and 1911 to Turkish Mesopotamia, where she surveyed and photographed the surviving early Christian architecture of Tur 'Abdin, the 'Mountain of the Servants of God', were also published (in M. van Berchem and J. Strzygowski, eds., 'Amida', 1910), and in 'Zeitschrift fur Geschichte der Architektur', 9 (1913). Her work remains valuable, not least because some of the monuments no longer survive (see her 'The Churches and Monasteries of Tur 'Abdin', ed. M. M. Mango, 1982). 
Bell's intervals in England, between expeditions, were partly spent in laying out the garden in her late grandfather's house, now the family's home, Rounton Grange, near Northallerton. In the years before 1914 her most conspicuous public work in England was as an organizer of the campaign against enfranchising women in parliamentary elections. She became a founder member and later president of the northern section of the Women's National Anti-Suffrage League, launched in July 1908 and chaired by Lady Jersey, which was in 1910 subsumed in the National League for Opposing Woman Suffrage under the presidency of Lord Cromer. Her family was divided on the issue: while her father and stepmother, Sir Hugh Bell and Florence Bell, were both anti-suffragists, her half-sister Molly Trevelyan was a constitutional suffragist. Gertrude was among a number of highly talented, well-to-do, and imperially minded women affiliated to the anti-suffrage cause. Like her friend Violet Markham, she supported Mary Ward's Local Government Advancement Committee, founded in 1912 to promote the idea of women's public service in local government, where their expertise in issues of health, education, and welfare, gained through philanthropy, could be most effectively exercised. 
The man in Bell's life was Charles Hotham Montagu (Dick) Doughty-Wylie (1868-1915), a married army officer whom she had first met in 1907 in Konia, where he was serving as British military vice-consul. After he visited Rounton in August 1913 they started to exchange love letters. The next phase of her travelling has often been seen as an escape from the personal confusion, desolation, and uncertainty arising from their physically unconsummated relationship. Her famous expedition (1913-14) to Ha'il in central Arabia, the seat of the Banu Rashid dynasty, should, however, be connected to Gertrude's inner need to be part of the historical moment, both as a voluntary agent of Britain's interests in the Middle East and as a woman trying to break one of the most challenging barriers of her time: the physical conquest of the desert and the decoding of the moral and ethical code of its inhabitants. 
Bell, who had been elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in June 1913 soon after membership was opened to women, set out from Damascus with her caravan of camels in December 1913. As with most of her other expeditions, she was the only European among the retinue of Arab drivers and guides. Passing through Amman she crossed the Nefud desert, and reached Ha'il in February 1914. In the absence of Amir Ibn Rashid, his sheikhs kept her captive there for eleven days. Returning through Baghdad, she arrived back in Damascus in May 1914. Her intention to publish an account of the journey (for which she received the Royal Geographical Society's gold medal in 1918), was thwarted by the outbreak of war, though after her death D. G. Hogarth wrote it up in the 'Geographical Journal' (1927). Her day-to-day diary, together with a journal of the Amman to Damascus section written for the benefit of Doughty-Wylie, were published in 2000. Her diaries and letters written during the expedition remain the most colourful descriptions of life in the city-fortress and a fascinating study of the customs and practices in central Arabia on the eve of the First World War. Although her journey covered previously uncharted areas of the desert, it was not principally notable as one of exploration; Lady Anne Blunt (whom Bell met in 1906) had travelled in the same region a generation earlier. Rather it was of diplomatic importance for the information that Bell, as the first European to reach Ha'il for over a decade, was able to gather about the Rashids, the Ottoman clients in the region. 
During the early months of the First World War, Bell served as an officer of the Red Cross, assigned with the search for missing and wounded soldiers. After service in Boulogne she was recalled in February 1915 to reorganize the headquarters in London. Doughty-Wylie's heroic death at Gallipoli in April 1915 was a devastating blow; thereafter her life was mainly dedicated to the politics of the Middle East. 
An opportunity to return there arose in autumn 1915 when the military intelligence department in Cairo sought the assistance of British subjects with expert knowledge of pre-war Arabia. At the invitation of the archaeologist D. G. Hogarth (the brother of her Oxford friend Janet), she reached Cairo at the end of November 1915. In the following year the organization formally became known as the Arab Bureau, set up in January 1916 as an adjunct to the intelligence offices of general headquarters (military) to reassess Britain's policy in the region. At first under Hogarth's directorship, the bureau's officers included Ronald Storrs, Kinahan Cornwallis, G. P. Dawnay, and T. E. Lawrence among other British experts in the area. Their main aim was to hasten the departure of the Turks and to provide Britain with a link to the Arabs that would ensure Britain's hegemony over the Middle East once the war was over. 
Early in 1916 Bell was summoned to India and asked by Lord Hardinge to proceed to Basrah on a liaison mission as the viceroy's personal envoy in order to assess the effects of the Arab Bureau's schemes, whose approach differed from the India Office's imperial policy. The Arab Bureau took a more pragmatic, flexible, and -- in the view of some -- insidious strategy, ready to exploit the advantages to be extracted from a rising Arab nationalism to perpetuate Britain's presence in the area. Annexed to the military intelligence department at the headquarters of the Mesopotamian Expeditionary Force, Bell was charged with gathering information on the movements of Bedouin tribes in central Arabia and in the Sinai peninsula. In Basrah in June 1916 she joined the staff of Sir Percy Cox, chief political officer with the expeditionary force, and was appointed assistant political officer, the only woman to hold formal rank within the force. Among her contributions during these years were informative articles for Hogarth's 'Arabian Report' and for the famous 'Arab Bulletin', one of the best sources of information on the events in the Middle East during the war. 
After the capture of Baghdad from the Turks by Lieutenant-General Sir Stanley Maude in March 1917, Bell continued to act as Cox's right hand in the civil administration of Mesopotamia, as his oriental secretary in charge of daily contacts with the population. In 1917 she was appointed CBE. On Cox's transfer to Tehran in 1918 to negotiate an Anglo-Persian agreement, Bell served his successor, Lieutenant-Colonel Arnold Wilson, though their relationship was uneasy as she actively promoted her own policies, sometimes conspiring with Wilson's superiors at the India Office, among them Sir Arthur Hirtzel, against the acting civil commissioner. 
Bell's conflicts with Wilson represented not just a clash of personalities, but also a profound disagreement over Iraq's future. She had previously been sceptical about the possibility of Arab self-government, preferring the model of British rule in Egypt as that for the post-war administration of captured Ottoman territories. But after attending the Paris peace conference in 1919 she became converted to the idea of Arab governments, though guided by British advisers. A staunch believer in the administrative methods of the India Office (and rejecting the promises of autonomy exposed in the 1918 Anglo-French declaration), Wilson opposed Bell's more liberal approach concerning the establishment of an Arab government as the best and cheapest way to maintain Britain's presence in Iraq, and complained that she intrigued behind his back to gain her ends. In two memoranda, 'Self-determination in Mesopotamia' (1919) and 'Syria in October 1919', Bell argued that Arab self-government and administration were a viable option. She also completed her acclaimed 'Review of the Civil Administration of Mesopotamia', commissioned by Wilson and published as a white paper in 1920. The review which, among other things, described the social conditions in Iraq's tribal areas, remains a widely used source of information. 
In April 1920 the San Remo conference established Britain's League of Nations mandate over Iraq. This was followed in summer 1920 by tribal disturbances fanned by Iraqi nationalists of the 'Ahd. Although the uprising had other causes related to tribal politics and reinforced by discontent with taxation and rural conditions the short-lived alliance between Shi'i tribal sheikhs and mujtahids and Sunni nationalists became a national myth or landmark with far-reaching consequences -- among them, the end of the regime of military occupation and the establishment of an Arab provisional government under the presidency of the naqib of Baghdad. The uprising brought the return of Sir Percy Cox in October 1920 as British high commissioner and with it an enhanced role for Bell as oriental secretary, a position she held under him and his successor until her death. Cox set about creating a council of state under the naqib, with whom Bell maintained close contact. 
In the light of Britain's financial difficulties after the war, Winston Churchill, secretary of state for the colonies, initially favoured British withdrawal from Iraq. But at the Cairo conference of British Middle East officials in March 1921, Churchill came to adopt Cox's and Bell's position for maintaining a presence in Iraq by setting up an Arab regime advised by British officers. This system of indirect rule became a heavy burden on the young state's treasury and was later considered by Iraqi nationalists as an obstacle in the country's path to independence. Bell also played a significant role in securing the throne for Feisal ibn Hussein, whose coronation as king of Iraq took place in August 1921. A close adviser to King Feisal, the Khatun ('Lady of the Court', as she became widely known) also stood behind the negotiations for the ratification of the Anglo-Iraqi treaty (October 1922), which formally replaced the mandate. 
Bell took part in organizing the elections for the constitutional assembly, and in preparing the electoral law that provided the king and the British high commissioner with the authority to administer the country and create the mechanisms necessary for political representation of all sectors of the population. Together with Kinahan Cornwallis ('Ken' in her letters), adviser to Iraq's ministry of the interior and the king's personal counsellor, Bell continued to intervene in the political arrangements that led to the signing of the protocol of 1923. Among other things the protocol fixed Iraq's frontiers with Jordan and Saudi Arabia and, more importantly, with Turkey. It left unsolved, however, the question of the former Mosul vilayet with its Kurdish population, which was settled only in 1925, after the visit to the area of a commission appointed by the League of Nations. Bell was also involved in the discussions regarding the terms of the subsidiary agreements (financial, judicial, and military), the appointments of officials and qadhis, and the question of establishing Arabic as the country's official vernacular. She played an important part in the debates on the methods and aims of the educational system to be created in Iraq, which mainly involved the adoption of more appropriate educational methods for the rural (that is, Shi'i and Kurdish) areas, mediating at times between Sati' al-Husri (the director of education who favoured the establishment of a uniform educational system for all the segments of the population), the subsequent Shi'i ministers of education, and her close friend Lionel Smith, the British adviser to the ministry. She tried to help the Muslim women in Baghdad, who were largely confined indoors; she organized tea parties for them and arranged a series of lectures from a woman doctor. 
Gertrude Bell's position in Iraq was eroded after Iraq's new constitution (1924) and administrative structures replaced the old, colonial order. She was often at odds with Cox's successor, Sir Henry Dobbs. Her later letters were a barometer of her feelings at the end of her mission in Iraq. Isolated, grief-stricken, and disappointed by Cornwallis's apparent indifference to her infatuation for him (which grew after his divorce in 1925), Bell found consolation in archaeology, gathering funds for a national museum in Baghdad, which was inaugurated in 1923 and installed in a permanent building in 1926. There was little consolation to be found in England, where economic depression had weakened the family's financial position and forced them to close up Rounton Grange. Having returned to Iraq after a sick leave in England in summer 1925, Gertrude Bell died in her sleep at Baghdad during the night of 11/12 July 1926 and was buried on the evening of the 12th in the British military cemetery there. The cause of her death was an overdose of sleeping tablets, taken on the night of 11 July. Close friends, who were aware of her depression, believed that she had taken her own life, but there was no direct evidence as to whether the fatal dose was intentional. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster. 
Bell's adult life divided into three phases. In the first, during the 1890s, contemporaries saw her as 'an accomplished young lady of good family and brilliant intellectual gifts' (Arberry, 6). But dissatisfied with the conventional role of domesticity and philanthropy assigned to well-to-do, unmarried women, she turned to independent travel, first in the Alps, then in the Middle East, with the intellectual dimensions of archaeological discovery and political observation. The latter enabled her to assume a public role as the First World War and the end of Ottoman rule in Arab lands created an official outlet for her expertise. At her death she was commemorated as a brilliant public servant, who helped to shape the post-war settlement in the Middle East and in particular the creation of the kingdom of Iraq. H. St J. Philby called her 'the maker of Iraq' and reflected that if Feisal's kingdom survived the vicissitudes of time, 'it will stand forth in history a monument to her genius, to the versatility of her knowledge and influence, and to the practical idealism tempered with honest opportunism which were the outstanding characteristics of a remarkable Englishwoman' (Arberry, 8). Her vitality and vigour were admired by many of her female European contemporaries. 'With a man's grasp of affairs she united a woman's quick instinct', wrote her friend Janet Courtney (Courtney, 62), who placed her in stature alongside the great imperial proconsuls Cromer, Curzon, and Milner. 
Bell's legacy in Iraq proved ambiguous; the regime she helped to create was toppled in 1958. Later generations, however, became familiar with her through publication of her letters, first heavily edited by her stepmother (1927) and subsequently in fuller selections edited by Elizabeth Burgoyne (1958, 1961). Later studies brought to light the emotional trauma of her relationship with Doughty-Wylie. Most of all they reveal her ability as a writer and observer, and the extent of her engagement with a Middle East which is also documented in the large collection of technically impressive photographs taken by her during her journeys in the area. Indeed, it is as one of the greatest chroniclers of Britain's imperial moment in the Middle East that she is best remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 30687


Bell, Sir (Harold) Idris (1879-1967), papyrologist and scholar of Welsh literature, was born on 2 October 1879 at Epworth, Lincolnshire, the son of Charles Christopher Bell ('b'. 1845), chemist, and his wife, Rachel Hughes (died 1880). His father's family had been yeoman farmers in the north midlands and had marked literary leanings, his father not least; but the Welsh inheritance from his mother meant more to Bell and was a determining factor in his life. He was educated at Nottingham high school and Oriel College, Oxford, which he entered as an Adam de Brome scholar in 1897; he was placed in the first class in classical moderations in 1899 and two years later narrowly missed a first in 'literae humaniores'. More significant for his future career was the year he subsequently spent in Hanover, Halle, and Berlin learning German and studying Hellenistic history; classical scholarship in Germany was then in its heyday and among the lecturers he heard were Friedrich Blass, Eduard Meyer, and U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorf. This experience both deepened his knowledge of the classical world and introduced him to the most rigorous methods of contemporary scholarship, reinforcing a native tendency to painstaking accuracy and objectivity. 
If Bell's ancestry and his period of study in Germany were decisive factors in his development, a third was his appointment as an assistant in the department of manuscripts in the British Museum in 1903. Here, more by chance than design, he found himself working before long on Greek papyri with F. G. Kenyon. After he had collaborated with him for the third volume of the museum catalogue on documents of an earlier period, chance again directed him to the department's large holdings of Byzantine papyri. Verbose, complex, and often illiterate and lacking the obvious attractions of many Ptolemaic and Roman texts, documents of this period had been largely ignored both in England and on the continent. Bell's edition of these papyri in volumes 4 and 5 of the catalogue, two massive volumes with an ample commentary (1910 and 1917), which provided a striking picture of the Byzantine empire seen from a provincial standpoint and one to which in an article in the 'Journal of Egyptian Archaeology' (vol. 4, 1917) he supplied the title 'The Byzantine servile state', both set a new standard for the museum's publications in accuracy of decipherment and in interpretation, and established him as the leading authority on Byzantine and early Arab Egypt. 
While Bell always retained his interest in Byzantine studies, Roman Egypt later became his main field of study. Both his 'Jews and Christians in Egypt' (1924), an elaborate edition of some remarkable and important documents, and 'Fragments of an Unknown Gospel and other Early Christian Papyri' (1935), jointly edited by him and his colleague T. C. Skeat, long remained indispensable in spite of the numerous re-editions and discussion they occasioned. Bell's achievement was due in part to his technical expertise and capacity for hard work, and in part to the fact that he rightly saw papyrology as a 'Hilfsdisziplin' to be pursued in the wider perspective of the historian; he demonstrated this belief most clearly in the chapters he contributed on Roman Egypt to the 'Cambridge Ancient History' (in vols. 10 and 11), which were a definitive statement of their subject. His work as editor, writer, and contributor of numerous articles in learned journals was done against the background of, and largely in the intervals from, steadily increasing departmental duties; in 1927 he was promoted to deputy keeper, and on the death of J. P. Gilson in 1929 he became keeper, a post he held until his retirement in 1944. In these years the much-debated 'Codex Sinaiticus' was acquired, as well as the Luttrell psalter and some of the missing Paston letters; the department also became the centre of international papyrology from which, thanks mainly to Bell's activities, an understanding of Greek papyri extended to an ever wider circle of studies and in which many younger scholars received an invaluable if informal training. In 1935 he was made an honorary reader in papyrology at Oxford where until 1950 he did much to secure the continuity of papyrological studies; in 1936 he became an honorary fellow of Oriel College. 
Bell's training and long practice in the school of severely objective scholarship controlled but did not inhibit a mercurial temperament and lively imagination. This found scope in his translations from Welsh poetry in which a lifelong devotion to poetry (especially for that in the tradition of Swinburne) joined with a no less deep and lasting enthusiasm for Welsh language and literature. 'Poems from the Welsh', a work of collaboration between Bell and his father, had appeared in 1913 and was followed in 1925 by 'Welsh Poems of the Twentieth Century in English Verse', again by father and son. The pattern was continued in a more ambitious venture, an edition of fifty poems of the greatest Welsh poet of the later middle ages, Dafydd ap Gwilym, consisting of text, translation, and introduction, in which Bell collaborated with his son David. Here scholarship had its part to play too, as it did in his admirable 'The Development of Welsh Poetry' (1936) and in his translation of Thomas Parry's history of Welsh literature down to 1900, to which Bell added an appendix of his own, amounting to a quarter of the whole, on the twentieth century. In this book, which appeared in 1955, and in its predecessors, he was concerned to introduce the English reader to the often unsuspected riches of Welsh literature, just as in much of his papyrological work he was intent on making available to scholars generally the information lurking in the technical publications of papyrologists. For his services to Welsh literature he was awarded the Cymmrodorion medal in 1946 and was president of this society in 1947; he was also admitted to the gorsedd as a druid in 1949. 
Bell was appointed OBE in 1920 and CB in 1936, and was knighted in 1946. Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1932, he served as its president from 1946 to 1950, helping to renew the ties with continental scholarship, a task much after his own heart. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Liverpool, Brussels, Michigan, and Wales, and he was a member of many foreign academies; he was vice-president of several learned societies, and president of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies from 1937 to 1945, of the International Association of Papyrologists from 1947 to 1955, and of the Classical Association in 1955. 
Unassuming, courteous, kindly, always accessible, a man of wide sympathies and considerable power of enjoyment, Bell had many friends at all levels. He was a lifelong supporter of the Labour Party and in matters of religion an agnostic for most of his working life. Shortly after the Second World War, however, for reasons he made clear in a volume of essays, 'The Crisis of our Time' (1954), he returned to the Christian faith. On leaving the British Museum in 1944 he retired to Wales, where he had always spent his holidays, and in his later years played an active part in the intellectual life of the principality and in that of the Church in Wales, of whose governing body he became a member. 
Bell married Mabel Winifred, daughter of Ernest Ayling, in 1911; there were three sons of the marriage, of whom the eldest and the youngest survived him. He died on 22 January 1967 at his home, Brogynin, Iorwerth Avenue, Aberystwyth, a week after his wife's death. 
C. H. Roberts', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30688


Bell, Sir Henry Hesketh Joudou (1864-1952), colonial governor and author, was born on 17 December 1864 in the West Indies, the eldest son of Henry A. J. Bell. Little is known of his early life other than that he was said to be of French extraction, and he lived for extended periods with his father in Belgium and France where he received only a limited education. However, he spoke French perfectly. In 1882 he began his career as a third-class clerk working in the office of the governor of Barbados and the Windward Islands. His financial acumen was soon recognized and he was transferred to the treasury department of Grenada where he served successfully for seven years. Given long-standing local sensitivities about revenue collection, Bell must have gained a good grounding in the art of stretching very limited resources a long way. 
In 1890 Bell joined the colonial service and was posted to the Gold Coast as supervisor of customs. He served here for four years in both financial and administrative positions, being promoted several times. This was not a happy period as he particularly feared the climate of tropical Africa, and was therefore relieved to return to the Bahamas to take up the post of receiver-general in 1894. Several good appointments followed, including administrator of Dominica and acting governor of the Leeward Islands, between 1895 and 1905. His service during this period impressed the Colonial Office, as well as Joseph Chamberlain, and his career advanced rapidly thereafter. Bell was particularly aided in his dealings with the Colonial Office by his ability to write lucid and interesting accounts of his activities. He was appointed CMG in 1903 and more importantly in 1905 was offered the post of high commissioner to Uganda, his first major appointment. In spite of his reservations about the climate, Bell felt that he could not reject such a promising offer. One of the first major problems that he had to deal with in Uganda were epidemics of sleeping sickness that claimed many lives. Having ascertained that cases of the sickness were generally confined to areas within 2 miles of open water, he sought permission from the Colonial Office to move all communities living by the tsetse-fly infested shores and islands of Lake Victoria to new plots on crown land further away. While the Colonial Office demurred at the political implications of forcibly moving large sections of the population, Bell ordered the moves to be carried out regardless. As a consequence many lives were saved and no unrest was reported. His actions in this matter were recognized with advancement to KCMG in 1908. 
During his time in Uganda, Bell continued to develop his ideas on economic development, believing that the region would be best served through nurturing the interests and improving the agricultural methods of the local farmers. He was also determined that the activities of the European planters should be curtailed as far as possible. The role of government, he argued, was to provide leadership, set standards, and bear the cost of agricultural experiments as well as to provide scientific advice, particularly in relation to the development of cash crops. To these ends he introduced the 1908 Uganda cotton ordinance which gave the governor wide powers to control the quality of cotton produced, and wrote his own useful report on the subject in 1909 for the Colonial Office. He worked very hard to improve the transport infrastructure, steering every available penny into the construction of new roads. 
In 1909 Bell was promoted to the post of governor of Northern Nigeria and it was at this point that his career began to falter. The permanent officials at the Colonial Office, particularly Charles Strachey, felt that he had too little knowledge of Nigerian affairs to cope unaided. Charles Temple was appointed chief secretary, with a dormant commission, to shore up Bell's administration. Temple was a ruthlessly determined, ambitious, and very skilful officer who had been in Nigeria since 1901 and had been one of Sir Frederick Lugard's pioneering administrators. Bell arrived in the protectorate already seriously handicapped in his dealings with the tough and independently minded Northern Nigerian political officers. It was hoped that he would have some impact on the economic development of the region, but in practice his influence was so limited that he could do little more than occasionally delay and question the actions of his senior officers who were convinced proponents of the policy of indirect rule. These officers had little time for Bell, decrying his lack of social background, his fear of the climate, and, above all, his apparent lack of credibility when compared to Temple. Events came to a head when a satirical doggerel verse outlining the many faults of Bell was passed around the protectorate until, inevitably, someone could not resist placing it on his desk. Bell unwisely made a great play to find the culprit, even taking the matter up with the Colonial Office. It was thought that this ditty explained his departure from Nigeria in 1912, nearly a year earlier than expected. Lugard was appointed as his successor. 
After Nigeria, Bell returned to the Caribbean, serving as the governor of the Leeward Islands from 1912, and was then posted to Mauritius in 1916. Once again he was able to demonstrate his skill in fostering economic development, and he took a frank pleasure in the trappings of his office. He retired in 1925 and was made a GCMG the following year. Immediately after retiring he travelled extensively throughout Java and French Indo-China, and on his return wrote 'Foreign Colonial Administration in the Far East' (1928), which won the Royal Empire Society's gold medal. In all he published ten books on various subjects including the occult. His first book, a study of witchcraft, appeared in 1889; his last, 'Witches and Fishes', appeared in 1948. He continued to travel for the rest of his life, sojourning in the Bahamas during the Second World War. Bell did not make a home in England after his retirement but he frequently visited London (where he was a member of the Athenaeum). He died, unmarried, on 1 August 1952, at 92 Redcliffe Gardens, Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30689


Bell, Horace (1839-1903), civil engineer and author, was born at 81 Guilford Street, London, on 17 June 1839, the son of George Bell, a London merchant, and his wife, Frances Dude, of Norfolk. Bell received his early education in France and at Louth, Lincolnshire. He began engineering at fifteen under John Wilson in London but soon sought broader based training as an apprentice to D. Cook & Co. of Glasgow. He next served in the workshops and surveys of the Caledonian Railway before taking employment (1859-62) as an assistant engineer on the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway. 
Success in an open competition led to Bell's appointment on 7 July 1862 to the Indian public works department as a probationary assistant engineer. He reached India in December 1862 where he was employed from 1862 to 1870 on the Grand Deccan Road in the Central Provinces during which, in April 1866, he was promoted to executive engineer fourth class (first class, March 1871). Railway work followed and he was among the early appointees to the state railway service initiated in 1870. In 1870 he participated in the Chanda and the Wardha valley railway surveys followed by service on the Indore (1870), the Punjab Northern (1874), Rajputana (1875), Sind (1876), and Neemuch (1878) state railways. 
Promoted to superintending engineer third class in January 1880 (first class, March 1886) and chief engineer third class in October 1890 (first class, January 1892), he had charge of the Dacca-Mymensingh railway surveys (1881-4) during which he served, in August 1883, on a committee considering a scheme for the reorganization of the public works department engineering establishment. In the period 1884-90 he held in rapid succession a series of important positions: testimony to his flexibility and competence. He had the engineering and managerial charge of the Tirhut State Railway (1884 and 1887-8) and charge of the Nalhati railway (1884), and served as the acting director of the large North-Western Railway (1887). Stints as the engineer-in-chief of the surveys for the Great Western of India and the Mughal Sarai to Howrah railways followed (1888-9). In August 1890 he went to Calcutta as the consulting engineer to the government of India for state railways. From January to April 1893 he served as officiating director-general of railways and deputy secretary from which he reverted to consulting engineer until his retirement in June 1894. 
Bell possessed many friends and was considered to be a person of energy, technical ability, and administrative capacity: witness his promotions to high posts and his commendations by the government of India. He also wrote extensively on engineering and other topics, including unpublished reports and memoranda in his official capacity, and published articles, pamphlets, and a book. The book was the substantial and useful 'Railway Policy in India' (1894). He wrote pamphlet length primers on economics ('The Laws of Wealth', 1883) and government ('The Government of India: a Primer', 3rd edn, 1893) that were adopted for Indian students in government schools. 
After Bell retired he established himself as a private consulting engineer in London in which capacity he maintained a close contact with India. The Southern Punjab Railway and the Nilgiri mountain rack railway were among his clients. In quite a different sphere he provided advice regarding the construction of the Marconi masts at Poldhu in Cornwall, England. Made an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 5 March 1867 and transferred to the status of member on 30 January 1872 he was elected in 1897 to the institution's council, on which he served until his death on 10 April 1903. He died at 114 Lexham Gardens, Brompton, London, from heart disease, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Marcia Napier Ogilvy, one of their four sons, and three of their five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30690


Bell, Sir (Isaac) Lowthian, first baronet (1816-1904), iron and steel manufacturer, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 15 February 1816, the eldest of four sons (out of seven children) of Thomas Bell (1774-1845), chemical and iron manufacturer, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Lowthian (died 1875). Lowthian Bell (as he was usually known) was steeped in the local coal, iron, and shipbuilding industries. His father operated the Walker ironworks for the firm of which he later became a partner, Losh, Wilson, and Bell, and his family had links with Lord Dundonald, who had pioneered the Leblanc soda process in England. A second brother, Thomas, was involved in the iron trade; a third brother, John, became a geologist and an important adviser to the family. 
After a nonconformist education at Bruce's academy, Newcastle, Bell visited Germany and Denmark before attending Edinburgh University. He then went to the Sorbonne, and later finished what was an unusually wide (and influential) continental education by undertaking practical work on alkali manufacture at Marseilles. He joined the Walker ironworks in 1835, aged nineteen, and under the influence of the firm's rolling-mill superintendent, John Vaughan, he began studying the operations of blast furnaces and rolling mills. A desire to master thoroughly the technology of any manufacturing process was to be one of the hallmarks of Bell's career. In 1842 he married Margaret (died 1886), daughter of Hugh Lee Pattinson, a well-known chemical manufacturer. The couple had two sons and three daughters. Eight years later Bell started his own chemical factory at Washington in Gateshead, where he operated the new French Deville patent, used in the manufacture of aluminium. Bell expanded these chemical interests in the mid-1860s, when he developed with his brother John a large salt working near the ironworks. 
In 1844 Lowthian Bell and his brothers Thomas and John formed a new company, Bell Brothers, to operate the Wylam ironworks. These works, based at Port Clarence on the Tees, began pig-iron production with three blast furnaces in 1854 and became one of the leading plants in the north-east iron industry. The firm's output had reached 200,000 tons by 1878 and the firm employed about 6000 men. The company's need for ironstone led to the association of Bell Brothers with Ralph Ward Jackson, who leased the Bells important ironstone beds. Bell and Jackson then built the Cleveland Railway to convey material to the Clarence works, thus freeing the company from the railway monopoly formed by the local Quaker industrialist Joseph Pease. It was part of a strategy which allowed Bell eventually to control his own supplies of coal, ironstone, and limestone -- all carried on railways free of freight charges set by his rivals. 
Jackson's activities later bankrupted him, and Bell bought out certain of his colliery properties. In the aftermath Jackson's railway interests (he had also promoted the West Hartlepool Harbour and Railway Company) were acquired by the North Eastern Railway (NER). The latter also negotiated for the purchase of the Cleveland Railway and in 1865 Bell became an NER director, a post he held until his death. From 1895 until 1904 Bell was deputy chairman of the company. He was not the only industrialist on the NER board, though he was one of the most influential. He ensured that the local ironmasters were well protected by a sliding scale of rates; and the NER also funded attempts at the Bell ironworks to rid Cleveland iron of the phosphorus which prevented its use in the manufacture of rails and other products. Bell also influenced policy making at the NER with a wide-ranging series of policy papers on matters as diverse as operating costs and investment in new technology. These papers are said to have been 'remarkable for the statistical concepts employed, for the lucidity of analysis and above all for their bearing on the question of costs, the most pressing business problem of the organisation at that time' ('DBB'). 
In the face of competition from steel, the demand for iron inevitably weakened after the late 1870s. In 1889 Bell therefore erected open-hearth furnaces at Clarence and began utilizing Cleveland pig iron for the manufacture of steel. The business was competently launched, but competition in the UK steel industry was by now keen, and an ageing Bell and his managers were too old to pioneer steel technology as successfully as they had iron. In 1899, therefore -- when Bells became a public company -- the more dynamic neighbouring steel firm of Dorman Long took a half share. In 1902 the latter acquired Bells' remaining ordinary shares in exchange for 225,000 shares in Dormans and the merger was complete. Bells survived as a separate iron and steel firm through the First World War, but the Clarence works was to close in the inter-war depression, when the Dorman empire fell on hard times. Bell's eldest son, (Thomas) Hugh Bell (1844-1931), who succeeded to the baronetcy, was later associated with Dorman Long. 
Bell's reputation depended not only on his career as a mostly successful company manager. For over a quarter of a century he was the unchallenged spokesman for the north-eastern iron industry, and was recognized as one of the 'fathers' of the trade. He was also a respected scientist who was recognized as a world authority on blast-furnace technology. The way in which he combined business and science was unusual in Victorian Britain: nevertheless, his abilities as chemist, mineralogist, and metallurgist challenge the view that the economy at that time was run only by empiricists. His principal works, which combined technical knowledge with international comparative surveys, can still be read with profit. They include: 'The Principles of the Manufacture of Iron and Steel' (1884); 'The Iron Trade of the United Kingdom' (1886); 'The Chemical Phenomena of Iron Smelting' (1872); 'Notes on a Visit to Coal and Iron Mines and Ironworks in the United States' (1875); 'Report on the iron manufacture of the United States of America, and a comparison... with... Great Britain' (1877). His writings, when they discussed non-technical matters, espoused a guardedly optimistic view of British industry. He was anti-protectionist, committed to competitive wage rates, and -- not surprisingly -- a promoter of attempts to improve the scientific base of British industry. 
Bell's sensitivity to Britain's declining competitive standing (nurtured by frequent trips abroad, especially to the USA) and his commitment to technology, management, and labour relations led logically to his strong support for more business and technical organizations. He helped to create the British Iron Trade Association in 1875 (and became its first president) and was a key instigator in the formation in 1869 of the Iron and Steel Institute. He was the third president of the latter in 1873, when the institute held its first meeting overseas. Typically, Bell gave his presidential address in French. In the following year, when he was again president, he was the first recipient of the Bessemer gold medal. He was also involved with the Institute of Mining Engineers and was its president in the year of his death. Closer to home, he was an active supporter of Armstrong College at Newcastle. 
Besides receiving awards from technical societies (such as the Albert medal of the Society of Arts in 1900), Bell was also elected FRS in 1875 and in the 1880s and 1890s he accepted a string of honorary degrees. He was twice mayor of Newcastle and was deputy lieutenant and high sheriff for the county of Durham. A liberal in politics, he eventually became MP for Hartlepool in 1875, but took little part in Commons life. He was a member of the Legion d'honneur (1878) and, on Gladstone's nomination, he received a baronetcy in 1885. Florence Bell was his daughter-in-law and Gertrude Bell was his granddaughter. 
In his later years Bell looked every inch the typical Victorian middle-class industrialist: broad-shouldered, heavily bearded, eminently worthy. His passionate belief in the application of science to industry, however, did mark him out as someone unusual among his contemporaries. His moderation and lucidity, and his rigid adherence to the evidence and scientific facts, were recognized as being among his chief qualities. His contemporaries had no doubts about his standing and spoke of him having 'made a name that will live in history with those of Bessemer, Siemens and others... who devoted so large a portion of their careers to the scientific study of the manufacture of iron and steel' ('North-Eastern Daily Gazette'). Yet Bell lacked the flash of genius or egotism that was apparent in men such as Bessemer and Siemens; and that may explain why his historical profile has always seemed less prominent than that of the other great Victorian engineers. It was perhaps typical of Bell that, despite his massive researches into separating phosphorus from pig iron, the technical problem was eventually solved by Sidney Gilchrist Thomas, who had started his career as a police court clerk. It was typical, too, that such was Bell's generosity of spirit that he was the first to hail Thomas's success in pre-empting him. 
Active until the end, Sir Lowthian Bell died at his home, Rounton Grange, Rounton, Northallerton, North Riding of Yorkshire, on 20 December 1904. He was buried at Rounton on 23 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 30691


Bell, James (1825-1908), chemist, was born in Altnanaghan, Newtownhamilton, co. Armagh, in November 1825. He was educated privately and at University College, London, where he studied mathematics and chemistry, the latter under A. W. Williamson. In 1846 he became an assistant in the Inland Revenue laboratory at Somerset House, which had been established to carry out the provisions of the 'Tobacco Act' of 1842, and was successively deputy principal (1867-74) and principal until his retirement in 1894. 
The work of the laboratory was not restricted to the examination of tobacco, but extended to the quality of brewing materials, the denaturing of alcohol for use in manufacture, and other matters affecting the excise. When the 'Food and Drugs Act' of 1872 was amended in 1875, Bell was made chemical referee for all cases of disputed food analyses that appeared before the magistrates. In this capacity he developed methods for the chemical analysis of foods regulated by the act, and published his results in a successful book, 'The Analysis and Adulteration of Foods' (2 vols., 1881, 1883). In 1882 he was awarded a PhD from the University of Erlangen in Germany in recognition of this work. 
In connection with his official position, Bell was the chemical inspector for the lime and lemon juice supplied to the British merchant navy to prevent scurvy in seamen (1868-94), and he was also consulting chemist to the Indian government, 1869-94. His researches into the grape and malt ferments were published in his revised edition of the 'Excise Officers' Manual' (1865) and in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society' (1870). His research on tobacco was summarized in a pamphlet, 'The Chemistry of Tobacco' (1887). 
Bell's scientific contributions were recognized in 1884 by his election as FRS, and by the award of an honorary degree of DSc from the Royal University of Ireland (1886). He was made CB in 1889. He was a member of the Playfair committee on British and foreign spirits, and served as president of the Institute of Chemistry 1888-91. 
In 1858 Bell married Ellen (died 1900), daughter of W. Reece of Chester. They had one son, Sir William James Bell, alderman of the London county council (1903-7). Bell was generally well liked. The bad relations that existed between the Inland Revenue laboratory and the public analysts after the 1875 act did not extend to him, and had largely disappeared at the time of his death, which occurred at his home, 52 Cromwell Road, Hove, on 31 March 1908. He was buried on 4 April at Ewell, Surrey, where he had formerly resided. 


@@@@@


doc= 30692


Bell, Sir Thomas (1865-1952), engineer and shipbuilder, was born on 21 December 1865 at Sirsawa in India, the son of Imrie Bell, a consultant engineer specializing in the design of lighthouses, and his wife, Jane Walker of Edinburgh. His early education was undertaken at the 'Gymnasium' in Celle, Hanover, and then at King's College School, London. In 1880 he entered the Royal Naval Engineering College at Devonport, and graduated in 1886 as a fully qualified engineering officer; he was intent on a naval career, but was denied this path due to deficient eyesight. Fortunately this was no barrier to a commercial career, and he was appointed to the engineering design staff in the large new engine works which J. and G. Thomson had opened at its famous Clydebank yard. Bell was quickly given experience in the engineering shop, the drawing office, and the estimating department. His promotion was rapid: he was appointed assistant to the engineering director in 1895, and was also the 'outside' manager for the engineering work in the yard. When John Brown of Sheffield acquired the yard in 1899 Bell's qualities were quickly recognized. He was appointed engineering manager and by 1903 had become a local director on the board. When the senior Clydebank manager, John Gibb Dunlop, retired in 1909, Bell was appointed director in charge, a position later to be known as managing director. 
Bell's experience and breadth of outlook made him alert to the many developments in his professional field, and he applied himself with vigour to keeping the Clydebank firm in the forefront of these advances. He undertook his management duties when the steam turbine was appearing in the field of marine propulsion. Under his direction Clydebank acquired a Parsons licence in 1903, and had erected a set of experimental engines by 1904, subsequently installed in the Clyde passenger ferry 'Atlanta'. Turbines were then quickly installed in the 'Carmania' in 1905, Cunard's first such venture, and in the prototype of the quadruple screw machinery of the 'Lusitania', launched the following year. The performance of this innovative machinery was the subject of a paper presented in 1908 by Bell to the Institution of Naval Architects. This early application to the development of turbine machinery was carried a stage further in the building of the 'Aquitania' in 1913. The production of turbine machinery for merchant ships under Bell's guidance reached its climax in the 'Queen Mary', launched in 1934. 
Similar progress was also made in the field of naval machinery. In 1908 Bell acquired for Clydebank the UK licence to the American Curtis turbine, this being the beginning of the development of the Brown-Curtis turbine, especially suited to heavy duty naval service. The first Brown-Curtis turbines were fitted in the cruiser 'Bristol'. The Brown-Curtis turbine was widely installed and was taken up under sub-licence by most other naval builders in Britain. The Admiralty sought Bell's assistance in 1917 as deputy controller of dockyards and warshipbuilding; his qualities were appreciated and quickly rewarded when in 1918 he was appointed KBE. He served in the Admiralty until the end of 1918, returning to Clydebank in January 1919. 
With the armistice the flow of naval orders to Clydebank dried up, and after the signing of the Washington treaty on naval disarmament in 1921, the Clydebank yard received no Admiralty order between 1918 and 1924. Bell consequently had to redirect the work of the yard into the merchant market, where slack demand and over-capacity prevailed. He kept the yard going through skilful negotiation of preferential links with major shipping lines, particularly Cunard, the Orient Steam Navigation Company, the Royal Mail group, and especially the Canadian Pacific Railway, which delivered six of the seventeen contracts obtained by Clydebank between 1925 and 1930. Even with this success the yard was running out of work, and by September 1930 all eight berths were vacant. The yard was only saved from closure by Bell's success in landing the Cunard contract in December 1930, for the construction of their new giant transatlantic express liner, the vessel ultimately to be launched as the 'Queen Mary'. The yard number for the contract was 534, worth $4 million. Work on 534 was brought to a halt on 12 December 1932, when Cunard could not continue financial provision in the wake of the disruption of the bill markets, following the financial crisis of 1931. Work was not resumed until 3 April 1934, on the conclusion of the Cunard-White Star merger, which brought government assistance to complete the liner. During this time Bell presided over a yard whose workforce slipped from over 7600 in 1928 to 422 in 1932. The vessel was finally launched on 27 September 1934, and six months later, in March 1935, Sir Thomas Bell retired from his post as managing director, but continued to serve as a director of John Brown & Co. Ltd until 1946. 
Bell was tall of stature, grave in demeanour, and his strength of character was evident to all who met him. His initial naval training accustomed him to discipline and authority. He exercised both, and was a strict disciplinarian, not least with himself. While he was autocratic and patriarchal with his workforce, he made immense efforts to minimize the hardship of unemployment for his men and their families in the depression. In 1932 he leased 15 acres of land to provide allotments for 150 of his skilled men, and obtained seeds and implements through an English allotment association run by the Society of Friends. In 1900 Bell married Helen MacDonald, daughter of Malcolm MacDonald, a Scottish coal merchant; they had two daughters, one of whom died in childhood. 
In addition to his professional work Bell interested himself in the public life of Clydebank. He was an active member and benefactor of St Columba's Episcopal Church. Together with his wife he had founded the Clydebank Nursing Association, and in 1914 they established for it a residential home in which he and his wife took active interest. After his retirement from executive duties in 1935 he became district commissioner of the Boy Scouts in the Clydebank area, and in 1947 was elected honorary president of the Dunbartonshire Association, to the affairs of which he had given very vigorous support. As a young man he was a keen gymnast; in later years his recreations were golf and gardening. 
Bell finally retired as a director of John Brown & Co. in 1946 due to failing health. He died six years later, on 9 January 1952, at his home, Furzecroft, in Helensburgh, and was buried in the same town. His wife had died in 1926, and he was survived by his remaining daughter. His personal estate was a modest $28,632, nearly $12,000 of which was held in stock of the company he had served for sixty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 30693


Bell, Valentine Graeme (1839-1908), civil engineer, born in London on 27 June 1839, was the youngest son of William Bell, merchant, of Aldersgate Street, London, who was subsequently official assignee in bankruptcy. Educated at private schools and apprenticed in 1855 to Messrs Wren and Hopkinson, engineers, of Manchester, Bell became, in 1859, a pupil of James Brunlees. For Brunlees he was resident engineer in 1863-5 on the Cleveland Railway in Yorkshire, and in 1866-8 on the Mont Cenis Railway (on the Fell system), for which he directed the construction of special locomotives in Paris in 1869-70. While in charge of the Mont Cenis line he rebuilt for the French government the 'route imperiale' between St Jean de Maurienne and Lanslebourg after its destruction by flood. In 1864 Bell married Rebecca (died 1868), daughter of Alexander Bell Filson MD; they had a daughter and a son, Archibald Graeme Bell (1868-1948), who became director of public works in Trinidad. Bell was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 4 May 1869. In 1871 he set up in private practice in London, and in 1872-5 he carried out waterworks at Cadiz for a company which failed and caused him financial losses. During the same period, with Sir George Barclay Bruce, he constructed a railway for the Compagnie du Chemin de Fer du Vieux Port de Marseille. 
From 1880 Bell worked for the Colonial Office in Jamaica where he spent much of his professional life. In 1882 he married Emilie Georgina, daughter of Francis Robertson Lynch, clerk of the legislative council of Jamaica; they had two daughters and a son. Until 1883 Bell was engaged in reconstructing the government railway in Jamaica between Kingston and Spanish Town, which was in disrepair. He extended the line to Ewarton and Porus, and later to Montego Bay and Port Antonio. The governor, Sir Henry Norman, who recognized Bell's capacity and energy, appointed him in 1886 a member of the legislative council. Despite clear reservations within the Colonial Office concerning Bell's overall suitability, he was appointed director of public works in 1887 and held the office for nearly twenty-one years with admirable results. Under his direction the mileage of improved roads was extended from 800 to near 2000; 110 bridges and many modern public buildings were built, and works for water supply, drainage, and lighting were carried out. Energetic in his opposition, he was unable to prevent the transfer, in 1889, of the government railways to an American syndicate. This controversial move proved a failure, and the government resumed possession in 1900. He was made CMG in 1903 in recognition of his valuable public service. The Jamaican earthquake of 1907 seriously affected his health; Bell resigned his appointment in March 1908, and returned to England. He failed to recover from a serious operation and died at the Home Hospital, 16 Fitzroy Square, London, on 29 May 1908. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30694


Bell, Vanessa (1879-1961), painter, was born at 22 Hyde Park Gate, London, on 30 May 1879, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Sir Leslie Stephen (1832-1904), the first editor of the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and his second wife, Julia Prinsep Jackson (1846-1895) ['see 'Stephen, Julia Prinsep], widow of Herbert Duckworth. Leslie Stephen also had a daughter from his previous marriage, and Julia had two sons and a daughter from her marriage to Herbert Duckworth. From an early age Vanessa and her sister Virginia Woolf (1882-1941) determined the one to be a painter, the other a writer. They were educated at home; in 1896 Vanessa began to attend Arthur Cope's School of Art in South Kensington, London, and in 1901 she gained admission to the Royal Academy Schools, where she was much influenced by the teaching of John Singer Sargent. By the time she left in 1904 it is clear that she had moved far from the artistic dominion of her mother's family, which had been on familiar terms with the Pre-Raphaelites and which venerated the work of George Frederic Watts. 
The domestic and social pressures which fell upon Vanessa Stephen as the eldest daughter of an eminent widower and the protegee of her more socially ambitious relatives were eased on the death of her father in 1904, and later that year she moved with her sister and two brothers from Kensington to Bloomsbury, a respectable but unfashionable district, where they set out to follow their own pursuits without undue regard to the conventionalities and constrictions of formal London society. Increasingly they found themselves in the company of the Cambridge contemporaries of the elder brother, Thoby Stephen. In 1905 Vanessa founded the Friday Club in order to provide a meeting-place for artists and persons interested in art, and this led to a closer friendship with the art critic (Arthur) Clive Heward Bell (1881-1964), the most visually educated and aware of Thoby's friends, and, following Thoby's untimely death in 1906, to their marriage on 7 February 1907. The Bells' home at 46 Gordon Square was thereafter one of the focal points of what has come to be referred to as the Bloomsbury circle, which included such friends as Lytton Strachey, Desmond MacCarthy, and, somewhat later, Maynard Keynes, Leonard Woolf (who married Virginia in 1912), Roger Fry, and Duncan Grant (1885-1978). 
Although Vanessa Bell shared her husband's interest in the developments of contemporary French art, her own painting remained essentially sober and tonal, having much in it of Whistler and of the New English Art Club, with which she sometimes exhibited. However, early in 1910 a close and lasting friendship between the Bells and Roger Fry began; this had a profound influence, both personally and intellectually -- and particularly upon Vanessa, with whom Fry was to fall deeply and enduringly in love. In November of that year, with their enthusiastic co-operation, Fry promoted the notorious exhibition 'Manet and the post-impressionists', which was to give the British public virtually its first opportunity to see the work of such painters as Cezanne, Gauguin, and Van Gogh. In its successor of 1912, the 'Second post-impressionist exhibition', four of Vanessa Bell's paintings were hung, with examples by other British and Russian artists, among works by Picasso, Matisse, Derain, and other representatives of the school of Paris. Liberated from the English tradition of direct representation by the intoxicating example of the French and the stimulating theorizing of Bell and Fry, Vanessa's work grew increasingly bold, with a simplification of design and form and a free and joyous use of colour, a progression which was to lead her, before 1916, to paint some of the first totally abstract pictures in Britain. But underlying the audacious innovations of this period, her passion for order, serenity, and harmony was always evident. 
In 1913 Roger Fry founded the Omega workshops to enable artists fired by post-impressionism to apply their gifts to the decorative arts. Although it failed in 1919, Vanessa Bell was from the outset a wholehearted collaborator in this venture, from which she derived, besides a number of commissions, a permanent interest in the use of ornament and decoration. Textiles, embroideries, ceramics, painted furniture, and the many book jackets designed for the Hogarth Press are evidence of her remarkable and felicitous talent as a decorator. However, changes of taste and the disasters of war have all but obliterated her larger decorative schemes, which were usually undertaken in conjunction with Duncan Grant. The mural decorations (1940-42) at Berwick church, Sussex, and rooms at nearby Charleston, Firle (which became her country home in 1916 and after her death was preserved by a trust for the public benefit), survive from among the considerable body of work which they carried out together, mainly for private patrons; but she herself seldom lived in a house, studio, or flat without feeling impelled to decorate its walls and furnishings. This partnership with Grant was one of the happiest in the history of art, and from 1913 -- while remaining always on terms of amity with Clive Bell -- they lived virtually as man and wife. 
Vanessa Bell had two sons -- Julian Bell (1908-1937) and Quentin Claudian Stephen Bell (1910-1996) -- with her husband, and a daughter, Angelica Vanessa (1918-2012) ['see 'Garnett, Angelica], with Duncan Grant. Julian, who lost his life driving an ambulance for the republican forces during the Spanish Civil War, was a poet; Quentin was a painter, potter, teacher, and writer. Angelica, an artist, became the wife of the writer David Garnett and wrote an account of her upbringing, 'Deceived with Kindness' (1984). 
During the First World War Vanessa Bell, as did most of her circle, held pacifist views; she lived in the country with Duncan Grant and her children, and the difficulties of domestic life in wartime left little time for painting. But she appears during this period to have come to feel that in abstraction she approached a dead end, and that, as she put it, 'Nature was more interesting'. She turned to the form of representational art which she felt best suited her. Her method, which allowed her to explore and to celebrate the solidity and brilliance of the natural world, was not radically changed for the rest of her life. Although she had a considerable gift for portraiture and used her friends and family as subjects when she could prevail upon them to sit, she painted few formal portraits and, from necessity as much as choice, applied herself to still life, landscape, interiors with figures, and, from time to time, interpretations of the work of the Old Masters. 
Vanessa Bell contributed regularly to group exhibitions, particularly the London Group, of which she became a member in 1919, the London Artists' Association, and from the 1950s the Royal West of England Academy. The first exhibition consisting solely of her own work was held at the Independent Gallery in London in 1922, and in the years that followed she had solo shows at the Cooling, Lefevre, Leicester, and Adams galleries. In 1964 a memorial exhibition of her work, organized by the Arts Council, was shown in six English cities. She gave generous encouragement to fellow artists, particularly the young, and was a sponsor of, and taught at, the School of Painting and Drawing (later known as the Euston Road School) when it opened in Fitzroy Street in 1937. From 1949 to 1959 she was an active committee member of the Edwin Austin Abbey memorial trust, which commissioned mural paintings for public buildings. 
Between the wars Vanessa Bell lived very privately, mainly in London, devoted to her painting, her family, and her close friends. She travelled in Spain, Germany, and Austria, and made extended stays in Provence, Italy, and Paris. The death of Roger Fry in 1934 was a severe loss to her; but that of her son Julian in 1937 was a shattering blow from which she never fully recovered. The suicide of her sister Virginia Woolf four years later was a further calamity. With the outbreak of the Second World War she again began to live almost wholly in Sussex, with Duncan Grant and Clive Bell, painting industriously to the last. After a brief illness she died at Charleston, Firle, near Lewes, Sussex, on 7 April 1961 and was buried on 12 April, without any form of service, in Firle parish churchyard. 
Vanessa Bell was a woman of grave and distinguished beauty, with a low and beautiful speaking voice -- characteristics which tended to mask her wit and humour and capacity for laughter. Her affections when given were strong and enduring; she was a powerful centripetal force in the small group of friends whom she thought of as 'old Bloomsbury', and among such often difficult and egotistical people she was a conciliator and a peacemaker. As an artist she may be accounted one of the most gifted of her time in Britain, blessed as she was with an instinctive sense of colour and design. She had the intelligence and self-awareness not to be seduced by the pioneering experimentalism of her brilliant post-impressionist period into a sterile extremism; her integrity and sincerity of purpose, and her workmanlike discipline and total lack of affectation led her, during the last four decades of her life, to produce a body of work which affirmed her belief in the simpler pleasures and beauties of the visible world. Her own humility and her unwavering confidence in the superiority of Duncan Grant's genius may have encouraged critics to regard her as his follower, and thus to undervalue her real originality. Their community of interest was indeed close, but in fact the influences were reciprocal. 


@@@@@


doc= 30695


Bellamy, James (1819-1909), college head, born on 31 January 1819 in the school house of Merchant Taylors' School, then in Suffolk Lane, London, was elder son in the family of two sons and three daughters of James William Bellamy BD (1788-1874). The father (of an old Huguenot family settled in Norfolk and Lincolnshire) was headmaster of Merchant Taylors' School from 1819 to 1845. His mother was Mary, daughter of Thomas Cherry BD, headmaster of Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1795 to 1819. In 1822 the father, while still headmaster, became vicar of Sellinge, Kent, a living which he held until his death in 1874. The son James entered Merchant Taylors' School in June 1826. The 'Merchant Taylors' Magazine' (1833-4) contains three poems by him. In 1836 he was elected scholar (leading to a fellowship) at St John's College, Oxford. He graduated BA, with a second class in classics and a first class in mathematics, in 1841. In that year he was librarian of the Oxford Union Society. Although he was not a follower of the Tractarians, he was an admirer of J. H. Newman, whose sermons at St Mary's he attended, and became a friend of Charles Marriott and E. B. Pusey. He proceeded MA in 1845, BD in 1850, and DD in 1872; he was ordained deacon in 1842 and priest in 1843, and settled down to the routine of a college don. He held the college offices in turn, made a very efficient bursar in his year of office, and was a successful tutor; the future Lord Salisbury was among his private pupils. Until 1871 he was precentor, with charge of the college choristers. He was a keen and capable musician, a devoted admirer of Handel, and a friend of John Hullah and other musicians. His fine collection of music was given in trust, after his death, by his sister, Eleanor Coates Tylden, to form the nucleus of a historical library of music in Oxford. During the vacations he occasionally visited Germany, where he studied music, but his home was with his father in Kent. 
On 7 December 1871 Bellamy was elected president of his college, a position he held for over thirty years. Leader of the Conservative Party in the university at a time when his former pupil and friend Lord Salisbury was university chancellor, he was appointed a member of the statutory commission chaired by Lord Selborne which was established in 1877 to draw up new statutes for the university and colleges. Bellamy, who was closely associated with E. B. Pusey in academic politics, attempted to preserve restrictions limiting college headships and fellowships to clergymen; his college resisted the commission's secularizing policy to the end, making an unsuccessful last-ditch stand before the universities' committee of the privy council in 1883. He was a member of the university's hebdomadal council from 1874 to 1907 and was vice-chancellor from 1886 to 1890 as successor to Benjamin Jowett, whom he had known from childhood but with whom he disagreed trenchantly on almost every subject. 
During his presidency of St John's Bellamy embodied the college's conservative traditions, which he strove to uphold. Himself a convivial bachelor, he fortified the resistance to allowing married men to hold fellowships, most controversially in the case of Sidney Ball. Agricultural depression, which reduced estate revenues, threatened to undermine the college, forcing in 1888 a 22 per cent reduction in the emoluments of fellows and scholars: Bellamy, a wealthy man by inheritance, made good the deficiency to the undergraduate scholars from his own pocket. He did not attempt a 'modern' style of headship, remaining a remote figure to undergraduates and, unlike many of his peers, he never preached in his college chapel. Nor did he publish any scholarly work. His reputation as a common-room raconteur and wit -- sometimes caustic -- overshadowed his shrewd administrative abilities: under him the college grew rapidly, its fortunes restored by the astute and far-sighted development of its property in north Oxford. 
Bellamy maintained a long-standing association with the Merchant Taylors' Company, of which he received the honorary freedom in June 1894. From 1895 to 1907 he held the sinecure rectory of Leckford, Hampshire, paying the income into college funds. Until extreme old age he retained his powers: up to his ninetieth year he sang the service in the college chapel on stated days, in perfect tune and with remarkable power of voice. Failing health led him to resign the presidentship on 24 June 1909. He retired to Ingoldisthorpe Manor, Norfolk, the property which he had inherited from his uncle, and died there on 25 August 1909. He was buried in the churchyard adjoining his garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 30696


Bellew, Harold Kyrle (1855-1911), actor, the youngest son of John Chippendall Montesquieu Bellew (1823-1874), popular preacher and public reader, and his first wife, Eva Money, was born at Prescot, Lancashire, on 28 March 1855. He was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Lancaster, and, though originally intended for the army, he drifted into the navy, and for some time served on the training ship 'Conway'. He left this for the merchant service, in which he remained intermittently for several years. He then spent four years in Australia, and on 26 October 1873 he married Eugenie Legrand ('b'. 'c'.1854) in St Patrick's Cathedral, Melbourne. The following year he made his first appearance as an actor, at Solferino, New South Wales, playing Eglinton Roseleaf in T. J. Williams's farce 'Turn Him Out'. 
Bellew returned to England in August 1875, and almost immediately secured an engagement with Helen Barry. His English debut was at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, on 30 August, as Lord Woodstock in Tom Taylor's 'Lady Clancarty', when he performed as Harold Kyrle, the name by which he was known until the end of 1878. After moving to London he made his first appearance in the capital at the Park Theatre, Camden Town, in October 1875, as Roseleaf in 'Turn Him Out', and was next engaged at the Haymarket Theatre, where he was seen in January 1876 as Paris in 'Romeo and Juliet', with Adelaide Neilson. He made his first notable success there in February 1877, when he played Belvawney in W. S. Gilbert's comedy 'Engaged'. The following year he supported Adelaide Neilson as leading man in 'Measure for Measure', 'Twelfth Night', and other plays. 
In December 1878 Bellew was engaged by Henry Irving for the opening of his Lyceum management, and in September 1879 he joined Marie Litton's company at the Imperial Theatre. In the next few years he achieved his greatest success in comedies, notably playing Jack Absolute in 'The Rivals' and Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal'; his Orlando in 'As You Like It' was widely regarded as one of his best efforts. He also toured the provinces with his own company before leaving for New York in 1885. His first appearance there was at Wallack's Theatre, as Hubert in 'In his Power', and he remained in America for the next two years, performing chiefly in old comedy parts. 
After his return to London in 1887 Bellew began a long artistic association with Cora Urquhart Brown-Potter at the Gaiety Theatre. That autumn they formed a company, which toured for ten years through England, Australia, America, South Africa, and the Far East; their repertory included such plays as 'Antony and Cleopatra', 'Romeo and Juliet', 'Camille', 'She Stoops to Conquer', 'As You Like It', 'La Tosca', and 'David Garrick'. Brief appearances in London during this period were made, among others, in three plays of his own composition: 'Hero and Leander', at the Shaftesbury (June 1902), 'Francillon', at the Duke of York's (September 1897), and 'Charlotte Corday'. 
At the termination of his partnership with Mrs Brown-Potter, Bellew performed at the Criterion (November 1898) with Charles Wyndham, in 'The Jest' by Murray Carson and Louis N. Parker, but soon rejoined Irving at the Lyceum (April 1899), where he appeared as Olivier in Sardou's 'Robespierre'. Later in the year he returned to Australia, and interested himself in mining ventures, which proved profitable. From January 1902, when he was once more at Wallack's Theatre, New York, until his death he was associated entirely with the American stage. His new parts, which were few, included Raffles, in the play of that name (1903), and Richard Voysin in 'The Thief' (1907). 
Bellew was an actor of ease and distinction, with a beautiful voice, handsome, clear-cut features, and a courtly bearing. He died of pneumonia while on tour at Salt Lake City, Utah, on 2 November 1911, and was buried in a cemetery on the Boston Post Road, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 30697


Bellman, Sir (Charles) Harold (1886-1963), building society manager, was born in Paddington on 16 February 1886, the second son of Charles Henry Bellman, coach builder, and his wife, Ellen Clemens, both of Cornish origin. After attending a higher-grade school in Kilburn until the age of fourteen he entered the Railway Clearing House near Euston in 1900. An early and lasting cultural influence was Wesleyan Methodism. He also, as a young man, served with the 3rd County of London imperial yeomanry. Bellman's talent for organization became apparent during the First World War, when he served as principal assistant in the establishment department of the Ministry of Munitions. 
In 1918, having formed a friendship with Gilbert Lane, secretary of the Abbey Road and St John's Wood Permanent Building Society, he was invited to join its board of management. When Lane died in 1921, Bellman succeeded him as secretary. When Bellman joined the society it was little known outside the borough of Paddington in which it was situated. Bellman studied minutely every aspect of the work -- the processes of borrowing and lending, the duties of clerks, cashiers, and surveyors -- and made many innovations and improvements. He appointed agents and pioneered a policy of opening branches. He overhauled the publicity, wrote the prospectus himself, and advertised in the national press. Home-ownership through thrift became for him a conviction. 
The inter-war years witnessed both rising incomes and a continuing shortage of houses to let, and these conditions led to the growth of the building society movement. There was a strong flow of funds into building societies, not least the Abbey Road. Its assets, which in 1919 were $750,000, rose to $8 million in eight years, and advances rose from about $150,000 to over $3 million. 
During these years the board was strengthened by new directors. Sir Josiah Stamp (1880-1941) became president in 1926, and Bellman took great trouble to make the annual meeting a memorable occasion, inviting a prominent person, usually a cabinet minister, to be the chief speaker. In 1932 the society's new building in Baker Street, with its lofty belled tower, was opened by the prime minister, James Ramsay MacDonald. In 1944 the society merged with the National Society to form the Abbey National, with assets of $80 million and Bellman as chairman and joint managing director. After four years he gave up his executive post, but he remained chairman until his death. 
Bellman's activities were not confined to his own society. As early as 1922 he formed the Metropolitan Building Societies Association, composed of some fifty societies, and became its first honorary secretary, then its chairman. In 1923 he was elected to the council of the central organization, the National Association of Building Societies; from 1933 to 1936 he served as its chairman, in succession to Sir Enoch Hill (1865-1942). In 1934 the Building Societies Institute for training building society staff was founded, with Bellman as the first president. From 1934 until 1938 Bellman was president of the International Union of Building Societies and presided with great distinction over two conferences: at Salzburg in 1935 and at Zurich in 1938. By this time, influence in the building society movement had become worldwide; he was especially highly regarded in the USA. 
The years in which Bellman served as chairman of the National Association were stormy: he tried to secure the co-operation of the 374 societies for the common purpose of adopting a new code of ethics and procedure, but was frustrated by the old-established societies. In consequence, those societies assenting to the new code dissolved the National Association in 1936 and formed the new Building Societies Association. Bellman remained its chairman for another year. Some fifty societies, however, splintered off and founded their own national organization. The split was healed only in 1940 after public anxiety about alleged irregularity by a Yorkshire society in the 'borders' case' had led to the passing of the 'Building Societies Act' of 1939. This embodied in the main the code of ethics and procedure which the dissenting societies had rejected and which all societies now had to accept. The Building Societies Association then became the authoritative voice of the whole movement. Although Bellman retired from the chair in 1937 he remained on the council until 1956, when he was made a vice-president. 
Bellman had a dignified presence and perfect articulation. He had first learned to speak in the Sunday school and the guild attached to the Wesleyan chapel in Fernhead Road, Paddington, which he claimed had been the strongest influence in his life as a boy. In 1911 Bellman married Kate, daughter of Edwin George Peacock, of Brondesbury Park. They had been at school together, but it was their common interest in the choir and the social life of the chapel which ripened their friendship. When she died in 1959 Bellman presented a window to the new Fernhead Road Chapel in her memory. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In addition to his chapel activities, Bellman undertook a wide range of public duties, serving as chairman of Clayesmore, the boys', and Queenswood, the girls', public schools. He was chairman and treasurer of the National Children's Home, chairman of several hospitals, and a member of the Ministry of Health's Central Housing Advisory Committee and of numerous departmental committees. He was president of the Aldwych Club (1935-6) and of the Advertising Association (1939); and as a member of the court of governors of the London School of Economics took a special interest in its department of business management. He was chairman of the Hampstead and Marylebone bench of magistrates and a vice-lieutenant of Middlesex. In the war of 1939-45 he served as a major in 22nd Middlesex battalion Home Guard. He wrote some dozen books -- four of which became standard works in the building society world: 'The Building Society Movement' (1927), 'The Silent Revolution' (1928), 'The Thrifty Three Millions' (1935), and 'Bricks and Mortals' (1949). He was appointed MBE in 1920 and knighted in 1932. He was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, an officer of the Australian order of merit, and an honorary LLD of the American University, Washington (1939). 
Gardening was Bellman's chief relaxation; he cultivated azaleas and prize-winning roses and chrysanthemums. He died at Guy's Hospital, London, on 1 June 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 30698


Bello, Sir Ahmadu, sardauna of Sokoto (1910-1966), premier of Northern Nigeria, was born at Rabah, a small riverain town upstream of Sokoto, one of ten half-brothers and fifteen half-sisters born to his father, Ibrahim Rabah, the district head. Both parents were Sokoto Fulani, though his maternal grandmother was a daughter of Ibrahim Dabo, emir of Kano ('r'. 1819-46). His paternal grandfather was Abubakar Atiku, the seventh sultan of Sokoto ('r'. 1873-7). 'Sardauna', the title by which he was later universally known and which he preferred to all others awarded him, was one of the senior traditional Fulani titles in Sokoto, restricted to scions of the ruling family. It glosses as 'captain of the royal bodyguard'. 
Ahmadu Rabah, as he was then known, learned Arabic and the 'Koran' from a local religious 'malam' or teacher. Aged ten, he was sent to the Sokoto provincial school and in 1926 to the Katsina Training College. The college, opened only in 1922, was designed to enable emirate Muslim students to observe their religious principles and upbringing while at the same time learning to become teachers in the new English-language based secondary schools. The college was to become 'the Eton of the North', and so influential were its alumni that when the first cabinet of Northern Nigeria was formed in 1951, nearly every minister was an old Katsina College boy. A prefect and a hard-working student, Ahmadu was also a keen cricketer and captained the college team at Eton fives, introduced by one of the first British tutors at the college, S. J. Hogben. In later years he was invited to play fives at Eton College; in return he hosted the Eton fives team in Nigeria. During his premiership he was frequently to be found enjoying fives with members of the northern politico-administrative elite, urging his cabinet to play also -- 'quick exercise for stiff Ministers', he would explain. 
On finishing at Katsina College in 1931 Ahmadu was appointed to the new Sokoto middle school, teaching English and geometry and being in charge of games. In 1934 he was, at only twenty-four, turbanned district head of Rabah. There were still no schools in the outlying districts, so, in addition to tax-collecting and encouraging agricultural improvements, Ahmadu spent his spare time teaching local children. To keep up his English in a town where no other Nigerian spoke it, he borrowed the 'Illustrated London News' from a district officer who used to visit Rabah on tour. 
Promotion in the Sokoto native administration (local government) came in 1938 when Ahmadu was posted to the boom town of Gusau, on the new railway line from Zaria, to supervise the work of a dozen subordinate district heads. He was appointed to the sultan's council and given the title sardauna. He became involved in 'war work', including grain purchases, recruitment of labour, and organizing patrols on the frontier with Dahomey. Intrigue played its part, too, but following his conviction for tax embezzlement he appealed to the supreme court and was acquitted. He did not return to Gusau but became the sultan's councillor for police and prisons. 
Unlike his political peers Obafemi Awolowo and Nnamdi Azikiwe, the sardauna was essentially a native administration man. He had no higher education or professional training. It was not until 1948 that he travelled outside Nigeria, to England on a British Council study tour of local government, and only in 1949 did he visit the Nigerian capital, Lagos. With party politics imploding on Nigeria following the 1946 constitution, the sardauna was elected a member for Sokoto in 1949. He became president of the literary society turned political party, the Northern Peoples Congress (NPC), and after the 1951 election he was appointed minister of works for the north. He soon added community development and the powerful portfolio of local government. Under the 1954 federal constitution he became premier of the Northern Region. Again unlike his regional counterparts, he never sought to move to Lagos, content to leave the prime ministership to his NPC vice-president, Abubakar Tafawa Balewa. Significantly, he publicly referred to Tafawa Balewa as 'my able lieutenant'. 
Fortunately for the north, its political leadership was in strong and safe hands during the critical years from 1951 to 1960. Determined that the region -- larger than the west and east together in population and land -- should play its full role in the federal government despite its backwardness in Western education, the sardauna rejected the southern politicians' motion of 1953 in the house of representatives that Nigeria should become self-governing in 1956, and substituted the words 'as soon as practicable' ('Debates of the House of Representatives', 31 March 1953, 985 ff.), meaning when the north was ready to assume its role in the manning and management of the federation. To this end, the sardauna instituted a vigorous programme of northernization of the regional bureaucracy, with priority of appointment going first to a northerner, then, if none was available, to a European on contract, and only finally to a Nigerian from the other regions. This policy was implemented through crash programmes to train northerners for the civil service, in which the Institute of Administration at Zaria (called 'my baby' by the sardauna) was the region's flagship. Northernization did not endear the sardauna to the south, nor did his threat to secede unless the north was given what he saw as its fair share and proper place. Because of his impeccably aristocratic (his great-grandfather was Shehu Usman dan Fodio, founder of the Sokoto empire 'c'.1810) and religious (he traced his lineage to the Prophet Muhammad) pedigree, he was able to carry the traditional northern rulers with him in his change-within-continuity reforms. He remained premier of the Northern Region after Nigerian independence in 1960, keeping a vigilant eye on the national policies formulated in Lagos. 
The sardauna was appointed CBE in 1953. Advanced to KBE in 1959, he took the name of his revered ancestor Sultan Bello. His memoir, 'My Life', appeared in 1962. Though ghosted, it represents a major statement. In 1963 he became the founding chancellor of Ahmadu Bello University. He had married Hafsatu (1920-1966) of Sokoto, daughter of the waziri, Abdulkadir Macido, in 1932. They had no children but the sardauna was survived by three daughters born to his fourth wife, Amina, whom he married in 1940. In 1934 he had also married Kande and then Amiru. Both were divorced in 1938. He married Jabbo in 1952. Despite not bearing him any children, Hafsatu remained his senior wife throughout. 
A giant in every sense and an aristocrat in every way, 'distinguished in appearance and conspicuously well dressed in the many-coloured splendour of the Northern robes' ('DNB'), the sardauna held centre stage. With the ready vanity of a prima donna and a thunderous temper as quick to deflate as to erupt, he was no sufferer of fools. 'They say that I am proud and impatient', he wrote. 'Who would not be, with all the responsibilities that have been placed upon me?' (Bello, 238). Yet laughter, friendship, and generosity came easily to him. As leader of the NPC, he enjoyed huge popularity in the north. A devout Muslim who frequently undertook the pilgrimage to Mecca, his personal leadership of the Islamic conversion campaign among northern animists nevertheless did not win him uncritical support, even from the clerics. He had the gift of portraying himself as the northern culture-hero, rich in allusion to the history of his ancestors in establishing the Fulani empire and ever ready with a Hausa proverb or allegory. In the military coup of 15 January 1966 the sardauna and his wife Hafsatu were murdered: they were shot at State House. He was buried at the sultan's house in Unguwar Sarki, Kaduna. For many in the south, his assassination was the symbolic elimination of the feared northern political domination. 
Death spared the sardauna the need for any decision over when to retire from party politics and compete for the sultanship of Sokoto, for which both his ancestry and his achievements rendered him pre-eminently eligible. In 1968 the award of grand commander of the federal republic of Nigeria (GCON) was posthumously conferred. On his success in creating Northern Nigeria there is no dissent: without his strong and unifying leadership in the 1950s, there would have been no such polity. On his contribution to Nigerian unity, debate continues. To understand the sardauna, it is not possible to isolate his activities and attitudes from the mood of his time and the whole context of 150 years of Nigerian history. His legacy remains a palpable one. 


@@@@@


doc= 30699


Belloc, (Joseph) Hilaire Pierre Rene (1870-1953), poet and author, was born on 27 July 1870 at La Celle St Cloud, near Paris, the younger child of Louis Marie Belloc (1830-1872), barrister, and his wife, Elizabeth Rayner (Bessie) Parkes (1829-1925), daughter of Joseph Parkes, a prosperous solicitor from Birmingham, and his wife, Eliza. Louis Belloc was French (although with Irish blood from his maternal grandfather, Armand Swanton); his father Hilaire was a well-known portrait painter. Bessie's family was both wealthy and cultivated -- her father founded the Reform Club -- and she grew up among eminent Victorians. She became a Roman Catholic as a young woman and Cardinal Manning was among her friends. 
Hilaire Belloc was born just before the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian war; a few weeks later the family retreated to England, having taken the last train out of Paris. When the Bellocs returned to the family home after the war they found that it had been wrecked and pillaged by Prussian soldiers. Belloc would have been too young to remember this episode, but accounts of it would have fuelled his lifelong prejudice against all things German. When he was only two years old his father died, and Bessie Belloc and her two children (the older, Marie, became the well-known novelist Mrs Belloc Lowndes) moved to London. She had inherited enough family money to be comfortably off, but lost most of it when she entrusted it to an incompetent stockbroker. Thereafter the family were never far from genteel poverty, though Belloc did not realize this for several years; the loss of what he liked to think of as a considerable fortune was a cause of enduring resentment. The Bellocs then settled at Slindon in Sussex, a county he came to love and celebrate in his writings. He spent holidays in France and throughout his life preserved a sense of Anglo-French identity. He grew up to be a prolific and respected English writer but his French origins gave him an unusual and sometimes disconcerting view of English life and society. 
Belloc attended the Oratory School, Birmingham, between 1880 and 1887; it had been founded by John Henry Newman and the aged cardinal occasionally appeared before the boys, but Belloc had no high regard for him. After he left school his characteristic energy and restlessness made it hard for him to settle to a career; in succession he attempted to train for the French navy, to become a farmer, and then a draughtsman. In 1891 he travelled across the United States, walking much of the time, financing himself by making drawings and selling them. He was bound for California on a romantic mission to see Elodie Agnes Hogan (1868-1914), an Irish-American girl he had met and with whom he had fallen in love when she was visiting London with her mother and sisters the previous year. The journey was inconclusive, though they eventually married. Belloc spent most of 1892 doing his military service in the French army as an artilleryman; this was necessary if he wished to retain French nationality, though a few years later he opted to become a British subject. It was a severe but highly formative experience, which gave him a lifelong interest in military matters. It also made him aware that he was by now more of an Englishman than a Frenchman; he was known to his comrades as 'l'Anglais' and later wrote, 'I had come into the regiment faulty in my grammar and doubtful in accent, ignorant especially of those things which in every civilization are taken for granted but never explained in full' ('Hills and the Sea', 1930, 89). The experience is said to have left his spoken French with soldierly turns of phrase which could be an embarrassment on formal occasions. 
After he returned from France, Belloc was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, with the financial support of his sister and her fiance. Belloc loved Oxford, and particularly Balliol, as he later recalled in one of his best-known poems, 'To the Balliol Men Still in Africa'. He became a star performer in debates at the Oxford Union and was awarded a first in modern history in 1895. After he graduated he applied for a prize fellowship at All Souls College, which would have given him a financially secure niche in Oxford -- without any teaching duties -- for the next few years, while becoming established in an academic or legal career. He was over-optimistic about his chances in the highly competitive examination, and he was not successful; his aggressive and argumentative demeanour had already made him enemies in the small world of the university. He took this disappointment very hard, and thereafter lost no opportunity to mock and ridicule 'dons' and 'pedants', just as the loss of family money lay behind his attacks on the 'rich', though he enjoyed the company of rich people and was always ready to cultivate them. 
For a while Belloc hung on in Oxford, making money by tutoring and giving extension lectures, while unsuccessfully applying for academic posts. He was also launching himself as a writer, and it was in this early phase of his career that, beginning with 'The Bad Child's Book of Beasts' in 1896, he started to produce the comic and satirical verse which for many readers is the best-known and most enjoyable part of his 'oeuvre'. In the same year he published 'Sonnets and Verse', a collection of sonnets and lyrical poems which are classical in form but romantic in spirit, and are at their best when they are most compressed and epigrammatic. Henceforth he made his living by his pen, and as a man of immense energy, versatile talents, and wide reading, he worked in many genres. 'Danton' (1899) was the first of a long series of studies in French and English history. 
For five years Belloc had corresponded with Elodie Hogan, and he had never doubted his love for her, which took the form of what his biographer A. N. Wilson has called 'a chivalric ardour' (Wilson, 67). Elodie, a very devout (and painfully scrupulous) Catholic, was unsure whether to marry or to become a nun; eventually she entered a convent to try out the religious life, but the experiment showed that she was not suited to it. Belloc crossed the Atlantic again and married Elodie at Napa, California, in June 1896. It was to be a happy marriage, but Belloc, restless and constantly needing money to support his growing family, was often away from home on lecture tours which took him all over England, with occasional trips to the United States. There were, too, the walking holidays, alone or with male companions, which provided material for books and essays. In 1897 Elodie gave birth to a son, Louis, the first of their five children. 
Belloc eventually realized that he would never get a college fellowship in Oxford, and in 1899 the family moved to London, to a rented house at 104 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. In 1900 he met G. K. Chesterton whom he strongly influenced. Belloc's literary career was taking off, though finances were always precarious, and he began producing a stream of books and articles. His energy was prodigious; he had a sharp, dogmatic intelligence, and there were few subjects on which he did not have strong opinions. In 1902 he published 'The Path to Rome', which remains one of his most attractive and popular books; it tells the story of the author's solitary walk -- in effect a personal pilgrimage -- from Toul in Lorraine, where he had done his military service, to Rome. It is full of entertaining reflections about the people he met and Sternean digressions on whatever came into his mind on the journey. It also shows his capacity to convey physical experience vividly, as, for instance, in the account of crossing the Alps, when he was lost in a snowstorm. Belloc wrote many other books in this vein of reflective pedestrianism, describing journeys through France and England and further afield. 'The Four Men: a Farrago' (1912) is one of the best of them, a semi-fictional account of a walk through Sussex with three invented companions. Pedestrianism came into Belloc's many historical studies; he was particularly interested in military history, and before writing about a battle he liked to traverse the battlefield on foot. In 1904 he published 'Emmanuel Burden', the first of a series of satirical novels about Edwardian political and social life (some of them illustrated by Chesterton). 
In the Edwardian era Belloc acquired a public literary personality: a lover of wine and beer, of songs and male companionship, of walking and sailing, who was at home on both sides of the channel. J. B. Morton wrote, 'His wit was French but his humour English.... He was profoundly moved by the beauty of the English landscape, but preferred the French way of living' (Morton, 3-4). In 1906 Belloc and his family left London for Sussex, where he had bought King's Land, a rambling brick house in Shipley, near Horsham (parts of it dating from the fourteenth century); it was his home for the rest of his life, though his constant journeying meant that he was seldom there for long at a time. 
Most famously, Belloc became known as a polemical apologist for the Roman Catholic church, which he regarded as the only source of sanity and order in the world. He was an important influence on the small Roman Catholic community in England, giving them a new self-confidence, insisting that though they might seem to be a vulnerable minority in an offshore protestant island they were really part of the universal church with its centre in Rome. Although Roman Catholicism was central to Belloc's life and his writings, these reflect little of the serenity and hope of faith. His religion was a disciplined matter of the will and the intelligence, but his subjective stance to the world was a sad, stoic acceptance of the blows of fate, more pagan than Christian in spirit. It informs some of his best writing, such as the reflections on exile and death at the end of 'The Four Men', and much of his poetry. The epigram 'The False Heart' is characteristic: '
I said to Heart, 'How goes it?' Heart replied: 

'Right as a Ribstone Pippin!' But it lied. 

' 

In 1906 Belloc entered politics as Liberal MP for South Salford, placing himself on the radical wing of the party. It was to be an unsatisfactory and disillusioning experience, for he was never at ease with the practice and assumptions of the British parliamentary system and turned sharply against it after he left the House of Commons in 1910. He was outraged by the Marconi scandal of 1913, in which members of the Liberal government, including David Lloyd George, chancellor of the exchequer, were accused of improper trading in the shares of the Marconi Company. It was a complex business, never fully resolved, but Belloc had no doubt of the ministers' guilt. In 1911 he founded a weekly journal, the 'Eye Witness' (later the 'New Witness') in collaboration with Cecil Chesterton, G. K.'s younger brother, a fierce crusading journalist whose temperament and beliefs were akin to his own. Following an imprudent article on the Marconi affair in the 'New Witness' Cecil Chesterton appeared in court charged with criminal libel, was found guilty, and fined. This episode deepened Belloc's bitterness. 
Belloc believed that true democracy was feasible only in small communities such as the Greek city state or the Swiss canton, and that in large modern societies it inevitably degenerated into oligarchy. He had originally described himself as a republican and, despite his Catholicism, supported the ideals of the French Revolution; later he shifted towards a belief in absolute monarchy, or, in effect, dictatorship, as he expounded in 'The House of Commons and Monarchy' (1920). In 1912 he published a critique of modern society, 'The Servile State', which attacks both capitalism and socialism. His thesis is that modern civilization combines notional political freedom with economic slavery, since most people possess little or no property, and property is essential for both freedom and well-being. He opposed recent legislation imposing employers' liability and compulsory national insurance, since it reinforced a society divided by status, where the proletariat are essentially dispossessed. Belloc's ideal was a society of peasant proprietors or craftsmen, negotiating with each other by free contract, where property is widely distributed and not concentrated in a few hands. 'The Servile State' is forceful and lucid though repetitive, and its ideas were later developed in the distributist movement in which Belloc and G. K. Chesterton were active in the 1920s. 
Belloc was shattered when Elodie died (probably of cancer) early in 1914. He treasured her memory for the rest of his life, turning her room at King's Land into a shrine which was never opened, and always wearing black. J. B. Morton recalled him thus: 'The black clothes, black tie and old-fashioned, stiff, stick-up collar made him look like the Frenchman of my boyhood. But the ruddy complexion and the broad, square shoulders and massive body gave him the look of an English farmer. (Morton, 26)' The outbreak of the First World War strengthened Belloc's attachment to France, a Catholic nation at the heart of civilization in conflict with protestant Germany, or 'Prussia', as he liked to call it; he regarded the Catholic south Germans and Austrians as at best misguided, at worst renegades. During the war he was much in demand as a commentator on military affairs, and this work temporarily restored his finances. But his grief over Elodie was extended when his eldest son, Louis, an airman, was reported missing in action and was later confirmed as dead; a further blow was the death of Cecil Chesterton in December 1918 from an illness contracted on active service. 
Belloc entered the post-war period 'an unhappy and a disappointed man', in Morton's words (Morton, 118); to his existing resentments were added disgust with public affairs and sorrow at personal losses. Two books from the 1920s develop some of his basic ideas. 'Europe and the Faith' (1920) sets out a mythologized reading of European history: true civilization has been preserved by the Latin Catholic nations as the legacy of Rome, with France the senior partner; Belloc is hostile to the protestant nations and ignores the Orthodox ones. The Roman Catholic church has continued and transformed the Roman empire; he argues 'that the Catholic Church which accepted it in its maturity caused it to survive, and was, in that origin of Europe, and has since remained, the soul of our Western civilization' (p. 163). England, which Belloc loved, was a special case; it had been a province of the empire but was lost to the barbarians; then it was redeemed by a thousand years of communion with Christian Rome. 'Europe and the Faith' is a work of personal mythmaking, written with passion and energy, rather than of accurate historiography. 
In 'The Jews' (1922) Belloc argues that the Jews are an essentially alien people who cannot be successfully assimilated in Christian societies; he refers to the Jews with respect and even admiration and denies that he is antisemitic. There is no doubt, though, that that was the case, as is evident from his novels and references in his essays and verse. He rejects any suggestion of persecuting or expelling the Jews and proposes that they should be recognized as a special community, with the rights and responsibilities of resident foreigners; this is, in effect, an extension of the ancient institution of the ghetto. Despite its conciliatory tone, the book is offensive as well as unconvincing; it reflects not just personal prejudice but Belloc's adherence to the attitudes of the French right, evident in his lifelong belief in the guilt of Dreyfus. The deepest cause of his antisemitism seems to have been the ancient Christian hostility to the Jews as deicides. 
Belloc's qualities as a writer are much more happily expressed in two other books of the 1920s. 'The Cruise of the 'Nona'' (1925) is in the relaxed, digressive vein of travel writing first evident in 'The Path to Rome'. It recalls a voyage which he made round the coast of England in his small boat on the eve of war in 1914. 'Belinda' (1928) is a romantic novella subtitled 'A Tale of Affection in Youth and Age'; it has a fairy-tale setting in early Victorian England and is written in a sparkling pastiche of the minor fiction of the period. It possesses a delicate charm and tenderness, and is quite unlike most of his writing. 
In his final years Belloc was a public figure with many friends and admirers, in the Catholic world and outside it; in his personal life, though, he was lonely, and increasingly wearied by having to turn out books for money. His desolation deepened during the Second World War when his son Peter died on active service in the Royal Marines. After a stroke in 1942 his health declined and he became senile within a few years. Many of Belloc's numerous books are now forgotten, though some remain immensely readable as biography and history, and others are significant contributions to early twentieth-century debates about politics and social organization; developments in the Roman Catholic church since the Second Vatican Council (1962-5) have made his writings about religion very dated, and his antisemitism has been universally rejected. But as he remarked in an essay on Gibbon, whom he detested as a historian because of his anti-Christian content but loved as a writer, 'A writer's business is to write' ('A Conversation with an Angel', 1928, 24). And at his best he wrote extraordinarily well; in some of his travel writing and personal narratives he is a master of prose; as a serious poet he is minor but memorable and sometimes haunting; and his comic verse is splendid -- it remains in print and is frequently quoted. 
Hilaire Belloc died on 16 July 1953 at the Mount Alvernia Nursing Home, Guildford, Surrey, from shock and burns following a fall at King's Land when he was trying to put a log on a fire. He was buried at West Grinstead, Sussex, on 20 July 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 30700


Bellows, John Thomas (1831-1902), printer, lexicographer, and archaeologist, born at Carthew House, Church Street, Liskeard, Cornwall, on 18 January 1831, was the elder of the two sons of William Lamb Bellows (1798-1877), schoolmaster, of Bere Regis, Dorset, and his wife, Hannah Stickland (1790-1874), daughter of John Stickland, bailiff and Wesleyan preacher, of Eastholme, Wareham, Dorset. John's parents later became Quakers. John was educated at his father's school in Camborne until he was apprenticed, aged fourteen, to a local printer. At twenty he moved to Gloucester, working as a foreman printer until he started his own business. 
In 1872, needing premises for his new steam printing press, Bellows developed a site at Eastgate, Gloucester, using the excavation as an opportunity for archaeological research. Against advice, he dug down, finding Roman pottery and a section of the Roman city wall. Later evidence confirmed his projected line of the entire city wall. He saved the 'Birdlip grave group' and gave this, together with his collection of Samian and Roman fragments and coins, to Gloucester Museum. Malcolm Watkins, the city's archaeologist, called him 'a genuine pathfinder' (Charity, 118). 
In January 1863 Bellows's Norwegian fiancee was seriously ill. In 'A Winter Journey from Gloucester to Norway' he describes his dangerous journey to her home in Arendal, unhappily arriving just after her death. The bulkiness of the Danish dictionary he used on his travels led to his creation of a French pocket dictionary: 'one cannot unpack a portmanteau for the sake of a word' (J. E. Bellows, 5). 
For the next ten years Bellows worked unstintingly as a lexicographer while continuing his printing business. Professor Max Muller, the philologist, helped him to produce his English 'Outline Vocabulary for the Use of Students of the Chinese Language' (1868). He mastered the French language and with the aid of the Beljame brothers (Paris) produced the first French pocket dictionary in 1873, dedicated to the philologist Prince Lucien Bonaparte. The book contained 340,000 words, measured 43/4 x 23/4 inches, and was printed by hand in diamond type on specially thin paper; 6000 copies sold rapidly, and thirty reprints were made between 1915 and 1947. 'The Times' called it 'a gem of typographical art' (J. E. Bellows, 6), and Mark Twain referred to it in 'The church of the gratis lesson'. 
In January 1869 Bellows married Elizabeth Earnshaw (1841-1932), daughter of Mark Earnshaw, surgeon, of Clitheroe, Lancashire. There were nine children, whose early lives are described in letters to his American friend and correspondent Oliver Wendell Holmes. 
During the Franco-Prussian War (1870) Bellows spent one month as a commissioner for the Quakers, travelling the war zone on horseback, wagon, and foot, to assess the needs of the populace. He describes his journey in 'The Track of the War around Metz'. Deeply committed to the Society of Friends, Bellows used their plain speech and wore Quaker dress to the end of his life. The austerity of this tall and distinguished figure was tempered by his warmth and irrepressible humour. His independence of mind and un-Quakerly views were expressed in his pamphlets. 
In 1892, aged sixty, Bellows accompanied an Australian Friend to the Caucasus to aid a group of persecuted Russian pacifists. In Moscow the travellers visited Count Lev Tolstoy, who was sympathetic to their project. Bellows and Tolstoy formed a close friendship, corresponding for several years. The two Friends travelled into the mountains. Negotiating hazardous roads, and threatened by armed robbers, they reached the remote settlements of the Stundists and Dukhobors. 'Don't be uneasy on our account... we are under a higher protection than the police', John wrote to his wife ('Letters and Memoir', 178). On returning to Moscow, he and Tolstoy, with others, arranged for many Dukhobors to emigrate to Canada. 
Despite further travels the business continued to thrive: Bellows was an inventive employer, too, producing Bellows's cylindrical rapid wages calculator, and a series of concentric calculators for metric conversion. In 1901 he made his final journey, to America, to receive an honorary degree of MA at Harvard, with the citation 'English Quaker, authority on Roman antiquities in Britain, delightful essayist and learned lexicographer'. After returning home he developed heart failure and died of cardiac asthma at his country home, Upton Knoll, Upton St Leonards, Gloucestershire, on 5 May 1902. He was interred in Painswick burial-ground, Gloucestershire, on 9 May 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 30701


Bemrose, William (1831-1908), writer on wood-carving and ceramics, was born at Derby on 30 December 1831, the second son in a family of three sons and one daughter of William Bemrose of Derby, founder in 1827 of the printing and publishing firm of William Bemrose & Sons of Derby and London. His mother was Elizabeth Ride of Lichfield. His elder brother, Henry Howe Bemrose (1827-1912), was Conservative member of parliament for Derby from 1895 to 1900 and was knighted in 1897. 
After education at King William's College in the Isle of Man, Bemrose, like his brother Henry, joined his father's business, which passed to the management of the two brothers on their father's retirement in 1857, and grew rapidly in all directions. In 1858 Bemrose married Margaret Romana (died 1901), only daughter of Edward Lloyd Simpson of Spondon, with whom he had five sons and one daughter. Although always active in the printing business, Bemrose pursued many other interests. In middle life he became a director of the Royal Crown Derby porcelain works, and thus helped to revive an important local industry. 
Bemrose travelled and studied varied forms of art, on which he wrote with much success. Practising in early life wood-carving, fret-cutting, and modelling in clay, he compiled useful manuals on these subjects for the instruction of amateurs, which were well illustrated and circulated widely. The chief of these was his 'Manual of Wood-Carving' (1862), the first work of its kind in England, which reached a twenty-third edition in 1906. This was followed by several other instructional works on wood-carving, marquetry, and paper mosaic work. Meanwhile Bemrose's association with the local pottery led him to publish three authoritative works on china. The first, with A. Wallis, was 'The Pottery and Porcelain of Derbyshire' (1870), followed by his own 'Bow, Chelsea and Derby Porcelain' (1898) and 'Longton Hall Porcelain' (1906). 
Bemrose was also a clever amateur painter in oils and watercolour. He collected pictures, china, and objects of vertu, especially rare specimens of Egyptian art, which he acquired on visits to the East. In 1885 he published a sumptuously illustrated and finely printed 'Life and Work of Joseph Wright'. 'A Descriptive Catalogue of Porcelain and other Art Objects' in his own collection was published in 1898. He also wrote on technical education and archaeological and topographical subjects. In 1905 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. Bemrose played an active part in local affairs of Derby, and was for many years chairman of the Railway Servants' Orphanage. In 1903 Bemrose married as his second wife Lilian, daughter of William John Cumming MRCS of Matlock, and widow of Alderman William Hobson of Derby, proprietor of the 'Derbyshire Advertiser'. He died on 6 August 1908 at Bridlington, Yorkshire, while on a short holiday, and was buried at the new cemetery, Derby. 


@@@@@


doc= 30702


Bendall, Cecil (1856-1906), Sanskritist, was born on 1 July 1856 in Islington, London, the youngest son in a family of six sons and three daughters of Robert Smith Bendall (died 1863/4), a tradesman in London, and his wife, Elizabeth Kay, daughter of William Holmes. He was educated at the City of London School (1869-75), gaining a Carpenter scholarship in 1871. On the initiative of the progressive headmaster, Edwin Abbott Abbott, Bendall, who had shown a talent for languages, was taught Sanskrit from 1872/3 by George Frederick Nicholl, afterwards professor of Arabic at Oxford. In 1875 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, with a Broderers' Company scholarship, and soon won a Sanskrit exhibition also. In 1877 he migrated as a scholar to Gonville and Caius College; he graduated BA in 1879 in the first class of the classical tripos, and then became a fellow of Caius (1879-86). During seven years' residence in the university he read Sanskrit with Edward Byles Cowell, professor of Sanskrit, whose influence decided the direction of his career. After graduating, he turned his whole attention to Sanskrit; in the summer of 1879 he attended Theodor Benfey's lectures at Gottingen on the 'Veda' and on 'Avestan', and in 1881 gained a first class in the Indian languages tripos at Cambridge. That October he began lecturing on Sanskrit to classics students and to Indian Civil Service candidates studying at Cambridge. He had already published his first work, an annotated abridgement of the 'Megha-Sutra', with translation ('Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland', new ser., 12, 1880, 286-311), and in 1883 he completed the 'Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Library of Cambridge', which had been initiated by Cowell. In the introduction Bendall showed systematically for the first time how palaeography determined the age of Sanskrit manuscripts. 
In 1882 Bendall moved to London to become senior assistant in the department of oriental manuscripts and printed books in the British Museum. He held the post until his retirement, through ill health, in 1898. While at the museum he catalogued both the Sanskrit and Pali books (1893) and the Sanskrit manuscripts (1902). He was from 1883 a member of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland and from 1884 a member of its council. He was a contributor to its 'Journal'. He frequently read papers at the meetings of the International Congress of Orientalists, and was delegate for his university in 1899 and 1902. He also held the chair of Sanskrit at University College, London, from 1885 to 1903. 
With the aid of grants from the Worts fund at Cambridge Bendall twice visited Nepal and northern India to acquire manuscripts for Cambridge University Library. On his first visit (1884-5) he obtained some 500 Sanskrit manuscripts and discovered nine historical inscriptions, one of great importance for the early chronology of Nepal; he described the trip in his 'Journey of Literary and Archaeological Research in Nepal and Northern India' (1886). His second visit (1898-9) resulted in the acquisition of some ninety manuscripts (see 'Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland', 1900, 162-4). 
At Esher on 19 July 1898 Bendall married a French woman, Georgette, daughter of Georges Joseph Ignace Jung, and widow of G. Mosse of Cowley Hall, Middlesex; they had no children. She became a member of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1901, was author of 'Practical Lessons in Cookery for Small Households' (1905), and died on 24 December 1910 at her sister's home in Paris. 
In 1901 Bendall returned to Cambridge, having succeeded Robert Alexander Neil as university lecturer and lecturer to the Indian Civil Service board. In 1902 he became curator of oriental literature in the university library. On Cowell's death in 1903 he was elected professor of Sanskrit and was made honorary fellow of Caius in 1905. By this time Bendall had become recognized throughout Europe as a scholar of the first rank. He was a sound textual critic, an expert in Indian palaeography and epigraphy, and a vigorous and clear teacher. His special interest was the Sanskrit literature of Mahayana Buddhism, and his 'magnum opus' was his edition of the 'Sikshasamuccaya' (1897-1902), an important compendium of Mahayana doctrine, which he made from a unique manuscript and an early Tibetan version; he was engaged with W. H. D. Rouse on its translation at his death. 
Bendall was slight and delicate, but had a bright and kindly personality, and was self-disciplined but sympathetic towards others. His chief interests from childhood on were music, especially that of Palestrina, Bach, and Handel, and the religious architecture of both Britain and India, as well as English literature. In late 1905 he had to go to Liverpool for surgery. He died on 14 March 1906 at 96 Princes Road, Liverpool, and was buried on 19 March in St Giles cemetery, Cambridge. By his will he left books and a unique palm-leaf manuscript of the 'Tantrakhana', a collection of Indian folklore, to Cambridge University. His residuary estate after his wife's death was assigned to the foundation of a prize for Sanskrit at Caius and the formation there of an oriental lending library for undergraduates. Part of his valuable musical collection was acquired by the Fitzwilliam Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 30703


Benham, William (1831-1910), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 15 January 1831 at West Meon, near Petersfield, Hampshire, where his grandfather and his father, James Benham, successively held the position of village postmaster. He was educated until 1843 at the village school, built by the rector, Henry Vincent Bayley, who made him his secretary and taught him Greek and Latin. At his death in 1844 Bayley left instructions that the boy's education should be continued -- he was therefore trained as a schoolmaster at St Mark's College, Chelsea, under Derwent Coleridge. Among other places, he then taught at the Blue Coat School, Westminster, and as a private tutor. Then by his own exertions and the help of Archdeacon Bayley's family he was enabled in 1856 to attend the theological department of King's College, London, where the influence of F. D. Maurice permanently affected his religious position in the direction of attempted engagement with intellectual trends outside the church, such as evolutionism. In 1857 he was ordained deacon, and priest in 1858. He was appointed divinity tutor and lecturer in English literature at St Mark's, Chelsea, still under Derwent Coleridge, and remained there until in 1864 he became editorial secretary to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and professor of modern history at Queen's College, Harley Street, in succession to F. D. Maurice. At the same time he engaged in Sunday ministerial work as curate of St Lawrence Jewry, under Benjamin Morgan Cowie. On 4 January 1862 he married Louisa Marian Engelbach (1831/2-1870), daughter of Lewis Edward Engelbach, esquire. 
Meanwhile Benham's preaching attracted the attention of Archbishop Longley, who made him in 1867 first vicar of the newly formed parish of Addington, where the archbishop resided. The health of the primate was giving way. Benham assisted him as his private secretary during the anxious period of the first Lambeth conference in 1867, and was with him at his death in 1868. Partly to vindicate Longley, he entered the periphery of the Colenso controversy by seeking to publicize what he regarded as the true views of the conference against misrepresentations by Archbishop Robert Gray, who sought to claim its support for all his actions against Bishop Colenso of Natal. Comparative leisure at Addington enabled Benham to increase his literary work. He produced 'The Church of the Patriarchs' in 1867 and an edition of William Cowper's poetry in 1870 (followed by one of his letters in 1884), worked on a commentary on the 'New Testament', and published in 1873 his well-known 'Companion to the Lectionary' (new edn, 1884). 
For Tait, Longley's successor in the archbishopric, Benham developed 'a love that was filial in its nature... a case of genuine hero-worship' ('Church Times'). Tait gave him the Lambeth degree of BD, made him one of the six preachers of Canterbury, and in 1872 bestowed on him the important vicarage of Margate. Here Benham restored the parish church, was chairman of the first school board of the town, and made the Church Institute a centre of intellectual and spiritual life. He lectured there on church history and also on Charles Dickens, of whose liaison with Nelly Ternan he handed down the first clear hints to posterity after having become a confidant of hers at Margate. He now resigned his Queen's College chair, but remained on the college council. After the death of his first wife, in August 1870, he married Caroline Elizabeth Sandell ('b'. 1839/40) of Basing, Hampshire, on 9 January 1872. She outlived him. 
As Benham complained of overwork at Margate (aggravated by his disputes with the Irvingists), in 1880 Tait made him vicar of Marden, and in 1882 he was appointed rector of St Edmund the King with St Nicholas Acons, Lombard Street, a benefice he held until his death. There Benham suffered from attacks by low-churchmen. His curate, at least, was accused of saying prayers for the dead at Lombard Street. 'The Record' conceded in an obituary (5 August 1910) that he was 'never a High Churchman in the modern sense'. Benham wrote that 'the Tractarian movement was an inestimable boon to English religion, in spite of all its errors' ('Treasury', 1, 1902-3, 548). He had sought to play a mediatory role in the affair of C. H. Collette's attack on J. H. Newman. His personal letters, however, show very limited sympathy for Anglo-Catholicism. His own view of Lombard Street was: 'Our ritual is not very high. I moderated it as much as I could when I came there first, but continued what I felt able to fall in with, and so kept my congregation together' (Fulham MSS, F. Temple MS 22, fol. 349). At St Peter, London docks, on the other hand, he had been appalled in 1874 by a service full of interpolated mumblings and strange gestures -- 'simply the mass', he complained to the archbishop (Tait MS 203, fol. 328). He deplored Christopher Wordsworth's degree of hostility to both Romans and nonconformists; to a large extent, his own position was equal tolerance of both. Tait, when asked Benham's party, thought that 'on the whole he belonged to the Benhamist school' ('The Guardian'). A later archbishop, Randall Davidson, considered: 'People might or might not agree with him in opinion. They could hardly fail, if they knew him well, to respect and even love him as a man' ('Foreword' to 'Letters of Peter Lombard', iv). 
Benham made St Edmund's Church a preaching centre of exceptional intellectual force and impartiality; 'Lombard Street in Lent' (1894), the title of a course of addresses by various preachers, presented the kind of sermon which he thought a city church should supply in order to attract the businessman in the lunch hour. In 1888 Archbishop Benson made him honorary canon of Canterbury, and in 1898 Hartford University, USA, granted him the degree of DD. He was Boyle lecturer in 1897, and rural dean of East City from 1903 until his death. 
Benham's literary activity was always great. He collaborated with Randall Davidson on the 'Life of Archbishop Tait' (1891), having already (1879) edited the memoirs of Catherine and Craufurd Tait, his wife and son. Benham also edited the series of cheap reprints entitled the 'Ancient and Modern Library of Theological Literature' and contributed substantially to the series 'English Cathedrals'. But the characteristic work of the last twenty years of his life was the lightly written series of miscellaneous paragraphs which he contributed to the 'Church Times' week by week under the heading 'Varia' and with the signature of Peter Lombard, edited after his death by his daughter Ellen Baxter as 'Letters of Peter Lombard' (1911). Benham's long involvement with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel was unfortunately overshadowed in his last years by some bitterness arising from the death of another of his daughters by his first marriage, Marian, in an accident (in which Benham considered her superiors to have been negligent) during missionary work in India in 1902. He died at his home, 32 Finsbury Square, London, of heart failure on 30 July 1910, and was buried at Addington churchyard (near Archbishop Tait) on 4 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 30704


Benn, Sir Ernest John Pickstone, second baronet (1875-1954), publisher and libertarian, was born in Ferncliffe Road, Hackney, London, on 25 June 1875, the eldest child of the four sons and two daughters of Sir John Williams Benn, first baronet (1850-1922), publisher and Liberal member of parliament, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1928), daughter of John Pickstone of Hyde, Cheshire. He was the elder brother of William Wedgwood Benn, first Viscount Stansgate. Ernest Benn was educated at a local dame-school and then at the Central Foundation School, Cowper Street, City Road, London; his time there was interrupted by an eighteen-month exchange visit, from 1890, to Paris, where he attended the Lycee Condorcet. In 1891 he joined the family firm of Benn Brothers Ltd, founded by his father in 1880 to publish the 'Cabinet Maker'. This journal, declared the father, 'was the cornerstone, but the bricks for the House that Benn built have been collected and well and truly laid by my eldest son' (J. Benn, 8). By the turn of the century Ernest Benn had taken effective control of Benn Brothers 'because of his father's preoccupation with other matters' (Shaw, 281), and the business developed rapidly; the 'Hardware Trade Journal' and other trade papers were acquired, others were newly launched. On 3 January 1903 he married Gwendoline Dorothy (died 1966), youngest daughter of Frederick May Andrews of Edgbaston, Birmingham; they had three sons and two daughters. 
Benn succeeded to the baronetcy, and to formal management of the firm, on his father's death in 1922. In 1923 he founded the book publishing company of Ernest Benn Ltd, introducing in the late 1920s the 'Augustan Poets' and 'Benn's Sixpenny Library' as the precursors of the paperback. In 1926, with the construction for $150,000 of new premises at Bouverie House, he said that he had 'put the trade press into its proper place in the heart of Fleet Street' (J. Benn, 9). 
In 1927 Benn sponsored what became the Boys' Hostels Association, of which the prince of Wales became patron, to provide residential clubs for homeless boys in London. He was president of the National Advertising Benevolent Society (1928), the Readers' Pensions Committee (1933), the Royal Commercial Travellers' Schools (1935), and the Advertising Association (1935). In 1932 he became high sheriff of the county of London. From 1934 until 1949 he was chairman of the United Kingdom Provident Institution, a position which took much of his time and where his major contribution was a significant improvement in staff conditions and relations. 
In the First World War Benn served as a voluntary civil servant at the Ministry of Munitions and later at the Ministry of Reconstruction; he also became honorary chairman of the trade organization commissioners. He was appointed CBE in 1918. In 1916-18 he wrote three books advocating collaboration between government, business, and trade unions in the management of industry. This represented his early collectivist political views. But, his son later claimed, his growing impatience with 'the ways of bureaucracy' (J. Benn, 10), during the war years, and a five-week visit to the United States in 1921, led him to radically alter his views and to embrace a full-blooded individualism. 
In 1925 Benn wrote 'Confessions of a Capitalist', a classic exposition of the view that 'successful and conscientious businessmen were public benefactors through the employment they provided and the wealth they created' (Shaw, 282). He also epitomized the libertarian position, criticizing the process whereby 'Day by day, in a well-meaning effort to ease somebody's little trouble, we take away a little bit of discretion or liberty from the rest of the 40 millions of us' (Freeden, 267). Benn made the promotion of such views the central cause of his life. 
In 1926, with Sir Hugh Bell, Benn founded the Individualist Bookshop. As leader of the Friends of Economy from 1931 he attacked what he saw as excessive public expenditure. He began a weekly magazine, 'The Independent', in 1933, but this lasted only for a short time. Benn had been a Liberal until 1929 but in that year he publicly supported the Conservatives because of what he considered to be their sounder position on individualism. 
The increased government controls brought about by the outbreak of the Second World War revitalized the individualist movement. The Individualist Bookshop, which had closed in 1934, was reopened in 1941 and Benn wrote a large number of pamphlets as part of a sustained campaign, which continued after the war, against any move towards a state-planned economy or a reduction in personal liberty. Between 1916 and 1953 he wrote some twenty books on these subjects; he also wrote libertarian feature articles for scores of newspapers and journals at home and overseas, and contributed for many years a weekly column, 'Murmurings of an individualist', to 'Truth'. In 1951 he protested over compulsion in the national census, and was prosecuted for refusing to fill in his form. 
Sir Stephen King-Hall wrote of Benn that 'he was a most warm-hearted generous man, who while publicly proclaiming the principles of undiluted 'laissez-faire'... privately followed the dictates of his great humanity' (J. Benn, 12). He believed in his role as paternalist employer and philanthropist, concerned for his workers' welfare and contributing to many causes and charities. His son suggested that Benn could be a stubborn man, with a strong belief in his own correctness. This both typified his approach to his political causes and at times caused difficulties for his family to whom he was 'apt to dictate' (ibid.). Benn died at Oxted and Limpsfield Hospital, Oxted, Surrey, on 17 January 1954. 


