@@@@@


doc= 30705


Benn, William Wedgwood, first Viscount Stansgate (1877-1960), politician, was born on 10 May 1877 at Hackney, London, a younger son of Sir John Williams Benn, first baronet (1850-1922), publisher and politician, and his wife, Elizabeth Pickstone (died 1928). His eldest brother was Sir Ernest John Pickstone Benn, the publisher and libertarian. William Wedgwood Benn was educated at the Lycee Condorcet, Paris, and at University College, London, where he obtained a first in French (1898) and later became a fellow (1918). He worked for some years in his father's publishing business. Deeply influenced by social conditions in the East End of London, and associated with the London Progressive Party, of which his father was leader within the London county council, Benn was a lifelong radical nonconformist. He was soon adopted as Liberal candidate for his father's former seat of St George's, Tower Hamlets, and became a member at the general election of 1906. He gained experience at the Treasury, Board of Education, and Admiralty as parliamentary private secretary to Reginald McKenna. After retaining his seat at both general elections in 1910, Benn became a junior lord of the Treasury and a singularly active politician, serving as Liberal whip for 1910-15. In 1912 he successfully organized relief of suffering during the dock strike and two years later, when war broke out, he became chairman of the organizing committee of the National Relief Fund. 
In October, when over $2 million had already been raised, Benn answered an inner call and resigned this post to apply for active service. Despite his short stature, he secured a commission in the Middlesex yeomanry. He took part in the fierce fighting on the heights above Suvla Bay in August 1915, during the Gallipoli campaign, and later became an observer with the Royal Naval Air Service; he participated in the pinpoint bombing of the Baghdad railway. Among his other exploits was to be rescued from a sinking aeroplane in the Mediterranean, and to be aboard an improvised aircraft-carrier sunk by shore batteries at Castelorizo. He also commanded a party of French sailors in guerrilla activities against the Turks and served in authorized privateering in the Red Sea, before returning to Britain to qualify as a pilot. 
After refusing the office of chief whip from the hand of Lloyd George, Benn returned to service in Italy and was eventually seconded to the Italian army to organize and participate in the first parachute landing of a secret service agent behind the enemy lines. His distinguished war record was recognized with many honours: he was twice mentioned in dispatches, appointed to the DSO, awarded the DFC, was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, received the Croix de Guerre, the Italian war cross, and the Italian bronze medal for valour. He later published an account of his wartime experiences, which was modestly entitled 'In the Side Shows' (1919). On 17 November 1920 he married Margaret Eadie (1897-1991) ['see 'Benn, Margaret Eadie Wedgwood], daughter of Daniel Turner Holmes, Liberal member for Govan, Lanarkshire, from 1911 to 1918. There were four sons of the marriage, of whom the youngest died at birth. 
At the general election of 1918, his former constituency having been redistributed, Benn was returned as member for Leith, a seat which he held through three more general elections and for nine years of intense parliamentary activity. A supporter of Asquith just this side of idolatry, Benn chafed under the leadership of Lloyd George. He found himself increasingly voting with the Labour Party, applied for membership of that party in 1927, and resigned his seat. The next year he was returned at a by-election as member for North Aberdeen, and held the seat in the general election of 1929. His transfer of allegiance had proved timely, and in Ramsay MacDonald's second administration he became secretary of state for India with a seat in the cabinet, and was sworn of the privy council. 
Benn occupied this high, but exposed, position for the next two years under fairly constant attack. The controversial political trial at Meerut, of Indian communists accused of a 'conspiracy' against the government, was about to commence, having been authorized by his predecessor. And the report of the Indian statutory commission under Sir John Simon, published in June 1930, was in course of preparation. Against this background Benn authorized the viceroy, in October 1929, to make the historic declaration that the legitimate goal of Indian aspirations was dominion status. Simon's concurrence was not obtained and a short but bitter parliamentary debate ensued, in which Benn defended his action with courage. When Lloyd George denounced him as a 'pocket edition of Moses' he retorted, 'But I never worshipped the golden calf' ('Hansard 5C', 231, 1929, 1321). In 1930 the Indian leader M. K. Gandhi initiated a successful campaign of civil disobedience, directed against the salt tax, and Benn ultimately felt compelled to order his arrest. Gandhi was released the following year for talks with the viceroy which resulted in the Delhi pact, but by the time he arrived in London for the second round-table conference, Benn was out of office. On the formation of the 'national' government in August 1931 he had remained loyal to the Labour Party, and was decisively defeated at the ensuing general election. He was again defeated in November 1935 as a candidate for Dudley. 
Benn used this period of enforced parliamentary inactivity to make, with his wife, a journey round the world by almost every known means of transport: an extensive visit to the United States was followed by travels through the Far East, Japan, Mongolia, Siberia, and Moscow. 
At a by-election in 1937 Benn was returned as member for the Gorton division of Manchester. On the outbreak of war in 1939 he enlisted as a pilot officer in the Royal Air Force, where he rose to the rank of air commodore. He was again mentioned in dispatches, and though officially grounded was known to have taken part in air operations. In January 1942 he was called to the House of Lords as first Viscount Stansgate: the peerage was expressly granted to strengthen Labour representation in the upper house. He was vice-president of the Allied Control Commission in Italy, 1943-4. 
In the Labour government of 1945 Stansgate became secretary of state for air. The following year he was entrusted by the foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, with the conduct in Cairo of the abortive negotiations for a revision of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty. Later that year, however, Stansgate, who was nearly seventy, was one of a number of older ministers dropped from the government to make way for younger blood. 
In 1947 Stansgate became president of the inter-parliamentary union, and he held this position for ten years with universal esteem. In the House of Lords he became the authentic voice of liberalism. His persistence might cause temporary annoyance, and once Lord Hailsham carried a motion that 'the noble lord be no longer heard', but Stansgate's patent sincerity, his complete freedom from malice, and his natural modesty of manner, made many admirers. While his perpetual effervescence, buoyancy, and wit conveyed an impression of the gay cavalier, 'Wedgy Benn' was really the happy warrior, a man of profound ethical conviction, with a great love for his fellow human beings. 
Stansgate was taken ill in the Palace of Westminster on 16 November 1960 while waiting to speak. He had closed the previous day's proceedings with some brief observations on the importance of continued friendship with India. He was taken to Westminster Hospital, where he died on 17 November 1960. His eldest son, a flight lieutenant who was awarded the DFC, had died in 1944 of injuries received in action. His second son, Anthony Neil Wedgwood (Tony) Benn ('b'. 1925), was elected Labour member for Bristol South East in 1950. Though he sought to renounce the succession, he was held to be disqualified from the Commons after his father's death. He headed the poll at the ensuing by-election in May 1961 but was again ruled disqualified, and so began a protest that resulted in the 1963 'Peerage Act', which made possible the renunciation of a hereditary peerage. Having duly disclaimed his title, Benn was returned for Bristol South East in August 1963. He went on to become postmaster-general in the Labour government of 1964, entered the cabinet as minister of technology in 1966, and was a candidate for the Labour leadership in 1976 and 1988. The viscountcy remained in abeyance. 


@@@@@


doc= 30706


Bennett, Alfred William (1833-1902), botanist and publisher, was born on 24 June 1833 at Clapham, Surrey, the second son of William Bennett (died 1873), tea dealer and botanist, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1891), author of religious books for the Society of Friends. His father was interested in education and apart from the winter of 1841-2, which the family spent at the Pestalozzi School at Appenzell in Switzerland, Bennett was taught at home. He later attended classes at University College, London, and graduated BA from the University of London with honours in chemistry and botany (1853). He proceeded MA in 1855 and gained his BSc in 1868. 
On leaving college Bennett became tutor to the family of the banker Gurney Barclay. In 1858 he married Katherine, the daughter of William Richardson of Sunderland, and started business as a bookseller and publisher. He was one of the first publishers to use photography for illustrating his books, whose topics ranged from alpine scenery to Yorkshire abbeys. For a time about 1860 he was both proprietor and editor of the weekly journal 'Friends'; he later wrote on pre-Foxite Quakerism (1894). Among other works Bennett published were poems by John Leicester Warren, afterwards third Baron de Tabley, and his own parents. Bennett also prepared the original catalogue of the Lindley Library following its purchase by the Royal Horticultural Society in 1867. 
In 1868 Bennett gave up his business and became a lecturer on botany at Bedford College and St Thomas's Hospital, London. He remained there until 1896 and was described as 'an excellent and painstaking teacher, and a careful examiner' (Baker, 157). He also had an interest in the higher education of women and opened his house to enable several female students to attend Bedford College. From 1870 to 1874 he was biological sub-editor for the newly established journal 'Nature' and was also botanical reviewer and writer for 'The Academy'. Bennett became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1868. He briefly served as assistant editor of the society's publications during 1873-4, but was 'grossly careless in his reporting' (Gage, 67). About this time he also wrote several papers on flower-fertilization and began his studies of the order Polygalaceae (milkworts) which allowed him to contribute a synopsis of the Indian species for J. D. Hooker's 'Flora of British India' (1872) and also of the more numerous Brazilian species for the 'Flora Brasiliensis' published by Martius (1874). 
Bennett's knowledge of the German language enabled him, with the assistance of William Thiselton-Dyer, to translate the third edition of the 'Lehrbuch der Botanik' by F. G. Julius von Sachs as the 'Textbook of Botany, Morphological and Physiological' (1875). This had a great influence on the teaching of botany, 'turning it away from lectures... to courses on anatomy and physiology' (Baker, 157). Bennett also translated and edited the 'Lehrbuch' by Professor Otto Thome, which was published as 'Textbook of Structural and Physiological Botany' in 1877 and 1885. Throughout his life he made numerous botanical contributions to scientific periodicals and published 'Mycological Illustrations' (1871) with W. Wilson Saunders and Worthington G. Smith. 
An early love of natural history, walking, and flowers led to a tour of Switzerland in 1875 that resulted in Bennett's translation of J. Seboth's 'Alpenpflanzen nach der Natur gemalt' as 'Alpine Plants' (1879-84), and of a work by K. W. von Dalla Torre as 'Tourists' Guide to the Flora of the Austrian Alps' (1882, 1886). In these and his own 'The Flora of the Alps', published in 1897 with the coloured plates taken from David Wooster's 'Alpine Plants' (1872), Bennett endeavoured to improve and widen the available illustrations of alpine plants. 
In 1879 Bennett became a fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society, and thereafter confined his research to cryptogamic plants, especially the freshwater algae. He revised the section on cryptogams for the fourth edition of Henfrey's 'Elementary Botany' (1884) and dealt with all the groups containing chlorophyll for the joint 'Handbook of Cryptogamic Botany' with G. R. Milne Murray (1889), which has been recognized as his 'most valuable original work' (Baker, 157). 
Bennett served on the council of the Royal Microscopical Society and became editor of its publications in 1897. He died suddenly from heart disease, collapsing on the top of an omnibus at Oxford Circus, London, on his way home from the Savile Club to his home in Regent's Park, on 23 January 1902. His wife had predeceased him and he was buried next to her at the Quaker burial-ground in Isleworth, on 28 January; they had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 30707


Bennett, Edward Hallaran (1837-1907), surgeon, born on 9 April 1837 at Charlotte Quay, Cork, was the youngest of the five children, all sons, of Robert Bennett, recorder of Cork, and Jane Hallaran, the daughter of William Saunders Hallaran, a physician of Cork with an interest in mental disease who wrote on insanity. His grandfather James Bennett was a physician in Cork, and another kinsman, James Richard Bennett, was a distinguished teacher of anatomy in Paris in the 1820s. His brother Robert served all through the Crimean War and retired with the rank of major-general. 
Bennett was educated at Hamblin's School in Cork, and then at the Academic Institute, Harcourt Street, Dublin, whose headmaster was the Revd Daniel Flynn. Bennett entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1854, and graduated in 1859 with the degrees of BA, MB, and the newly established MCh. He continued his surgical career in Dublin at the school of physic, Trinity College, and at Dr Steevens' Hospital, the Meath Hospital, the Richmond Hospital, and Sir Patrick Dunn's Hospital; in 1863 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. The following year he proceeded MD and was appointed university anatomist in Dublin University, a post that carried with it the office of surgeon to Sir Patrick Dunn's Hospital. On 20 December 1870 Bennett married Frances, the daughter of Conolly Norman of Fahan, co. Donegal, and a cousin of the alienist Conolly Norman; they had two daughters. 
In 1873, on the death of Robert William Smith, Bennett was appointed professor of surgery in Trinity College and curator of the pathological museum. He held these posts, together with his appointment as surgeon to Sir Patrick Dunn's Hospital, until 1906. Bennett also held numerous appointments of distinction in Ireland; in 1880 he was president of the Dublin Pathological Society; from 1884 to 1885 he served as president of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland; from 1897 to 1900 he was president of the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland; from 1897 to 1906 he represented the University of Dublin on the General Medical Council; and from 1902 to 1905 he was surgeon to the lord lieutenant, the earl of Dudley. In 1900 he was made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in England (his photograph with signature is in the album of honorary fellows). 
Bennett assembled a remarkable collection of fractures, dislocations, diseases, and surgery of bones in the Pathological Museum of Trinity College, Dublin. The collection was begun by his predecessor, R. W. Smith, and was developed by Bennett into one of the most important collections of its kind in Europe. He spent years in compiling a catalogue furnished with notes and clinical histories, but it remained unfinished. Bennett frequently published communications and reports dealing with the surgery and pathology of bones. In 1880 he described for the first time at the Cork meeting of the British Medical Association, and in 1881 at the Dublin Pathological Society, the fracture at the base of the metacarpal bone of the thumb which was previously unrecognized and which became universally known as 'Bennett's fracture'. Its significance lies in the fact that, unless skilfully treated, it leads to arthritic changes at the base of the thumb with consequent pain and disability. As an operating surgeon, Bennett was one of the earliest in Ireland to adopt the antiseptic technique of Lister. As a teacher, he was forcible and practical, and able to enlighten the driest subject with touches of humour. 
Bennett died on 21 June 1907 at his residence, 26 Lower Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin, and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery in Dublin. He was survived by his wife and one daughter, Norah Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 30708


Bennett, (Enoch) Arnold (1867-1931), writer, was born at Hope Street, Burslem, Staffordshire, on 27 May 1867. 
Arnold Bennett was the eldest child in a family of three sons and three daughters -- three other children died in infancy -- of Enoch Bennett (1843-1902) and Sarah Ann (1840-1914), eldest daughter of Robert Longson, who started life as a weaver in Glossop and moved to Burslem in 1860, where he set up a tailor's shop. According to his son, Enoch had been an ambitious child, who, by the age of ten, was earning 2died an hour teaching in 'a sort of night school'. Unable to pursue either an academic or a legal career, Enoch took up pottery, and by the age of twenty-two had become a master potter. On his marriage in 1866, his business having failed, he set up as a draper and pawnbroker. Four years later his father died, leaving him some money with which he articled himself to a solicitor, and in 1876 he himself qualified as a solicitor. 
Arnold Bennett's early years were beset by his father's financial worries. Nevertheless the Bennett family, Wesleyans though they were, encouraged musical and artistic activities. They were also bookish. From 1877 Bennett attended the endowed school, Wedgwood Institute, Burslem, transferring in 1882 to Newcastle under Lyme middle school. He stayed there for only a year, but in that time was fortunate to be taught French by a gifted master who instilled in him a love of French language and literature that was to last a lifetime. Alone of his class, in 1882 he passed the Cambridge junior local examination, which would have qualified him to go on to Newcastle under Lyme high school, and thence in all probability to university. But in 1883, at the age of sixteen, Bennett left school and began work in his father's office at Piccadilly, Hanley. Here he divided his time between rent collecting and other menial tasks by day, all of them unpaid, and at night studying for his matriculation. His father intended a legal career for him but Bennett repeatedly failed his examinations. He did, however, master Pitman's shorthand, and in March 1889, having borrowed the train fare from his mother, he set off for London, to take up a clerical post with a firm of solicitors, Le Brasseur and Oakley. 
In the days since leaving school Bennett had begun to contribute light journalistic articles on such subjects as tramlines and coffee houses to the 'Staffordshire Sentinel'. Once settled in London he began to write more seriously. His first success came with a story, 'A Letter Home', published in the 'Yellow Book' (July 1895). Bennett, who had become devoted to the fiction of George Moore, now resolved to write a novel modelled on Moore's naturalistic mode. 'Life being grey, sinister, and melancholy, the novel must be grey, sinister, and melancholy' ('DNB'). The novel, to which Bennett had given the title 'In the Shadow', was sent to the publisher John Lane, who asked John Buchan to report on it. Buchan's favourable comments led to the publication in 1898 of what was now called 'A Man from the North'. By then Bennett had long given up his legal work. In 1893 he had become assistant editor of the weekly journal 'Woman', and three years later he was made editor-in-chief. During this period he began the practice of regular journalism and reviewing which in later years brought him considerable sums of money as well as hostility from a younger generation of writers. 
In 1900 Bennett felt sufficiently confident of his future as a writer to resign as editor of 'Woman'. He also left London to set up house at Trinity Hall Farm, near the village of Hockliffe in Bedfordshire, where he installed his parents and younger sister. Here, already the author of two pot-boilers, 'Journalism for Women' (1898) and 'Polite Farces for the Drawing Room' (1899), he finished writing 'Anna of the Five Towns', on which he had begun work in 1896, immediately after selling his first novel. The novel was completed in 1901 and published more or less alongside 'The Grand Babylon Hotel' in 1902. Bennett, who had become friendly with the writer Eden Phillpotts, followed him in deciding to keep a journal, although Bennett's journals owe rather more to the Goncourt brothers in their scrupulous recording of the details of financial transactions. He was thus able to note that although 'The Grand Babylon Hotel' helped to make his name -- it was the first of his books to be reviewed in 'The Times', and remained in print up to the twenty-first century -- it did not fill his purse. He did not of course know that it was going to prove so phenomenal and long-lasting a best-seller, but he quickly realized that he had sold it far too cheaply. The mistake forced him to recognize the value of a good literary agent. Fortunately, one was to hand. At the end of 1901 Bennett had been introduced to J. B. Pinker by H. G. Wells, with whom he was on friendly terms. By the time Bennett set off for France, which he did at the end of 1902, Pinker had agreed to act as agent for his work, an agreement which not only led to a lifelong friendship between the two men but eventually made Bennett one of the highest-paid authors of his age. 
It was almost certainly Bennett's desire to be recognized as a serious artist that prompted his move to Paris at the end of 1902. There, and in a house at Fontainebleau, he lived for the next ten years. During this period he married in July 1907 Marie Marguerite Soulie ('b'. 1874); they were to have no children. In France Bennett developed and widened his expertise as a dedicated man of letters. There were dramatic collaborations with Phillpotts, articles for 'T. P.'s Weekly', and further pot-boilers, including 'The Truth about an Author' (1903), 'A Great Man' (1904), and 'Sacred and Profane Love' (1905). Bennett may have intended the last of these to be a serious study of sexual passion, although it reads as though an unconscious parody of the school of Elinor Glyn. 
Yet to these years belong also 'Whom God hath Joined' (1906), 'The Old Wives' Tale' (1908), and the first volume in the 'Clayhanger' trilogy (1910). These works between them justly established Bennett as a major exponent of realistic fiction. At the same time he maintained his output of lighter fiction, including most memorably 'The Card' (1911), and he also produced a steady stream of literary journalism. In this regard, the short pieces he wrote about books under the pseudonym Jacob Tonson, which were published at regular intervals between 1908 and 1911 in A. R. Orage's 'New Age', deserve mention. These pieces initiated the type of brief literary essay, aimed at the general 'cultivated' reader, which later writers such as J. B. Priestley and V. S. Pritchett took up, and which was perfectly adapted for weekly journals. In 1911 Bennett visited America, which led to 'Those United States' (1912). The visit was a financial success; Bennett sold the serial rights of his projected novel, 'The Price of Love', to 'Harpers' for $2000 (it was published in novel form in England in 1914), eight essays to 'Metropolitan' for $150 each (they were later gathered together as 'The Author's Craft', 1914), and the American rights of a hastily planned fourth volume of 'Clayhanger' for $3000. Bennett was accompanied on his voyage over by Edward Knoblock, an American dramatist whom he had first met in London at the Author's Club in May 1911. Bennett, keen to learn more of the craft of writing for the theatre, collaborated with Knoblock on a play entitled 'Milestones'. This, together with other plays successfully produced for the stage, including 'The Great Adventure' (1913; a dramatization of his 1908 novel 'Buried Alive'), brought him yet further fame and money. In 1912 he returned from France to England. He now bought himself a yacht, 'Velsa', and soon bought a Queen Anne country house at Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex, which he furnished at considerable expense. 
During the First World War Bennett busied himself as a public servant and public man, furthering the war effort. In 1915 he produced a book, 'Over There', derived from his experiences when sent to France. Three years later, when in 1918 Lord Beaverbrook was made minister of information, Bennett was put in charge of propaganda in France. He devoted considerable energies to the work, but misgivings about the war reveal themselves in his fine novel 'The Pretty Lady' (1918). In 'Lord Raingo' (1926) he memorably anatomizes the kind of public figure with whom war work had brought him increasingly into contact. His introduction to the catalogue which accompanied a showing of Paul Nash's work as a war artist, held at the Leicester Galleries in 1924, provides further evidence of Bennett's less than wholly enthusiastic endorsement of the war. That he should have been asked to write the catalogue also testifies to Bennett's lively and enduring interest in the visual arts. Further evidence of this is to be found in the introduction he wrote in 1919 for a catalogue of an exhibition of modern paintings organized by Osbert, Sacheverell, and Edith Sitwell at the Mansard Gallery, London. The previous year he had agreed to help stand the losses of the distinguished quarterly 'Art and Letters', which published work by Modigliani, Gaudier-Brzeska, T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, Wyndham Lewis, Herbert Read, and Aldous Huxley. 
After the war Bennett gave up the house in Essex. Following the legal separation from his first wife in 1921, he lived in London with Dorothy Muriel Cheston (1891-1977), an English actress, first in George Street, Hanover Square, later in Cadogan Square. Their daughter, Virginia, was born in 1926. During these years Bennett, by now a friend of cabinet ministers and newspaper moguls, including Beaverbrook, went on publishing novels and plays. The latter were for the most part inconsiderable and even unperformed. The best of his post-war novels are 'Riceyman Steps' (1923), 'Lord Raingo' (1926), 'Accident' (1929), and 'Imperial Palace' (1930). For much of the 1920s he was famously the highest-paid literary journalist in England, contributing a weekly column to the 'Evening Standard', advertisements for which were splashed on the sides of London omnibuses. At the very end of 1930 he and Dorothy went on holiday to France, where he unwisely drank local tap water. By the time they returned to England in the third week of January 1931, Bennett was already ill; influenza was at first suspected, but it was from typhoid fever that he eventually died in his flat at 97 Chiltern Court, Clarence Gate, Regent's Park, London, on the night of 26-7 March 1931, his date of death being formally recorded on his death certificate as 27 March 1931. He was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, in April 1931. 
Arnold Bennett was a prolific and highly successful author in a wide variety of modes. As essayist, dramatist, occasional travel writer, author of short stories, and, above all, of novels, he profited in most senses of the word from the fact that his career coincided with the pre-eminence of the printed word in cultural life. Yet his very success alienated younger writers suspicious of the professionalism on which he prided himself. Bennett for them exemplified the popular as opposed to the good. They saw him as a man whose concern for his pocket far outweighed concern for the novelist's art. This view of Bennett is most famously advanced in Ezra Pound's poem 'Hugh Selwyn Mauberley (Life and Contacts)' (1919), where a Mr Nixon, met aboard 'the cream gilded cabin of his steam yacht', advises the poem's writer-protagonist always to '
Consider 

Carefully the reviewer. 

' The line-break and thus pause between the words 'Consider' and 'Carefully' may well have been intended to mime the stratagems by which Bennett attempted to conquer his stutter. More importantly, the bathos of the conclusion indicates that Mr Nixon has no interest in art's considerations. Nixon indeed offers further advice: '
And give up verse, my boy, 

There's nothing in it. 

' Pound may have wanted not merely to impugn Bennett, but to present a more generalized cameo of the kind of author whom he saw as selling out to commercial interest. Yet in some aspects Bennett's profile matches that cameo to perfection. He used his journal to record at each year's end the number of words he had written in the previous twelve months and the amount of money their publication had brought him. And certainly a good deal of his writing was made to order. As a journalist he became an accomplished space-filler, a master of the 'feuilleton'. His plays, lively though their dialogue is, have not worn well; the same may be said of many of his novels, especially those written with an eye to the market in crime and detective fiction, such as 'Teresa of Watling Street' (1904). 'The Loot of Cities' (1905) is a collection of stories which owes much to that fictional anti-hero of the 1890s, Raffles. Bennett came to call these and other such novels 'fantasias'. His final fiction in this mode, 'The Strange Vanguard', appeared as late as 1928. Bennett confided in his journal that when reading the proofs of the novel's opening chapters he found them to be 'very good -- brilliant'; there is a temptation to believe that after years of efficiently supplying the fiction market with entertainments, whatever critical judgement Bennett may once have had was by now quite eroded. 
Yet from 'A Man from the North' (1898) right through to 'Imperial Palace' (1930) Bennett could produce fictional work of rare distinction. He began as a novelist obedient to the requirements of realism, and he remained loyal to them as he remained loyal to his early hero, George Moore. Bennett often praised the scrupulous attention which he felt that Moore in the 1880s had directed towards the ordinary lives he had studied in several novels, of which perhaps the most important for Bennett was 'A Mummer's Wife' (1885). His admiration for this novel is recorded in various journal entries of the 1890s, most significantly perhaps in the remark that Moore is the only English novelist who can stand comparison with the major French realists. 'A Mummer's Wife', which in some ways reads like an English version of a novel by Zola, is set in part in that area which Bennett was to make his own. But in one all-important respect he goes beyond his master. Bennett brings far greater understanding to his studies of the five towns than Moore was capable of. While 'Anna of the Five Towns', the first of Bennett's novels to be set in the Potteries, undoubtedly owes something to Moore's example, the imaginative sympathy of his portrait of the young woman for whom the novel is named extends well beyond Moore's range. It also gives the lie to another familiar criticism of Bennett, first voiced by Virginia Woolf: that while he was capable of describing the bricks and mortar out of which a house is built, he was unable to imagine the life within. Anna Tellwright is a most convincing study of a girl trapped in joyless family circumstances who struggles to do her best for others. Her escape into a loveless marriage is made entirely credible. 
From the beginning Bennett was clearly alert to issues which preoccupy other novelists of the period, especially women's rights, and the 'new woman'. Hence he produced two important novels which turn on married infidelity and divorce. The first of these, 'Leonora' (1903), is marred by the convenient suicide of the heroine's erring husband; this spares her the full pain of the divorce proceedings for which the novel seems to have been preparing us. The second, 'Whom God hath Joined' (1906), is a minor masterpiece in its anatomy of a failing marriage. All through his career, indeed, Bennett showed remarkable insight into the plight of women caught in marriages or by emotional circumstances which bring them little satisfaction but which they nevertheless try to manage in ways that allow them some freedom. This ability shows itself in another excellent work, 'The Price of Love' (1914). On the other hand, as with most of his would-be liberated male contemporaries, Bennett could only cope with suffragettism by condescending to it in a genially jokey manner, as he does in 'The Lion's Share' (1916). 
By then, with 'The Old Wives' Tale' and the 'Clayhanger' trilogy behind him, Bennett's major work was done. These novels, important though they are, and impressively though they testify to his thoroughgoing realism, suffer from his habitual recourse to invocations of 'the riddle at the heart of life' or 'life's melancholy' -- phrases which testify to a rather debilitating pessimism, and which caused D. H. Lawrence explosively to protest that tragedy should be a great kick at misery. Moreover, the second novel in the trilogy, 'Hilda Lessways', suffers from the fact that the eponymous heroine is one of Bennett's least convincing female characters; and while the concluding novel, 'These Twain', marks something of a recovery, especially in its detailed study of a provincial marriage, it is the first novel, 'Clayhanger' itself, that is fit to set beside 'The Old Wives' Tale'. These two ambitious novels most memorably concentrate Bennett's great virtues of patient, scrupulous narrative, together with his ability to accumulate a convincing account of intertwined lives and circumstance, in a place to which he gave lasting identity through his term 'the five towns'. He can justly be thought of as one of the finest of all regional novelists. 
In common with Lawrence and other writers of his age Bennett felt deeply divided about his origins. The Potteries had nurtured him and he turned to them for nearly all his finest work. Yet he clearly felt that in order to become a writer he needed to escape from the environment in which he had grown up. This is explored in the finest of all his short stories, 'The Death of Simon Fuge', which formed part of his collection 'The Grim Smile of the Five Towns' (1907). 

'The Pretty Lady' is a much underrated study of England during the war years, especially in its sensitive feeling for the destructive frenzy that underlay much apparently good-hearted patriotism. However, with 'Mr. Prohack' (1922) Bennett might seem finally to have succumbed to the temptation to turn out nothing but undemanding fictional entertainments. The novel's hero, in his untroubled and unquestioning acceptance of the post-war world as it is, including the thousands of unemployed war veterans who throng London's streets, is a monster of complacency, although that is not what Bennett intended. But even then Bennett was not done. 'Riceyman Steps' is a remorseless study of miserliness. Its protagonist, Henry Earlforward, a second-hand bookseller, is constitutionally incapable of generosity -- he even sells his wife's previous wedding-ring so he can buy her a cheaper one. (He gives her the change.) Henry's death from stomach cancer reads not merely as symbolically appropriate, but suggests that Bennett was responsive to the then fashionable theories of Homer Lane (an American psychologist who worked in London between 1918 and 1925) and others who proclaimed the psychosomatic basis of all forms of illness. 
Bennett liked to keep abreast of new ideas and fashions. When T. S. Eliot was working on 'Sweeney Agonistes' he consulted Bennett about what he called 'jazz rhythms'. And 'Accident' (1929), a novel which turns on a train crash, for at least half its length tries to ponder the meanings of those cracks and divisions opening up in post-war society for which the general strike, although it is never mentioned, provides the most troubling evidence. Significantly, Bennett began writing the novel in 1926. However, in the latter half of 'Accident' he dissolves the mood of ominous danger which he has so skilfully built up in the opening pages. He thus leaves it to Edward Upward in 'The Railway Accident' (1928) and Evelyn Waugh in 'Vile Bodies' (1930) to develop the potential for dystopic fables of a society about to go smash which 'Accident' begins. The limits of Bennett's realism perhaps lie in his cautious assumption that as things are, so they must be. Nevertheless, at its finest, Bennett's work has rightly commended itself to successive generations of readers and is certain to continue to do so. 


@@@@@


doc= 30709


Bennett, George Macdonald (1892-1959), chemist, was born in Lincoln on 25 October 1892, the youngest of the three children of the Revd John Ebenezer Bennett (died 1906), teacher and Baptist minister, and his wife, Hanna Martha (died 1932), daughter of William Grange, a farmer in Hertfordshire. He was named after the novelist and children's writer George MacDonald (1824-1905), a friend of his father. In 1893 his father moved to a living in Hackney, and about 1899 to Clacton-on-Sea, where he ran a private boarding-school. 
Bennett was a pupil at the school for ten years. The science teacher, who took over the running of the school when J. E. Bennett died, was Harold Picton, a pupil of William Ramsay. Under Picton's influence Bennett developed a liking for chemistry and decided to take it up as a career. He obtained a London University exhibition in 1909 and entered East London (later Queen Mary) College as an internal student, subsequently obtaining a scholarship in chemistry. In 1911 he took an external BA degree, and in the following year he was awarded first-class honours in chemistry. He then began research in organic chemistry but in 1913 he obtained an open exhibition at St John's College, Cambridge, becoming a foundation scholar in the following year. In 1915 he obtained a first class in chemistry in part two of the natural science tripos and became a research assistant to William Pope, with whom, and with C. S. Gibson, he made important contributions in the field of explosives and war gases. Notably, he carried out the first experiment for making mustard gas from disulphurdichloride and ethylene, work which led to his sustained interest in sulphur chemistry. 
In 1918 Bennett left Cambridge to take up a post in industry, where he worked on the commercial production of citric acid from cane sugar. He was unhappy there, however, and in 1921 became a senior demonstrator in the chemistry department of Guy's Hospital medical school. In 1924 he became lecturer in organic chemistry in the University of Sheffield, where he built up an enthusiastic research team. In 1931 he was appointed to the university's Firth chair of chemistry. 
In 1938 Bennett became professor of organic chemistry at King's College, London, and was in charge of the chemistry department when the college was evacuated to Bristol at the outbreak of war in 1939. There, in addition to his teaching and administrative duties, he carried out studies on the mechanism of aromatic nitration which were of great importance in relation to the development of explosives. King's College returned to London in 1943 but in 1945 Bennett left academic work to become the government chemist. Despite a serious heart condition he undertook much administrative work and actively encouraged the development of links with industry and other government departments. He also maintained a close contact with the academic world through the University of London, the Chemical Society, and the Royal Society, and he was especially concerned in the development of new experimental techniques such as X-ray diffraction, X-ray fluorescent spectroscopy, and gas chromatography. 
Bennett obtained the degrees of PhD (London, 1924) and ScD (Cambridge, 1932). He was a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge (1917-23), and was elected a fellow of Queen Mary College in 1939 and FRS in 1947. In 1948 he was appointed CB. He generously devoted his time to the service of chemistry, and was a member of the council of the Chemical Society (1929-32), honorary secretary (1939-46), and vice-president (1948-51); he was a member of the council of the Royal Institute of Chemistry (1949-51) and its vice-president (1951-3). He was also a member of the council of the Faraday Society (1946-8) and honorary secretary of the Chemical Council (1945-51). 
Bennett was a scrupulous and conscientious scientist. Reserved in nature, he could show tremendous excitement when research investigations were going well. He was rigorous in his dealings with students, and only the hard worker received his fullest support. He was a prolific reader but his main interest was always chemistry and apart from walking he had few outdoor activities. His contributions to chemical knowledge ranged over a wide field and he was author or joint author of some ninety publications, most of which appeared in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society'. 
Bennett suffered a severe heart attack in 1953, after which he did little beyond his official duties at the Government Laboratory. In 1918 he had married Doris, daughter of James Laycock MPS, of Fulham; they had no children, and when she died in 1958 he was devastated. Bennett died on 9 February 1959 at his home, 74 Kingsmead Avenue, in Worcester Park, Surrey, after a further heart attack. He left the bulk of his estate to Dr Barnardo's Homes. 


@@@@@


doc= 30710


Bennett, Peter Frederick Blaker, Baron Bennett (1880-1957), industrialist, was born on 16 April 1880 at Dartford, Kent, the eldest son of Frederick Charles Bennett, a carpenter, and his wife, Annie Eliza Blaker. When Bennett was twelve the family moved to Birmingham, where he was educated at Five Ways grammar school of the King Edward's Foundation. A convinced Christian like his father, who had been a YMCA organizing secretary, Bennett was brought up as a Methodist and was an active worker in his younger years, a Sunday school superintendent, and a teetotaller. 
On leaving school, Bennett worked for a time with an electrical company in India. The course of his business career was set in 1903, when he joined the Electrical Ignition Company of Sparkbrook, makers of sparking plugs, trembler coils, and switches. As sales manager Bennett met the motor factor Albert Thomson in 1905 and in 1907, with Thomson's backing, set up Thomson-Bennett Ltd to manufacture products similar to those of the Sparkbrook firm. The new business began on a small scale, as Bennett described it in 'British Industries', 'four white-washed walls, my signature and the little money I had scraped together' (Bennett, 143-4). Thomson-Bennett began making magnetos, but only for specialized purposes as a result of the virtual monopoly on the car magneto maintained by the German Bosch company. 
The outbreak of the First World War underlined the seriousness of this dependence on German supplies and British manufacturers such as Joseph Lucas, British Thomson-Houston (BT-H), and Morris and Lister, eventually under Admiralty control, endeavoured to develop magnetos and to rationalize and expand production. (The Admiralty's concern was for aero-engine magnetos for the Royal Naval Air Service.) It was in this context that Bennett's business skills found the environment in which to expand and mature, when his company was taken over by the older and much larger Joseph Lucas Ltd in the early months of the war. The latter, founded in 1875, employed about four thousand in 1914, in comparison with the Thomson-Bennett workforce of about a hundred. Harry Lucas had seen the need for British-made magnetos, vital to the development of mechanized armed services, and for this reason he acquired Bennett's small firm with its specialist production. 
Bennett's wartime role was on the home front, where he was appointed chairman of the two bodies set up to co-ordinate magneto producers, the Aero Magneto Manufacturers' Association and the British Ignition Apparatus Association. Bennett was remembered by A. P. Young of BT-H as 'a humble and kindly man with a keen business brain', with whom 'right from the start we established a friendly relationship' (Young). Within the Lucas concern Thomson-Bennett was run as a separate business under Bennett as managing director. 
In the early post-war years the Lucas board suffered internal disputes, which opened the way for Bennett to join Harry Lucas in 1920 as one of two managing directors. In the following year Oliver Lucas was made a director and he and Bennett became joint managing directors in 1923. Oliver, born in 1891, had been educated at King Edward's School and had then gone into the family firm, where his skill as a motorist proved of considerable practical use. His war service resulted in the development of the 'OL' signalling lamp for the army. Despite the eleven-year difference in age, the partnership of Bennett and Oliver Lucas was crucial for the inter-war growth of Joseph Lucas and the development of Bennett as a leading entrepreneur in the motor component industry, although his qualities and capabilities would have brought him to prominence whatever the external circumstances of his career. 
The Bennett-Lucas partnership from the early twenties was described by Nockolds as one of the most remarkable the motor industry has ever seen. Oliver Lucas brought to it his technical skill and good commercial judgement, while Bennett's significant contribution lay not in his early technical experience, but in the strength of his main interest, the expansion of the company. Though the two differed widely in their personal interests and beliefs, within the company the outstanding feature of their partnership was their unanimity in business decisions. As Bennett expanded his public life and Oliver Lucas immersed himself in the technical details of engineering development, their partnership was increasingly supported by Bertram Waring as company secretary. 
Bennett came to play a major role in public life in Birmingham and on the national scene. He was a member of the British delegation to Ottawa in 1932, president of the Birmingham chamber of commerce, 1932-3, of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, 1935-6, and of the Federation of British Industries during the crucial period 1938-40, which included the 1939 negotiations with the German Reichsgruppe Industrie. In 1940 Bennett succeeded Neville Chamberlain as Unionist member for Edgbaston. Rearmament and war brought numerous official appointments, such as membership of the panel of industrial advisers to the Ministry of Supply, 1938-9, and the chair of the Automatic Gun Board, 1941-4. The war also proved the long-term value of the decision of Bennett and Oliver Lucas to set up CAV-Bosch in 1931, without which a deficiency in supplies of fuel-injection equipment might well have paralleled that in magnetos in the First World War. 
In the house Bennett commanded respect by his moderation and modesty, speaking only on what he knew, in a quiet and persuasive manner. This was especially important during his term of office as parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Labour and National Service, 1951-2. Bennett resigned on health grounds in 1952, rejoining Lucas as joint managing director with Waring in August of that year. His great partner in business, Oliver Lucas, had died, from overwork, four years earlier, prompting Bennett's comment that he had lost his lifelong friend and colleague. 
Bennett was a generous public benefactor, donating $10,000 to the Birmingham Children's Hospital in 1936 and the same amount to Lucas employees' hard luck fund two years later. He was knighted in 1941 and raised to the peerage in 1953. He married Agnes, daughter of Joseph Palmer, in 1905; there were no children of the marriage. Bennett's wife had a distinguished record of social service and she provided guidance and encouragement throughout his career. For recreation Bennett turned to sport, rugby giving place to golf and tennis, and he was an enthusiastic walker. He remained with Lucas until his death at his home, Ardencote, 18 Luttrell Road, Four Oaks, Warwickshire, on 27 September 1957. Great figures of industry, especially the motor industry, attended his funeral on 2 October (the Rootes brothers, Sir Leonard Lord, and Sydney Guy) and his memorial service, at which the Federation of British Industries (Sir Norman Kipping), Jaguar Cars (Sir William Lyons), ICI, the Dunlop Rubber Company, the Standard Motor Company, and Vauxhall Motors were represented. 


@@@@@


doc= 30711


Bennett, Richard Bedford, Viscount Bennett (1870-1947), prime minister of Canada, was born at Hopewell Hill, Albert county, New Brunswick, on 3 July 1870, the eldest of the three sons and two daughters of Henry John Bennett (1842-1905), shipbuilder and later general merchant at Hopewell Cape and his wife, Henrietta Stiles (1844-1914), a schoolteacher, daughter of Captain Daniel Stiles of Hopewell Hill, 8 miles to the west of the cape. His mother was a staunch Wesleyan Methodist, her husband an easy-going, occasionally bibulous, Baptist. 
Henrietta Stiles's Methodism became the supreme law in the Bennett family, with its strong emphasis on work, diligence, and self-denial. Make sure, John Wesley had said, that you don't waste time with 'silly unprofitable diversions. You have always something better to do... Do it as soon as possible. No delay!... And do it as well as possible. Do not sleep or yawn over it. Put your whole strength to the work. (J. Wesley, 'The use of money', 'The Works of John Wesley', ed. A. C. Outler, 1985, 273-9)' Then followed Wesley's further rule, 'Save all you can' (ibid.). And curb wilfulness, which is the main source of sin, including smoking, drinking, and dancing. By this abstemious life, having earned and saved all you could, you then gave away as much as you could to society, to the needy, to good causes. These were the lessons that Henrietta taught Richard, her eldest son. Bourgeois to the core, they inculcated a way of life that was austere, sober, hard-working, and socially conservative. If charitable to the outer world, Henrietta's Methodism was exacting to the inner self. Those moral principles would guide R. B. Bennett all his life. 
Something else came from Bennett's mother: ambition. Aim high, she said. Young Bennett had to memorize Longfellow's 'Ladder of St Augustine': '
The heights by great men reached and kept 

Were not attained by sudden flight, 

But they, while their companions slept, 

Were toiling upward in the night. 

' Henrietta Bennett's ambition for her eldest son came probably from frustrated hopes for her husband. Henry Bennett's training was in shipbuilding in his father's yard at the cape; by the mid-1870s the shipyards there, and in the maritime provinces of Canada generally, were having a difficult time and Henry Bennett had to turn himself into a general merchant and farmer. He was not very successful at either. R. B. Bennett's penury started early in life and he never forgot it. 'I'll always remember', said he in 1934, 'the pit from which I was digged and the long uphill road I had to travel. I'll never forget one step' (J. S. Stewart to Alice Millar, Bennett's private secretary, 27 Sept 1947, Bennett MSS). 
After attending Fredericton Normal School in New Brunswick, Bennett started work as a schoolteacher when he was sixteen years old, and for the next four years, from 1886 to 1890, he eked out a living teaching at Douglastown, a lumber village on the Miramichi River in north-eastern New Brunswick. But he saved enough to put himself through law school at Dalhousie University, Halifax, in 1890-93. He did remarkably well, eschewing all but work, study, and debating. His record was sufficiently remarkable that Dalhousie's dean of law, R. C. Weldon, also MP for Albert county, 1887-96, in the Canadian House of Commons, recommended Bennett to a fellow Conservative, Senator James Loughheed of Calgary. Loughheed was looking for an able young lawyer and possible junior partner. At this point, 1896, Bennett had taken up a law practice in Chatham, New Brunswick, on the Miramichi, his familiar territory. But the call of western opportunity was strong and in January 1897, his law books preceding him, young Bennett, tall, lean, and twenty-six years old, got off the Canadian Pacific Railway train in Calgary, Alberta. It was bitterly cold, with a thin skiff of snow holding down the dirt and dust of the streets; Calgary was a cow town of some 4000 people, new, raw, and as Bennett added in letters back to New Brunswick, with not all that much business. 
Bennett was a very eastern looking denizen of Calgary. He dressed meticulously. He was not like the local Calgary lawyers, but then he never was one to emulate the crowd. He took the world on his own terms, with his own standards of what an able, upright, advocate should, or should not, do. He neither drank nor smoked. He did not swear; his expletive nearest to swearing was 'Blast!' He had a vigorous and retentive mind; he worked like a horse, long hours with little or no play; there was in fact only a little play in him. 
The Loughheed-Bennett practice went slowly at first; but by 1900 Calgary was expanding, with land, farming, ranching (and by the 1920s oil). Bennett's reputation grew with it as an honest, versatile, clever, and persistent lawyer; he took silk in 1905 and by 1914 had an extremely busy and profitable practice, and with a substantial clutch of business ventures and investments as well. 
Bennett was by this time well into Conservative politics. A vigorous, not to say voluble, debater, not afraid of challenges, confident, perhaps too confident, of his own mind and opinions, he took on the Alberta Liberal establishment. He was elected first in 1898 for Calgary West to the territorial legislature at Regina. After Alberta's creation as a province in 1905, with its new capital in Edmonton, he was put forward by friends in 1909 for the new 41-seat Alberta legislature. In that election the Liberals took thirty-seven seats; there was one socialist and three Conservatives. Of this narrow and unpromising opposition he was soon the spokesman, giving the Liberal government no quarter. In 1911 he ran in the Canadian general election for Calgary West and won. That rare being, a successful western Conservative, he was now a formidable voice, though not one brought easily under party discipline. 
Bennett's views on Canadian railways, tariffs, on Canada's proper position within the British empire, were in advance of those of the Conservative Party leader, Robert Borden. To his old friend Max Aitken, now in London contemplating entry into British politics, Bennett wrote on 13 November 1910: 'Your problem is how best to serve the Empire. It is too bad that such erroneous ideas should prevail in England about Canada and the Empire. I am convinced that the real crisis in the life of our Empire is now upon us. If the Empire is to endure the self-governing nations which compose it must in some way be federated. Unless there is a recognition of common interests, common traditions, & above all common responsibilities and obligations, and that too within the lifetime of this generation, independence is inevitable not of Canada alone but of all the nations that now make up the Empire. In Canada the situation is really acute. (Beaverbrook MSS, vol. 66)' That prescient letter sums up much of Bennett's imperial ideas then and later. 
Bennett was a restive back-bencher in the Canadian House of Commons. He was never much of a follower, ready to quarrel with party leaders on what he felt were important issues of principle. But he was so able a parliamentarian, so valuable an assistant, that Borden took him to England in 1915 as adviser, and on a tour of the battlefields of France. Both men came home dissatisfied with British conduct of the war. In October 1916 Bennett was appointed director of the Canadian National Service, an inventory of Canada's male population. In his view this was not a prelude to conscription but an effective substitute for it, rationalizing manpower in all aspects of war, army, industrial production, and farming. He wanted to make sure that useful farmers and workers were not sent needlessly off to the western front. Like Borden, he was still confident that Canada's war effort could go forward without conscription. But the battle of Vimy Ridge in April 1917 changed that. The Canadian army lost 10,000 men in that battle and that April produced only 4000 recruits. Bennett believed that the war now required conscription though still not at the expense of sacrificing Canada's farm labour. 
Bennett was chagrined that the prime minister, Robert Borden, did not appoint him to the senate in February 1918, something that Bennett believed he had been promised. That humiliation -- for so he regarded it -- was partly assuaged by his being appointed minister of justice in 1920 under a new Conservative prime minister, Arthur Meighen, Borden having retired from politics owing to ill health. But in the general election of December 1921 the Meighen government was defeated and Bennett with it. Just then he was called to England on an appeal in one of his cases at the judicial committee of the privy council. 
Bennett was already thinking of moving to England, losing interest in his Calgary law practice. But when his partner, Sir James Loughheed, with a minimum of consultation and arrangement, arbitrarily chose to use Bennett's absence in England to dissolve the old partnership, Bennett, after an acrimonious exchange of cables, returned from England in high dudgeon. He went straight to Calgary and established his own law firm. It would fare much better than his old partnership with Loughheed. That accident of circumstance would keep him in Canada for the eventful next seventeen years. 
Bennett was by this time a millionaire. In 1925 he had an annual income from professional fees and business of some $90,000. He was elected to the House of Commons in the general elections in 1925 and in 1926, and Meighen appointed him minister of finance in 1926 during Meighen's brief three-month tenure as prime minister. Meighen then resigned the leadership of the Conservative Party, and the party for the first time called a national convention, set for Winnipeg in October 1927, to select a new leader. 
In the meantime Bennett had to deal with his serious responsibilities for the E. B. Eddy Company, a huge match and pulp and paper conglomerate that stretched along the Quebec shore of the Ottawa River for 2 miles. Bennett owned just over half of Eddy's 3000 shares. How that came to be went back to Bennett's days on the Miramichi in the 1890s. One of his acquaintances was Jennie Shirreff, some nine years older than Bennett. She had trained as a nurse in Boston, and in 1894 in Halifax married E. B. Eddy, a 67-year-old widower who had created the Eddy Company. Eddy died in 1906 and his widow inherited his control of the company. The Quebec government demanded succession duties on such a scale that Jennie Shirreff Eddy needed expert legal advice and at once. She called on Bennett, whom she knew had the tough legal skills she needed. Eddys was also profitable: dividends in 1907 were 14 per cent and in 1910 reached 50 per cent. Bennett was drawn into the company more and more, becoming the senior legal adviser, and was so influential that when Mrs Eddy died in 1921 she left 500 shares to him and 1007 shares to her brother. The latter died in 1926 and left his shares to Bennett who now held 1508 shares, at that time worth about $1.5 million. 
The Winnipeg convention of October 1927 elected R. B. Bennett leader of the Conservative Party. He was now leader of the opposition. He set about getting rid of some of the more important corporate commitments, directorships especially, that would get in the way of political responsibilities. Eddys was sold to Bryant and May, the English company, late in 1927; many of Bennett's other directorships, and some substantial blocks of stock, were given up in 1928. It was a good time to be unloading stock! 
The depression that followed the 1929 crash made it easier for the Bennett Conservatives to win the general election of July 1930. The Liberal regime of Mackenzie King was defeated partly by issues arising from the gathering force of the worldwide economic dislocations. Bennett promised measures that would cure those effects on the Canadian economy and would push Canadian exports into the markets of the world. A strikingly successful businessman and politician, he was listened to and believed. He and his party won the election of July 1930 with 137 seats in the 245-seat House of Commons. He was sworn in as prime minister, minister of external affairs, and minister of finance on 7 August 1930. He had now to deliver on his promises to the Canadian electorate. It was not going to be easy. 
There was an early session of parliament in September 1930 to provide emergency funds for the unemployed. Bennett, his party, and the public expected orthodox solutions to Canada's problems in the world economic crisis. He went to the Imperial Conference in London later that autumn, where he urged an economic union of the British empire, with free admission of empire natural products into the British market, in return for what would be, presumably under certain conditions, free entry of British goods into the Canadian market. The Ottawa economic conference of 1932, called and presided over by Bennett, was to be the capping stone of this policy. It did not work all that well. Britain was not ready to exclude foreign wheat and lumber, and Canadian manufacturers were unwilling to allow free admission of British goods. What emerged were complex bilateral treaties between different segments of the empire. Nevertheless, trade between Canada and the rest of the empire rose considerably; Canadian exports rose by 51 per cent over the next two years, most of the increase being between Canada and Great Britain. 
In 1931 and 1932 the judicial committee of the privy council reversed policies of many years' standing. The privy council's rulings in Canadian constitutional cases for half a century had favoured the provinces in legal battles with the central government. Now with new questions of jurisdiction, aviation, and radio broadcasting, the privy council gave the federal government control over them. Bennett acted. The Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission was established in 1932, the immediate predecessor of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. The following year he appointed Lord Macmillan as royal commissioner to examine the possibility of establishing a central bank, the Bank of Canada. This was done in 1934 in the teeth of the resistance of the Canadian private chartered banks. 
In 1935, with the depression still grinding down the country, exports still languishing, and conditions in the prairies truly desperate, Bennett went much further. Overcoming resistance within his own cabinet and his party, he established the 'Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act', and, more dramatically, the 'Employment and Social Insurance Act', the latter the centrepiece of what came to be called the Bennett New Deal. This social legislation, as the name suggests, was inspired superficially by the Roosevelt New Deal in the United States, but its social core was the Methodist Bennett of old. When asked about it, he would pull out his speeches in his first days as an MP in 1911, or his address on becoming party leader in 1927. This leftish social legislation did not sit well with older members of the party, particularly the business elements from Montreal and Toronto. Moreover, to the electorate as a whole it seemed like a last-minute conversion, for Bennett had to have an election in 1935. On top of those questions, the Conservative Party was weakened by the defection of H. H. Stevens, one of Bennett's ablest and most popular ministers, whose royal commission on price spreads was revealing how big business was systematically undercutting the small businessman. 
Thus came the election of 14 October 1935, which Bennett fought boldly and lost. Probably no government would have survived five years of the depression of the 1930s. But he took the defeat much to heart, especially its devastation of the Conservative Party in the House of Commons. With 30 per cent of the popular vote, the Conservatives took only 16 per cent of the seats; the Liberals, with 45 per cent of the popular vote, took 71 per cent of the seats. So the Conservatives in 1935 elected only 40 members, the Liberals 173, others 32. 
Bennett was not well. In March 1935 he had been diagnosed with atrial fibrillation of the heart. He might then have resigned, but the forthcoming election and the defection of Stevens put him squarely on his mettle, and he carried on despite the heavy drain on his hitherto superabundant energy. Indeed as leader of the opposition from 1935 to 1938, he was still one of the most vital and vigorous members of the House of Commons. Finally, however, in March 1938 he resigned the leadership of the Conservative Party. 
A private tragedy now was upon him. In May 1938 Bennett's sister Mildred died of breast cancer in a New York hospital. She was only forty-nine years old. Mildred had been the light of his life. Born in 1889, three years after Bennett had left home, a surprise baby to her mother, Mildred was always something more than a sister to him. He had looked after her education and as she grew into an attractive young woman, she became his hostess and companion. She had qualities that Bennett lacked. She loved a party, she could dance, she liked champagne; she had what men called charm, that is, vivacity, a sense of humour, tact, and a willingness to listen. She had also great political sagacity, and she had much to do with Bennett's victory in the 1930 election. Mildred had the moral sweep of Shaw's Candida and her death stunned her brother. Bennett shut himself up in his suite in the Chateau Laurier, reading aloud the book of 'Ruth', 'And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee, for whither thou goest, I will go... ought but death part thee and me.' 
Bennett had been a bachelor all his life, but certainly not a misogynistic one. There had been ladies who wanted him, and after Mildred's marriage in 1931 to W. D. Herridge, Canadian minister to the United States, he had certainly wanted at least one lady, a rich and handsome Montreal widow, Hazel Kemp Colville. After two years she broke off relations. Bennett would not have been the most tractable of husbands: gifted, energetic, honest, generous, with integrity beyond the reach of most businessmen of his time, he could also be temperamental, autocratic, and impatient. Mildred knew how to handle him, and also his long-serving secretary, Alice Millar; few others did. 
In the autumn of 1938 Bennett decided he would live in England. His ample means allowed him to buy a substantial 60 acre property at Juniper Hill, Mickleham, Surrey, next to that of Max Aitken, now Beaverbrook. He moved his books and effects from Ottawa and Calgary to England, and after effecting at some expense those very necessary Canadian improvements, central heating and substantial new plumbing, he came to settle in at Juniper Hill, not unhappily. He had things to do; there was his house, garden, and grounds; after the war started he was recruited by Beaverbrook to help at the Ministry of Aircraft Production, and there was an abundance of charities. He was also a justice of the peace, and occasionally sat on the local bench at Dorking. His social life was considerable and he commuted back and forth from Mickleham to London by chauffeur-driven car. In June 1941 he was made Viscount Bennett of Mickleham, Calgary, and Hopewell, the result of Beaverbrook's lobbying with Churchill. In the House of Lords he was not a viscount 'faineant'; his not infrequent interventions were usually pertinent and informed. 
In 1944 Bennett was diagnosed with diabetes and from then on had to take insulin every day. He loved chocolates and never stinted his food. He always claimed sugar did not ruin families: alcohol did. He also liked his hot baths and had his butler to help. On 26 June 1947 he had been in London all day; it was warm. Epps, his butler, was sent off for the evening; Bennett would not bathe that night. But he changed his mind, and died in his bath of a heart attack. He was buried on 30 June at St Michael's, Mickleham. 
Bennett had considerable gifts: a quick intelligence, a tenacious memory, enormous energy, and a huge appetite for work. As prime minister he took on too much; he was rarely satisfied with the work and functioning of his colleagues, and would often say so with his mordant wit and sarcastic style. That did not always endear him to his associates. His style of dress, formal and stiff whether in Calgary or Ottawa, suggested he was rich even before he became so. In the depression years in Canada it was easy to cartoon him as crass, wealthy, overbearing, and unfeeling. While that had some truth in it some of the time, it was a gross distortion of his real character. His reputation has suffered ever since, in many respects unjustly. He gave his best to Canada at a very difficult time and was ill rewarded for it. 


@@@@@


doc= 30712


Benson, Arthur Christopher (1862-1925), poet and college head, was born on 24 April 1862 at Wellington College, the son of Edward White Benson (1829-1896), first headmaster of the college and later archbishop of Canterbury, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Sidgwick (1841-1918). He was the brother of Edward Frederic Benson, Robert Hugh Benson, Mary Eleanor Benson, and Margaret Benson. In 1874 he won a scholarship to Eton College from Temple Grove, a preparatory school in East Sheen; in 1881 he went on to King's College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar and took a first in the classical tripos in 1884. 
The formative influences upon Benson were essentially ecclesiastical. Between the ages of ten and twenty-one his home was in the cathedral close, first at Lincoln and then at Truro. He retained a love of church music and ceremony, and although his Christianity became theologically liberal and distinctly unorthodox, he remained definitely 'on the side of the things it stands for' ('Diary', ed. Lubbock, 1913, 139.52). Having an archbishop for a father sharpened the sense that he ought to achieve something in life. But what? He returned to Eton as a master in 1885, a post he was to hold for eighteen years, yet despite his obvious success at schoolmastering he had no real interest in it, and was largely bored by the grind of classical teaching and the dominance of the games ethos. Even the compensation that he found in being surrounded by attractive boys was marred by his consciousness of their propensity for masturbation: a dreaded and disastrous 'moral evil', deeply troubling to him, 'the dark shadow on the life of a schoolmaster, his most anxious and saddest preoccupation' (A. C. Benson, 'The Schoolmaster: a Commentary', 1902, 1908, 148-9). 
Benson nurtured, however, a real ambition for a literary career, and began by writing poetry. He completed an impressive two-decker biography of his father in 1899, and throughout his life he wrote or edited upwards of sixty books. These included relatively serious literary studies of Rossetti, Fitzgerald, and Pater (between 1904 and 1906), but his output mostly consisted of essays, quietly reflective and homiletic, and quasi-autobiographical stories, popular with a genteel, middle-class readership. They were the kind of books which got bad reviews but made him a lot of money, books happily and obsessively churned out between tea and dinner -- 'a thousand pages in his sight / were but an evening gone' (Benson, 'Final Edition', 24). Such titles as 'The House of Quiet' (1904), 'From a College Window' (1906), and 'Beside Still Waters' (1907) speak for themselves. Benson himself acknowledged their essential vapidity ('sauce without meat'). The complacent fluency, daintiness, and over-written tepid sentiment lent themselves easily to parody, most notably in Max Beerbohm's 'Out of Harm's Way' ('A Christmas Garland', 1912, 21-30); but 'At a Safe Distance' was also tellingly suggested as a possible future title. 
Meanwhile, as a result of Queen Victoria's understandable indifference to Alfred Austin, Benson became an unofficial laureate of the court at Windsor. This led to the writing of the famous words of 'Land of Hope and Glory' as a coronation ode for King Edward VII in 1902, fitted to what Benson called Elgar's 'wizard-like music' ('Diary', ed. Lubbock, 1902, 19.157). He became a fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge in 1904, his court connections having enabled him to retire from Eton to Cambridge on appointment as joint editor (with the second Viscount Esher) of the first three volumes of 'The Letters of Queen Victoria, 1837-1861', which appeared in 1907. 
In appearance Benson was a tall, upright figure of considerable bulk (weighing 16 stone when he was sixty), with shaggy fair hair going grey, a ruddy complexion, a heavy moustache, blue eyes, and bushy eyebrows. He was, in his own description, 'like the cornet-player of a German Band'. Invariably he dressed in grey flannel with a double-breasted jacket. He loved to observe life, but was a reluctant participator. He could feel warm affection for boys and young men (among them George Mallory and Dadie Rylands), but was totally unable to come to terms with physical intimacy of any kind. This fastidious self-withholding apparently precipitated a nervous breakdown as an undergraduate (November 1882), when a chastely loved schoolfriend gave in to 'immorality' with someone else, and ruined Benson's relationship with him. He never married; in fact, he never even contemplated it. 'My own emotions do not scorch,' he wrote, 'they merely shine and ripple like the waters of a lake' ('Diary', ed. Lubbock, 1907, 94.15-16). And: 'I don't want to claim or to be claimed -- I want nothing but a cordial camaraderie -- and thus a whole range of [sexual] problems mean nothing to me' (ibid., 1916, 159.45). In any case: 'the Head of a College can hardly hope to inspire undergrads with romantic passion' (ibid., 1924, 175.26). So he concentrated on entertaining the young men to lunch, talking amusingly, and perhaps taking them for a cycle ride afterwards. 
The real love affair of Benson's life was with Magdalene College, where after eight years he became president in 1912 and master in December 1915, a post he held until his death. The college was at a very low ebb indeed when he joined it (at the invitation of his old colleague S. A. Donaldson, who had just been appointed master). But he rapidly supplied the courageous inspiration and the generous benefactions needed to brighten and improve it, to establish indeed a 'New Magdalene'. 'He built, he adorned, he financed and he reigned' (Benson, 'Final Edition', 126). He was helped crucially by gifts totalling over $60,000 from an American admirer living in Switzerland, Mme de Nottbeck. Benson promoted lively and genial teaching, his most notable protege being I. A. Richards. He encouraged 'modern' subjects, not only English and history, but science, archaeology, and music. He also widened the range of school connections, and supplied good sense and forward-looking understanding to governing body debate. Above all, he was friendly and helpful towards a large proportion of the undergraduates. As master he was kindly, benevolent, and richly humoured, certainly, but he was also radical, analytical, combative, egotistical, and despotic. In short, he was a figure quite unrecognizable from most of his writings. As he himself put it, 'in my books I am solemn, sweet, refined; in real life I am rather vehement, sharp, contemptuous, a busy mocker' ('Diary', ed. Lubbock, 1913, 142.31). 
If, on the whole, Benson could hold these two aspects of personality together -- the quietistic scribbler and the activating leader, the generously companionable but finally unapproachable man -- there was a price to pay. Twice (in 1907-8 and 1917-22) he descended into prolonged and terrible depression, diagnosed as neurasthenia. He struggled to make sense of it in his diary, but even his facility with words was eventually crushed by the enervating, baffling unintelligibility of it all ('Diary', ed. Lubbock, 1917, 166.48). 
Benson died in the Old Lodge at Magdalene on 17 June 1925 and was buried at St Giles's cemetery, Huntingdon Road, Cambridge. Of all of his writings, it is his diary which may give him enduring significance. Begun in 1897 when he was thirty-five years old, it is well over 4 million words long, and runs to 180 volumes. Two edited selections have appeared -- Percy Lubbock's a year after Benson's death, and, more recently, David Newsome's in 1981. The diary remains an important document for understanding late Victorian (public) schoolmastering, the Edwardian literary scene, and Cambridge in the first quarter of the twentieth century. Benson was one of the most charismatic, intelligent, and culturally influential dons Cambridge has ever seen. 


@@@@@


doc= 30713


Benson, Edward Frederic (1867-1940), novelist, was born at Wellington College on 24 July 1867. He was the third son of Edward White Benson (1829-1896), headmaster of Wellington College and subsequently archbishop of Canterbury, and his wife, Mary Sidgwick (1841-1918). He was a younger brother of Arthur Christopher Benson (1862-1925), Mary Eleanor Benson (1863-1890), and Margaret Benson (1865-1916), and an elder brother of Robert Hugh Benson (1871-1914). He was educated at Temple Grove School, Sheen, at Marlborough College, and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was exhibitioner (1888) and scholar (1890), and secured first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1890, 1891). His first book, 'Sketches from Marlborough', was published while he was at Cambridge. 
Benson worked in Athens for the British School of Archaeology (1892-5) and in Egypt for the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies (1895). His first novel, 'Dodo', was published in 1893 and was a runaway success. From 1895 to 1918 he lived in London and devoted himself to writing, much of his work being published in fashionable magazines. From 1918 he lived for the greater part of each year at Lamb House, Rye, Sussex, which had been the home of Henry James. 
Benson described himself as uncontrollably prolific: he published at least ninety-three books, excluding collaborations. Benson's writings fall into three groups: novels of social satire, reminiscences, and horror stories. Most famous among his social satires are the novels of manners, especially the 'Mapp and Lucia' novels, which include 'Queen Lucia' (1920), 'Lucia in London' (1927), and 'Miss Mapp' (1922); they are set both in London and in 'Tilling', a fictionalized Rye, and are said to be 'romans-a-clef' (as also are the 'Dodo' novels, where Dodo is believed to be a portrait of Margot Tennant, later Lady Oxford). These novels remain witty and penetrating social studies. A London Weekend Television dramatization, entitled 'Mapp and Lucia', was screened by Channel 4. This, along with an omnibus publication of the complete novels, 'Make Way for Lucia' (1977; 1986), revived interest in Benson's work, and increased his popularity with a wider audience. Another group of his social satires deals with university life, examples being, 'The Babe, BA' (1897), 'David Blaize' (1916), and 'Colin II' (1925); these novels are less successful. 
Benson's books of reminiscences, such as 'As we were' (1930), 'As we are' (1932), and 'Final Edition' (1940), have value as sources for social history and personal anecdote, as he excelled in creating vivid pictures of the atmosphere of the times, and this was a quality also displayed in his biographical studies of Edward VII and Queen Victoria. In one of his books of family recollections Benson claims for himself a retentive, observational memory, even of things hardly noted at the time; and this was perhaps his most remarkable quality, displayed in his non-fiction and fiction alike. His stories of horror and the supernatural have remained consistently popular. Early horror novels, such as 'The Luck of the Vails' (1901), and 'The Room in the Tower' (1912), are characterized by lavish descriptions and psychological tension. 'Visible and Invisible' (1923), 'Spook Stories' (1928), and 'More Spook Stories' (1934) are more coldly unemotional excursions into the realm of ghosts and marvels. 
Benson never married and many of his novels suggest that he had a generalized dislike of women. He lived alone in Rye and continued writing until his death. He was mayor of Rye from 1934 to 1937 and a JP. He was elected an honorary fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1938 and was appointed OBE. He died in University College Hospital, London, on 29 February 1940, and was buried in the Rye cemetery after a funeral conducted by the bishop of Chichester. The E. F. Benson Society was founded in London in 1984, and publishes a journal, 'The Dodo', semi-annually. 


@@@@@


doc= 30714


Benson, Sir Francis Robert (1858-1939), actor and theatre manager, was born at Eden House, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 4 November 1858, the third son and fourth child of William Benson (1816-1887), a barrister and justice of the peace of Alresford, Hampshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Soulsby (died 1892), the daughter of Thomas Smith of Colebrooke Park, Tonbridge. William Arthur Smith Benson, the designer, and Godfrey Rathbone Benson, later Baron Charnwood, were among his brothers. 
Although Benson claimed viking ancestry, his family is traceable to eighteenth-century Quakers. He spent an idyllic, rural childhood before attending Darch's Preparatory School in Brighton (from 1867). In 1871 he went to Winchester College, where he preferred sports to academics, but was attracted to Shakespeare and played female roles. Sports still predominated when he went to New College, Oxford, in 1878, but he created a stir in 1880 when he mounted a successful production of Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon'. Presented in Greek and with Benson as Clytemnestra, the production was repeated for three performances at St George's Hall, London, an enterprise witnessed by Henry Irving and Ellen Terry (the latter particularly fostered Benson's early career). His Oxford days were also typified by his triumph in winning the inter-varsity 3 mile race against Cambridge in 1881 in fifteen minutes and five seconds. 
The success of 'Agamemnon' persuaded Benson his future lay in the theatre and, on leaving Oxford, he presented 'Romeo and Juliet' for a single performance at the Imperial Theatre, London, in July 1881. In addition to playing Romeo, Benson attempted to manage every aspect of the production. The result was amateurish and financially disastrous, although some perceived histrionic potential in Benson himself. Indeed, this early effort epitomizes Benson's whole career: his own limited acting and managerial capabilities, his abundant enthusiasm, and his ensuing financial woes, which resulted in someone else bailing him out. On this occasion his father provided $500, an act he was to repeat frequently. 
Benson's determination to become a professional actor was founded on a minimal understanding of acting or of the theatre, but he possessed an almost arrogant conviction he could improve conditions. However, for a few months he did study stage-fighting, dancing, boxing, and elocution with various tutors, notably Hermann Vezin, the last in an attempt to improve his always problematic voice. Then, in June 1882, the supportive Ellen Terry invited him to participate in a private reading of 'Much Ado about Nothing', with Irving as Benedick, Helen Faucit as Beatrice, and Benson as Don Pedro. 
Shortly afterwards Benson obtained his first professional engagement, playing Paris in 'Romeo and Juliet' with Irving and Terry at the Lyceum Theatre (2 September 1882). His performance, despite Benson's own confidence, was inauspicious, and Terry had to persuade Irving to retain him. When no further roles materialized, Benson was told he would profit from working with a provincial touring company, advice which fundamentally dictated the remainder of his career. 
Benson joined the Manchester Shakespearian company of Charles Bernard and Annie Alleyn in December 1882. After a few weeks' trial he failed to impress and was advised to quit the stage. Undeterred, early in 1883 he joined Walter Bentley's touring company, which performed Shakespeare and classic comedies in the north of England and Scotland. After a few months Bentley decamped for financial reasons, and Benson, still the novice, arrogantly took over the company, although not without his father's substantial financial assistance. The new F. R. Benson company began its first tour on 5 May 1883 at the Public Hall in Airdrie, Lanarkshire, still presenting Shakespeare and old comedies. The tour eventually lost $450. However, Benson did attempt some innovations, largely as a result of seeing the Meiningen company at Drury Lane in 1881. Although circumstances made application of the Meiningen theories difficult, he tried to present concerted scenes, ensemble acting, and a coherent stage picture. During his career he became notorious for conducting protracted rehearsals, oblivious to the needs of ordinary mortals. His objectives were to perform constantly as many of Shakespeare's plays as possible, changing the programme frequently so that no play predominated. Additionally, his actors were trained in speaking blank verse. He believed that a play should not be adapted merely to serve star performers, and that scenery should be simple and subordinate to dramatic interest. 
More provincial touring followed, posing its own difficulties. Benson perceived the need for a circuit of towns for his company's visits, although it was difficult to keep the company stable. People constantly joined and then moved on (although some, such as the excellent low comedian George R. Weir, stayed permanently with Benson). Salaries were negligible and the lure of the London stage was irresistible. All, however, remained loyal old Bensonians, and it is significant that in 1920, for example, no fewer than seventy old Bensonians were playing prominent parts in London. Those who remained on several occasions made financial sacrifices cheerfully in order to keep the venture afloat: such was the loyalty Pa, as Benson was dubbed, inspired. 
Indeed, the concept of provincial touring inherently courted financial strains as people and baskets of costumes and sets were transported from town to town. But Benson gradually built up his stock of properties so that he was able to stage virtually any play anywhere as he knocked on virtually every door in the country. In November 1899 a fire at the Theatre Royal, Newcastle, destroyed the company's possessions entirely, a loss from which Benson never really recovered (although on that occasion Irving and George Alexander generously loaned costumes so that Benson could fulfil his engagements). Eventually, by the early 1900s, there were several Benson companies, each with a designated area of the country ('north', 'south', 'midland') to cover. And there was the occasional trip overseas, such as that led by Matheson Lang to the Caribbean in 1904. 
A significant aspect of a visit to any town were the games Benson and his company would play against the locals: cricket, soccer, water polo, and other sports were played with equal zest as occasion demanded. This habit endeared them to the provinces but incurred metropolitan disdain. There is the apocryphal tale of a young actor who, asked by Benson whether he could play Rugby, assumed Benson meant the sport, not the role (in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'). Benson did believe acting demanded physical fitness, and he once played hockey in the morning, and then performed Henry V and Macbeth later the same afternoon and evening. 
Early in his touring ventures (December 1884) Benson met an actress performing as Constance Fetherstonhaugh. Her father was Captain Morshead Fetherstonhaugh Samwell (1827-1864), and he had died shortly before her birth in India on 26 February 1864. 
Benson's provincial reputation grew rapidly, and in 1886 he was asked to direct a one-week spring festival at the Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, which was the beginning of a long and successful association. The festival week had been established only in 1879 and had not been marked by noteworthy productions. But Benson's zealous, missionary passion for Shakespeare coincided with the ideals of the festival's founder, Charles E. Flower (1830-1892), the Warwickshire brewer. Benson was seen as a responsible director who could pick a good company, although his early work at Stratford was disdained by London managers and ignored by the capital's press. 
The first season began modestly enough on 24 April 1886 with 'Hamlet', and included 'Othello', 'Richard III', and Sheridan's 'The Rivals'. Of these 'Richard III' was deemed the best. Other plays in the Shakespearian canon were added with successive festivals, and eventually, in his thirty years' association with Stratford, Benson produced all Shakespeare's plays with the exception of 'Titus Andronicus' and 'Troilus and Cressida'. The most frequently staged were 'Hamlet', 'The Merchant of Venice', and 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (twenty festivals each), followed by 'The Taming of the Shrew' and 'Twelfth Night' (17), 'As You Like It' (16), 'Henry V' (16), and 'Richard II' (14). Several plays, however, received only a solitary production. 
Benson preferred plays which gave him the opportunity to perform athletically: for example, in 1891 as Caliban in 'The Tempest', he hung upside down from a tree while keeping a fresh fish in his mouth. It was this sort of athletic trait which led Max Beerbohm in 1900 to characterize Benson's 'Henry V' as a good form of cricket but not acting, a characterization which stuck, much to Benson's detriment. But that overlooks such achievements as introducing the little-performed 'Timon of Athens' to Stratford in 1892, the never highly popular 'Coriolanus' in 1893, and a lavish and archaeologically accurate 'Antony and Cleopatra' in 1898. He was particularly good as Coriolanus and Antony, although Constance was less secure as Cleopatra. 1899 saw the production of the complete folio version of 'Hamlet', which was performed over an afternoon and evening, with Benson restoring large, unfamiliar portions of the play. Novel, too, was Benson as a beardless Lear for the 1902 festival. By the middle of the 1900s he had staged thirty of Shakespeare's plays and the festival lengthened in duration (the 1903 festival, for example, comprised six plays in two weeks, the 1906 festival eighteen plays in three weeks). A summer season of three to four weeks was instituted in 1910 and became a regular feature. All this received due recognition when in 1910 Stratford conferred the freedom of the borough on Benson, the first actor so distinguished since David Garrick in 1769 (the city of Cork followed suit in 1931). 
Ironically, from 1910 onwards Benson's relationship with Stratford became more uneasy, largely because of the financial difficulties he invariably incurred, but also because there was a sentiment to replace Constance, who was becoming too old for the female leads she insisted on performing. Benson soldiered on for a few more years until the First World War finally took its toll. His last attenuated Stratford season was in the spring of 1916. 
The provinces and Stratford were never enough for Benson, and he always yearned to make his mark in London. So he presented his first London season at the Globe Theatre in 1889, beginning on 19 December with 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', which ran for a then record 110 performances. He added 'The Taming of the Shrew', 'Hamlet', and 'Othello' to form a four-play repertory, but this policy, essential to his artistic vision, succeeded only in confusing a public unfamiliar with such a notion. The season ended less successfully than it might have done, and Benson, typically, lost money. He did not return until February 1900, when he took the Lyceum for four months. He presented the 'Henry V' so disdained by Beerbohm, along with seven other plays, including 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', a complete 'Hamlet', and the production considered to be his best, 'Richard II'. Again, the season ticket and repertory policy displeased audiences, as did Benson's methods of staging, which were less sumptuous than the elaborately pictorial Shakespeare given by Herbert Beerbohm Tree at Her Majesty's. Subsequently West End seasons followed -- at the Comedy (1901), Adelphi (1905), St James's (1910), Shaftesbury (1914), Court (1915), and St Martin's (1920). Additionally, Benson's company appeared regularly at 'outer' theatres -- the Coronet (Notting Hill), Hammersmith, and Wimbledon -- until the late 1920s. Benson also toured Canada and the United States in 1913-14, sometimes to appreciative audiences, but he was mauled by the critics in Chicago. He did, however, receive an honorary LLD degree from McGill University in Montreal in recognition of his services to the theatre. 
Further recognition was the knighthood conferred on Benson by George V, during the Shakespeare tercentenary performance given at Drury Lane on 2 May 1916, when he appeared as Julius Caesar. Still in costume, he was knighted in the royal box with a sword borrowed from a local armourer, the first instance of an actor being knighted in a theatre. 
While Benson staged patriotic performances of 'Henry V' during the early war years, he desperately wanted to make a practical contribution, but he was rejected for active service because of his age. However, while his wife directed a canteen for soldiers in France, Benson drove an ambulance and received the Croix de Guerre for rescuing wounded men on the firing line. Both Benson and Constance grieved deeply for their son, Eric, when he was killed in action in September 1916. 
After the war, Benson's fortunes declined sharply. He made his last appearance at Stratford in 1919, and then toured South Africa in 1921-2. On his return he toured the provinces giving farewell performances, and found time to write a book of genial if vague reminiscences, 'My Memoirs' (1930), and the brief handbook of advice about the acting profession, 'I Want to Go on the Stage' (1931). He made what was to be his last appearance on stage, as Dr Caius in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', at the Winter Garden on 26 December 1932. When Benson was injured by a bicyclist in Bradford in March 1933, his career was finally ended. He was, by now, living in much reduced financial circumstances and was awarded a civil-list pension of $100 in July 1933. He remained a solitary but gentle, courteous old man and, a husk of his former self, lived out his days eccentrically in lodgings at 18 Holland Road, Kensington, London, where he died of broncho-pneumonia and a kidney infection on 31 December 1939. A small private funeral followed on 4 January 1940, attended by Lady Benson and the family; his body was cremated the same day at Golders Green crematorium. However, the theatrical profession was out in force to honour Benson at a memorial service held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 12 January 1940. 
By the time of his death, Benson, and whatever innovations and contributions he had made, had been superseded. It is true he was never a great actor: Richard II, Petruchio in 'The Taming of the Shrew', and Caliban were probably his best roles. His noble Roman appearance with his aquiline nose lent physical distinction to other roles, but he could become easily bored by his own performances and was notorious for 'ponging' or extemporizing blank verse (albeit expertly). His great talent was for nurturing other actors, teaching them with his wife, affording them opportunities, and creating a theatrical nursery, and for bringing Shakespeare to countless provincial towns; perhaps his greatest contribution was laying a solid foundation for theatrical performances at Stratford. 


@@@@@


doc= 30715


Benson, Godfrey Rathbone, first Baron Charnwood (1864-1945), politician and writer, was born at Langtons, Alresford, Hampshire, on 6 November 1864, the fourth son of the six children of William Benson (1816-1887), barrister, and his wife, Elizabeth Soulsby (died 1892), daughter of Thomas Smith, of Colebrooke Park, Tonbridge. The actor-manager Sir Francis Robert (Frank) Benson and the designer William Arthur Smith Benson were his brothers. 
Benson was educated at Winchester College and Balliol College, Oxford. He obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1887) and was appointed lecturer in philosophy at Balliol. He worked in close association with R. L. Nettleship, the second volume of whose 'Philosophical Lectures and Remains' (containing the well-known lectures on the 'Republic' of Plato) he edited in 1897. 
In 1892 Benson was elected as the Liberal member for the Woodstock division of Oxfordshire, but held the seat only until the next election in 1895. He unsuccessfully stood for St Pancras West in 1900 and Worcestershire West in 1906. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1898. On 11 May 1897 he married Dorothea Mary Roby (1876-1942), daughter of Roby Thorpe of Nottingham, and granddaughter of A. J. Mundella. The marriage brought Benson significant wealth and political connections. They had two sons, the younger of whom died in infancy, and two daughters. As 'The Times' noted, as a member Benson 'never took strongly to life in the House of Commons. The House of Lords probably suited his temperament better' (5 Feb 1945, 6) and he was elevated in June 1911 as Baron Charnwood of Castle Donington, Leicestershire. He was initially a strong supporter of home rule and later of imperial federation and national service. He 'was happier perhaps when dealing with questions outside the range of party politics, in supporting Lord Cromer and Lord Curzon in their opposition to woman suffrage' (ibid.). He did much social, charitable, and municipal work, serving as chairman of the council of the Charity Organization Society, president of the National Institute for the Deaf, chairman of quarter sessions, a deputy lieutenant for Staffordshire, and mayor of Lichfield. 
Benson's deepest interests were religious and intellectual, and, partly through his friendship with Randall Davidson and H. M. Burge, he was closely associated with various causes connected with the Church of England. In 1930 he edited a volume of Burge's 'Discourses and Letters'. His own personal views on religion were set out in a very candid study of St John's gospel, 'According to St. John' (1926), and, in revised form, in 'A Personal Conviction' (1928). His biography of Abraham Lincoln (1916) was widely praised for its 'originality... keen analysis and literary facility' (Thomas, 209-10) and it changed the historical approach to Lincoln's life, with an emphasis on interpretation of the acts of his administration rather than idolatry. He also published 'Theodore Roosevelt' (1923). 
Benson died at his home, 5 Cadogan Court, Draycott Avenue, London, on 3 February 1945, and was buried at Kingston, near Lewes, Sussex, on 7 February. He was succeeded by his son, John Roby (1901-1955), who, as an ophthalmic surgeon, did valuable research in space perception. Benson's elder daughter, Antonia, married as her second husband Cyril Radcliffe, Viscount Radcliffe, and the other, (Eleanor) Theodora Roby Benson, became a novelist and writer of books on travel. 


@@@@@


doc= 30716


Benson, Sir Reginald Lindsay (1889-1968), army officer and merchant banker, was born on 20 August 1889 at 16 South Street, Mayfair, London, the second of the five children of Robert Henry Benson (1850-1929), merchant banker and art collector, and his wife, Evelyn Mary (1856-1943), daughter of Robert Stayner Holford (1808-1892), art collector and MP, of Westonbirt, Gloucestershire, and Dorchester House. He had two brothers and two sisters and was educated at Ludgrove School, Wokingham, at Eton College, where he was captain of cricket and president of Pop, and at Balliol College, Oxford. 
Benson's career as a soldier began in 1909 when, having overcome his father's opposition, he left Oxford after only a year and entered into an attachment with the Life Guards. In 1910 he was gazetted a subaltern in the 9th Queen's Royal Lancers. Impatient to join the regiment he could not bear to wait for its imminent return from South Africa and so paid for the journey out by working as a stoker on a Union Castle steamer. In 1913 he was appointed aide-de-camp to the viceroy of India, Sir Charles Hardinge; he was able to score some notable polo victories in India, in the same year winning the coveted Calcutta cup with fellow aide-de-camp John Astor, against a team of Indian princes. 
Rex Benson rejoined his regiment, which formed part of the 2nd cavalry brigade, in France in August 1914; he survived the battle of the Aisne despite, he wrote to Hardinge, having 'had two horses shot, and my pipe taken out of my mouth by a shrapnel bullet' (private information). After serving at Ypres and then Messines, where he and three others defended the regimental aid post (housing the wounded) for forty-six hours under continual fire from the Germans who were within 50 yards, he was awarded one of the first Military Crosses. In May 1915, during the second battle of Ypres, he was severely gassed and wounded by a bullet that destroyed the brachial artery and the nerves of his right arm, after which he endured numerous operations at Dorchester House, which was turned into a hospital for the duration of the war. 
From there, with his arm still in a sling, Benson was sent officially as liaison officer with the 'ministere de la marine' in Paris but unofficially as representative of the head of the secret service (MIIC). This involved some curious work with the head of the French 'surete'. After service in Ireland during the 1916 uprising he returned to France as liaison officer with General Franchet D'Esperay, commanding the 'groupe des armees du nord', and then with Marshal Petain at the French headquarters at Compiegne. The success of his role was acknowledged by the French, who awarded him the Croix de Guerre and made him a member of the Legion d'honneur. After the armistice he became chief of the British Mission and was attached to the staff of Sir Henry Wilson at the peace conference. While in France he had also been appointed to the DSO and mentioned four times in dispatches. 
Promoted major in 1920 Benson next accepted the post of military secretary to the governor of Bombay, Sir George Lloyd, and in 1922 he helped to organize the highly successful official tour of the prince of Wales, for which he became MVO. On his return home that year he resigned his commission and was almost immediately entrusted with a covert mission by Lloyd George to try to reopen trade with post-revolutionary Russia. He was given a large cargo of tea, among other basic commodities, and sent to Batumi without possessing a word of Russian. It turned out to be a language it was then much safer not to know: his Russian-speaking companion, Tommy Carr, was flung into gaol, leaving Benson, dressed as a Russian, to travel across country to Moscow. Undaunted he proceeded to sell $10,000 of goods, hiding the payment in banknotes inside his boots. He was searched at the Russian-Polish frontier but, fortunately, not asked to remove his boots. The Bank of England duly honoured the bundle of notes without question, even though they appeared somewhat worn and full of holes. 
Benson's father, however, decided that such escapades were no substitute for a career and that Rex should learn the business of banking at the family firm of Robert Benson & Co. In 1924 the partnership was reconstituted to include Rex Benson and his two brothers and, after his father's death in 1929, Benson set about trying to modernize the firm and improve its profitability. The Bensons' personal and banking exposure to US securities was large at the time of the Wall Street crash, with the result that their investment management business -- the mainstay of the firm -- faded to nothing, and the whole office sat idle. Despite this Rex Benson and his brothers refused to make any staff redundant, indeed they rewarded them with bonuses for having worked so well during a trying period. 
Conditions improved, however, to the extent that by 1934 the firm had recovered almost all of its lost capital as the performance of its stable of investment trusts had improved. In 1928 Benson had been given by his father a dormant investment trust, the English and New York, to revitalize. Its capital of $750,000 plummeted in the depression but by 1935 Benson, through hard work and enthusiasm coupled with the skill and experience of his chosen co-directors, had increased its capital to $1.35 million. He also made many business trips to North America, where he vigorously exploited the firm's long-standing connections and developed underwriting and new-issue business. He was, in the words of a colleague at Bensons, 'a devil for work', and in 1936 he succeeded his elder brother Guy as chairman of Robert Benson & Co. In November 1932 he married Leslie, formerly wife of the publisher Conde Nast, and daughter of Albert Volney Foster, investment banker, of Lake Forest, Illinois. They raised a daughter from her previous marriage and their two sons. 
In September 1939, though aged fifty and despondent at the outbreak of another war, Benson served as liaison officer to the French First Army until the evacuation from Dunkirk. He was appointed chairman of the inter-allied timber commission in 1940, and then in 1941 he became, with the rank of colonel, military attache at the British embassy in Washington, under Lord Halifax. The appointment owed much to his excellent high-level connections in America and, with a brief to try to persuade America to enter the war on the allied side, he immediately undertook a series of speaking engagements throughout the country. Wherever Benson went he knew people, but he always knew more by the time he left. He possessed a delightful way of getting on with everybody -- literally from the lift operator to the chairman or prime minister. 
After the war Benson returned to the chairmanship of Bensons and oversaw the resurgence of its investment banking business. The problem of inadequate capitalization was resolved in 1947 by merging with the Lonsdale Investment Trust, a quoted public company, to form Robert Benson Lonsdale & Co. (RBL) under his chairmanship. He continued to concentrate on the firm's American investment holdings, remembering his father's adage, 'to keep on the inside track with management', by travelling over twice a year to see brokers and directors of companies in which RBL had an interest. Although he had no formal training or technical expertise, he was an astute banker; he was adept at identifying investment opportunities, especially in smaller North American companies, and at finding the talent to run them. He valued people and excelled in personnel management. Despite the increase in staff at Bensons he continued to know everyone who worked for him. As Jim Deacon, a long-serving commissionaire, pointed out, 'I don't work for Sir Rex, he works for me'. He was decisive, sometimes too impulsive, and an excellent communicator. 
In 1958 Benson was knighted for his contribution to the work of the English Speaking Union, of which he had been honorary treasurer for thirty-three years and joint deputy chairman since 1957. He was a trustee of, and instrumental in starting, the Winston Churchill Memorial Trust, for which he personally met the development cost in the early years. To these and the many other organizations and projects with which he was involved he brought a strength of purpose, an inexhaustible enthusiasm, and an endearing modesty: he never spoke of his many exploits or achievements because his mind was entirely focused on the future and on what he could do next. Whether it was international polo -- he played to a 7 handicap and picked, purchased, and managed the ponies for the British teams; or sheep farming -- he improved the stock at his farm in Singleton, Sussex, to win two championships at the royal show in 1960 and 1968 -- he devoted himself with unquenchable energy and panache to the task at hand. 
Benson possessed a talent for friendship. His bright blue eyes would sparkle with high spirits and a wide smile would crease his aquiline features as he entered a room. His warmth and gaiety were exhilarating and he was wonderful company. He played the piano impeccably by ear, often singing songs by Cole Porter, whom he had known well in Paris at the end of the First World War. 
Under Benson's chairmanship RBL achieved growth and greater profitability, and it moved up the league table of City issuing houses. In March 1959 he retired from the chairmanship aged seventy, but he remained on the board until 1961. He thus oversaw the merger that year between Robert Benson Lonsdale and Kleinwort Sons & Co. to form Kleinwort Benson Lonsdale Ltd, of which he was a director. Sir Rex Benson died suddenly from a heart attack, while on board an aeroplane awaiting take-off at Naples airport, on 26 September 1968. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30717


Benson, Richard Meux (1824-1915), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born on 6 July 1824 at Bolton House, Russell Square, London, the second son of Thomas Starling Benson (1775-1858) and his third wife, Elizabeth (died 1859), only child of Richard Meux. He was baptized at St George's, Bloomsbury. His father was the high sheriff of Surrey and rented a succession of country houses where he could occupy himself in hunting, shooting, and fishing. Shortly after Richard's birth the family moved from Camberwell to Sanderstead Court, near Croydon, soon moving to North Cray Place, Kent. In 1833 they moved to Sketty Park, near Swansea, and eventually settled in 1839 at the Manor House, Teddington, Middlesex. Mrs Benson's father owned a noted London brewery and claimed royal descent from Anne, sister of Edward IV. The strong evangelical faith in which she raised her sons had been nurtured in her upbringing among the influential evangelicals known as the Clapham Sect. 
Mrs Benson allowed Henry Roxby, her eldest son, who was to become a general and colonel of the 17th lancers, to be educated at Harrow School, but Richard was educated at home by tutors. In 1841 he spent the summer in Germany with his half-sister Sarah Benson and the following year they spent the winter in Rome, where they quickly made friends among the intelligentsia. Benson's fluent Italian enabled him to converse easily with Pope Gregory XVI in a private audience and to develop his theological acumen in conversations with leading theologians. 
Benson went up to Christ Church, Oxford, in October 1844. When he arrived the Oxford Movement -- which had already attracted him -- was in crisis. E. B. Pusey, regius professor of Hebrew, was still prohibited from preaching in the cathedral of which he was a canon and Newman's conversion to Roman Catholicism was impending. Benson was indifferent to outward success and came under Pusey's influence at this time of apparent debacle. Benson remained a loyal disciple of Pusey throughout his life. In 1846 Pusey nominated him to a studentship, and he was admitted on 24 December along with his friend H. P. Liddon; he retained his studentship until death. He took his BA degree (second class in 'literae humaniores' and mathematics) in 1847. In 1848 he won the Kennicott Hebrew scholarship and was ordained deacon by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce, becoming assistant curate of St Mark's, Surbiton. He was ordained to the priesthood in 1849 and graduated MA in the following year. 
In 1850 Benson accepted the college living of St James, Cowley, a sparsely populated parish extending from the eastern side of Oxford to the small village of Cowley. The prayer and study that accompanied his pastoral work enabled him to pioneer a form of ministry through which he would exercise great influence as a spiritual guide for half a century. After immersing himself in Ignatian spirituality, Benson led the first retreat for Anglican clergy at Cuddesdon in July 1858. He was also preparing to pioneer an unprecedented form of missionary endeavour in India, a brotherhood that would bear witness to native people by living the ascetic life among them. As he was about to sail plans were announced to develop Cowley Common as a suburb of Oxford, and at the urging of Bishop Wilberforce he agreed to remain in order to serve the new population. 
Within a few years Benson emerged as the key figure in a movement to found an Anglican religious order for men, to which John Keble had given impetus in a sermon of July 1863. Several orders for women had been founded in the previous two decades. In the spring of 1865 an American priest, C. C. Grafton (later bishop of Fond du Lac), who had been attempting to found a community with O. S. Prescott, came to Oxford to participate. Benson was successful in obtaining the approval of Bishop Wilberforce for 'a Congregation of Priests and Laymen, giving up the world, living by simple rule and devoting ourselves to prayer, study and mission work' (Woodgate, 64). Grafton and Benson were joined by S. W. O'Neill and they spent 1866 establishing the life of the community. The Society of St John the Evangelist came into being when the three priests made their life vows of poverty, celibacy, and obedience on 27 December and Benson was elected superior. In 1868 the community moved into the mission house at 16 Marston Street, Oxford. In 1870 the parish was divided and Benson became the vicar of the new parish of Cowley St John. 
Benson did not imitate a traditional model of the religious life, but crafted a synthesis. The ordered life of liturgical prayer and community was derived from the Benedictine heritage, and the emphasis on solitary prayer in the cell and asceticism from the contemplative orders. But the mobility and availability for evangelistic and pastoral work reflected the charisms of the Society of Jesus and the modern apostolic congregations. 
In the next two decades Benson exhibited the full range of his extraordinary versatility. Fully active as the pastor of a rapidly expanding parish, he was at the same time establishing the society on the foundation of a monastic theology and spirituality, the power and originality of which is evident in 'The Followers of the Lamb' (1900) and the addresses and commentary on the rule of life in 'Instructions on the Religious Life' (1927, 1935, 1951) and 'The Religious Vocation' (1939). His influence spread not only through his preaching, retreats, and immense correspondence but also through parochial missions. This was a form of ministry that he had pioneered from 1862, adapting methods developed by the Lazarist Fathers in France in the eighteenth century, and those of Robert Aiken and Richard Twigg, Anglican priests who used revivalist techniques to encourage 'Catholic' churchmanship. In his writing he especially devoted himself to spiritual commentary on scripture and the liturgical year, notably 'Bible Teachings' (1875), 'Spiritual Readings' (1879-82), and 'The Final Passover' (1884, 1893-5). 
Benson was a small, wiry man of formidable stamina, with an ascetic's indifference to comfort or appearance. Although his personal reserve and prophetic intensity could be intimidating, he was known for a rich and sardonic sense of humour and the remarkable tenderness he could show. His letters reveal a wide and cultivated mind with a lively interest in current affairs, literature, poetry, music, and history. In his preaching he habitually soared to heights where few could follow, but in the more intimate setting of retreat the immediacy of his inspiration and his spiritual passion made an indelible impression on his hearers. His monastic experience and his absorption of patristic theology and the writings of the mystics gave rise to an uncompromising insistence on orthodoxy as a living reality that could only be appropriated through prayer and worship. Benson's loyalty to the Church of England was undeviating, but his critique of the entire system of Christendom that had been inaugurated under Constantine was very radical. He believed that a renewed apostolic Christian community could emerge only from the disintegration of Christendom, and criticized political schemes for disestablishment as partial and unrealistic. Much of his motivation for foreign mission stemmed from his hope that the younger churches could forge more authentic expressions of Christianity. 
Benson was resistant to some of the later developments of the Oxford Movement. His unwavering focus on spiritual conversion excluded sympathy with Christian socialism. Developments in biblical criticism did not impress him; he mordantly referred to 'Lux mundi', the volume of essays edited by Charles Gore in 1889, as 'Lux mundana', worldly light. 
In 1870 Benson went to the USA to establish a branch of the society in Boston; work in India began in 1874 and in South Africa in 1883. By 1884 the society had attained maturity, and its rule and statutes were formally approved by Bishop Mackarness of Oxford, who accepted the position of visitor. Two years later Benson relinquished his responsibilities as vicar. 
The era of his leadership drew to a close in 1890 when Benson resigned as superior. Administration of the society had become complex and he had reservations about the institutional development of religious life. He left for a long mission tour in India and then Canada, finally settling in Boston in 1892, where he was to stay until recalled to Cowley in 1899. His later years bore fruit in 'The War Songs of the Prince of Peace' (1901), a spiritual commentary on the psalter. He continued to be active in preaching and retreat conducting for several years until the onset of blindness and crippling rheumatism curtailed his ministry. He died at the mission house in Oxford on 14 January 1915, and was buried two days later in the cemetery adjoining the parish church of St Mary and St John. 


@@@@@


doc= 30718


Benson, Robert Hugh (1871-1914), Roman Catholic priest and writer, was the fourth son and youngest child of Edward White Benson (1829-1896) and his wife, Mary Sidgwick (1841-1918), a second cousin. He was born on 18 November 1871 at Wellington College, of which his father was the first headmaster. In 1872 Edward Benson was appointed chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral and moved to Lincoln; in 1877 he became bishop of the new diocese of Truro, and in 1882 archbishop of Canterbury, from which date the Bensons had Lambeth Palace and Addington Court, near Croydon, for their homes. These romantic surroundings ever coloured the imagination of Robert Hugh Benson, and he inherited, and early displayed, a high-strung and dramatically responsive temperament. He was also hopelessly spoiled and indulged as a child. His brothers included Arthur Christopher Benson, later master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and also the writer Edward Frederic Benson. His sisters were Mary Eleanor Benson and Margaret Benson. 
In 1882 Benson went to a preparatory school at Clevedon, Somerset, and in 1885 gained a scholarship at Eton College, where he stayed until 1889. Not idle, he yet showed no interest in study, nor any remarkable religious sense, but ended by winning the Hervey prize for a poem on Father Damien. At Wren's collegiate establishment, a crammer where he prepared unsuccessfully for a year for the Indian Civil Service, 'John Inglesant' (1880) by J. H. Shorthouse made a lasting impression on him. In October 1890 he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1893. He was only moderately successful in classics, but he began theology, as he had decided to take holy orders. Wagner, Swedenborgianism, mesmerism, and climbing in the Alps were among his interests. 
Prepared for the diaconate by Charles John Vaughan, dean of Llandaff, Benson was ordained deacon in 1894, not without a sharp mental struggle due, seemingly, to a fear of the irrevocable. After a retreat in which Father Basil Maturin, still an Anglican, gave him much spiritual and intellectual help, he was ordained a priest in the Church of England (1895), and until the autumn of 1896 he worked in the Eton mission at Hackney Wick among poor people who loved him more than he liked them. After his father's death in October 1896 he went to Egypt, whence Anglicanism 'seemed provincial'. From May 1897 until June 1898 he was curate at Kemsing, near Sevenoaks, but fled, for discipline, to the Community of the Resurrection at Mirfield, Yorkshire. Benson's views about the sacraments developed fast, but some lectures by Charles Gore, then superior of the community, unsettled him: he began to see no alternative but authority or scepticism. 
In 1903 Benson returned to his home and in September of that year was received into the Roman communion at Woodchester, Gloucestershire. Given his background, he was regarded as 'the supreme catch of a convert from the very arms of Canterbury' (Masters, 206). However, his family felt the conversion made him 'smug and insufferably pontifical' (ibid., 162), however much they continued to love him. 
Benson had already written 'The Light Invisible', a very popular semi-mystical fiction (1903); in 1904 appeared 'By what Authority?', a vivid story of the Elizabethan religious revolution. The months from November 1903 to June 1904 were spent at San Silvestro, Rome, and, after ordination as a Roman Catholic priest in 1904, he returned to England, and at Llandaff House, Cambridge, read theology and wrote 'The King's Achievement' (1905) on Henry VIII, 'The Queen's Tragedy' (1906) on Mary Tudor, and 'The History of Richard Raynal, Solitary' (1906), fiction disguised as history, being an account of a hermit in Henry VI's reign. He migrated in 1905 to the rectory, Cambridge, and there wrote novels of modern life: 'The Sentimentalists' (1906), 'The Conventionalists' (1908) -- studies of rather abnormal, and also of very average, temperaments; 'A Mirror of Shalott' (1907), 'The Papers of a Pariah' (1907) -- studies of Roman Catholic ritual as from without; and 'The Lord of the World' (1907), a sensational description of the coming of Antichrist. Lesser works of this period were 'A City Set on an Hill' (1904) and 'An Alphabet of Saints' (1905). 
Benson bought and quaintly adorned an old house at Hare Street, Buntingford, Hertfordshire, where he lived from 1908 until his death, carving, embroidering, gardening, entertaining friends, and writing. The books belonging to this period were: 'The Necromancers' (1909) on spiritualism, 'A Winnowing' (1910), 'None other Gods' (1910), 'The Coward' (1912), 'Come Rack, Come Rope' (1912), 'An Average Man' (1913), 'Oddsfish' (1914) on Charles II, 'Initiation' (1914), a study of pain, and 'Loneliness' (1915). He also printed some sermons, 'The Religion of the Plain Man' (1906), 'Christ in the Church' (1911), 'The Friendship of Christ' (1912), and 'Paradoxes of Catholicism' (1913), four short religious plays, as well as some war prayers and poems. 
Perhaps the most unfortunate friendship of Benson's life was with the writer Frederick Rolfe (Baron Corvo). The two proposed to collaborate on a life of Thomas Becket. However, not only did Rolfe prove impossible to work with, but Benson 'was advised that it was hardly suitable to have his name coupled on the title-page with a Venetian pimp and procuror of boys' (Masters, 207). In the event, the life of Becket appeared in 1910 under Benson's name alone. Rolfe is said to have cruelly satirized Benson in 'The Desire and Pursuit of the Whole' (1934). 
Benson was immensely popular as a preacher, although his manner was violent owing to his stammer, and his voice shrill. However, his brother E. F. Benson referred to his 'tumultuous eloquence' and to the 'flawless, flame-like delivery of his sermons' (Masters, 207). Benson visited Rome and America more than once, preaching and lecturing, had a vast correspondence, and poured forth press articles on innumerable subjects; but he lacked leisure, patience, and health to deal adequately with his materials. 'By what Authority?', at once well documented, vigorous, and tender, and 'None other Gods', with strong characterization, varied incident, and many mystical touches, not superadded to but expressed through the normal, were perhaps the best specimens of his two styles of writing. But his astounding vitality was infused into all his books; the charm of his boyish enthusiasm won him a welcome everywhere; his friendships were warm; but they were none too lasting when he lost interest, save within his family where the influence of his mother remained paramount with him. Athirst for experience, he used fully every lesson he had learned, yet his piety remained childlike and his faith fierce. In 1911 he was made private chamberlain to Pius X. 
Benson's death was due to pneumonia supervening on false angina, and to the ruin of his nervous system by feverish yet systematic overwork. He died at Bishop's House, 250 Chapel Street, Salford, on 19 October 1914, in the presence of his brother Arthur Christopher Benson, to whom he was devoted. He bequeathed his house in Hare Street to the church as a residence for archbishops of Westminster. A morbid side to Benson's nature was manifest in his will. This gave elaborate instructions for burial in a tomb which could be opened from the inside, in case he was entombed while still alive. 
One of the most high profile converts to Roman Catholicism of his day, Benson was a Catholic author of suggestive power. Discussing his conversion, the 'Catholic Who's Who' noted that few had converted 'with so high a sense of responsibility and so entire a devotion of... time and interests to the service of the Church'. 


@@@@@


doc= 30719


Bent, Sir Thomas (1838-1909), premier of Victoria, Australia, born at Penrith in New South Wales on 7 December 1838, was the eldest child of five sons and three daughters of James and Maria ('nee' Toomey) Bent. His father had been transported for housebreaking; his mother was a free immigrant from co. Clare, Ireland. In 1849 the family moved to Fitzroy in the Port Phillip district (later Victoria) where James Bent worked as a contractor and Thomas attended St Mark's Anglican school. Two years later the family moved to Moorabbin where James set up a market garden and Thomas's formal education ended when he left school at the age of thirteen to work with his father. He exhibited his enterprising spirit early on, starting a small market garden in 1859 and taking his produce to market in a rough cart. In 1861 he became rate collector for the district of Brighton. 
Bent entered public life in 1863 when he was elected to the Moorabbin Road board district (after 1874 known as the shire of Moorabbin). He entered the Victorian parliament in 1871 when, to general surprise, he defeated the highly respected retiring member, George Higinbotham, for the legislative assembly seat of Brighton. It was subsequently revealed that Bent had used the position of rate collector to stack the electoral rolls. He represented the constituency with one short interval throughout his career. In 1874 he resigned his position as rate collector on being elected to the Brighton borough council. He was thus on both the Brighton and Moorabbin councils and was the district's legislative assembly member (MLA). 
From the outset Bent demonstrated that he was a force to be reckoned with, and early in 1880 he was responsible for bringing down the government of Graham Berry. He held the public works portfolio in the short-lived government of James Service (March-August 1880) and in mid-1881 joined the government of Sir Bryan O'Loghlen as minister for railways. His term was characterized by his uninformed interference in the day-to-day running of the railways and by his introduction of a 'Railway Construction Bill' which the press dubbed the 'bribery bill'. It provided for a railway in every electorate and gave Bent considerable power in the house as each member sought to secure the line for his district. O'Loghlen's government lasted until March 1883, when for a time Bent led the opposition; but his temperament was little suited to such a task. In October 1887 he was defeated by one vote as candidate for the office of speaker of the assembly. Almost immediately afterwards he was elected chairman of the first railways' standing committee, and in that capacity for two years did much solid work. In 1892 he was elected speaker, and held the office (for which he had few qualifications) for nearly two years. 
Bent was obsessed with real estate and in 1873 began speculating in land. Never one to do things on a small scale, he seriously stretched his resources and by the early 1880s was in severe financial difficulty. No sooner had he recovered than he began again and between 1887 and 1893 was engaged in the 'land boom'. At first this brought him a huge fortune, on paper at least; but by 1893 he was all but ruined. His land-booming activities became public, he was thrown out by the electors of Brighton, and from 1894 to 1900 he eked out a living milking cows at Port Fairy. He made two unsuccessful attempts to come back, at South Melbourne in 1896 and at Port Fairy in 1897, before being again elected for Brighton in 1900. This time he used voters' certificates to stack the rolls. 
On 10 June 1902 Bent joined William Irvine's ministry as minister for railways and works, and was heavily involved in the great railway strike of May 1903. On Irvine's retirement Bent became premier (February 1904). His ministry lasted over four years, and in that period passed much valuable legislation, but in December 1908, six months after being made KCMG, he failed to survive a vote of no confidence. John Murray became premier and immediately announced a royal commission into the land transactions of Bent's cabinet. He emerged with general credit. 
Bent married twice: first, in 1860, Elizabeth Hannah Hall ('b'. 1839), who died within a year leaving no children. In 1864 he married Elizabeth Huntley (died 1903). Their first daughter, Elizabeth Hannah ('b'. 1866), as Elizabeth Bleazby became a Brighton councillor and was one of Victoria's first female councillors. A second daughter, Gertrude Huntley ('b'. 1868) died in infancy. Bent died on 17 September 1909 at his home, Huntley, Bay Street, Brighton. He was still a councillor for both Moorabbin and Brighton and the MLA for Brighton. After a state funeral on 19 September he was buried at Brighton cemetery. 
Rough and uncultivated, shrewd and strong, Bent was certainly an interesting and remarkable figure. His methods were unorthodox, often unprincipled, and, towards the end, quite eccentric; but he had an uncanny ability to sum up others and to turn a situation to advantage. 


@@@@@


doc= 30720


Bentley, Edmund Clerihew (1875-1956), writer, was born in London on 10 July 1875, the eldest son of John Edmund Bentley, a civil servant in the queen's bench office, and his wife, Margaret Richardson Clerihew. He was at St Paul's School in the days of Frederick Walker, and formed there his lifelong friendship with G. K. Chesterton. He was a member of the history eighth, newly created by Walker, and won a history exhibition at Merton College, Oxford. He fell in love with the college at once and quickly and gratefully absorbed the spirit of Oxford. At the Oxford Union he was an effective debater in a quiet and scholarly style and became president in 1898. John Simon, F. W. Hirst, and John Buchan were among his friends; he knew Hilaire Belloc slightly, but it was not until later that he became close friends with him. His interests during his Oxford years were not confined to political and intellectual discussion: he was captain of the Merton boat club, but gave up rowing in his fourth year in order to work for his degree. One great disappointment of his life was his failure in 1898 to obtain a first in history. 
In 1898 Bentley went down from Oxford and read for the bar. He did well in his examinations at the Inner Temple, London, became a pupil in William Hansell's chambers in 1900, and was called to the bar in 1902. One of his closest friends recorded that Bentley had all the qualifications of a successful barrister except the legal mind. On the other hand, he had from his schooldays onwards been active with his pen. At St Paul's he had been a contributor to 'The Debater', founded by his friend Lucian Oldershaw; at Oxford he had written regularly for 'Isis' and for 'The J. C. R.', the magazine in which Belloc's 'Lambkin's Remains' first appeared. While still in chambers he wrote light verse for 'Punch' under the critical eye of Owen Seaman, and by the end of 1899 he was a regular contributor to 'The Speaker', the Liberal weekly edited by J. L. Hammond. 
On 14 June 1902 Bentley married Violet Alice Mary (1878/9-1949), fourth daughter of General Neil Edmonstone Boileau, of the Bengal staff corps. They had one daughter and two sons, of whom the younger, Nicolas ['see 'Bentley, Nicolas Clerihew (1907-1978)], went on to illustrate his father's books, as well as many others. Bentley's marriage was one of the reasons for his decision in 1901 to become a professional journalist and to join the staff of the 'Daily News'. Its editor was Rudolph Chambers Lehmann, a good Liberal, a strong opponent of the South African War, and a great oarsman. Thus Bentley felt thoroughly at home in his new work and with his new colleagues, among whom were Herbert Paul, H. W. Massingham, and Harold Spender. The owner of the 'Daily News' was George Cadbury, who, as a Quaker, was regarded by Bentley as a serious-minded nonconformist, but still commendable: 'if all business men were Quakers, I do not think we should be any the worse off' (Bentley, 'Those Days'). Nevertheless, Lehmann fell out with the Cadbury family on a matter of principle, 'and journalism knew him no more'. Lehmann was succeeded by A. G. Gardiner, under whom Bentley in due course became deputy editor. In that capacity he was faced at times with critical decisions and he confessed that he enjoyed the experience. When the 'Daily News' was amalgamated with the 'Morning Leader', Bentley felt that he was no longer in sympathy with Liberal journalism and in 1912 he joined the 'Daily Telegraph', with which he remained for twenty-two years. 
Had Bentley confined his activities to leading articles, he might well have been little known and gradually forgotten. In fact, his name is linked with two highly individual achievements: he added a new word to the language and he wrote what Chesterton once described as the finest detective novel of the century. As he sat in the science class at St Paul's at the age of sixteen, the following lines came into his head: '
Sir Humphrey Davy 

Abominated gravy. 

He lived in the odium 

Of having discovered Sodium. 

' Such was the beginning of what Chesterton called the 'severe and stately form of free verse known as the Clerihew'. Sir Humphrey soon had a number of companions, and their lives were entered into a notebook with appropriate sketches by Chesterton. Bentley chose to drop his surname for the occasion and 'Biography for Beginners' by E. Clerihew, with illustrations by G. K. C., was published in 1905. The book did not have an immediate success, but in Bentley's own words, 'in course of time it seemed to find its way into the hands of connoisseurs of idiocy everywhere'. 'More Biography' followed in 1929; 'Baseless Biography', with illustrations by the author's son Nicolas, in 1939; finally 'Clerihews Complete' appeared in 1951. It should be noted that the drawings of Clerihew in the illustrations are themselves caricatured portraits of the author. 
In 1910 Bentley thought of a new kind of detective story. Like all boys of his generation he had revelled in the Sherlock Holmes series; but Holmes's eccentricities and his reputed infallibility irritated him and he conceived the notion of a detective's convincing solution being proved wrong in the end. The result of his meditation was 'Trent's Last Case', published as one of Nelson's two-shilling novels in 1913. It was a best-seller immediately, and was published in the USA as 'The Woman in Black': amid the torrential output of detective stories in that period, it still holds its distinctive place. Bentley's later books are 'Trent's Own Case', written with H. Warner Allen (1936); 'Trent Intervenes' (sixteen short stories, 1938); and 'Elephant's Work' (1950). 
Bentley was happy in, and proud of, his profession as a journalist. At the outbreak of the Second World War he returned to the 'Daily Telegraph'; but the worlds that he loved best -- Oxford in the nineties and pre-1914 Fleet Street -- had vanished and he recalled them nostalgically in 'Those Days' (1940). Bentley died at his home, 10 Porchester Terrace, Paddington, on 30 March 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 30721


Bentley, John Francis (1839-1902), architect, was born at Doncaster on 30 January 1839, the third surviving son of Charles Bentley, wine merchant, and his wife, Ann, daughter of John Bacchus of that town. He received his education partly at home and partly at a private school in Doncaster. In boyhood he made a model from memory of St George's Church, Doncaster, after its destruction by fire in February 1853, and when George Gilbert Scott began the rebuilding in October 1853, Bentley frequented the fabric and rendered some services to the clerk of works. In 1854 he acted as voluntary superintendent in the restoration of Loversall church, Yorkshire, and there tried his hand at carving. His father, who deprecated the artistic career on which his son had set his heart, placed him for a short time, early in 1855, with Sharpe, Stewart & Co., a firm of mechanical engineers at Manchester; but in August 1855 Bentley entered on a five years' indenture with the building establishment of Winslow and Holland in London. The next year his father died, and Richard Holland, a partner of this firm, placed him (1857) in the office of Henry Clutton (1819-1893), an architect in extensive domestic and ecclesiastical practice, who had joined the Church of Rome. Bentley took the same step in 1862, taking the baptismal name Francis. In 1860, though invited by Clutton to join him in partnership, he preferred the risks of independence. In 1862 he took chambers at 14 Southampton Street, Covent Garden. 
While waiting for commissions, Bentley continued the sketching and modelling which had already occupied his evening leisure, and often made for other architects designs for work in stone, metal, wood, stained glass, and embroidery. Works designed by him were shown at the exhibitions of London (1862) and Paris (1867). These included stained glass made by the firm of Lavers and Barraud (after 1868 Lavers, Barraud, and Westlake), and metalwork made by Hart & Son. He designed over forty organ cases for his friend the distinguished organ builder T. C. Lewis. For St Francis's Church, Notting Hill (the scene of his own baptism by Cardinal Wiseman), he designed the stone-groined baptistery, font, and porch, as well as the altars of St John and the Blessed Virgin (with paintings by his friend N. H. J. Westlake), a jewelled monstrance in the Byzantine style (now in the City of Birmingham Art Gallery), and at a later date the high altar. In 1866 he undertook for the poet Coventry Patmore the adaptation of an old Sussex house, Heron's Ghyll, near Uckfield (now Temple Grove preparatory school). His work betrayed from the first conscientious anxiety for perfection and soundness of construction. His own experience of entering the competition for a new church at Heigham, Norfolk, in 1858 led him to regard architectural competitions as inimical to art. 
In 1868 Bentley received the commission for the seminary of St Thomas at Hammersmith (built 1876-88; since 1893 the Convent and High School of the Sacred Heart), one of his best works, and in the same year transferred his office to 13 John Street, Adelphi. In 1870 he designed the altar and reredos of the church of St Charles, Ogle Street, Marylebone. In 1887-8 Bentley built in the style of the Renaissance (but with a Gothic chapel) the large preparatory school (St John's) in connection with Beaumont College (now closed) at Old Windsor. For some years (beginning in 1874) he spent much thought and labour on the internal decoration and furniture of Carlton Towers, Selby, Yorkshire, for Lord Beaumont. On 6 October 1874 he married Margaret Annie (1857-1939), daughter of Henry J. Fleuss, a painter, of Dusseldorf (later art master at Marlborough College); they had four sons and seven daughters, of whom one son and one daughter died in infancy, and the remainder survived him. 
For thirty years Bentley was engaged at intervals on the church of St Mary of the Angels, Moorhouse Road, Bayswater, where he designed additional aisles, a baptistery, various chapels, and furnishings. Apart from Westminster Cathedral, only five churches were erected to Bentley's designs. The church and presbytery of St Mary at Cadogan Street, Chelsea (1877-9), and the church of Our Lady of the Holy Souls at Bosworth Road, Kensal New Town (1881-2), are simple examples of Bentley's brick construction. In 1886-7 he built the unfinished portion of Corpus Christi Church, Brixton Hill, in Early Decorated style. The fine church of the Holy Rood at Watford, his Gothic masterpiece, was, with its schools and presbytery, in hand from 1889 to 1900. Bentley's fifth church was for the Church of England. The commission for St Luke's, Chiddingstone Causeway, Kent (built 1897-8), came to him on the recommendation of John Singer Sargent. 
For the Redemptorist Fathers, Bentley did varied work at Bishop Eton, Liverpool, and Clapham. To the church of Our Lady of Victories at Clapham (his own parish church) he added a fine lady chapel (1883-7), a transept, stained-glass windows, and a monastery, completed in 1893. For the church of St James, Spanish Place, London, he designed several altars and some glass. In 1898-9 he built with stone and red brick in the early fifteenth-century style the convent of the Immaculate Conception for Franciscan nuns at Bocking, near Braintree. The screen and organ case of St Etheldreda's, Ely Place, Holborn, are from his designs. Bentley also had commissions from the Church of England. In 1893-4 the two City churches of St Botolph came under his care. For St Botolph without Bishopsgate he provided external repair as well as internal decoration (1889-94), and for that at Aldgate he designed numerous embellishments (1888-93), notably the fine cornice of angels bearing the shields of the City companies. Similar works were done at St Mark's, North Audley Street. For St John's Church, Hammersmith (designed by his old friend William Butterfield), he schemed a morning chapel, organ case, and some decorations. 
In 1894 came the great opportunity of Bentley's life. Cardinal Vaughan called upon him to design the Roman Catholic cathedral of Westminster. The conditions laid upon the architect were that the church should have a nave of vast extent giving an uninterrupted view of the high altar; that the design should be such that the fabric could be erected comparatively quickly, and the decoration added later; and that rivalry with the nearby Westminster Abbey should be avoided. Vaughan was thinking of an Early Christian basilica, but Bentley won him over in favour of the Byzantine style. Bentley perceived that his design should be preceded by special foreign study, and though not in robust health set out in November of the same year for a tour of Italy. After visiting Milan (especially for Sant' Ambrogio), Pavia, Florence, Rome (where the work of the Renaissance disappointed him), Perugia (which with Assisi delighted him), and Ravenna, he came at last to Venice, where cold and fatigue compelled him to rest before he could study St Mark's. His natural wish to proceed to Constantinople was frustrated by the prevalence there of cholera, and after returning to London in March 1895 he was ready by St Peter and St Paul's day (29 June) for the laying of the foundation-stone. 
The cathedral is outwardly remarkable for its tall campanile and its bold use of brick and stone. The design is throughout marked by the greatest simplicity, largeness of scale, and avoidance of trivial ornament. Internally the vast nave consists of three bays measuring 60 feet square and each surmounted by a concrete dome. A fourth bay nearest the nominal east forms the sanctuary, and beyond it is an apse. The nave is flanked on each side by an aisle; outside the aisles are the many chapels. When first opened for worship, and before any progress had been made with the marble decorations, the interior effect was a triumph of pure form. The construction was remarkable, Bentley having set himself to avoid any structural materials but brickwork, masonry, and concrete. 'I have broken', he said, 'the backbone of that terrible superstition, that iron is necessary to large spans' (Howell, 1982, 90). The cathedral was praised by Richard Norman Shaw as 'beyond all doubt the finest church that has been built for centuries' ('Architectural Review', 10, 1901, 171). At the time of Bentley's death in 1902 the whole fabric of the building was complete, except for the final 50 feet of the campanile, but only a part of the marble revetment of one chapel had been installed. The first great ceremony held in the cathedral was Vaughan's requiem, on 25 June 1903. It was consecrated in 1910. The marble decoration is largely complete, but comparatively little of the mosaic decoration has been carried out. 
In 1898 Bentley was summoned to the United States to advise on the design and construction of the Roman Catholic cathedral at Brooklyn, for which he prepared a Gothic scheme, which remained unexecuted. After being seized in November 1898 with paralytic symptoms, which in June 1900 affected his speech, he died on 2 March 1902 at his residence, 3 The Sweep, Old Town, Clapham Common, the day before his name was to be submitted to the Royal Institute of British Architects for the royal gold medal. He was buried in the cemetery of St Mary Magdalen's Church, Mortlake. His third son, Osmond, succeeded, in partnership with J. A. Marshall, to the architectural practice, and his eldest daughter, Winefride de l'Hopital, wrote her father's biography. 


@@@@@


doc= 30722


Benton, Sir John (1850-1927), civil engineer, was born on 5 August 1850 at Sheriffhaugh, Banffshire, the second son of John Benton, of Sheriffhaugh, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Alexander Hay, of Edintore. He was educated at Aberdeen, attended lectures at the university, and in 1869 became a pupil of William Smith, a civil engineer, in Aberdeen. In 1870 he entered Edinburgh University, but in 1871 he became one of the first students of the Royal Indian Engineering College at Cooper's Hill, Englefield Green, Surrey, which was opened in that year. In 1873 he was appointed a second-grade assistant engineer in the Indian public works department, assigned to the Punjab. He was promoted to executive engineer, fourth grade, in 1881, to third grade in the same year, to second grade in 1885, and to first grade in 1892. During this period he had charge of heavy constructional work on the improvements and extensions to the network of canals irrigating the area around Lahore. Benton married, in 1885, Margaret Forsyth, daughter of Robert Dick, provost of Rothes, Moray; they had two daughters, and a son, who was killed in the First World War. 
In 1897 Benton became a superintending engineer and his services were lent to the government of Burma. Fresh from the Punjab canals he found irrigation in Burma in a primitive state, weirs being made of stakes and stones instead of masonry and brickwork; but by originality and resource, as well as by refusing to tolerate incompetence, he effected great reforms. On the Mandalay Canal, his first work, opened in 1902, when he found that the standardized 10 foot openings could not take the amount of drift brought down by the floods, he substituted 40 foot openings, a practice which he followed later in the Shwebo and Ye-u canals, the former of which was opened in 1906. In the Thapaugaing Aqueduct, spanning a flood-swept ravine, he converted the walls into folding shutters, so that the flood water might safely sweep over the whole structure. He remodelled the canals in the Kyaukse district, and improved the Meiktila Lake works. He remained in Burma for five years, was made a chief engineer in 1900, and was created a CIE in 1902. 
At the end of 1902 Benton returned to the Punjab in order to succeed Sidney Preston (with whom he had earlier been associated in his work there) as chief engineer and secretary to government. He retired under the age limit in August 1905, but in January 1906 he was recalled by the viceroy, Lord Curzon, and appointed, in succession to Preston, inspector-general of irrigation for all India. 
In these later periods of service Benton undertook two projects of the greatest importance, the Triple Canals scheme and the upper Swat Valley Canal. The former doubled the fertile area in the Punjab by distributing the surplus waters of the Jhelum across the province. The scheme, sanctioned in 1905 and completed in 1917 at a cost of $8 million, was the largest irrigation work hitherto carried out in India and served as an example for subsequent achievements. It was described by Benton in a paper read before the Institution of Civil Engineers in November 1915, for which he received a Telford medal. 
Benton's second irrigation scheme was located nearer the Afghan frontier. He tapped the Swat River at Chakdara by a canal, which he carried in a tunnel more than 2 miles long, known as the Benton Tunnel, under the Malakand Pass through the mountain barrier above Dargai. This extension more than doubled the area formerly served by the Swat River Canal. The fall of 400 feet from the mouth of the tunnel into the Dargai valley provided power for the electrification of the Nowshera-Dargai railway as well as for local purposes. 
Benton was created KCIE in 1911 and retired finally in 1912. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1893, and was a member of its council from 1906 to 1908. He died at his home, Westcroft, 49 Silverdale Road, Eastbourne, Sussex, on 29 August 1927. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30723


Beresford, Charles William de la Poer, Baron Beresford (1846-1919), naval officer, was born at Baronstown, Dundalk, co. Louth, on 10 February 1846, the second son of the Revd John de la Poer Beresford, fourth marquess of Waterford (1814-1866), and his wife, Christiana (1820-1905), fourth daughter of Charles Powell Leslie MP, of Glaslough, co. Monaghan. 
He was educated at the Revd George Renaud's Bayford School, Hertfordshire (1855-7), by a tutor, the Revd David Bruce Payne, at Deal, and at Stubbington House, near Fareham, Portsmouth. He entered the 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in December 1859, and in March 1861 was appointed to the 'Marlborough', 121 guns, flagship in the Mediterranean, one of the last built and finest of the old wooden line of battleships. He was rated midshipman in June 1862. He was transferred in July 1863 to the 'Defence', a new wooden hulled ironclad which he later described as 'a slovenly, unhandy tin kettle' ('Memoirs', 1.41). After less than a year he was appointed as senior midshipman to the corvette 'Clio', 22 guns, in which he sailed to the Falkland Islands and round Cape Horn to Honolulu and Vancouver. In December 1865 he was transferred to the frigate 'Tribune', 31 guns, at Vancouver, promoted sub-lieutenant 1866, and in the following February transferred to the steam frigate 'Sutlej', flagship on the Pacific station. The following June he returned home in her and joined the 'Excellent' gunnery school ship. After eight months in the royal yacht, 'Victoria and Albert', which gave him his promotion to lieutenant in October 1868, he was appointed to the frigate 'Galatea' (captain, Prince Alfred, duke of Edinburgh), in which he made a voyage of two and a half years, visiting the Cape, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, China, India, and the Falkland Islands. In November 1872 he was appointed flag lieutenant to Sir Henry Keppel, commander-in-chief at Plymouth, and remained there until August 1874, when he was sent for a few months to the 'Bellerophon', flagship of the North American station. 
Through the influence of his brother Lord Waterford, Beresford was Conservative MP for co. Waterford from 1874 to 1880, opposing home rule but supporting denominational education, and opposing abolition of naval flogging. In September 1875 he went as aide-de-camp to the prince of Wales on his tour in India and was promoted commander in November of that year. In May 1877, after a short period in the 'Vernon' for torpedo instruction, he was appointed executive officer of the 'Thunderer', channel squadron, until April 1878. Beresford married, on 25 April 1878, the 'picturesque' Ellen Jeromina (died 26 May 1922). Called Mina by her friends and Dot by her husband, she was the daughter of the late Richard Gardner, MP for Leicester, and his wife, Lucy, Countess Mandelsloh. Beresford and his wife had two daughters. Shortly after Beresford's marriage the prince of Wales requested that he be given command of his paddle yacht, the 'Osborne', a post which Beresford retained until November 1881. During these years, 1874-1881, he was known chiefly as a dashing sportsman, a friend of the prince of Wales, and a prominent popular figure in smart society. 
At the beginning of 1882 Beresford took command of the barque rigged screw gunvessel 'Condor', 3 guns, under Sir Beauchamp Seymour (afterwards Lord Alcester). At the bombardment of the Alexandria fortifications (11 July 1882), Beresford took the little 'Condor' close in under Fort Marabout and she took the leading part in silencing its guns. Seymour signalled 'Well done, Condor' and the crews of the great ironclads cheered her. Aboard the 'Condor' were the 'Times' correspondent and the 'Graphic' special war artist, Frederic Villiers. Beresford's role was fully reported. After the bombardment Beresford was sent ashore under Captain John Fisher and appointed provost-marshal and chief of police, and efficiently restored order. He was promoted captain and mentioned in dispatches for gallantry. 'Charlie B' became a national hero and celebrity, from then on much featured in the illustrated and other press, and later also on picture postcards. He was offered an appointment on the staff of the khedive and also as war correspondent of the 'New York Herald', but Sir Garnet Wolseley refused to release him. Beresford returned home to public adulation and royal congratulations, and remained on half pay until August 1884, when he was appointed to the 'Alexandra', to act on the staff of Lord Wolseley (as he now was) during the Gordon relief expedition. He afterwards commanded the naval brigade on the Nile, with which he took part in the battle of Abu Klea on 17 January 1885. He also commanded the expedition which went to the rescue of Charles William Wilson in the 'Safieh', when he kept his ship steadily engaged under heavy fire while his engineer, Benbow, repaired her disabled boiler (4 February). He was commended in the House of Commons, and described by Wolseley in his dispatch as 'an officer whose readiness and resource and ability as a leader are only equalled by his daring'. For these services he was made CB (1885). 
Beresford came home in July 1885 and was elected Conservative MP for East Marylebone, London; he was re-elected in 1886. The prince of Wales, to whom he had become close, urged Lord Salisbury, on the formation of the 1886 Conservative government, to give him political office, but Salisbury appointed him fourth naval lord of the Admiralty under Lord George Hamilton. He secured the establishment of the naval intelligence department, but was a difficult colleague and early showed himself hostile to the policy of the board. He criticized the shipbuilding programme and the organization and pay of the intelligence department, and objected to the supreme authority of the first lord in naval administration. He resigned over the naval estimates in January 1888. Salisbury commented to the queen that he was 'an officer of great ability afloat, but he is too greedy of popular applause to get on in a public department. He is constantly playing his own game at the expense of his colleagues' (Bennett, 145). For the next two years he was 'member for the navy', a constant and outspoken critic of naval affairs in the House of Commons, demanding naval reforms and a stronger fleet. He contributed to the introduction of the 1889 'Naval Defence Act' and the Hamilton naval building programme. 
During the period from 1889 to 1892 Beresford's and his wife's lives were darkened by a quarrel with the prince of Wales and the threat of public scandal. It stemmed from the prince's attempt to retrieve a highly indiscreet letter written in January 1889 by Frances, Lady Brooke, later countess of Warwick (1861-1938) ['see 'Greville, Frances Evelyn], with whom Beresford had an affair in 1886-7 and who, in 1889, became the prince's mistress. Beresford and the prince were eventually formally reconciled, but their once warm relationship was replaced by resentment. In December 1889 Beresford was appointed to command the armoured cruiser 'Undaunted' on the Mediterranean station, resigning his seat in parliament. He returned to England in June 1893 to take command of the Medway dockyard reserve until March 1896. In 1897 he was appointed aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria, and in September 1897 was promoted rear-admiral. From 1897 to 1900 he was Conservative MP for York. He continued to use the press to demand naval reform. 
In 1898-9 Beresford visited China on an investigative mission for the Associated Chambers of Commerce -- one of his indiscreet speeches led Salisbury to comment 'C.B. is an ass' (Bennett, 219) -- and published his report, 'The Break-up of China' (1899), advocating British reassertion of the 'open door', and Chinese reforms, and warning against the Russian threat. In January 1900 he was sent to the Mediterranean as second in command to Sir John Fisher, whose reforming zeal he shared. He earned a rebuke from the Admiralty after Arnold White in 1901 leaked to the 'Daily Mail' a letter criticizing Admiralty policy. From very different backgrounds, Beresford and Fisher were both naval reformers with their own agenda, ambitious and sometimes unscrupulous rivals, and prima donnas. From 1900, through several incidents including Fisher's public reprimanding of Beresford, relations between them deteriorated into hostility. Thenceforth Beresford was apparently motivated largely by hatred of Fisher, whom he called 'the Mulatto', and whom he challenged for leadership of the navy. Their feud split the navy into the Fisherite 'fishpond' and the Beresfordian 'syndicate of discontent', while others deprecated the dispute and its harmful results. In the following years, to some extent Beresford became the spokesman of, and was used by, others with their own naval agendas. 
In February 1902, after returning to England, Beresford was elected MP for Woolwich. He was promoted vice-admiral in October 1902, and early in 1903 again left the House of Commons to take command of the channel squadron. He was made KCB in June 1903. In 1904 he opposed Fisher's proposal for fast armoured cruisers rather than battleships, and he favoured Arthur Pollen's controversial rangefinding apparatus rejected by Fisher and the Admiralty. In March 1905 he hauled down his flag, and two months later went to the Mediterranean as commander-in-chief, with the acting rank of admiral, to which he was promoted in November 1906. 
From 1907 to 1909 Beresford was commander-in-chief of the Channel Fleet, then the principal fleet with fourteen battleships. His flagship was, ironically, the new battleship 'King Edward VII' and he 'lived in great style' (Bennett, 283), attended by his Irish servants and his bulldog bitch Kora -- with whom he was repeatedly photographed -- and kept his motor car stowed amidships. In November 1907 he publicly reprimanded the Fisherite Sir Percy Scott for his insubordinate 'paintwork' signal. It was a time when, against the German threat, the naval forces in home waters were being gradually but radically reorganized by Fisher, first sea lord from 1904 to 1910; Fisher's 1905 promotion to admiral of the fleet dashed Beresford's hopes of succeeding him as first sea lord. Beresford opposed many of the changes, and relations between him and Whitehall became very strained; the gradual development of the Home Fleet as an independent command in peacetime, resulting in a significant diminution of his command, angered him. In March 1909, following McKenna's decision, he was ordered to haul down his flag and come ashore a year short of the normal term of command, the Channel Fleet being abolished as a separate command and absorbed into the enlarged Home Fleet. Beresford, greeted by cheering crowds at Portsmouth and London, next challenged the policy of the Admiralty and its organization of the fleets in a long polemical letter (dated 2 April 1909), particularly on the necessity for a war staff, to the prime minister, Asquith. 
Politics and personalities played a major role. Beresford was a Unionist, Fisher a Liberal. Beresford accused Fisher of operating a system of espionage against him when he was commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, and ruthlessly crushing all opposition at the Admiralty. However, there were also solid professional reasons for the dispute. Beresford believed that Fisher's division of the forces destined to defend home waters into separate channel, home, and Atlantic fleets was potentially disastrous and that these forces should be under a single commander-in-chief who would manoeuvre and train them for war. Beresford alleged that the policy of scrapping obsolete warships had gone too far and left the navy with too few cruisers for trade route protection in war. Furthermore, there were not enough British destroyers suitable for work in the North Sea and they compared poorly with their potential German foes. Money spent on submarines was also wasted, they were purely defensive craft and not suited for an offensive fleet like that of the British. Beresford also asserted he had not received proper war plans from the Admiralty and that it was necessary to establish a real naval staff. Beresford's charges were referred to a subcommittee of the committee of imperial defence, composed of the prime minister, Crewe, Morley, Grey, and Haldane. Asquith defined the inquiry very narrowly, excluding the 1904-5 reforms. Beresford, McKenna (who put the Admiralty case), and others presented evidence. Beresford showed up very badly under Asquith's penetrating examination and he gave an impression of incompetence. The committee's report (published August 1909) on the whole vindicated the Admiralty, though in certain respects -- notably that the Admiralty had insufficiently informed Beresford -- it justified some of his criticisms. Beresford published his views in 'The Betrayal' (1912). He was placed on the retired list in February 1911, and received the GCB the same year. 
From 1910 to 1916 Beresford was MP for Portsmouth. He continued in parliament, the press, and elsewhere his campaign against Fisher and Fisher's changes. Although he gained some right-wing support, Balfour and other leading Unionists refused to support him. He supported the National Service League and compulsory military training, and co-operated with Roberts on the invasion controversy. He supported and was supported by the more extreme and largely Unionist Imperial Maritime League (the 'Navier League') which with his encouragement broke from the Navy League in 1908 and demanded Fisher's removal. Rebuffed by Northcliffe, Beresford was supported by the 'Daily Express' and the 'Standard' -- H. A. Gwynne was probably his most important ally -- both owned by Arthur Pearson, and by the 'Morning Post'. In parliament he spoke vehemently but sometimes incoherently. He bitterly criticized Churchill (first lord of the Admiralty, 1911-15) for his autocratic methods and interference in professional naval matters, and in 1914 for his apparent attempt to coerce the Ulster loyalists. In 1914 Beresford published his surprisingly non-controversial two-volume 'Memoirs', largely on his career to 1885. In 1915 he requested a peerage. Balfour and Bonar Law favoured this and Asquith, though disliking it, acquiesced. On 22 January 1916 Beresford was created Baron Beresford of Metemmeh and Curraghmore, co. Waterford. 
Charlie B was one of the most remarkable personalities of his generation: colourful, idiosyncratic, maverick, brave, high-spirited, an enthusiastic sportsman, of noble birth, and with ample private means. He touched life at many points, and to the general public was the best-known sailor of his day. However, arguably there was truth in Lansdowne's criticism that 'there never was a more cheaply acquired reputation than his' (Williams, 135). Beresford was passionately devoted to the navy and to his country, but his love of publicity and impatience of control sometimes led him into conduct alien from the strict traditions of the navy. He was not an original thinker. In parliament and on the platform, while not strong in argument -- the pro-Fisher Garvin called Beresford 'the great dirigible... the biggest of all recorded gas-bags' (Williams, 213) -- he was a forceful speaker and was widely popular, usually confining himself to naval topics in which he was especially interested. Owing partly to his variety of interests and partly to his quarrels with authority, he had until late in life comparatively little sea experience, but from January 1900, when he hoisted his flag in the Mediterranean, aged nearly fifty-four, he was for the greater part of nine years continuously afloat. He was an able and active flag officer; and he commanded the most important British fleet with energy and ability, enhancing fighting efficiency, and devoting personal care to the welfare of his men. 
There are however widely divergent opinions about Beresford. Many of his ideas were sound and full of common sense, but his actions and statements, particularly in later years, alienated others. He was ambitious to reach the highest naval position, and it was unfortunate that the last years of his command were clouded by personal antagonism with Fisher. An admirable host, in London and in general society, he enjoyed widespread popularity. 
Beresford died of a cerebral haemorrhage while staying with the duke of Portland at Langwell, Berriedale, Caithness, on 6 September 1919. He had a state funeral in St Paul's Cathedral, followed by burial at Putney Vale cemetery, London, four days later. At his death his peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 30724


Bergne, Sir John Henry Gibbs (1842-1908), diplomatist, was born at 19 Hans Place, London, on 12 August 1842, the elder son of John Brodribb Bergne (1800-1873), Foreign Office clerk, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Gibbs. He was descended from a French family originally resident in Auvergne, which settled in England after the French Revolution. Educated at schools at Brighton and Enfield and at London University, where he graduated BA, he followed his father by entering the Foreign Office as a clerk in the diplomatic establishment after passing a competitive examination in 1861; he was appointed an assistant clerk in 1880, and promoted to be superintendent of the treaty department in 1881, an office in which he continued until 1894, when he became superintendent of the commercial department and examiner of treaties. He held this position for eight years, doing much valuable work in the development of the commercial department and particularly in the arrangement of its relations with the Board of Trade, and in introducing a more regular and complete system of reports on commercial and industrial subjects from diplomatic and consular officers in foreign countries. He was occasionally employed abroad on business which came within the sphere of his permanent work, and on which he possessed special knowledge. In 1875 he assisted the British agent before the international commission, which sat under article 22 of the treaty of Washington, to assess the amount to be paid by the United States to Great Britain in return for the fishery privileges accorded to the citizens of the United States under article 18 of that treaty; when the commission met at Halifax in 1877 he acted as secretary and protocolist to it. In September 1887 he was appointed secretary to Joseph Chamberlain's special mission to Washington to adjust certain questions relating to the North American fisheries. For his services he was made KCMG in 1888, having been made CMG in 1886. 
In 1885 Bergne was second British delegate at the international copyright conference held at Bern, and signed the convention which was agreed there (9 September 1886). While at Washington in 1887 he was deputed to discuss the copyright question with the United States department of state. In May 1896, as British delegate to a conference at Paris, he signed the additional act to the international copyright convention of 1886. He was appointed a member of the departmental committee on trade marks in 1888, and was sent as British delegate to the conference on industrial property held at Rome in 1888, at Madrid in 1890, and at Brussels in November 1897 and again in 1900. From 1898 onwards he was constantly employed in the negotiations for the abolition of bounties on the export of sugar, and was one of the British delegates at the conferences held in Brussels on this question in 1899 and 1901; on 5 March 1902 he signed the convention concluded on the latter occasion. In 1903 he was appointed the British delegate on the permanent commission established under article 7 of that convention, and attended the various meetings of the commission, furnishing reports which were laid before parliament and which were marked by his usual power of terse, lucid explanation. He served as a member on the royal commission for the Paris Exhibition of 1900. He retired from the Foreign Office on a pension on 1 October 1902, but his employment on the special subjects of which he had an intimate knowledge continued. He was made CB in 1902 and KCB in the following year. In November 1908 he served as British delegate at the international copyright conference at Berlin. 
Though scarcely an author in the ordinary sense of the term, Bergne rendered important services to the Society of Authors, of which he became a member in 1890; after his retirement from the Foreign Office he served on the committee of management and copyright subcommittee, and acted as chairman of the general committee (1905-7). He contributed articles on diplomatic topics to the 'Quarterly Review', 'Blackwood's Magazine', 'The Spectator', and other periodicals. He was also an accomplished mountaineer and well-known member of the Alpine Club from 1878 until his death, and a collector of oriental china. 
Bergne married, in 1878, Mary a Court, daughter of the Revd S. B. Bergne; they had two sons, the elder of whom was killed in an accident near Saas Fee in Switzerland in January 1908. Bergne died of a chill at the Hotel Continental, Berlin, on 15 November 1908. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30725


Berkeley, Sir George (1819-1905), colonial governor, born on the island of Barbados, West Indies, on 2 November 1819, was the eldest son of General Sackville Hamilton Berkeley, colonel of the 16th regiment of foot, who had served at the capture of Surinam in 1804, of the Danish islands of St Thomas, St John, and St Croix in 1807, and of Martinique in 1809, and was descended from a branch of the family of the earls of Berkeley. His mother was Elizabeth Pilgrim, the daughter of William Murray, of Bruce Vale estate, Barbados. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 3 July 1837, and graduated BA in 1842. Soon afterwards he returned to the West Indies, where he remained for most of his active life. 
On 11 February 1845 Berkeley was appointed colonial secretary and controller of customs of British Honduras, where he was also 'ex officio' member of the executive and legislative councils. While still serving in that colony he was chosen in 1860-61 to administer temporarily the government of Dominica, and on 8 July 1864 was appointed lieutenant-governor of the island of St Vincent. During his tenure of office in 1867 an act to amend and simplify the legislature substituted a single legislative chamber for the two houses which had been in existence since 1763. 
Berkeley was acting administrator of Lagos from December 1872 to October 1873, when he was appointed governor-in-chief of the west Africa settlements (Sierra Leone, the Gambia, Gold Coast, and Lagos). The Gold Coast and Lagos soon became a separate colony (24 July 1874), and Berkeley was recalled to allow the appointment at a reduced salary of a new governor of Sierra Leone and the Gambia. While on his way home in June 1874 he was offered, and accepted, the government of Western Australia, but did not take up the appointment, being sent instead to the Leeward Islands as governor-in-chief. There he remained until 27 June 1881, when he retired on a pension. He was created CMG on 20 February 1874, and KCMG on 24 May 1881. 
Berkeley died unmarried in London on 29 September 1905 at his home, 10F Hyde Park Mansions, Marylebone Road, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30726


Berkeley, Randal Thomas Mowbray Rawdon, eighth earl of Berkeley (1865-1942), physical chemist and landowner, was born on 31 January 1865 at Ixelles, Brussels, the third son -- but the only one born after his parents' marriage -- of George Lennox Rawdon Berkeley (1827-1888) and his wife, Cecile (died 1914), daughter of Edward Drummond, count of Melfort, in the French nobility, and divorced wife of Admiral Sir F. B. R. Pellew (1789-1861). He assumed the courtesy title Viscount Dursley in 1882, when his father took the title of seventh earl of Berkeley on the death of his cousin, Thomas Moreton Fitzhardinge Berkeley, who by a family arrangement had not used the earldom to which he was entitled. On his father's death in 1888 Viscount Dursley assumed the title of eighth earl of Berkeley and in 1891 his right to the peerage was established. 
Berkeley's parents lived abroad and he was educated in France before moving to England to be coached for the Royal Navy at Burney's academy, Gosport. In 1878 he joined the cadet training ship 'Britannia' berthed at Dartmouth. From 1880 to 1887 he served in various ships, including a period on the China station, and also attended the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. While he was in the navy his interest in science and mathematics was stimulated, particularly by books he was lent by a chaplain in one of the ships on which he served. In 1887, finding naval discipline irksome, he resigned his commission in order to devote himself to science. The same year, on 9 November, he married Kate (died 1898), daughter of William Brand, a landowner, and widow of Arthur Jackson, a composer and teacher at the Royal Academy of Music. 
Berkeley studied chemistry for a short time at the Royal College of Science and also attended lectures in other subjects, including geology. A lecture on petrography aroused in him an interest in crystals and he began to study the relationship between crystalline form and chemical composition. However, a serious illness put an end to his work in London. In 1893 he moved to Foxcombe near Oxford and resumed his crystallographic work in the Christ Church laboratory, work which led to two short papers on the accurate determination of the densities of solids. (Real understanding of the relationship between crystalline form and chemical composition had to await the advent of X-ray crystallography.) In 1897, in association with Ernald Hartley, Berkeley conducted research into the electrolysis of glass. No publication resulted, but this work apparently turned Berkeley's attention to semi-permeable membranes and hence to osmotic pressure. 
Berkeley built a private laboratory at Foxcombe in 1898 and began researches on the measurement of osmotic pressure. The work began in earnest in 1902 when he was joined by Hartley (who was his collaborator until 1916). At that time physical chemists were interested in the deviations of real solutions from the osmotic pressure equation of Van't Hoff (analogous to the ideal gas equation) and the possibility of expressing these by an equation similar to the van der Waals equation used for real gases. First, however, there were major difficulties to be overcome in order to obtain accurate experimental results; this was the goal Berkeley set himself. 
Berkeley and Hartley designed and built an apparatus incorporating a semi-permeable membrane which was capable of measuring accurately osmotic pressures up to 150 atmospheres. They also measured osmotic pressures by the so-called indirect method, based on the lowering of the vapour pressure of a solvent by a solute. Initially there were considerable discrepancies between the results given by the two methods, but these were gradually reduced, almost to zero, by refinements of technique and the discovery and application of necessary corrections. Although much effort was also expended in trying to express the results by equations of the van der Waals type, with the benefit of hindsight it is apparent that such attempts were doomed. 
Over the years additional workers were recruited to Foxcombe and the study of solutions was broadened to include diffusion and centrifugation, and there were further opportunities for constructing ingenious apparatus. However, August 1914 marked the start of the decline of the Foxcombe laboratory, as the team Berkeley had assembled dispersed to war work. 
During the war years Berkeley himself acquired another interest: on the death of his kinsman Lord Fitzhardinge in 1916 he succeeded to the Berkeley estates in Gloucestershire. The castle was in a neglected state and he threw himself energetically into its restoration, acting as his own architect and clerk of works. But he never lost his interest in osmotic pressure and related phenomena; some research continued at Foxcombe throughout the war and the laboratory did not finally close until 1928. Even after the laboratory closed Berkeley was seeking new equations to express his old experimental results. 
Berkeley was not prominent in the life of the scientific community, but he was elected FRS in 1908 and served on the council of the Chemical Society from 1914 to 1918. For many years his main interest outside science was golf, and he laid out a nine-hole golf course at Foxcombe. In 1936 he published 'Sound Golf by Applying Principles to Practice'. On inheriting the Berkeley estates he became master of the Berkeley hounds; he took up hunting when he was over fifty and continued in the sport until 1927. On 8 November 1924 he married his second wife, Mrs Mary Emlen Lloyd (died 1975), daughter of John Lowell of Boston, Massachusetts; they spent much time in California and in Italy. Berkeley died peacefully in his sleep at Berkeley Castle on 15 January 1942. There were no children by either marriage and the earldom of Berkeley ended with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30727


Bernard, Sir Charles Edward (1837-1901), administrator in India, was born at 16 The Crescent, Clifton, Bristol, on 21 December 1837, the son of James Frogo Bernard MD and his wife, Marianne Amelia Lawrence, sister of John, first Lord Lawrence. He was educated at Rugby School and in 1855 accepted a cadetship at Addiscombe College; in 1856 he switched to the East India College at Haileybury, and passed out in 1857 at the head of the list for Bengal with prizes in mathematics, Persian, Hindustani, and Hindi. He married at Calcutta on 23 October 1862 Susan Capel, daughter of Richard Tawney, rector of Willoughby, Warwickshire. 
Bernard's early service was in the Punjab and afterwards the Central Provinces, where he was secretary to two chief commissioners, Sir Richard Temple and Sir George Campbell (in 1893 he was to oversee the posthumous publication of the latter's memoirs). In 1871 he became the commissioner of Nagpur division, and for four years he was a member of the council of the lieutenant-governor of Bengal. In 1880 he was appointed judicial commissioner of the Central Provinces. 
In 1881 Bernard became home secretary to the government of India and in 1882 chief commissioner of British Burma. Upper Burma was then still independent, but in November 1885 Lord Dufferin, largely at the urging of Bernard, sent in an army and deposed King Thibaw. Bernard applied his characteristic energy to governing the new territory, but was handicapped by his disregard for Burmese social and political institutions. As a liberal he put great faith in the civilizing nature of British ideals of law and order and attempted to superimpose on Upper Burma the wholly alien system of civil administration developed in British India. Resistance to British occupation was not easily crushed, and as guerrilla outbreaks continued throughout 1886 rumours spread in Calcutta that Bernard was not up to the job, a view fuelled by a series of critical reports in 'The Times'. This however was not the official line and in 1886 Bernard was created KCSI. 
In 1887 he was briefly the resident at Mysore and chief commissioner of Coorg, before returning to England in 1888 to become secretary to the department of revenue, statistics, and commerce at the India Office. In 1889 he compiled a comprehensive report on Britain's administration of India since the uprising of 1857, which was laid before parliament. He finally retired in 1901 after forty-three years' continuous service. His extraordinary breadth of experience (he had served in all of the Indian provinces except the North-Western Provinces) meant that for the last twenty of these years his advice was sought on numerous issues. He was more a man of common sense than of original or radical ideas and although a liberal, his opposition to illiberal acts, such as the 'Vernacular Press Act', was typically based on a pragmatic appreciation of their inutility rather than moral repugnance. He was popular with his colleagues and made remarkably few enemies during his career. The Bernard Free Library in Rangoon was built in his memory. 
He died on a visit to Chamonix in France on 19 September 1901 and was buried there the next day. His wife survived him; of their eight children the eldest son, James Henry, followed his father into the Indian Civil Service and died of cholera together with his wife at Chinsura in Bengal in November 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 30728


Bernard, John Henry (1860-1927), Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin and college head, was born on 27 July 1860 at Sooree, Beerbohm, Bengal, the eldest of the three children (one brother who died in infancy and one sister) of William Frederick Bernard (1825-1863), a civil engineer who worked in India for sixteen years and died there in 1863, and his wife, Martha Amelia (1833-1899), eldest daughter of Henry Humphrys, woollen merchant, of Dublin. 
On his father's death, when Bernard was still just two years of age, his mother returned to Ireland with the children, and settled in Bray, co. Wicklow, where Bernard attended school for the first time at the small local Bray College, then for a few months at St John's College, Newport, co. Tipperary, before in 1875, only just over fifteen, entering Trinity College, Dublin. He graduated in 1880, with a first in both mathematics and philosophy, and won a fellowship in 1884. Although he won the fellowship in mathematics, his real interest was in theology and philosophy and he took holy orders in 1886; two years later he was appointed to Archbishop King's lecturership, the second post in the divinity school of Trinity College. 
After failing as part of a group seeking reforms to the management of the college, Bernard moved away from college politics and resolved to devote his energies to the duties of his lecturership (which was converted into a professorship in 1906) and to literary activities. Under the influence of Sir John Pentland Mahaffy, his output was prodigious and wide-ranging. Between 1889 and 1918 he published well over a dozen books, on biblical scholarship, theology, Kantian philosophy, and the writings of Jonathan Swift. He proved to be an excellent and influential teacher as well. On 29 July 1885 Bernard married his cousin Maud Nannie, second daughter of Robert Bernard MD RN. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Judged by Irish standards Bernard ranked as a high-churchman, and was attacked for his views by others within the general synod. In 1897 he was appointed treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral, and in 1902 he accepted the deanery of St Patrick's. He took advantage of his position to invite visits from leading men in the Church of England. Unity and close relations between the two churches he always strove for. He had many friendships among prominent English churchmen, and he frequently preached at Westminster Abbey and was select preacher at Oxford and at Cambridge. 
In his double capacity at St Patrick's and in Trinity College Bernard's influence reached its maximum. But he was 'clearly marked out for the episcopate by intellectual gifts and administrative abilities' ('The Times', 30 Aug 1927, 13), and in 1911 he accepted the see of Ossory, resigning his professorship, and severing for a time his connection with Trinity College. 
In 1915 Bernard was elected archbishop of Dublin by the bench of bishops of the Church of Ireland. He was one of the two representatives of the Church of Ireland at the convention called by the British government following the nationalist Easter rising of 1916, to consider a new constitution for Ireland. Bernard supported the recommendations of the majority of the convention on a scheme for self-government and was chosen, along with Viscount Midleton, to speak for the southern unionists on this in private negotiations with Lloyd George. When conscription was extended to Ireland in March 1917 and opposed by nationalists and the Roman Catholic church, Bernard sent out an urgent appeal hoping 'that 'compulsory service' would be cheerfully accepted' ('The Times', 30 Aug 1927, 13). 
In 1919 the provostship of Trinity College was offered to Bernard, and it seemed that this would give perfect scope to his administrative abilities. But the new political arrangements made for a difficult time for the college for a number of years, and Bernard required all his skills to maintain its stability. 
Bernard's writings covered a wide range of subjects. Philosophy first engaged his attention, and he collaborated with Mahaffy in the second edition of Mahaffy's book 'Kant's Critical Philosophy for English Readers' (1889), contributing a commentary on the 'Dialectic of the Pure Reason', which had been left unnoticed in the first edition; and in 1892 he published independently the first English translation of the 'Kritik of the Judgment'. But he soon abandoned metaphysics for scholarship, although his four volumes of sermons often show evidence of his philosophical training. Between 1890 and 1894 he edited and translated for the Palestine Pilgrims' Texts Society a number of itineraries of the Holy Land, from the originals by Eusebius and several early travellers. He made an important contribution to Irish liturgiology in an edition of the 'Liber hymnorum', published in collaboration with Robert Atkinson for the Henry Bradshaw Society (1898). Among several notable papers of Irish interest which appeared in the 'Proceedings' of the Royal Irish Academy was one on the 'Domnach airgid', a Latin-Irish manuscript of the gospels, and another on the copy of 'St John's gospel' in the Stowe missal (1893). His contributions to biblical scholarship included commentaries on the pastoral epistles (1899) and on '2 Corinthians' (1903), and two posthumously published volumes in the 'International Critical Commentaries' on the gospel according to 'St John' (1928). Like all his writings, these contained sound scholarship, terseness and lucidity of statement, well-balanced judgement, and a decidedly conservative point of view. 
Bernard received the honorary degree of DCL of Oxford University (1920) and of Durham University (1905), and the honorary DD degree of Aberdeen University (1906). He was an honorary fellow of Queen's College, Oxford (1919), and of the Royal College of Physicians, Ireland (1921), a privy councillor of Ireland (1919), president of the Royal Irish Academy (1916-21), and warden of Alexandra College, Dublin (1905-11). Bernard died at the provost's house, Trinity College, Dublin, from heart failure, on 29 August 1927 and was buried in the old churchyard of St Patrick's Cathedral on 1 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 30729


Bernard, Thomas Dehany (1815-1904), Church of England clergyman, second son of Charles Bernard of Eden estate, Jamaica, the descendant of a Huguenot family, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Baker of Waresley House, Worcestershire, was born at Clifton on 11 November 1815. Mountague Bernard was his brother. After private education he matriculated on 2 December 1833 from Exeter College, Oxford, and in 1837 was placed in the second class of the final classical school. He graduated BA in 1838, when he won the Ellerton theological prize with the essay 'On the conduct and character of St Peter'. In 1839 he was awarded the chancellor's prize for an English essay, 'The classical taste and character compared with the Romantic'. He proceeded MA in 1840. In 1841 he married Caroline (died 1881), daughter of Benjamin Linthorne of High Hall, Wimborne. They had two sons and seven daughters. In 1840 he was ordained deacon and licensed to the curacy of Great Baddow, Essex. Ordained priest in 1841, he succeeded to the vicarage of Great Baddow, where he remained until 1846. After working for a short time as curate of Harrow on the Hill, he became in 1848 vicar of Terling, Essex, showing a keen interest in the cause of foreign missions. He was select preacher at Oxford in 1858, 1862, and 1882. In 1864 he delivered the Bampton lectures, published as 'The Progress of Doctrine in the New Testament' (5th edn 1900). In later life, Bernard published several other works; though his greatest talents undoubtedly lay in parish work and administration, contemporaries admired his 'Before his Presence with a Song' (1885) and 'The Central Teachings of Jesus Christ' (1892). 
Of strong evangelical sympathies, Bernard was appointed by Charles Simeon's trustees to the rectory of Walcot, Bath, in 1864. There Bernard's gifts of organization were called into play. He increased the church accommodation and built St Andrew's Church and schools. In 1867 the bishop of Bath and Wells collated him to a prebendal stall in Wells Cathedral; and next year the dean and chapter elected him to a residentiary canonry. He succeeded to the chancellorship of the cathedral in 1879, and from 1880 to 1895 represented the chapter in convocation. Bernard was as zealous a cathedral dignitary as he was an energetic town rector. He revived the cathedral grammar school, at his own cost provided buildings for it, established a high school for girls, and interested himself in the general parochial life of Wells. An evangelical whom all trusted, though unfettered by party conventions, Bernard was a frequent speaker at the Islington clerical meeting, the most important annual gathering of Anglican evangelicals in his day. He resigned Walcot in 1886, and went to live at Wimborne, Dorset. In 1901 he retired from his canonry, retaining only the unpaid office of chancellor. He died at his home, High Hall, Wimborne, on 7 December 1904. Bernard had gained a reputation as a scholar and a man of affairs, and as a wise counsellor in private and a clear, cogent teacher in public. 


@@@@@


doc= 30730


Berry, Sir Graham (1822-1904), politician in Australia, was born at Twickenham, England, on 28 August 1822 to Benjamin Berry, a retired shopkeeper, and his wife, Clara, 'nee' Graham. After basic schooling, he was apprenticed to a draper; in 1846 he married the Scottish Harriet Ann Bencowe (1804-1868), and by 1849 had his own shop in Chelsea. He emigrated to Melbourne in 1852, establishing a general store and wine and spirit business in South Yarra. 
In the turmoil following the gold rushes, however, radical politics claimed Berry. In 1854 he sat on one of the juries which acquitted rebel miners who had defied the government at the Eureka Stockade, Ballarat. Soon he became a capable speaker and political organizer, and, in the post-gold rush depression, a passionate advocate of protectionism to foster native industry and, perhaps especially as father of a large and growing family (there were eleven children, eight of whom survived, from his first marriage), to employ native youth. In 1860 he bought the 'Collingwood Observer'. At his third attempt, he entered the legislative assembly in 1861, for East Melbourne, and then for Collingwood at the August general elections. He opposed the Radical Party's alliance with businessmen and pastoralists in the McCulloch ministry in 1863, and after the 1864 elections formed a small, disciplined, protectionist opposition. McCulloch's battle with the legislative council over tariff increases, however, forced Berry to support the government, and when he opposed McCulloch on a point of political strategy, Collingwood rejected him as a traitor at the January 1866 elections. 
Berry moved to Geelong and became part owner of the 'Geelong Register', amalgamating it later with the 'Geelong Advertiser'. He supported McCulloch's party when the battle against the council revived in 1867, but not until it ended did he succeed in re-entering the assembly, at the Geelong West by-election of October 1868. This success was clouded by his wife's death shortly beforehand, but next year he married Rebecca Madge, daughter of J. B. Evans of Geelong. After much hesitation, he joined the dissidents who helped defeat McCulloch in September 1869, and in January 1870 became treasurer in the Macpherson ministry. The government was defeated on his budget in April, but when McCulloch's next ministry fell in June 1871, Berry again became treasurer, and commissioner for trade and customs, under the famous Irish radical, C. G. Duffy, and passed a strongly protectionist tariff. In May 1872 this ministry fell; worse, allegations of scandal and nepotism had forced Berry to resign office shortly beforehand. 
Opportunity suddenly reopened three years later, when the Kerferd ministry resigned, its following divided over fiscal policy. In August 1875 Berry became premier, chief secretary, and treasurer, proposing to meet the deficit solely with a land tax. Although defeated in October, when McCulloch, having helped overthrow Kerferd, rejoined him and became premier, Berry unleashed a campaign of parliamentary obstruction and popular agitation which united radical Victoria behind him and a land tax to 'burst up the great estates'. At the May 1877 elections, helped by an extensive new party organization and by Catholics who remembered Duffy, he won a resounding victory, and became once more premier, chief secretary, and treasurer. 
The legislative council, dominated by landowners, had to accept Berry's land tax, but opposed a bill to make payment of members (a temporary measure first introduced in 1870) permanent. Berry 'tacked' it to the appropriations bill, which the council rejected in December; as public funds ran out, he dramatized the crisis on 'black Wednesday', 8 January 1878, by dismissing higher public servants wholesale, and some judges and magistrates; rumours circulated of even more revolutionary intentions. In April, however, compromise secured payment of members; Berry now concentrated on reducing the council's power to obstruct the assembly. 
When the council rejected his first attempt, Berry went on 'embassy' to London in December 1878, with Professor C. H. Pearson as adviser, seeking imperial legislation to allow the assembly alone to reform the constitution. The Colonial Office, despite having recalled governor Sir George Bowen for supporting Berry during the crisis, did not exclude future intervention, but preferred a local settlement. Berry returned to a public triumph, claiming victory, but his party was divided about the embassy, his reform proposals, and other matters; the assembly denied his reform bill the necessary absolute majority by one vote. He then lost the elections of February 1880, in part because a recession, called the 'Berry blight', was commonly blamed on his actions. However, he defeated the 'Reform Bill' of his successor, James Service, narrowly won another election in July, and resumed his former offices; eventually he passed a bill which, abandoning mechanisms for resolving disputes between the houses, merely made the council's electoral basis somewhat less undemocratic. Further radical defections brought down his government in July 1881. 
At the 1883 elections Berry and Service won roughly equal minorities; as no outstanding issues now separated them, Service became premier and Berry chief secretary. This alliance produced much practical legislation, promoted agricultural development inland, and freed the railways and public service from political patronage. In February 1886 Berry resigned and, after attending the first meeting of the newly established but rather ineffective federal council, became Victoria's agent-general in London, and was immediately appointed KCMG. There he took a vigorous part in lobbying the imperial government to curtail French imperialism in the New Hebrides, especially at the colonial conference of 1887. Further honours followed: he was made chevalier of the French Legion d'honneur and awarded the order of the Crown of Italy. 
In 1891 Berry returned to a Melbourne battered by economic depression, and to the unfamiliar politics of the Labor Party and the federation movement. He won East Bourke Boroughs in the April 1892 election and became treasurer in Shiels's ministry, turning in vain to the old protectionist panacea; the ministry fell in January 1893. In 1894 he became speaker until losing his seat in 1897. As his financial affairs, after unaccustomed affluence in the 1880s, had now suffered disaster, the assembly bought him an annuity of $500. Although elected to the federal convention in 1897, Berry was incapable of active participation; on 25 January 1904 he died of pneumonia at Balaclava, Melbourne, and was buried in Boroondara cemetery, Melbourne, after a public funeral. Lady Berry survived him, with her seven children and eight from his first marriage. 
Berry provided a remarkable example of what a man of humble origins could achieve in colonial politics. A man of great emotional energy and a remarkable orator, he was unusual among colonial politicians for his appreciation of political organization; as a political strategist he had, in his heyday, no equal. His ambition and persistence through political setbacks and financial difficulties were harnessed to enlarging opportunities for ordinary people, and bringing wealth and power under democratic control. Conservative caricaturists mocked his tall, skinny frame and whiskers, and his problems with the letter H; in later years he polished his speech and style, filled out into a dignified figure, and acquired a public standing beyond mockery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30731


Berry, (James) Gomer, first Viscount Kemsley (1883-1968), newspaper proprietor, was born on 7 May 1883 at 11 Church Street, Merthyr Tudful, the youngest of the three sons (all of whom became newspaper proprietors) of John Mathias Berry (died 1917), an estate agent and Liberal alderman, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1922), the daughter of Thomas Rowe, of Pembroke Dock. Berry followed in the footsteps of the second son, William Ewert Berry, first Viscount Camrose (1879-1954), and left school at fourteen to work on the 'Merthyr Tydfil Times'. Eager to learn his trade, William worked for several south Wales newspapers, before moving on to London, where he launched a paper of his own, 'Advertising World'. His only capital was $100 lent by his elder brother, (Henry) Seymour Berry, Baron Buckland (1877-1928), whose business partner he became in 1902. 
Ambitious and able, William Berry identified sport and leisure as an untapped and potentially lucrative field of magazine publishing. From the outset he planned for take-over and expansion. Gomer, on the other hand, was expected to fulfil the very specific tasks of promoting sales and selling advertising space. Nevertheless, the Berry enterprise proved remarkably successful, with sibling rivalry subsumed in a potent mixture of energy, entrepreneurialism, and -- particularly in the case of the junior partner -- honest endeavour. 
In 1905 William and Gomer Berry sold 'Advertising World' at an excellent profit. They bought a publishing house and started sundry periodicals, notably (in 1909) 'Boxing', of which sport William was a devotee. Their interests widened rapidly but they were discerning in their acquisitions. In 1907 Gomer Berry married Mary Lilian (died 1928), daughter of Horace George Holmers of Brondesbury Park, London. They had one daughter and six sons: one son died young, and another was killed in action in 1944. 
For well over three decades the Berry brothers pursued a common strategy, moving from specialist magazines back into the familiar world of the provincial press. High profit margins facilitated diversification, particularly after the First World War when their company invested in the fledgeling film industry as well as in more reliable revenue earners such as Kelly's directories. Large reserves of surplus capital also funded an early excursion into Fleet Street, with the wartime purchase in 1915 of a struggling 'Sunday Times', whose fortunes were swiftly restored through shrewd editorial direction and long overdue investment. In 1919 their purchase of the St Clement's Press brought control of the 'Financial Times', and with it a high City profile. 
The year 1924 saw the foundation of Allied Newspapers (later Kemsley Newspapers), controlled by the Berry brothers and Sir E. M. Iliffe. The purpose of this group was to take over most of the Hulton papers from Lord Rothermere. These included the 'Daily Dispatch', the 'Manchester Evening Chronicle', and the 'Sunday Chronicle'. During the years up to 1928 Allied Newspapers further acquired papers in Glasgow, Sheffield, Newcastle, Middlesbrough, and Aberdeen. They also bought the 'Daily Sketch' and 'Illustrated Sunday Herald' from Rothermere's Daily Mail Trust. In Cardiff, where they already held the 'Western Mail' and the 'Evening Express', they acquired the 'South Wales Daily News' and the 'South Wales Echo', merging the two morning and the two evening papers. 
Newspapers apart, the group's biggest purchase was made in 1926: the Amalgamated Press from the executors of Lord Northcliffe. This great concern comprised a large number of non-political periodicals, ranging from the 'Woman's Journal' to children's comic sheets. It included a powerful encyclopaedia and book section, which had been built up under Northcliffe's aegis, chiefly by John Hammerton and Arthur Mee. There were also printing works at Blackfriars and Gravesend and the Imperial Paper Mills, also at Gravesend. In 1927 paper supplies were further augmented by the acquisition of Edward Lloyd Ltd, one of the largest mills in the world. 
The key acquisition -- of a first-rate serious London daily newspaper -- came in 1927 when the Berry-Iliffe group purchased the 'Daily Telegraph'. William Berry assumed editorial control with a clear agenda for modernization and major sales growth, and within a decade circulation had risen sevenfold. Other less prominent national titles were accumulated throughout the inter-war period, but predominance at regional and local level remained a central tenet of company policy, and the firm held an almost monopolistic position across large swathes of the provincial press, particularly in south Wales. Nationally, Allied Newspapers and its subsidiary companies owned the best-selling quality daily and Sunday newspapers, and dominated the magazine market. 
Not surprisingly, the triumvirate at the heart of this huge media conglomerate were all ennobled, their loyalty dutifully acknowledged by a grateful Conservative premier. Stanley Baldwin recommended Gomer Berry for a baronetcy in 1928, and in 1936 facilitated his elevation to the peerage. Lord Kemsley, as he was now known, shared his brother William's unequivocal belief in Baldwin's ability, effortlessly transferring his affections to Neville Chamberlain when the latter entered Downing Street in May 1937. Indeed Kemsley kept faith with the new prime minister's policy of appeasing the axis powers long after his brother (since 1929 Lord Camrose) had steered the 'Daily Telegraph' towards an editorial position little short of hostile. Kemsley in contrast encouraged close contact with the German press, and as late as 27 July 1939 paid a fruitless visit to Hitler at Bayreuth. Such a blinkered approach to great-power relations rarely generated any serious tension between the two brothers, if only because Allied Newspapers had been dissolved in 1937. The families of Camrose, Kemsley, and Iliffe each expected to inherit a recognized raft of financial holdings: hence the decision to divide up the company. 
Although ownership of the 'Daily Telegraph' kept Camrose in the limelight, after 1937 Kemsley stepped out of his brother's shadow. He became chairman of Allied Newspapers, renamed Kemsley Newspapers six years later. Although much diminished, this was still the largest newspaper empire in Britain, boasting no fewer than six morning, seven evening, six weekly, and four Sunday titles nationwide. These included some of the provincial press's most popular -- and sometimes most notorious -- newspapers, notably the 'Daily Record' in Glasgow and the 'Daily Dispatch' in Manchester. In Fleet Street Kemsley owned the equally downmarket 'Daily Sketch', and also the 'Sunday Graphic'. However, the jewel in the crown, and the newspaper he remains most closely associated with, was the 'Sunday Times'. True to character, he would have left the paper in the hands of his brother had there not been a last-minute intervention by his second wife. Lady Kemsley recognized that, although the once moribund 'Sunday Times' was by 1937 outselling 'The Observer' by nearly 70,000 copies a week, a burgeoning middle-class market still remained largely untapped. Such insight reaped a rich reward, both in sales and in advertising revenue: circulation was then already 263,000, but over the next two decades it quadrupled. 
Though he was short on vision, and bereft of political nous, Kemsley had a real strength in his financial ability. His brother had for over twenty years been editor-in-chief of the 'Sunday Times': hence the new owner's insistence on adopting a similar hands-on approach. So acquiescent editors often found themselves awaiting lengthy and ponderous leaders, dispatched from the penthouse office in the renamed Kemsley House (a further insight into the nature of the man is his insistence in 1937 that henceforth every title block should include the words 'a Kemsley newspaper'). 
Although they were very different newspapers, both the 'Sunday Times' and the 'Daily Sketch' embodied the complacent conservatism and Victorian certitudes of their proprietor. Kemsley was genuinely shocked by Chamberlain's fall from grace in May 1940, adjusting only slowly to a very different political climate and a very different party leader. After all, only ten months had passed since he had blithely reassured the Fuhrer that Churchill could no longer be taken seriously; and yet, once Kemsley had made the appropriate psychological adjustment, all his newspapers became ardently pro-Winston, as could be seen in the excessive partisanship of the 'Daily Sketch' throughout the 1945 election campaign. Three years earlier the 'Sunday Times' not only upheld the prime minister's right to shut down the 'Daily Mirror' should he so wish (as was threatened, after its publication of the notorious cartoon by Philip Zec), but even went so far as to congratulate Churchill on his opposition to the Beveridge report. Every evening at dinner Kemsley scrutinized the 'Sketch''s galley proofs, his blue pencil poised to censor even the slightest hint of criticism or dissent. A defeated and despondent Churchill insisted in October 1945 that there was now only one press baron he could still depend upon. Kemsley's reward had been a viscountcy in the 1945 resignation honours list. 
The 'Daily Sketch' was relaunched as the 'Daily Graphic' in 1946, but its editorial policy remained staunchly anti-Labour. The paper's idiosyncratic view of the world reflected the prevailing preoccupations of its proprietor, a state of affairs that survived until the second Lord Rothermere purchased the title in 1952 and restored its former name. Throughout Labour's period in office Kemsley clashed repeatedly with both back-benchers and ministers. The early post-war years were marked by acrimony and litigation, with Kemsley Newspapers fighting a number of libel actions: in August 1946 the attorney-general, Sir Hartley Shawcross, was forced to apologize for using the phrase 'the gutter press'. Kemsley's deep antipathy towards Labour was a key factor in the setting up of the 1947-9 royal commission on the press; and when giving evidence he was perhaps less than frank about the level of proprietorial interference in editorial policy. 
By the early 1950s the lifting of wartime restrictions had left the newspaper industry facing a harsher, more competitive climate. As the decade progressed, Kemsley's stifling formality and relentlessly autocratic style of management appeared increasingly outmoded. The stiff manner and equally stiff collars, the bespoke suits and silk ties, the private lift to the top floor, the chauffeured limousine, and the white-gloved flunkeys all signalled a creaking, old-fashioned newspaper operation. Kemsley's sons, three of whom worked on the 'Sunday Times', enjoyed the same privileges as their father. Nevertheless, circulation remained buoyant in the mid-1950s, despite fierce competition from a revitalized 'Observer'. The Suez crisis late in 1956 marked a dramatic clash between the two newspapers, with David Astor wholly opposed to intervention and Lord Kemsley stoutly defending Anthony Eden's conduct throughout the whole sorry affair. 
With hindsight, it is clear that Kemsley made a crucial strategic error in 1955 by withdrawing from the consortium awarded the first ITA franchise for weekend television in the midlands and the north. The later 1950s also saw the gradual break-up of Kemsley Newspapers, culminating in the sale of the 'Sunday Times' in August 1959. Initially Kemsley envisaged selling off all his holdings other than his flagship paper, but he was advised that any serious bidder would insist on the inclusion of the principal revenue earner. The family's extravagant lifestyle and heavy tax bills, together with the prospect of crippling death duties, necessitated the sale of their remaining 40 per cent stake in the company. In the aftermath of a costly strike, and with his bloated enterprise clearly ripe for take-over, Kemsley was determined to get out while he could still demand a high price for his ordinary shares. A discreet approach to the Canadian newspaper and television proprietor Roy H. Thomson (later Lord Thomson of Fleet) culminated in the whole portfolio being offloaded for $5 million. Thomson had to borrow $3 million in the city in order to complete the deal. With piquant irony it was the substantial profits from his commercial television franchise in Scotland that guaranteed his creditworthiness. 
Kemsley left 200 Gray's Inn Road with scarcely a backward glance. He sold his large London home, Chandos House, but retained Dropmore, an impressive country estate in Buckinghamshire. Here he lived with his second wife, Edith (died 1976), the daughter of E. N. Merandon Du Plessis, of Constance, Flacq, Mauritius, whom he had married in 1931. Divorced from a Dutch diplomat, Cornelius Dresselhuys, and an impressive figure in her own right, the flamboyant and formidable Lady Kemsley was appointed OBE in 1953, later becoming a commander of the Legion d'honneur. She suffered from severe ill health for several years, but outlived her husband. Kemsley died in Monte Carlo on 6 February 1968. His eldest son, (Geoffrey) Lionel (1909-1999), became the second viscount. 
Kemsley's only daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 30732


Berry, Sidney Malcolm (1881-1961), Congregational minister, was born on 25 July 1881 at Southport, Lancashire, the younger son of Charles Albert Berry (1852-1899) and his wife, Mary Agnes Martin. He was always proud to think of himself as a Lancastrian. His father was then becoming widely known as a minister to large and flourishing Congregational churches in Bolton and then at Queen Street, Wolverhampton, and a preacher of great power. His fame crossed the Atlantic, where the Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, invited him to succeed Henry Ward Beecher, an honour he declined, and in later years Sidney himself also declined a similar invitation. 
Charles Berry's early death at forty-seven at Wolverhampton, while in the high tide of his ministry, greatly affected his young son, then eighteen. Berry determined to follow him into the Congregational ministry, and from Tettenhall College, Wolverhampton, went up to Clare College, Cambridge, to read history, in which he was in the second classes in part one (1902) and part two (1903). He went on to Mansfield College, Oxford (1903), then under the principalship of Andrew Martin Fairbairn. Mansfield College and its welfare always had a prime place in Berry's affections. He was chairman of the college council for twenty-five years. 
Berry was ordained at the Oxted Congregational Church in Surrey in 1906, and in 1909 was called to Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Manchester, and then in 1912 to Carr's Lane Chapel, in the heart of Birmingham, a pastorate made famous by R. W. Dale. He married in 1907 Helen, daughter of John Logan JP of Cambridge, and they had two daughters. 
Sidney Berry was now launched on a civic and national career in addition to the pastoral cares of his large congregation. In Birmingham he had his initiation into public life, while in the country his personal charm and wit as a preacher made him much sought after for the notable occasions of church life. To take him away from a great pastorate, as the Congregational Union of England and Wales successfully did in 1923, was thought by some to be a disservice to Congregationalism as a whole. But Berry was persuaded -- perhaps in loyalty to his father's memory, who had declined a similar invitation in 1893 -- that he had a duty to serve as the union's secretary, and so he went to the Memorial Hall in London where he stayed until 1948. For Congregationalism it was a revolutionary period. The independency of the Congregational churches was gradually reshaping itself into a more centralized fellowship, which carried responsibility for one another's churches and for their ministers. The moderational system, started in 1919, had proved its worth, and the $500,000 given through the Forward Movement (1925) helped to raise the standards of stipends, as did the later creation of the Home Churches Fund (1948), which made the regular income for ministerial maintenance a responsibility of the local county unions. Berry also took his share in raising the post-war Reconstruction Fund of $500,000. 
Sidney Berry saw his task mainly as a 'pastor pastorum', welcoming his fellow churchmen for consultation to the Memorial Hall as members of a family. In return he was welcomed in local churches with enthusiasm. He tended to gird under the routine of committee work and administration, but he had the gift of discerning the leadership of other people, and was adroit in using it. 
Berry gave considerable study to the art and style of preaching, and his Warrack lectures, entitled 'Vital Preaching' (1936), delivered to theological students in the universities of Aberdeen and Glasgow, are a fine exposition of his methods and one of the best examples of homiletical skill at work. He also wrote religious meditations for the London 'Sunday Times'. Glasgow made him an honorary DD in 1936. 
In public as well as church affairs Sidney Berry was the national leader of English Congregationalism from 1923 to 1948. He was moderator of the National Free Church Council (1934-7) and chairman of the Congregational Union (1947), supported the moves for a British Council of Churches (1942), and was present at the Lausanne faith and order meeting (1927) and at the World Assemblies at Amsterdam (1948) and Evanston (1954). 
But Berry was no over-zealous ecumenist. He believed that his best service for the cause of church unity was to nurture the life and witness of the Congregational churches and, if possible, to foster their union with the Presbyterian Church of England. It was this union he worked for through all its set-backs over fifteen years from 1932 to 1947, and he would have rejoiced in the eventual union of the two churches as the United Reformed church in 1972. 
Berry's secretaryship of the Congregational Union coincided with the economic and political crises which preceded the war of 1939-45. The grave unemployment in the industrial areas of the north and south Wales, where the strength of Congregationalism lay, threatened church stability, and from the Memorial Hall Berry organized much private relief in money and goods. 
As a League of Nations man and a convinced supporter of collective security Berry had to face strong pacifist opposition from the younger generation of both ministers and laymen, who accused him of supporting the establishment rather than the Christian pacifist view. At the union assembly in Norwich in 1929 the whole three days' agenda was devoted almost entirely to disarmament and the problems raised by pacifism in the church. The dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima in 1945 produced a further period of frustration and helplessness for the churches, whose only activity could be resolutions of protest. 
A fresh career opened before him on his retirement in 1948 when Berry was elected minister-secretary of the reorganized International Congregational Council (1949) which, under him, became a well-organized body for consultation and fellowship. Until 1956 he roamed the world as an ambassador of goodwill to the Congregational churches, and their immense affection for him was shown at a banquet in his honour at the Hartford (Connecticut) assembly in 1958. Berry died in University College Hospital, London, on 2 August 1961. 
Cecil Northcott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30733


Berry, William Ewert, first Viscount Camrose (1879-1954), newspaper proprietor, was born on 23 June 1879 at Gwaelod-y-garth, Merthyr Tudful, the second of the three sons of John Mathias Berry (died 1917), an estate agent and a Liberal alderman, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1922), the daughter of Thomas Rowe, of Pembroke Dock. Leaving school at fourteen, Berry joined the 'Merthyr Times', moving on to neighbouring newspapers in order to widen his experience. Having learned his trade in local journalism, in 1898 he was appointed a City reporter on the 'Investors' Guardian'. Unfortunately this lucrative post was short-lived, and a chastened Berry spent three months in the capital out of work before finally being taken on by the Commercial Press Association. Having spotted a gap in the magazine market, in 1901 Berry launched his first commercial venture, investing $100 borrowed from an equally ambitious elder brother, (Henry) Seymour Berry (1877-1928), fledgeling industrialist and future Baron Buckland. At first the tyro owner-editor doubled up as 'Advertising World''s sole contributor. He was also the advertising manager, and the sub-editor: the printrooms of the valleys had clearly provided a thorough grounding in the mechanics of production. Confident of early success, Berry brought to London his younger brother (James) Gomer Berry (1883-1968), who later became a press baron in his own right as Viscount Kemsley. 
When after four years William Berry decided to sell 'Advertising World', he saw a substantial return upon his initial investment. Innate financial acumen ensured that the next publishing company was sufficiently diverse to satisfy the burgeoning market for sports and leisure magazines. A lifelong love of the ring was reflected in the time and effort William put in to the successful launch of 'Boxing' in 1909. In 1905 he married Mary Agnes (died 1962), eldest daughter of Thomas Corns; they had four sons and four daughters. 
Although William and Gomer Berry enjoyed a remarkably harmonious working partnership, the elder sibling was always in the driving seat. In both Fleet Street and the City invidious comparisons were invariably made, with Gomer dismissed as narrow-minded, unimaginative, and a pale shadow of his profit-hungry brother. Nevertheless, it took both men to establish their partnership as a major newspaper chain. An insatiable seven-day demand for news from the western front after the outbreak of the First World War convinced them that the moment was right to acquire the 'Sunday Times'. In 1915 the least distinguished of the quality Sundays had seen sales slump to about 20,000 a week -- less than a tenth of 'The Observer's' circulation. When Gomer succeeded William as editor-in-chief in 1937, the 'Sunday Times' was outselling its historic rival by nearly 70,000 copies a week. 
The purchase in 1919 of the St Clement's Press, and its City flagship the 'Financial Times', further raised the Berrys' profile. Not surprisingly, therefore, they were assiduously courted by the circle surrounding the then prime minister, Lloyd George. One consequence was that in 1921 William Berry became a baronet. By buying up a variety of ailing enterprises, Berry expanded his business interests to cover a wide spectrum of media activities, ranging from Kelly's directories to the Gaumont-British film studios. Yet the secret of his company's success remained its strong regional presence, with the 1920s marked by the relentless and ruthless acquisition of provincial titles. From 1922 to 1932 the Berrys and Lord Rothermere were in fierce competition to take over the nation's few surviving independent morning and evening newspapers. One consequence was a spate of closures and a severe reduction in the number of firms and titles. Both sides eventually agreed upon a crude division of regional influence, but neutrals judged Rothermere the loser. The latter made a costly tactical error in selling the Hulton chain to Allied Newspapers, a consortium established in 1924 by the Berrys and the owner of the 'Midland Evening Telegraph', Sir Edward Iliffe. The Hulton titles included the 'Daily Dispatch', the 'Manchester Evening Chronicle', and the 'Sunday Chronicle' (the 'Sunday News' was later acquired and merged with the 'Sunday Graphic', bought shortly after the war). At the same time a subsidiary company, Allied Northern Newspapers, was establishing a major presence across the north of England, as well as in Glasgow and Aberdeen. The Berrys' enthusiasm for rationalization and cost-cutting was best illustrated in Cardiff, where the two morning and the two evening papers were merged, leaving the 'Western Mail' as the dominant voice in south Wales. 
By 1932 Rothermere's Associated Newspapers controlled seventeen daily and Sunday newspapers, and had a major interest in three others. However, his great rivals boasted twenty-seven titles, notwithstanding Iliffe's personal fiefdom in the midlands, as well as their ownership of Amalgamated Press, purchased from Lord Northcliffe's executors in 1926 under the nose of Rothermere, his younger brother. The latter's loss was the Berry brothers' gain: Amalgamated Press boasted over seventy magazines, a highly lucrative encyclopaedia and book section, and in south London three large printing works and paper mills. To consolidate what was intended as a wholly integrated publishing operation Allied Newspapers next acquired Edward Lloyd Ltd, then one of the largest paper mills in the world. Offsetting these profitable enterprises were the steel and coal holdings inherited after the eldest Berry brother, Lord Buckland, died as the result of a riding accident in 1928. Only two years earlier William had been forced to give up riding after he had suffered a similar accident. 
The Berry brothers had in less than twenty-five years established a vast and diverse media conglomerate; and yet it was not until 1927 that they finally acquired a major London-based daily newspaper. The 'Daily Telegraph' had been a great Victorian success story, setting high standards in its news reporting and attracting suburban middle-class readers. A commitment to solid tory values, plus a reputation for extensive coverage of both major sporting events and salacious court cases, ensured daily sales of nearly 300,000 by the early 1890s. By the late 1920s, however, sales had slipped to about 84,000, and the 'Daily Telegraph' was in urgent need of modernization. Reluctant to invest, the paper's chief proprietor, Lord Burnham, suggested a quick sale to Allied Newspapers. Thus on 1 January 1928 William Berry at last assumed editorial responsibility for a 'quality' national newspaper with enormous potential. While retaining the 'Telegraph''s unequivocal centre-right politics, Berry nevertheless made key editorial and personnel changes, as well as updating the paper's type and format. Not that these changes extended to the front page, which contained news for the first time only in April 1939. Sales slowly grew, and then doubled to 200,000 after the price was halved to 1died on 1 December 1930. The 'Daily Telegraph''s claim to be an up-market leader derived from its ability throughout the years of the National Government to gain readers without having to rely upon the gimmicks and special offers favoured by its more populist rivals. Within seven years circulation had reached 637,000, and on the eve of the Second World War it had increased to 750,000. 
In October 1937 Berry took over the 'Morning Post', the 'Telegraph''s creaking and penurious rival. He paid only $150,000 for the title, but honoured the 'Morning Post''s multiple debts, and provided pensions as well as posts for over half of the displaced editorial staff. His sympathy for unemployed journalists, rooted in his own experience as a young man, belied his reputation as a tough entrepreneur. He genuinely disliked shedding staff, generously rewarding loyalty. Berry respected long service and technical expertise, hence his preference for well-established, experienced men in key editorial posts: Colin Coote was appointed editor of the 'Daily Telegraph' in 1942 after many years at 'The Times', and was pleasantly surprised by the proprietorial light touch. Berry's generally sound judgement and reluctance to interfere contrasted sharply with his Fleet Street peers, not least his own brother. 
In 1929, on the recommendation of Stanley Baldwin, Berry was elevated to the peerage, as Baron Camrose of Long Cross, and it is as Lord Camrose that he is better known. Antipathy towards Rothermere was a factor in Camrose's continued loyalty to the former prime minister, particularly when the Empire Crusade in 1930-31 threatened Baldwin's leadership of the Conservative Party. A close working relationship culminated at the time of the abdication in Baldwin choosing the 'Daily Telegraph' rather than 'The Times' as the unofficial conduit of ministerial opinion. 
Camrose was similarly loyal to Neville Chamberlain, as indeed was Gomer Berry, by now Lord Kemsley. However, after the 1938 Czech crisis the two brothers would increasingly disagree over foreign policy, with Camrose encouraging the 'Daily Telegraph''s sceptical, even hostile, view of the Munich agreement. He urged Chamberlain to bring Winston Churchill back into government, calling for a much stiffer line towards Germany. Meanwhile Kemsley endorsed Downing Street's efforts to keep negotiating with the Nazi regime, going so far as to meet Hitler in Bayreuth as late as July 1939. Such profound differences over appeasement were not unduly damaging to Allied Newspapers, as the company had been amicably dissolved in 1937. Each partner needed a distinct raft of holdings to pass on to his heirs, and Camrose assumed sole control of the 'Daily Telegraph', the 'Financial Times', and Amalgamated Press. In consequence, his brother now became proprietor of the 'Sunday Times'. 
Whatever his views on foreign policy, Camrose was insistent that Neville Chamberlain should remain prime minister. Personal affection and patriotic duty meant acceptance of Chamberlain's request that he sort out press relations within a then chaotic Ministry of Information. However, he resigned as chief assistant to the minister as soon as he had cut a swathe through several layers of bureaucracy, and at the same time rendered himself redundant. Camrose was shaken by Chamberlain's departure in May 1940, yet by that time he had already forged a close relationship with Churchill. Again loyalty brought reward, and he became a viscount in 1941, followed by his brother four years later. The 'Daily Telegraph' supported Churchill, in and out of office, albeit not as slavishly as Kemsley's 'Daily Sketch'. After July 1945, its circulation boosted by the war to about 1.4 million, the 'Daily Telegraph' tested a Labour government increasingly sensitive to middle-class discontent. During this period Camrose acquired serialization rights for Churchill's wartime memoirs as well as negotiating their publication in the United States. Having secured Churchill a $1 million deal, Camrose then ensured that in June 1953 Fleet Street remained silent about the ageing premier's severe stroke. 
Camrose himself wrote only one volume. An uninspiring and unenlightening text, advertised originally as a reference book, which in format it resembles, 'British Newspapers and their Controllers' (1947) was Camrose's contribution to the debate initiated by the royal commission on the press (1947-9). Writing was no doubt a distraction from making money, as were sailing and motoring, his two principal hobbies once he had abandoned the saddle. Yet, for a man who appeared to take himself so seriously, Camrose appears to have been good company: witness his popularity as an after-dinner speaker and his appreciation of a good joke. 
Viscount Camrose died in the Royal South Hampshire Hospital, Southampton, on 15 June 1954, and was cremated at Woking on the 18th. His eldest son, John Seymour Berry (1909-1995), inherited the title, and at the same time became deputy chairman of the 'Daily Telegraph'. Again, however, the driving force was the second son, (William) Michael Berry (1911-2001) (made a life peer, Lord Hartwell, in 1968), who was editor-in-chief from 1954 until 1986, when the paper was sold in straitened circumstances to the Canadian media magnate Conrad Black. The family had offloaded Amalgamated Press as early as 1958. Thus, less than forty years after his death, William Berry's great media empire was no more. 


@@@@@


doc= 30734


Bertie, Francis Leveson, first Viscount Bertie of Thame (1844-1919), diplomatist, was born on 17 August 1844 at 48 Charles Street, Mayfair, the second son of Montagu Bertie, sixth earl of Abingdon (1808-1884), and his wife, Elizabeth Lavinia (died 1858), only daughter of George Granville Vernon Harcourt MP, of Nuneham Courtenay, Oxfordshire. He was educated at Eton College, and entered the Foreign Office by competitive examination in 1863. There he progressed steadily up the professional ladder. From 1874 to 1880 he was private secretary to the Hon. Robert Bourke (afterwards Lord Connemara), parliamentary under-secretary of state for foreign affairs, and in 1878 he was attached to the special embassy of lords Beaconsfield and Salisbury to the congress of Berlin. As acting senior clerk in the Eastern department from 1882 to 1885, years of crisis and tension in central Asia and the Near East, Bertie impressed his superiors with his industry and judgement. Four years later he gained substantive promotion to the rank of senior clerk, and in 1894 became one of the office's two assistant under-secretaries. But sensing that he had reached the peak of his official career in London, he began, after the turn of the century, to seek a post abroad. He had the backing of Edward VII, to whose circle he belonged, and with his assistance he was appointed ambassador to Italy in 1903 and to France in 1905. He retained the Paris embassy for the next thirteen years. 
By the time of his transfer to Rome, Bertie was already well known for his hard work, firm resolve, and strong language. Short in temper as well as stature, he was punctilious of etiquette and prone to Rabelaisian outbursts when others failed to meet his rigorous standards. He was a man of great likes and even greater dislikes, easily offended and slow to forgive. Yet, at Paris, where his junior staff nicknamed him 'the Bull', he was also remembered for his geniality, coarse humour, and love of gossip. Neither the arts nor literature were of great interest to him and he engaged in few outside pursuits other than shooting and fishing. He nevertheless maintained great state at the Paris embassy, to which he claimed a hereditary title. One of his ancestors, Lord Norreys of Rycote, had been an envoy of Elizabeth I to the French court; and, on 11 April 1874, Bertie had married Lady Feodorowna Cecilia Wellesley (1840-1920), daughter of Henry Wellesley, the first Earl Cowley, the British ambassador at Paris during the reign of Napoleon III. As if to affirm his right and status, on full-dress occasions Bertie would drive to the neighbouring Elysee Palace in a sumptuous coach ornamented with silver fittings and with his coat of arms upon its panels. His robust personality and independence of mind drew from Lord Vansittart, who served him at Paris, the tribute that he was 'not only a great ambassador -- and therefore troublesome -- but 'the' very last of the great ambassadors' (Lord Vansittart, 'The Mist Procession', 1958, 53). 
Bertie had, however, found it difficult to adjust to the part of envoy. During his last years at the Foreign Office he had exercised considerable influence in framing policy. He was instrumental in promoting the idea of an Anglo-Japanese alliance as a means of containing Russian ambitions in the Far East, and he fostered the careers of younger diplomats such as his cousin Sir Charles Hardinge. But he was soon bored by Rome and complained that as ambassador he was 'only a d -- d marionette'. Matters were different at Paris. There he became identified with the transformation of the 'entente cordiale' from a colonial settlement to a close working relationship which had all the appearances but, until 1914, few of the formal obligations, of an alliance. A practitioner of 'Realpolitik', Bertie initially saw in Britain's friendship with France a means of preventing the emergence of a hostile continental coalition. Later he came to regard it as a way of maintaining the balance of power in Europe against a potentially dominant Germany. Since the 1890s he had been increasingly critical of German diplomacy and he was one of the first Foreign Office officials to recognize the threat posed to Britain by the expansion of the German navy. He opposed any attempt to improve Anglo-German relations that might sap French confidence in the entente, and when in 1905 and 1911 Germany challenged French pretensions in Morocco he urged the British government to give full support to France. Meanwhile, he remained suspicious of the intentions of France's ally Russia, and was at first inclined to blame Russia and Serbia, rather than Germany and Austria-Hungary, for the war crisis of July 1914. 
Sir Edward Grey, the British foreign secretary from 1905 to 1916, valued Bertie's advice and allowed him wide discretion in handling relations with the French. After the outbreak of the First World War he agreed that Bertie, who had been due to retire in 1914, should remain ambassador until the end of hostilities. But Bertie soon found himself bypassed by ministers and others engaged in military liaison and planning. Unable to exert his authority over the numerous British missions that emerged in Paris, he was drawn into a personal feud with Lord Esher, who posed as a representative of both the War Office and the prime minister, David Lloyd George. The latter had little respect for traditional diplomatic methods and evidently sympathized with Esher's claims that Bertie was ineffective and out of touch with French opinion. When, in April 1918, Bertie fell ill, Lloyd George initiated a political reshuffle involving Bertie's replacement by the secretary of state for war, the querulous Lord Derby. After returning by hospital ship to England, in June 1918, Bertie recovered slowly but, following an operation, died at 9 Mandeville Place, Marylebone, London, on 26 September 1919; he was buried three days later in the chancel wall of Thame parish church. 
Bertie was created KCB in 1902, GCVO in 1903, GCMG in 1904, GCB in 1908, and a privy councillor in 1903. He also received the grand cordon of the French Legion d'honneur. He was raised to the peerage under the title of Baron Bertie of Thame in 1915, and advanced to a viscountcy on his retirement in 1918. He had one son, Vere Frederick (1878-1954), who succeeded him as second viscount. 


@@@@@


doc= 30735


Besant, Annie (1847-1933), theosophist and politician in India, was born at 2 Fish Street Hill in the City of London on 1 October 1847, the only daughter of William Persse Wood (died 1852), underwriter, and his wife, Emily Roche Morris (died 1874). Other relatives were Matthew Wood (1768-1843), lord mayor of London; William Page Wood, Lord Hatherley (1801-1881); Katharine Wood, wife of Captain W. O'Shea and later of C. S. Parnell; and Sir Henry Trueman Wood, her elder brother. The Woods came from Devon, but Annie's grandfather, as a younger son, went to Ireland and settled in Galway. His son, Annie's father, studied medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, where he married Emily, who came of an Irish family whose fortunes had declined. In 1845 they returned to London, where William's family connection secured him a City post. He and Emily had three children; the first two, Henry (1845-1929) and Annie, survived. When Annie was five years old her father died. Although her prosperous Wood in-laws offered support, Emily chose to see Henry through Harrow School without help. She rented a house near the college and took in boys as boarders. There was no room for a precocious little girl, so in 1856, when a wealthy spinster, Ellen Marryat (sister of Captain Frederick Marryat, author of boys' adventure stories), offered to educate Annie, Emily accepted, though she knew how keenly her daughter would feel the separation. 
Miss Marryat had a 'perfect genius' for teaching (Besant, 'Sketches', 16). The children she educated in a handsome, sunny house near Charmouth in Dorset were encouraged to learn from observation and experience. Because her father had made a fortune planting sugar, she had always been accustomed to affluence and social position. Consequently, besides Latin, French, history, and geography, Annie absorbed the unshakeable self-confidence of an English gentlewoman, together with the sense of duty towards others less fortunate than herself that was the evangelical Miss Marryat's guiding principle. Religion was to be Annie's chief preoccupation, recreation, and study, but she was not attracted to Miss Marryat's plain and serviceable faith, preferring ritual. At sixteen, when Miss Marryat dismissed her, she was intensely devout; in her own words, the very stuff of which fanatics were made. She was prevented from converting to Roman Catholicism only by a prior commitment to the Oxford Movement; Edward Pusey, Henry Liddon, and John Keble ruled her faith, while her imagination was engaged by the esoteric practices discussed by the fathers of the church. Their works were in Harrow School Library, where she studied by herself in the brief interval between returning to her mother and her marriage in Hastings parish church on 21 December 1867 to the Revd Frank Besant (1840-1917), son of William Besant, a wine merchant. He was seven years older; an impecunious, parsimonious, stiff-necked young man from Portsea, whose evangelicalism was approvingly described as 'serious' (one of his five brothers became the writer Sir Walter Besant). Digby, their first child, was born on 16 January 1869, followed by Mabel on 28 August 1870. 
In 1872 Lord Hatherley, now lord chancellor, preferred Frank Besant to the living of Sibsey, an agricultural parish in Lincolnshire. The marriage was already under strain from the -- to Annie -- horrid inevitability of a third pregnancy which, she argued, was beyond their means and a result of her having fallen out with God, whose failure to spare Mabel from a near fatal illness in 1871 she regarded as unjust. In vain she sought a remedy for her distress at losing her faith in the works of orthodox theologians, while an appeal in person to one of her heroes earned her a rebuke. 'You have read too much', E. B. Pusey told her (Besant, 'Sketches', 66). She turned for sympathy to the former vicar of Healaugh, Charles Voysey, whose appeal to the privy council against a sentence of deprivation for unorthodoxy had been upheld at a hearing on 11 February 1871 presided over by 'Pontius' Hatherley. Voysey, now head of a 'theistic' church in London, introduced her to the freethinker Thomas Scott, who encouraged her to write a pamphlet, which he published in 1872 as 'On the Deity of Jesus of Nazareth', by the wife of a beneficed clergyman. Fearful that this might put his own living at risk, in the summer of 1873 Frank Besant issued an ultimatum: Annie was to be seen to take holy communion regularly at Sibsey or she was to leave. 'Hypocrisy or expulsion', Annie wrote, 'I chose the latter' (Besant, 'Autobiography', 99). In 1874 she moved to London. 
Annie Besant existed in London on the small allowance awarded to her under a deed of separation dated 25 October 1873 that gave her custody of Mabel, and by what she earned from writing articles in favour of freethought commissioned by Thomas Scott. Digby stayed with his father, who continued vicar of Sibsey until his death in 1917. In 1875 Charles Bradlaugh, president of the National Secular Society, gave her a job writing for the freethought newspaper, the 'National Reformer', and encouraged her to speak in public (her first attempt had been behind locked doors, from the pulpit of Sibsey church). Soon she was second only to Bradlaugh in her ability to fill the halls of science up and down the country. 'What a beautiful and attractive and irresistible creature she was then', the Irish journalist T. P. O'Connor wrote, 'with her slight but full and well-shaped figure, her dark hair, her finely chiselled features... with that short upper lip that seemed always in a pout' ('T. P.'s Weekly', 21 Aug 1903). Her other asset was her voice, which Beatrice Webb described as 'the voice of a beautiful soul' ('Diary', 4.305). 
For the next eleven years Mrs Besant and Bradlaugh, who was fourteen years older, were close and affectionate colleagues. As Ajax she wrote a weekly column, 'Daybreak', in the 'Reformer' about current affairs, while research for lectures such as 'The gospel of Christianity v. the gospel of freethought' and 'The atonement' (of which she disapproved) called for the kind of theological knowledge possessed by a clerk in holy orders. As bishop, Bradlaugh demanded excellence. On 20 January 1877 they set up the Freethought Publishing Company, promising that 'All that we publish we shall defend' ('National Reformer', 4 March 1877). In March the publishing company invited prosecution under the 'Obscene Publications Act' of 1857 by reissuing Charles Knowlton's treatise on birth control, 'The Fruits of Philosophy' (1877). Bradlaugh and Besant aimed to establish the right to circulate information about a subject that, if mentioned at all, was referred to as neo-Malthusianism. At the trial on 18 June 1877 Mrs Besant conducted her own defence; the first woman publicly to endorse 'checks' on conception. In her evidence she stressed that such measures would help to relieve poverty. The pamphlet was judged to be calculated to deprave public morals, but Besant and Bradlaugh were exonerated from any corrupt motive in publishing it. Besant soon produced her own advice, 'The Law of Population' (1878), which sold thousands over the years. But she stood condemned as shameless by the public, and on 18 May 1878 Frank Besant succeeded in an action to reclaim Mabel on the grounds that Annie's views made her unfit to bring up a young girl. Mabel and Digby were reconciled to their mother later on; Frank Besant never was. His vocation ruled out any question of divorce. 
In 1879 Annie Besant was tutored in science by Edward Aveling, and matriculated at London University for a science degree, with which she did not proceed. 
From 1880 to 1886 Annie Besant was caught up in the bitter struggle over Bradlaugh, as an atheist, taking his seat in parliament as MP for Northampton. Her approach to politics, always radical, grew more extreme. In 1884 a new recruit to the freethought movement, Edward Aveling, introduced her to socialist ideas; they began appearing in 'Our Corner', the literary magazine she had just launched. Its art critic after 1885 was George Bernard Shaw, who introduced her to the Fabian Society. In March 1885 she became a member of its executive. When she saw how repressive the Liberal government was in containing unrest in Ireland and among the unemployed in London she also offered her support to the Marxist Social Democratic Federation. These moves upset Bradlaugh, who regarded socialism as a disruptive foreign doctrine. In November 1887 he was further infuriated by her attempt to involve him in the agitation against the Metropolitan Police commissioner's decree closing Trafalgar Square to demonstrations. On Sunday 13 November Annie Besant led one of many processions starting in the East End that aimed to force the square. Her plan, to get arrested in order to test the law, was frustrated when the police, recognizing her, removed her from the vicinity of the violent clashes for which the incident was known as 'bloody Sunday'. She joined W. T. Stead, William Morris, H. M. Hyndman, John Burns, Jacob Bright, and others in the Law and Liberty League, the aim of which was to uphold the right of free speech. In the summer of 1888 its journal, 'The Link', of which she was editor, carried the first account of the strike by the match-girls employed by Messrs Bryant and May to improve their pay and conditions. Besant helped them form a union, the first for women only. In the next two years, by means of publications to which she was connected as editor or contributor -- 'The Link', 'Our Corner', 'Justice', 'The Commonweal', 'National Reformer' -- she became a major figure in the organization of unskilled workers, referred to as the 'new unionism'. She published 'Why I am a Socialist' and 'Modern Socialism' (1886). By then it seemed the striking and effective personality she had become must find a role in politics. She hoped to stand for the newly founded London county council, but women were excluded. In 1889 she was top of the poll for the London school board when she won Tower Hamlets on a socialist platform. Hard work earned her the gratitude of her 'constituents' and the respect of her opponents on the board. In middle-class eyes her reputation, so badly damaged by her association with Charles Bradlaugh, was on the mend. But she refused a second term. 
In 1888 Besant's investigations into what she called the obscure side of consciousness -- dreams, hallucinations -- convinced her that 'there was some hidden thing, some hidden power' which it was her destiny to find (Besant, 'Autobiography', 309). She was disillusioned with other means of improving the human condition, not excepting socialism. In 1889 she put her large house at 19 Avenue Road, St John's Wood, at the disposal of Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, Russian co-founder of the Theosophical Society and author of the celebrated 'Isis Unveiled' (1877) and 'The Secret Doctrine' (2 vols., 1888). The society, which Madame Blavatsky and an American colonel, Henry Steele Olcott (1832-1907), founded in New York in 1875, had its headquarters at Madras. According to Madame, India was open to spiritual regeneration, as was another country under British rule -- one for which Annie Besant had a special feeling -- Ireland. The origins of the Theosophical Society were to be found 'in a group of Superhuman Men, Teachers, Masters, Adepts whose universal knowledge of evolution... constitutes them the wise Initiators and Guides of all movements designed to influence profoundly the growth of the world', a disciple wrote (Ransom, 1). Among these teachers were mahatmas who communicated from their sanctuary in the Himalayas. Besant's acceptance of this new discipline profoundly changed her attitude and beliefs, and astonished her former colleagues. Because Blavatsky held that birth control was incompatible with reincarnation, Besant withdrew all copies of her 'Law of Population'. Celibacy was another requirement of Madame's which seemed to contradict what had gone before -- the world supposed Annie and Bradlaugh had been lovers. It may have been so; however, in her 'Autobiographical Sketches' she revealed that, because her mother preferred her to be innocent, her wedding night had shocked and humiliated her; some thought the harm done to her pride then was never forgiven or repaired. 
'Theosophists appear to me to have sought to rehabilitate a kind of Spiritualism in Eastern phraseology', Bradlaugh wrote in the 'National Reformer' (30 June 1889), believing as he did that many of their allegations were erroneous and their reasoning unsound. Though Annie was offended, she was devastated by his death on 30 January 1891, aged only fifty-eight. Four months later, while she was lecturing in America, Madame Blavatsky also died. She had appointed Mrs Besant 'in the name of the Master, Chief Secretary of the Inner Group of the Esoteric Section, and Recorder of the Teachings' (Farquhar, 268). W. B. Yeats, who was briefly a member of the society at this time, reported that the esoteric section concerned itself with magic. 
On 16 November 1893 Mrs Besant was welcomed to India by Colonel Olcott, president founder of the Theosophical Society. Olcott hoped she would help him administer the many branches established since 1882, when he and Blavatsky moved into the former maharaja's palace on the banks of the River Adyar at Madras. Besant's progress towards Adyar was marked by such enthusiastic crowds that she was encouraged into breaking a taboo -- she called on them to throw off the foreign yoke. The government of India had long since made it clear that theosophists must not engage in politics, a rule that Olcott scrupulously observed. Besant's speeches caused the vernacular press to hail her as the long-awaited leader against the raj. Rebuked by 'The Times' (5 February 1894) for inflammatory remarks, she was called to order by Colonel Olcott. He and she also differed in the emphasis they placed on existing forms of belief: he was an enthusiast for Buddhism, she immersed herself in Hindu religion and culture. As long as he lived Olcott presided at Adyar, while Besant made her home for six months every year at Benares, the sacred Hindu city. She adopted Indian dress, white sari and white sandals (the Hindu mourning colour): she was in mourning for the wrong British rule had done to India. 
For the next fourteen years Mrs Besant was apparently content to carry on her work of regeneration in the field of education. In 1897, in Benares, she founded the Central Hindu College -- monastery and English public school combined -- where boys observed the Hindu way of life while becoming familiar with Western ideas. She published her own translation from Sanskrit of the sacred text the 'Bhagavad Gita' (1895). According to her its most important lesson was that 'union with divine life may be achieved and maintained in the midst of worldly affairs' (A. Besant, 'The Bhagavadgita', 1895, Preface), a call to social duty which Miss Marryat must have approved. 
In 1907, when Colonel Olcott died, the masters chose Mrs Besant to succeed him when she moved to Adyar. As president she reinstated Charles Webster Leadbeater, a former Anglican clergyman, who had resigned from the Theosophical Society in 1906 after charges of perversion -- which were never proved -- were brought against him. Leadbeater was an observant traveller on the astral plane and wrote many books describing his experiences. He and Besant collaborated to produce 'Occult Chemistry' (2nd edn, 1919), when they used clairvoyance to examine atoms. Leadbeater was responsible for the discovery on the seashore at Adyar in 1909 of the fourteen-year-old Brahman boy Jiddu Krishnamurti, whom Mrs Besant brought up as the reincarnation of the World Teacher. Her failure to follow her own advice and keep this discovery secret caused many defections from the society, and was the reason why the Central Hindu College, where a personality cult focused briefly on the boy, ultimately passed from her control (it became the Hindu University). 
Olcott's death enabled Besant to re-enter Indian politics, where she poured her superabundant energy into campaigning for self-government by means of newspapers she controlled -- 'The Commonweal' and 'New India' -- and in lectures such as 'India Bond or Free?' (1926). In 1913 she joined the Indian National Congress. In 1915 she proposed to its executive committee that a network of home rule leagues be set up across the country. While at the outbreak of the 1914-18 war most Indian politicians, including Gandhi, the rising star, called a truce in their opposition to the raj, Besant did not, proclaiming 'England's need is India's opportunity' ('New India', August 1914). In 1916 the tragedy of the Dublin Easter rising incited Mrs Besant to new heights of ferocity and contempt. In May 1917 the viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, bowed to Anglo-Indian demands and interned her at Ootacamund. The historic announcement made at Westminster on 20 August 1917 promising 'the progressive realisation of responsible government in India' ('Hansard 5C', 97, 1917, col. 1695) secured her release, when all India celebrated. Shortly afterwards the secretary of state, Edwin Montagu, granted her an interview at Viceregal Lodge at which she told him of her long-standing efforts to counter racial discrimination and advised him on his future course. 'If only the Government had kept this old woman on our side', he lamented in his diary; 'if only she had been well handled from the beginning' (Montagu, 58-9). On 26 December 1917 she became the first woman president of the 32nd Indian National Congress meeting at Calcutta. It was the summit of her influence, which thereafter declined. She did not get on with Gandhi, whose new method of passive resistance she denounced, and in 1919 she was reviled when she miscalculated her response to the massacre by British soldiers of civilians at Amritsar in the Punjab. But in the 1920s she continued to attend those occasions when the two sides met to discuss the future. Her last official appointment -- a token one -- was in 1928 when she was named a member of the Nehru committee to draft an agreed constitution. 
In this last decade, as president of the Theosophical Society, Besant visited branches all over the world, taking to the aeroplane with enthusiasm. Her support for Leadbeater and his Liberal Catholic church, for which she was visitor, remained a source of controversy. She presided at an annual camp in Holland when the coming of the World Teacher was proclaimed. In 1929 Krishnamurti's repudiation of this role was the blow that effectively ended her career. She retired to Adyar where she was much loved and, as her consciousness declined, faithfully looked after. She died there on 20 September 1933 and was cremated on the shore. 


@@@@@


doc= 30736


Besant, Sir Walter (1836-1901), writer and campaigner for authors' rights, was born on 14 August 1836 at 3 St George's Square, Portsea, the fifth child and third son in a family of six sons and four daughters of William Besant (1800-1879), a wine merchant of Portsmouth, and his wife, Sarah Ediss (1807-1890), daughter of a builder and architect, of Dibden near Hythe, who married in 1825. 
Walter Besant's introduction to literature was through his father's books, which included plays, eighteenth-century novels, Scott, and the works of Dickens then available. Besant's early education was varied. At nine he was taught the classics by a perpetual curate who had had the distinction of being mentioned in the 'Memoirs of Harriette Wilson'. In 1851 he was sent as a boarder to Stockwell grammar school, then affiliated to King's College, London -- a suitable choice for someone expected to become an Anglican clergyman. He enjoyed Stockwell and left in the summer of 1854 as school captain laden with academic prizes. 
Besant entered King's College, London, in October 1854; though he distinguished himself in classics, mathematics, and divinity, it proved a miserable but formative year. His naturally liberal temperament was alienated by the college's thoughtless orthodoxy and poor teaching. He spent much of his free time wandering around the City, an experience that laid the foundation for his lifelong interest in London's history. The year also proved disturbing: he was tempted by the raucous night life of the casinos, the Coal Hole, and the Cider Cellars. He was tempted but did not fall, explaining his preservation as being due to his naivety, his appearance (he was only 5 feet 6 inches tall and suffered from asthma and eczema), and his myopia. In 1855 he moved to Christ's College, Cambridge, which was then being transformed by reforming fellows such as Gunson and Wolstenholme. Here he found broader views and a greater sense of community. His near-contemporaries included Seeley, Skeat, and Calverley. Seeley introduced him to the writings of Coleridge, Carlyle, and Maurice, and these almost certainly confirmed Besant's doubts about Anglican orthodoxy. 
Some of Besant's contemporaries regarded his graduation in the mathematical tripos as eighteenth wrangler in 1859 as a poor reflection of his abilities, but Besant always argued with typical modesty that being bracketed with Calverley for his college's English essay prize was the distinction he really treasured. After a few months trying to make a living from journalism, Besant accepted a post as mathematics master at Leamington College; he was expected to be ordained and become chaplain to the college. An alternative offer of the job of senior professor at the Royal College, Mauritius, provided an escape from both England and its church. Besant spent the next six and half years socializing, climbing, and writing. College life was made difficult by frequent conflicts between its rector and the professors; in time the rector was removed and Besant invited to take over. By then, however, he was on leave in England and disinclined to return. 
Besant had spent much of his free time in Mauritius studying French literature and, in addition to writing his first (rejected) novel, he produced a series of essays which he published under the title 'Early French Poetry' (1868), the first of his many books and articles on French culture and history. In June 1868 Besant was appointed secretary to the Palestine Exploration Fund (PEF), a paid post which he held for eighteen years. The PEF brought him into contact with scholars, publishers, and military men -- including Edward Palmer, professor of Arabic at Cambridge, with whom he wrote 'Jerusalem: the City of Herod and Saladin' (1871). Besant was also involved in 1877 in the investigation of the Shapira forgery. In order to provide the PEF with a steady income Besant organized a system of local societies spread throughout the country; he also set up a small society for the translation and publication of ancient accounts of pilgrimages to the Holy Land. The PEF gave Besant a financial security from which he could launch a career in authorship without, in his own words, 'dependence on the pen, and the pen alone' (W. Besant). 
In 1874 Besant married Mary Garrat Foster Barham ('b'. 1849/50), with whom he had four children. His family life was happy and he extended this to include care for his nephew, Digby, the son of his younger brother the Revd Frank Besant and his estranged wife, Annie Besant. 
In October 1869 James Rice, unsuccessful barrister, historian of the turf, and editor of 'Once a Week', published an unacknowledged, uncorrected article by Besant. Besant protested; Rice made a fulsome apology and asked for more contributions. Rice had devised the plot of a novel on which he invited Besant to collaborate. The result, 'Ready Money Mortiboy', was initially serialized in 'Once a Week' and was published as a three-volume novel in July 1872; it proved a steady seller (140,000 copies by 1902). Between 1872 and 1882 the partnership, as well as numerous short stories, produced nine novels that appeared first in serial form, then in three volumes, and then in series of progressively cheaper one-volume editions. Most successful of all was 'The Golden Butterfly' (1876), which had sold some 300,000 copies by 1912. Rice provided more than plots: he also acted as Besant's unpaid literary agent. On Rice's death in 1882 Besant became, to use his own words, 'a novelist with a free hand' (W. Besant); he also found himself needing an agent. In appointing A. P. Watt to that job in 1883, Besant became one of the earliest major writers to employ a professional literary agent. The majority of his solo fictions were either concerned with current social conditions or were historical novels set in the seventeenth or eighteenth centuries. The latter benefited from his precise sense of period and place. Besant's most famous novel was his first: 'All Sorts and Conditions of Men', serialized in 'Belgravia' from January to December 1882 and published in three volumes in October 1882. The story of two lovers bent on social reform in the East End of London caught the public imagination and the novel continued to sell for decades (250,000 copies by 1905). Besant managed to produce on average a three-decker novel per year until his death; in addition he wrote essays, Christmas books, collections of short stories, and plays (many in collaboration with Walter Herries Pollock). 
Later in his writing career Besant developed a new line in the popular history of London. He published 'London' in 1892, and followed this with other studies ('Westminster', 1895; 'South London', 1898; 'East London', 1901). This interest culminated in 1894 when he was invited by A. and C. Black to undertake a multi-volume, modern version of Stow: 'The Survey of London'. The project was significantly under-funded by the publisher, relied too much on Besant's talents and money -- both already hopelessly over-stretched -- and was later seriously compromised by London county council's even more ambitious project. Ten volumes were finally issued, all posthumously, between 1902 and 1912. 
Besant was a highly clubbable man, an energetic organizer, and an instinctive reformer. He became a freemason in 1862 as a member of the Quatuor Coronati lodge; freemasonry appealed to Besant as 'a religion which requires no priest'. He joined the Savile Club in 1873; he became a member of the Athenaeum in 1887. He helped organize the Rabelais Club (1880-89). In 1884, taking up an idea Charles Leland (Hans Breitmann) had tried in Philadelphia, Besant initiated the Home Arts Association, which established evening schools through the country to promote handicrafts. In 1897 Besant helped to found the Women's Central Bureau of Work which, despite his dislike of the 'new woman', was devised to help middle-class women into employment. In his writings and public speaking Besant campaigned for sweatshop workers in the East End, for the poor in the parish of St James's Ratcliffe, the Ragged School Union, the London Hospital, free public libraries, and the work of the Salvation Army. Besant must be one of the few social critics who witnessed one of his ideas taking literally concrete form. In 'All Sorts and Conditions of Men' he had envisaged a Palace of Delight in the East End devoted to working-class recreation. Using 'All Sorts' as, Besant claimed, a textbook, Sir Edmund Hay Currie combined the Beaumont bequest and $20,000 from the Drapers' Company with money raised from the public to fund the building of the People's Palace on the Mile End Road, opened by Queen Victoria on 14 May 1887. The palace had a 4000-seat concert hall/ballroom, a library, a gymnasium, a swimming-bath, a winter garden, an art school -- and a technical school supported by the Drapers. Besant chaired the library committee, ran the literary club, and edited the 'Palace Journal'. Despite great achievements, all did not go well. Finally the Drapers took over, and later the palace became the East London Technical College and then a college of London University. Concerned to cultivate better understanding with North America, Besant worked in the last two years of his life for the Atlantic Union. In 1895 he was knighted for his charitable work. 
Besant was the prime mover in establishing the first successful collective organization for authors in Britain: the Society of Authors. He chaired the initial meeting on 28 September 1883 and it was he who drew up the plans. By 18 February 1884 a general meeting had been called, a prospectus issued, and fourteen vice-presidents and sixty-eight ordinary members had been enrolled. Perhaps Besant's greatest contribution in this formative period was to get Tennyson to become the society's first president, a morale-boosting coup which helped put the society on the map. Despite this, its growth was slow and Besant had to work tirelessly to encourage collective action in support of copyright law reform, the protection of literary property, and the promotion of the writing profession. For the last Besant had characteristically utopian hopes: he saw the society as a cross between the Academie Francaise and a self-regulating professional body. But he could not limit membership nor stop hopeful but hopeless writers paying for vanity publication. Although later Besant relinquished leadership of the society, his commitment to it increased. In 1890 he established the society's journal, 'The Author', and 'conducted' it (the Dickensian verb is significant) until his death. In 1892 he helped found the Authors Club and he was always to be found in the press promoting with vigorous hyperbole the rights and dignity of authorship. He summarized his views on authorship in 'The Pen and the Book' (1899). 
Amid rampant authorial egos, Besant was a touchingly self-denying figure: more than once he dipped into his own pocket to finance the Society of Authors; at society dinners he would often be found sitting near the bottom of the table. This modesty he also applied to his own writings which, one suspects, he did not believe would last. Despite advocating the retention of copyright, Besant tended to sell his own as soon as he could. Besant died of Bright's disease at his house, Frognal End, Hampstead, London, on 9 June 1901 and was buried in the burial-ground off Church Row in Hampstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 30737


Besicovitch, Abram Samoilovitch (1891-1970), mathematician, was born at Berdyansk, on the Sea of Azov, on 24 January 1891, the fourth child of the family of four sons and two daughters of Samoil Abramovitch Besicovitch and his wife, Eva Ilinichna Sauskan. The family was descended from Karaite Jews, a breakaway sect who accepted the written but not the oral Jewish tradition. Samoil Besicovitch was a jeweller but, after losses by theft, he gave up his shop and became a cashier. All the children were talented and studied at the University of St Petersburg, the older ones in turn earning money and helping to support the younger. Abram Besicovitch graduated in 1912, one of his teachers having been A. A. Markov, who encouraged him to research in probability. 
The last university to be opened before the revolution in Russia was at Perm near the Ural Mountains, established in 1916 as a branch of the University of St Petersburg. In 1917 it became autonomous, and Besicovitch became a professor in the school of mathematics. After Soviet power was established in Perm the university developed rapidly; at the end of the summer of 1918 the Perm Physics and Mathematics Society was founded and started to publish a journal. 
The Russian civil war brought severe hardship in 1919. In 1917 the Japanese mathematician S. Kakeya had posed the following problem: 'Let U=AB be a unit segment in the plane. We are to move U from its original position AB so as to bring it back to its original position with its end points reversed, so that the final position is BA, and during this motion U should sweep out the least possible area.' In the winter of 1919, when there was no fuel, Besicovitch worked on, and solved, another essentially equivalent problem. He held his feet in a box filled with straw to keep warm, and came to the conclusion that the switching of the end points of U can be done within an arbitrarily small area. On the strength of this work he was elected in 1920 to a professorship at the University of Leningrad. 
In the early 1920s Besicovitch was offered a Rockefeller fellowship to work abroad, but his repeated requests to accept this offer were refused by the Soviet authorities. In 1924 he made plans to leave Russia illegally. Originally it was intended that three academics, A. A. Friedmann (famous for his theory of the expanding universe), J. D. Tamarkin, another mathematician, and Besicovitch should be smuggled out together. Friedmann's wealthy father supported the operation, but Friedmann dropped out at the last minute, and died a few months later of typhoid; Tamarkin and Besicovitch crossed safely into Latvia. 
From Latvia, Besicovitch proceeded to Copenhagen, where he used the Rockefeller fellowship to work with Harald Bohr on almost periodic functions. While there Besicovitch visited Oxford, staying for some months in New College with G. H. Hardy who was quick to see his great analytical powers and secured for him a lectureship in the University of Liverpool for 1926. At the earliest opportunity in 1927 Cambridge appointed him a lecturer in the university, in 1928 he became Cayley lecturer, and in 1930 he was elected a fellow of Trinity College; he remained a fellow to the end of his life. He was naturalized in 1931. 
In 1916 Besicovitch had married a mathematician, Valentina Vitalyevna, daughter of Vitaly Doynikov, an administrator. She remained in Russia when he left. There were no children and the marriage was dissolved in 1926. A friend from Perm days, Mariya Ivanova, widow of a mathematician, Aleksandr Denisov, settled in England, and on 5 December 1928 Besicovitch married her elder daughter, Valentina Aleksandrovna, then aged seventeen. They had no family and it was the children of his friends who, throughout his life, enjoyed his affection. 
Besicovitch participated enthusiastically in Cambridge academic and social life. He organized his family life so that he could dine in the masculine setting of high table every evening, and drink port after dinner in the senior common room with bachelors G. H. Hardy and J. E. Littlewood and other Trinity intellectuals. As college lecturer he took a great personal interest in the undergraduates, and in the early 1940s when Winchester public school (which specialized in high-grade mathematics teaching) sent to Trinity an amazing crop of undergraduates which included Freeman Dyson, James Lighthill, and Michael Longuet-Higgins, who were joined by Tony Skyrme from Eton College, Besicovitch was heard to boast proudly that they now had several students of the calibre of Littlewood. He was elected FRS in 1934 and was Sylvester medallist of the Royal Society in 1952. He received in 1930 the Adams prize of the University of Cambridge for his work on almost periodic functions, and in 1950 the De Morgan medal of the London Mathematical Society. 
Throughout his life Besicovitch maintained a great interest in mathematical problems of all kinds. Over many years at Cambridge he ran, for the pleasure and benefit of undergraduates, a weekly 'contest problem': he read and annotated the solutions submitted and his announcement that they had provided perfect solutions encouraged several young mathematicians to develop their analytical powers. He described himself as an expert in the 'pathology' of mathematics. If someone put forward a conjecture which Besicovitch suspected to be untrue, he would keep worrying until he had produced a counter-example. 
Bessi (the name by which he was affectionately known to colleagues and students) was a superb lecturer and supervisor. Even in a full lecture class he could make analysis very personal by picking out a student (without the slightest trace of malice), leading that student to give the obvious answer to a problem, and then progressing gently to a contradiction, showing that the problem was much deeper than appeared at first sight. Those who experienced him as a teacher gained a clearer and more thoughtful attitude to mathematics. 
Besicovitch's book, 'Almost Periodic Functions' (1955), originated in his work with Harald Bohr in 1924-5. He wrote more than 120 papers, shedding new light on many questions in analysis and the classical theory of functions -- he was more likely than many to solve problems which seemed intractable. Few mathematicians, facing such problems, can rid themselves of preconceived ideas about the nature of the solution and possible methods of obtaining it, but Besicovitch could keep an open mind and envisage unexpected results. He was a master of intricate construction which could reveal paradoxical truths. He did not strive after abstractions and generalities; he was a problem-solver, not a system-builder. His formal statements had to be in the notation of analysis; the underlying mental pictures were geometrical, often expressible in simple language. This is well illustrated by his work on fractional dimensions, which has led to the extraordinarily fruitful development of fractals in the hands of Benoit Mandelbrot. A point having no magnitude (Euclid) is of dimension 0. A straight segment is of dimension 1; so is the circumference of a circle. The inside of a circle or the surface of a sphere has dimension 2. In 1919 Hausdorff defined dimensions of fractional order. A suitably sparse set of points on a line could have a measure of dimension (say) one half. The idea could be extended to sets of points, curves, and other figures in space. 
For a long time Besicovitch was the author or joint author of nearly every paper on the subject, and hence Mandelbrot decided to use the term Hausdorff-Besicovitch dimension to denote the dimension of a fractal. Pathological sets of points such as Weierstrass curves which are continuous but not differentiable at all points, the set of points belonging to a random walk, sets defined by Cantor, Koch, and others, can all be assigned a fractal dimension. Neither Hausdorff nor Besicovitch dreamed that their ideas would be of practical use in the real world. It was Mandelbrot who drew attention to the many occurrences of fractals in nature -- shapes of coastlines, mountainous landscapes, clusters of stellar matter, turbulence, percolation, polymer chains, and so on; he initiated a new field which grew with extraordinary rapidity. 
Besicovitch was exceptionally gentle as an oral examiner of doctoral students, and if he saw that a student was getting into trouble with one of the other examiners he would search out a method of intervening which would put the student at his ease. Since he spoke Russian at home, Besicovitch's command of English remained stationary from his early days at Cambridge. For him the definite and indefinite articles were superfluous. His individual words were usually correct -- it was their assembly and arrangement which were unusual, although he always managed to convey the intended meaning correctly. 
Besicovitch remained very suspicious of the Soviet Union. In the early 1930s his good friend the distinguished physicist Peter Kapitza was working at the Mond Laboratory, and used to return to Russia every summer. Besicovitch disapproved strongly of these return visits, and warned Kapitza that he would go back to Russia once too often, which is exactly what happened: on one such visit the Soviet authorities refused to grant Kapitza an exit visa (but provided him with a superb laboratory and excellent facilities). 
'A mathematician's reputation rests on his bad proofs' was one of Besicovitch's surprising aphorisms. He wished to convey the idea that the originator of a result in mathematics usually establishes it by long and complicated proofs. It is later, less original workers who undertake the process of simplification. About professors at English universities he said: 'No one is elected to a professorship unless he has been respectable for at least three years. Once he has become respectable, he no longer produces creative work.' Nevertheless, at the age of fifty-nine, in 1950, he succumbed to the temptation of succeeding J. E. Littlewood, the first holder of the Rouse Ball chair at Cambridge. A colleague remembered that on his thirty-sixth birthday Besicovitch, thinking that his own creative resources were drying up, proclaimed that he had had four-fifths of his life. Reminded of this on his appointment to the chair, Besicovitch sent a postcard in reply: 'numerator was correct!'. 
After his retirement in 1958 Besicovitch remained active in teaching and research and spent eight successive years as visiting professor in the United States. He then returned to live in Trinity College. Towards his eightieth year his health failed and he died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 2 November 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 30738


Baker, James Franklin Bethune- (1861-1951), theologian, was born on 23 August 1861 in Birmingham, the third son of Alfred Baker, surgeon, and his wife, Emmeline Bethune, daughter of George Armitage. Charles Baker (1803-1874), an instructor of deaf people, and Franklin Baker (1800-1867), a Unitarian minister, were his uncles; his aunt was the mother of Archbishop E. W. Benson. In 1884 he assumed the additional name of Bethune. 
Bethune-Baker was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and gained a classical scholarship at Pembroke College, Cambridge. In 1884 he took a first class in part one, in 1885 a third class in part two of the classical tripos; in 1886 a first class in part two of the theological tripos. In 1886 he won the George Williams prize and submitted an unsuccessful (and so unpublished) essay for the Burney prize in which his later modernist theology is clearly foreshadowed; in 1887 he submitted a successful essay entitled 'The influence of Christianity on war', and in the following year won the Norrisian prize. In 1886 he returned to teach at King Edward's School; and in 1888, although an anxious request for reassurance of his orthodoxy came from the dean of Pembroke, E. J. Heriz Smith, he was ordained deacon, accepting a title at St George's, Edgbaston. He was ordained priest in the next year and in 1891 was elected to a fellowship at Pembroke, which he retained until his death. He was also made dean, an office to which in 1906 he was not reappointed in consequence of complaints concerning his attitude to biblical criticism. Thereafter, although continuing to attend college chapel regularly, he never again felt confident to preach there, except on the occasion of a memorial service for his friend A. J. Mason, master of Pembroke College and canon of Canterbury. Bethune-Baker married in 1891 Ethel (died 1949), the daughter of Furneaux Jordan, a surgeon, of Birmingham, and they had one son, who died as a schoolboy at Marlborough. 
Bethune-Baker proceeded BD in 1901 and DD in 1912. His scholarly reputation was established by 'The Meaning of Homoousios in the Constantinopolitan Creed' (1901) and his 'Introduction to the Early History of Christian Doctrine' (1903), which became a standard textbook. Through the Archbishop's Mission to Assyrian Christians a copy of a Syriac manuscript containing the 'Bazaar of Heraclides' by Nestorius came into his hands; with the aid of a translation by Dom Richard Hugh Connolly (whose name did not appear on account of the papal anti-modernist decrees of 1907) he wrote 'Nestorius and his Teaching' (1908), claiming that Nestorius did not hold the doctrines attributed to him and was wrongly condemned by the ecumenical council of Ephesus in 431. In 1911 he succeeded W. R. Inge as Lady Margaret professor. Except for his time-absorbing work as editor of the 'Journal of Theological Studies' (1903-35), by which he guided and maintained the standards of British theology for a generation, his interest now turned from personal contributions to learning and was more devoted to teaching in Cambridge and to the advancement of liberal Christianity. In 1913-14 he became involved in the controversy concerning clerical orthodoxy in the Church of England. His open letter to Charles Gore, 'The Miracle of Christianity' (1914), pleads for the logical consequences of the liberal view of the 'Bible' adopted by Gore himself in 'Lux mundi' (1889). This avowal of sympathy with the 'critical school' led his friend Bishop J. R. Harmer of Rochester to request his resignation from the office of examining chaplain, which he had held since 1905; believing that hope lay only in the coexistence of conservative and modernist views he refused, and Harmer (who did not share this belief) relieved him of his post. The claim that the Anglican principle of comprehensiveness extended not only to the unity of Catholic and protestant but also to that of conservative and modernist he later expounded in 'Unity and Truth in the Church of England' (1934). His dogmatic beliefs are best seen in 'The Faith of the Apostles' Creed' (1918) and in a collection of essays, published at the suggestion of S. C. Roberts, 'The Way of Modernism' (1927). He advocated an evolutionary, immanentist approach to the incarnation and free enquiry in historical criticism, rejecting as irreligious the view that the virgin birth and the resurrection are truths to be accepted on supernatural authority by all believers. He lacked the philosophical equipment to make these writings wholly successful, but their subject-matter was his deepest concern. He was examining chaplain (1924-35) to Bishop E. W. Barnes, of whose 'Rise of Christianity' (1947) he disapproved. He was elected FBA in 1924 and resigned his professorship in 1935. He took part in college meetings almost until the end of his life and still drove his car in his eighty-ninth year. 
In the teaching of theology at Cambridge, Bethune-Baker played a leading part, encouraging in his pupils an attitude of detachment and impartiality. In 1922 he founded the Cambridge D Society for the discussion of philosophical and systematic theology. He had a keenly critical mind, a strong, sometimes obstinate personality, and a satirical tongue which enjoyed opposition and in some induced alarm. He had also a capacity for deep and generous friendship, and above all a profound concern for the presentation of the faith in a form tenable to the modern mind. 
Bethune-Baker died in Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 13 January 1951. 
Henry Chadwick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30739


Betterton, Henry Bucknall, Baron Rushcliffe (1872-1949), politician, was born at Woodville, Blackfordby, Leicestershire, on 15 August 1872, first son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Henry Inman Betterton (1844-1895), JP and brewer, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Samuel Bucknall. Educated at Rugby School (1886-90) and Christ Church, Oxford, he obtained a fourth class in modern history in 1893. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple at the age of twenty-four and practised as a lawyer for twenty years. On 19 December 1912 he married Violet, widow of Captain Hervey Greathed of the 8th hussars, and daughter of John Saunders Gilliat, formerly governor of the Bank of England. They had two daughters. Betterton was appointed OBE in 1918 and CBE in 1920 for his services as a member of the advisory board of the war trade intelligence department during the war. He entered politics as the Conservative member for the Rushcliffe division of Nottinghamshire in December 1918. He was parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Labour during the Conservative administrations of 1923 and 1924-9 and was created a baronet in July 1929. In August 1931 Betterton was appointed minister for labour in the National Government of Ramsay MacDonald. It was during his three years in this role that Betterton made his most significant contribution to the shape of British government. 
After earlier being a determined opponent of the centralization of unemployment relief, Neville Chamberlain, the chancellor of the exchequer, in 1932 proposed the creation of a new statutory commission which would take national control of the assessment and payment of relief for the able-bodied unemployed, taking away the powers previously held by local government. Despite this proposal generally being enthusiastically received within government, Betterton stood out in opposition, and for over a year he 'fought a dogged rearguard action' through the cabinet committee structure to change Chamberlain's plans (Lowe, 159). His criticisms were both practical and philosophical, but his main objection was that unemployment was an industrial problem and should be treated as such, while the new scheme simply 'applied Poor Law methods, through a Poor Law Commission, in Poor Law language' (Marquand, 733). Betterton, it has been said, was 'on excellent terms with labour's left wing' (Lowe, 35) and was 'sympathetic to the objections raised by the socialists regarding the 'means test'' and its use in unemployment relief ('The Times', 19 Nov 1949, 7). Betterton argued strongly for the principle, which was important in the development of later welfare structures, of distinguishing between the needs and treatment of those out of work for industrial reasons and those requiring support because of sickness, old age, or other factors. In this he received the support of MacDonald, and on a number of points in cabinet 'Betterton inflicted on Chamberlain a series of rare defeats' (Lowe, 155). Betterton took through parliament the amended proposal as the 'Unemployment Act' of 1934, and in June 1934 resigned from parliament to become the first chairman of the Unemployment Assistance Board established by the act, where he remained until 1941. 
Betterton's character and his response to the needs of the unemployed in the years of economic depression were suggested by the fulsome praise he later received from both Labour and Liberal opponents. Viscount Addison said the labour movement 'had known him as a most sympathetic Minister of Labour in an exceedingly trying period' ('The Times', 25 Nov 1949, 6). The Liberal Viscount Samuel described him as 'a man of benevolent mind, boundless good will, and unremitting devotion to the public service' (ibid.). In January 1935 he was created Baron Rushcliffe of Blackfordby, and in 1941 he was appointed GBE. He had been sworn of the privy council in 1931. Rushcliffe served on many committees and was chairman of the one which in 1943 determined an improved wage scale for British nurses which became known as the Rushcliffe scale. Addison said the nurses of Britain owed Rushcliffe 'a great debt' ('The Times', 25 Nov 1949, 11). He was also active as chairman, from 1944, of the special committee on legal aid and legal advice, whose recommendations were broadly enacted in the 1949 'Legal Aid and Advice Act', which introduced the modern system of legal aid. 
Rushcliffe's first wife died in 1947. In April 1948 he married Inez Alfreda, Lady Snagge (died 1955), whose first marriage had been dissolved, and who was the daughter of Alfred Lubbock of Par, Cornwall. They had no children. Rushcliffe died on 18 November 1949 at his home, The Gables, Blatchington Hill, Seaford, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 30740


Bevan, Aneurin (1897-1960), politician, was born on 15 November 1897 at 32 Charles Street, Tredegar, in the Sirhowy valley, Monmouthshire, the sixth of the ten children of David Bevan, collier, and his wife, Phoebe, daughter of John Prothero, colliery blacksmith. Two of Bevan's five brothers did not survive infancy; a third, the family's first-born, had died at the age of eight, and a much loved younger sister died in her teenage years. These were some of the hard and established facts of the industrial revolution, by which, Bevan later wrote, 'we were surrounded'. What also circumscribed the family was the economic and social power of the Tredegar Iron and Coal Company, for which all of the male members of his family (and two-thirds of the adult males of Tredegar, population 25,000 and a company town in every sense as he grew up there) worked underground. The key to Bevan's life and his political direction lies within this communal and collective framework rather than in any individual biographical differences between himself and the people of whom he sought to be truly representative. 
Bevan's generation, in particular, was formed both by the dynamic economic expansion of the south Wales coalfield, with all its attendant social possibilities, before the First World War and by the post-war decline of the steam coal export trade, which thwarted that potential for cultural change which some had sensed all around them. When David Bevan died from pneumoconiosis in his favourite son's arms in 1925, he was asking for the 'Daily Herald' and news of John Wheatley, socialist minister responsible for housing in the first Labour government of 1923-4, but his own youthful world had been one of liberal politics, Baptist religion, and that Welsh-language culture which had permeated the respectable working class of late Victorian times. At the end he was following his son, whose secular socialism broke with all those things. At home the boy, quickly and everlastingly known as Nye, was in thrall, as were all the family, to his formidable and competent mother -- homemaker and dressmaker supreme -- whom, in his sturdy frame and practical manner, he resembled. At school (Sirhowy elementary), an intense stammer and an unsympathetic schoolmaster ensured that his latent intellectual gifts were stifled and, barely fourteen, he left in 1911 to join his father and brother in the local colliery. 
Bevan found himself on a fast learning curve. In these years before 1914 south Wales was in turmoil. Serious rioting had broken out in the densely populated central coalfield in 1910 as strikes led to social disturbance, and in 1911 Tredegar itself had seen attacks, with some anti-Jewish overtones, on shopkeepers. Bevan began to listen to those around him who were trying to make sense of the connecting elements in the surrounding chaos. His early literary taste for romance and adventure led him to the Tredegar Workmen's Institute and the discovery of an author such as Jack London who combined the romantic with the political; but his formative education was undertaken by a local Independent Labour Party (ILP) enthusiast Walter Conway, who also worked with him to eradicate his stammer in public speaking, and by Sydney Jones, a slightly older man based further down the Sirhowy valley at Blackwood, who took weekly social science classes, based on the Central Labour College's teaching, which Bevan assiduously attended. The philosophy he imbibed was an eclectic mix of Marxist economic theory, German monism via Dietzgen, workers' control as 'syndicalism' (or 'industrial unionism' in its Welsh guise), and a materialist conception of history. In the circumstances of his one-industry time and place, it served as both illumination and a practical way forward, provided there was also a mass union membership educated for direct action. By 1916 Bevan, a skilled collier, had become chairman of his local lodge which, in turn, was combining with other lodges in wartime protests against inadequate provision of affordable housing and food, in which he proved prominent. A comb-out of the pits for conscripts saw Bevan ordered before a tribunal for refusing his military call-up: he produced a medical certificate for nystagmus (an eye disease suffered by miners) and the case was dismissed. 
Bevan was by now active in anti-war campaigns across south Wales, and already a delegate to the conferences of the South Wales Miners' Federation (SWMF) in Cardiff. That body, along with the National Union of Railwaymen, financed the Central Labour College in London, to which selected men were dispatched. His own attendance there, from 1919 to 1921, was scarcely that of a model student, but neither the rigid orthodoxies of the lecturing nor the constraints on his time (better spent, he felt, on the sights, sounds, and experiences of the capital than on the drummed-in pages of 'Kapital') were in line with the impatient, confident personality which his experiences had formed. He could not wait to return to Tredegar and effective action. 
Bevan reflected in his quasi-autobiographical credo, 'In Place of Fear' (1952), that in the post-war crisis the industrial workers of Britain, and especially the miners whose national strike of 1919 was averted by a royal commission whose majority report subsequently advocated nationalization of the mines, had been duped and defeated by the government at the behest of a capitalist class. This defeat was complete before 1921 had ended. For Bevan the general strike and miners' lock-out of 1926 was a tragic replay of a fight already lost. In his own life at the time he had plenty of opportunity to reflect on how late, and so how ineffective, direct action had been. In effect, his own leadership attributes were now used to agitate on behalf of the unemployed in whose ranks he found himself: there was some intermittent work as a labourer for the council; briefly, until one and then another pit closed, as a checkweighman on the men's behalf; and, from early 1926, paid work as a disputes agent for the local miners. He learned, with some bitterness, of the loss of benefit attendant on a sister's meagre income entering the household and saw, with even more bitterness, the social haemorrhaging of coalfield communities through migration. His own reputation, as an effective organizer and distinctive platform speaker, grew, especially during the long dispute of 1926 when he attended and spoke as a delegate at national conferences of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain. Towards the end of that desperate year, with appalling conditions of life in south Wales and the imminent destruction of the SWMF, the collective organization to which he had devoted most of his time and hopes, he was one of those who urged a negotiated return to work. It was a stance which marked him out from his close ally and contemporary Arthur Horner, the communist leader from the Rhondda who became president of the SWMF in 1936 and general secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) in 1946. It has led some to the view that it was from this point on that Bevan put direct-action tactics behind his youthful self in favour of electoral politics. The reality is rather that he spurned pre-ordained defeat in 1926 while never rejecting a twin-track route to the empowerment of the working class. 
Thus, as early as 1922 Bevan had stood for and won a seat as a Labour councillor on the 'independent'-run Tredegar urban district council. Although there was not a Labour majority on this council until 1928, the year in which he was returned as a county councillor from the town for Monmouthshire, his activities through the 1920s were vigorously directed to raising political consciousness, through all manner of non-political ancillary activities, in order to root and sustain the Labour Party in Tredegar's locality. His approach to this -- ranging from arguments for superior municipal housing and open public spaces, parks, and leisure activities to defence of the miners' own pre-war Tredegar Medical Aid Society and denunciation of the bureaucratic grip of the poor-law commissioners ('a new race of robbers') who replaced the local, and too sympathetic, board of guardians -- was wide-ranging and imaginative. Much of the generous, expansive vision of the later Labour minister in power is directly traceable to the powerless, frustrated Labour councillor of these years. Some of his frustration, early and late, was with what he consistently regarded as an insufficiently radical Labour Party. However, at no time, despite his close personal and even philosophical links, did he consider joining the Communist Party which, though strongly supported in parts of south Wales, was not a force on his own patch and which, besides, he considered a national political cul-de-sac. Other traditional openings for young aspirants to political influence were increasingly closed as the SWMF shed members and official positions in the deepening economic crisis that turned south Wales into a region of long-term, mass unemployment until the Second World War. In 1929 the opportunity came, not entirely fortuitously, to stand for parliament in the Ebbw Vale constituency, which also embraced Rhymni and Tredegar. 
Evan Davies, a miner's agent of the old school, had held the seat since 1920. His increasingly dilatory behaviour, allied to a political stance so moderate as to be deferential, infuriated the young turks of Tredegar, marshalled as they had been by Bevan into a debating society-cum-cell, the Query Club. When one of the quizzers, the diminutive and mischievous Archie Lush, became Davies's agent in 1927, the criticism mounted from within. Lush persuaded the SWMF's executive council to take the unusual step of balloting the local miners' lodges in the district as to which candidate should be preferred in the forthcoming election. Bevan topped the list on all three ballots held as others fell out and, as the miners' nominee, was adopted by the divisional Labour Party. The general election was called a month later and he entered parliament, aged thirty-two, in May 1929 as the member for Ebbw Vale. 
From this point Archie Lush, Bevan's closest friend, acted as his eyes and ears in the constituency. Bevan was freed to make his impact on the wider stage. As an untried back-bencher in Ramsay MacDonald's second Labour government (1929-31) that would not be easy, but Bevan had physical presence -- almost 6 feet, with open blue-grey eyes and a shock of black hair -- to match a debater's keen wit and a passionate anger scarcely banked down by the proprieties of the House of Commons, whose master, within a decade, he would become. It proved to be the natural forum for his forensic style and the scathing logic he deployed against opponents. Here, more than anywhere, Bevan's crafted performances gave the lie to accusations of demagoguery. He was, on the contrary, noticed immediately by the hallmark of his speeches: thoughtfulness brought to the point of originality by sincerity. He was not only noticed but taken up by talent spotters such as Lord Beaverbrook, whose entourage was as wide as it was unlikely, and by intellectuals in the party such as John Strachey, who were as uneasy as he was with MacDonald's consensual drift. His reputation, in the house, was made by full-fronted attacks on figures as major as his fellow countryman Lloyd George and, throughout the decade, by reminding the Commons of the unresolved condition of the unemployed in the so-called 'special areas'. At Westminster he cut a rather too raffish figure in the eyes of staider MPs. He clearly delighted in mixing with writers, actors, and journalists amid a metropolitan whirl. Bevan's social tastes and, soon, relatively high living, raised eyebrows and elicited quips (a 'Bollinger Bolshevik', a 'ritzy Robespierre', opined a not unfriendly Brendan Bracken, Churchill's close adviser). Yet his own self-assurance, allied to an unshakeable set of political principles and firm practice, left him as immune to these barbs as to the later, angrier comparisons with Hitler (from Gaitskell) and references to the 'Tito from Tonypandy', Churchill's wartime 'squalid nuisance'. Indeed, it was Bevan's very ability to combine social self-confidence with an abiding contempt for existing social structures which made him so dangerous an opponent in the cut and thrust of parliamentary debate: he oozed triumphalism, and he was, whenever the circumstance threatened to translate it into reality, hated more deeply for this by his political opponents than any other figure in mainstream politics in the twentieth century. 
For Bevan, relations with his own party were often equally fraught. As MacDonald's Labour government floundered by 1931 into a shape-shifting National Government (the politics of coalition leads to 'the knacker's yard', thought Bevan) he more than flirted with the dynamism of Oswald Mosley's New Party and, by 1933, though Mosley's extra-parliamentary route to the far right had been quickly detected and rejected, Bevan was, in a ravaged south Wales, advocating workers' freedom groups as a kind of militia. If in volatile times this activity was not divorced from a wider context of monster demonstrations, stay-down strikes, and direct clashes with a confrontational police force, it was none the less typical of his impatience with the form of intra-parliamentary politics. As the international crisis deepened Bevan, along with other Labour Party left-wingers, urged an interventionist stance, as in the Spanish Civil War which he visited at first hand in 1938, on both his own party leadership and Neville Chamberlain's government. He was prominent in 1937 in the unity campaign, pulling together allies to the left, including even the Communist Party, as the Socialist League under the leadership of Sir Stafford Cripps ventured to break the mould of party stultification. That ended, with the league's dissolution, when Labour's national executive committee (NEC) forbade platform-sharing with communists; then, in early 1939, as Europe lurched towards war, the groundswell for a popular front proved irresistible to the grass roots but not to the party leadership. Cripps, from within the NEC but intransigent on these issues, was formally expelled from the party along with others, including one of his chief acolytes, Nye Bevan. 
In all of this Bevan, whose membership was restored after a formal undertaking by him in December 1939, was a reluctant, if distinctly unruly, rebel. His contention was twofold: that the Labour Party required the invigoration of extra-parliamentary agitation to give it the purpose and courage it so singularly lacked as an opposition, but that, by historical circumstance, it was the chosen instrument of the British working class and, as such, alone capable of delivering any lasting change in the distribution of power. He resolutely, in the 1930s as in the 1950s, defended the right to argue, on an organized basis, for constitutional change within the party, but never willingly left it. Hence, the scorn with which he treated the decision of Jennie Lee to cling to the ILP when that founding section of the Labour Party defected, in righteous purity, in 1932. 

Jennie Lee (1904-1988) had entered the House of Commons in the same year as Bevan, but through an earlier by-election, in 1929, as the ILP member for North Lanark. Her gender, handsome looks, and fiery oratory made her a much better known figure in the public eye than Bevan was in those early years. They became friends rather than close confidants, and with more wariness on her part than his. Besides, she was deeply in love and soon caught up in a passionate affair with a man twenty years her senior, the influential Labour MP Frank Wise, whose marriage just about accommodated their open relationship. When Frank Wise died suddenly in 1933, Jennie and Nye pulled together politically as well as emotionally, quickly grew closer, and began to live together. Both railed against social conventions and both, but especially Jennie, insisted on maintaining freedom, sexual and professional, outside any partnership. None the less, and with this agreed, they married in 1934. Jennie Lee did indeed pursue a full-hearted career: as a journalist after the loss of her seat in 1931, and again, after the Second World War, as Labour MP for Cannock from 1945 to 1970. There is no doubt, though, that in the 1940s she increasingly recognized the scale of Bevan's capabilities and that she worked, with a growing number of disciples, notably the young journalist and MP in the 1945 intake Michael Foot, to help realize through his genius the ambitions they all shared. Bevan, initially somewhat reluctantly, accepted that there would be no children born to the marriage. Theirs was, in all other respects, and in the various lively homes they made and shared in London and in the country, a love affair that deepened and a significant alliance. 
For his conduct as an irrepressible and much maligned critic during the war, Bevan needed all the support he could find. It was now that his mark was truly made as a politician of national stature. It was Bevan's distinction to use the freedom of the back benches to uphold parliament's right to question the executive even when a wartime coalition cabinet enjoyed widespread popular support as a government of national unity. This, he argued, was the essence of democracy. The case was made weekly in 'Tribune', the paper to which he had contributed anonymously since 1937 and which, from 1941 to 1945, he edited. George Orwell, literary editor and columnist from 1943, affirmed the 'progressive and humane' stance of the paper as an unusual and principled one. Bevan personalized the principle by now pitting himself against both the rotundities of Churchill's rhetoric and the allegedly expert direction of the war. On the latter he urged greater energy in prosecuting any advantage that occurred and was an early advocate of a second front as soon as the Soviet Union entered the war in June 1941. He depicted Churchill as an orator trapped by the traditions and the interests of the past, incapable of envisaging or desiring a post-war settlement not carved up by the great powers. He put himself forward as a tribune representative of 'the hope and aspirations for the future' on both domestic and international fronts. Nor did he confine his critique to overt Conservatism; in 1944 when regulation 1AA, to be installed by Ernest Bevin as wartime minister of labour, sharply restricted the individual's right to strike, he launched a fierce polemic against both the impracticality of the measure and its sinister precedent for a society in which working-class liberties had so largely derived from such freedom of action. 
The anger directed against Bevan came, in large measure, from those in his own party whose trade union affiliation was affronted by his defence of the 'robust, dignified' rank and file against the 'cynical, irresponsible trade union official'. His libertarian stance was never clearer -- 'I do not represent the big bosses at the top', he told the Commons on 28 April 1944, 'I represent the people at the bottom, the individual men and women... this Regulation is the enfranchisement of the corporate Society and the disfranchisement of the individual' ('Hansard 5C', vol. 399, col. 1072). Bevan led the parliamentary revolt, substantial when dissidents and abstainers from within the Labour Party were added together, and again faced up to calls for his expulsion. Instead, with gritted teeth the NEC required a written promise to toe the party line in future. He gave it, and by the end of that climactic year he had for the first time been elected by the constituency section of the party to the NEC, Labour's governing body. When he had been elected in 1928 to the Monmouthshire county council the 'Western Mail' had labelled him in its report as a 'Socialist critic of Socialists' (Foot, 1.83). The sentiment was just as applicable in 1944; in the sixteen years of travail and achievement which now lay before him Bevan unrelentingly offered up the constructive critique he felt his party needed and the British working class demanded. 
Bevan threw himself into the general election of July 1945 with an optimistic conviction of victory few senior members of his party shared. He was vindicated by the landslide return of Clement Attlee's administration and by the offer, surprising to many, of a cabinet post as minister of health and housing. He joined the cabinet as not only its youngest member but also its most intriguing appointment. 
Bevan's tenure of this office -- over five years as it turned out -- would not be considered a failure even if his record was judged on housing alone. At a time of considerable shortage of building materials and burdened by unwieldy layers of administrative and procedural responsibilities, Bevan none the less oversaw the building of over 1 million permanent homes down to 1950. Crucially, they were homes built to high standards -- inside lavatories, three bedrooms, gardens -- which neither his successor nor the Conservative government, which built more and more quickly, chose to maintain. Yet for Bevan, 'a rabbit-warren accommodation leads to a rabbit-warren mind' (Foot, 1.53), as he said in 1925. It was axiomatic that the first Labour government with a public-housing policy to inaugurate since John Wheatley in the 1920s should fulfil it with regard 'to the artistic and aesthetic aspect' of workers' housing, which Bevan had stressed as a young councillor in the even more benighted 1920s. 
Relative success as a housing minister was, of course, eclipsed by the central achievement of Bevan's career -- an achievement on which his reputation, then and now, squarely rests -- the creation of the National Health Service (NHS). As minister of health he inherited a ramshackle structure of health care -- notably a mixed provision of voluntary and municipal or public hospitals administered by literally hundreds of separate local authorities -- and a set of vague proposals emanating from his wartime predecessor, Henry Willink, which failed to address the role of the general practitioner in any unified service. Bevan gripped the problem from the outset. By a combination of intellectual audacity and cautious practice he drove his proposals through cabinet by the end of the year, published his 'National Health Service Bill' with accompanying white paper in March 1946, and saw the NHS legislation become law on 6 November 1946. It would be another two years before the NHS was fully instituted, on 5 July 1948, and that intervening period revealed just how radical the minister was being and just how virulent was the opposition he would arouse. 
In essence Bevan proposed to nationalize the entire hospital service under a system of regional hospital boards and to abolish the sale and purchase of medical practices, with GPs becoming, in part, salaried employees of the state. The administrative structure devised to implement it was certainly complex, since various local government and professional interests needed to be assuaged by the plan, but the concept of a national service underlined Bevan's determination to ensure universal access to first-class care, free at the point of delivery, not a minimum subsistence level of care unevenly distributed. Costs would be met by general taxation. 'Bevan's model', wrote Charles Webster, the official historian of the NHS, 'was... the private wing of the voluntary hospital rather than the poor law infirmary' ('The National Health Service: a Political History', 1998, 24). 
The major stumbling block to full implementation of the plan was the medical profession itself. The British Medical Association fought a bitter rearguard action and, as late as February 1948, a plebiscite of their members showed an 8 to 1 majority in favour of boycotting the entire scheme. Bevan railed, privately and publicly, against their short-sighted self-interest. He also moved to disrupt any overall medical coalition by a sequence of concessions and compromises. Consultants, influential in their potential role as peacemakers within the profession, were allowed, on full- or part-time contracts, to engage in private practice and to use the old voluntary pay-bed system within the new NHS, so non-co-operation from that quarter was averted. Bevan's much quoted acerbic comment 'I stuffed their mouths with gold' was, however, made in 1955 or 1956 (C. Webster, ed., 'Aneurin Bevan on the National Health Service', 1991, 218-22). In so far as GPs were concerned Bevan refused to budge over ending the sale and purchase of practices but, along with a number of minor compromises over conditions of service, he yielded over the small element of salaried remuneration with the further promise of legislating to rule out the future introduction of a salaried service. Arguably these concessions, effectively ending any significant opposition to the proposals, killed off any hopes of a fully socialist NHS (health centres staffed by salaried doctors and run by locally elected authorities) as proposed by the Socialist Medical Association. Unarguably, the NHS was warmly welcomed by the British public -- Bevan could announce on its launch day that almost 94 per cent of the population had already enrolled -- for whom it rapidly became a touchstone of national identity. Bevan had demonstrated creative political skills as a minister and accomplished practice as an administrator. His star within the cabinet was clearly an ascendant one. 
Bevan chose this very moment to make the most notorious, possibly most damaging, speech of his career. At a time when Attlee urged his ministers, in general, to present the foundations of the welfare state as an act of national reconciliation, Aneurin Bevan, on 4 July 1948, at Belle Vue, Manchester, claimed the reforms as the conscious rebuttal of a pre-war Britain and its condemnation of 'millions of first class people to semi-starvation'. It was 'the Tory Party that inflicted those bitter experiences... [and]... so far as I am concerned they are lower than vermin' (Foot, 2.238). From now on, the 'Minister for Disease', as Churchill labelled him (ibid., 1.242), subjected to physical and verbal abuse by tories, was also seen as uncontrollable by key elements within his own party. Notwithstanding the probable spontaneity of the phraseology, both factions were instinctively right in thinking that Bevan not only meant to sound irreconcilable but also wished to serve notice that the Labour government, beyond the administration of things, should move to shift the 'social psychology' of British political culture once and for all. He had talked in 1945 of a quarter of a century of Labour government and 'the complete political extinction of the Tory Party'. The year 1948 was, in every sense, the high-water mark of his desire and his delivery. 
Although Bevan never repudiated any of the work of the two Attlee governments in which he served, his acceptance of collective responsibility scarcely hid a growing unease with aspects of its foreign policy (too subservient to American global interest; insufficiently Zionist) and its nervous, increasingly orthodox, economic policy. This stiffened as the balance of payments crisis and the 'dollar gap' led to financial austerity and, in 1949, devaluation. The latter was particularly promoted by Hugh Gaitskell, minister of fuel and power and not yet in the cabinet. Bevan supported the policy as inevitable. Its unstated implications, public expenditure cuts, were to be the price to pay. Their extent and their focus were what required resolution. When Cripps as chancellor of the exchequer had raised in 1949 the prospect of prescription charges in the NHS Bevan had swallowed that principle, though the point was deferred. Now, after Labour's victory with a reduced majority in the general election of February 1950, issues of principle threatened to destroy Labour's unity. In this dispute, down to his resignation from the government in April 1951, Bevan has, too often, been painted as the sole instigator and perpetuator of such disunity. 
Now that the cabinet minutes have been scrutinized by historians it is not a view which is sustainable, though it is indeed accurate to see Bevan, from early 1950, as being at odds with the way in which the domestic priorities of his government were being translated into the American language of global containment and military rearmament. His own translation, by Attlee in January 1951, to the Ministry of Labour (with health demoted to a non-cabinet office) scarcely calmed his misgivings. Now, on a regular basis, he had to confront the realignment of manpower attendant on quickening rearmament. Neither wage restraint nor threatening dock workers for illegal strikes sat easily with him, but he complied as a government minister; what stretched his loyalty to incredulity was the manner in which the outbreak of the Korean War (June 1950) led, by August, when his first open disavowal is recorded, to a rearmament programme whose scale menaced the social and welfare capacities of the administration. His erstwhile ally, Sir Stafford Cripps, had retired on grounds of ill health in October 1950 and Hugh Gaitskell, Bevan's nemesis in this as in much else, was catapulted into the cabinet as chancellor of the exchequer. Bevan may have harboured vague hopes for the job, though more so for the foreign secretaryship which went to Herbert Morrison in March 1951, and certainly, with the steady loss of the government's elder statesmen, was being urged by Jennie Lee and Michael Foot to 'lead the left' as a precursor to leading, one day soon, the entire movement. Steadily and loyally, however, his critique was neither petty nor personal: it was, in a nutshell, that Gaitskell, demanding defence expenditure of $4700 million over three years, was miscalculating both what was strictly possible and what was socially desirable. Besides, the policy had been impelled not by any impeccable economic logic but by Attlee's visit to President Truman in December 1950 when Britain, in Bevan's cutting phrase, allowed itself 'to be dragged... behind the wheels of American diplomacy' (Foot, 2.335). 
Bevan's objections, then, were twofold -- he did not believe that the ideological war against communism, whose totalitarian regimes he loathed, was best fought by military posturing under an American banner; and he, specifically, saw no logic in levering money out of the NHS by imposing charges on spectacles and dentures (both quite symbolic appliances to an inter-war working class deprived of both) when the finance to be raised was only $23 million in a full year. If necessary the NHS budget, rising way beyond initial expectations but, as the Conservative government's Guillebaud committee of 1955 demonstrated, actually remarkably efficient value for money, could be capped and 'efficiencies' found within it. Gaitskell, however, pressed relentlessly on. The budget he wished to present would impose those particular charges. He felt the cabinet's authority, and most certainly his own (for he too threatened resignation), was at stake. Attlee, not for the first time, let matters drift. After the budget had gone before the house, Bevan brooded for two weeks -- so intense was his inner battle between not splitting the government and, as he saw it, saving its soul -- and then, in April 1951, with two junior colleagues, Harold Wilson and John Freeman, he resigned. 
In the general election of October 1951 Labour increased its popular vote by over a million, but, with the Liberals fielding many fewer candidates in the second general election within eighteen months, the Conservatives won a majority of seats. Within the year Gaitskell's unrealistic budget -- 'a political and economic disaster' in the words of that Labour government's historian, Kenneth O. Morgan (Morgan, 456) -- had been overturned by a Conservative Party whose calculations on actually deliverable defence expenditure matched Bevan's own. Bevan's support within the Labour Party now rested firmly in the country and in the constituency sections; to the official hierarchy and to the trade unions, whose finance and block votes at party conferences dictated that hierarchy's personnel and policies, he was anathema. Bevanism was born in the throes of a civil war. In 1951 he headed the list of NEC members voted on by the constituency section of the party. 
Despite the affiliation of close associates to the 'Keep Left' group formed during his tenure of office and the sharp criticisms mounted of Attlee's governments in 'Tribune', Bevan had, necessarily, kept himself aloof from any alternative leadership (when Cripps had attempted a coup against Attlee in 1947 Bevan was distinctly not interested in any such move). Now, with five supporters voted onto the NEC in 1952 and the official opposition supine, as he felt, in the growing crisis of the cold war, he had no compunction about allowing a semi-organized group (the Bevanites) to coalesce, via public pronouncements and parliamentary caucus, around his name. The Labour Party's standing orders had explicitly banned any unofficial groups inside the party after the bitter 1952 conference. By dint of personality, not just his own, and disinclination, more clearly his than others, this faction never properly became a 'party-within-a-party', but its constant refusal to toe a party line made it seem definitively so to those who now saw the expulsion of Bevan as the antidote to chronic party disunity. His own role, a permanent minority within the shadow cabinet to which he had been elected in 1952, was to serve as a barometer of these discontents: in 1954 his dissociation, in the house, from Attlee's support of the South East Asia Treaty Organisation led to rebuke and resignation. Dissent from the Labour Party's foreign policy line rumbled on: the Bevanites stood out against German rearmament, and in 1955 it was another international matter which came close to causing a final breach. 
This time Bevan appeared to contradict and humiliate Attlee directly in a Commons debate. Labour had moved an official amendment to the Conservative government's endorsement of the manufacture of the H-bomb and its retaliatory use even against conventional attack. The tinkering amendment, however, challenged neither assumption directly. Bevan asked publicly for Attlee's clarification over weapons' use. He did not get it, and so abstained. Gaitskell and Morrison, though not Attlee, now urged his full expulsion as a party member on the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP), the shadow cabinet, and the NEC. Bevan narrowly survived. More importantly he offered a personal apology to Attlee. His jousting within the party was coming to an end. Perhaps he was wearying of failure, since his lifelong philosophy that ideals without power was not politics was becoming self-fulfilling. 
Thus, in 1954 Bevan had left the NEC to challenge for the vacant treasurership of the Labour Party, a largely symbolic but important party post. He knew he would not win against Gaitskell, behind whom the right-wing votes of the Transport and General Workers' Union and the Municipal and General Workers' Union were rallied (he actually won NUM support in 1956), but, decades ahead of his time, was repudiating the 'irresponsible group of trade union bureaucrats' who were deciding 'the policy of the Labour Party' (Foot, 2.439-40). He was adamant, too, that 'I cannot possibly allow it to be thought that Gaitskell, who is a product of the public school..., is the natural representative of the industrial workers of Great Britain' (Jones, 'Rift and Conflict', 34). Natural, or not, within the existing framework, Gaitskell not only won there, he scooped the leadership after Labour lost its second election in a row in 1955 and Attlee retired. Gaitskell won an absolute majority of the PLP on the first ballot (157 votes) with Bevan (70) and Morrison (40) left behind. 
Any effective challenge to Gaitskell was now doomed. Bevan continued to make the case for a greater, not lesser, socialist dimension within the party, alongside a perennial call for education and consciousness-raising. He seemed also to accept that this was, again, a minority position to take. His task was to use his stature to see that it was not marginalized. He did not contest the leadership in 1956 and, with Gaitskell, mounted a telling campaign inside and outside parliament against Eden's collusive Suez adventure. Inside the shadow cabinet he was first given responsibility for colonial affairs and then for foreign affairs. Observers claimed to notice a greater thoughtfulness, a mellowing tinge, in his words and deeds. In 1957, after defeating George Brown, he became, at last, party treasurer. Abroad, his presence and influence was eagerly sought by a galaxy of international statesmen including Mendes France, Nenni, and Nehru. Many of these visited him at his last, delightful home (Asheridge Farm, Buckinghamshire), where a slightly unexpectedly bucolic Bevan beamed and, as ever, waxed eloquent ('star-tapping', he called it) on the literary, musical, and artistic tastes he had somehow, as if by osmosis in his packed life, bred into his bone. Always there would be, via a Marx whose materialism he never rejected, passing reference to the romantic libertarian, the Uruguayan Jose Rodo, whose 'Motives of Proteus' (1929) he had long made his own. Part of his immense charm was his ability, indeed eagerness, to slough off pursuit of political trivia in the cause of good food, wine, and conversation. For many close acquaintances he was, in these moods, a boon companion. 
Geniality was soured by the worst kind of quarrel, a family affair. In hindsight it was long coming. Bevan had always been impatient with the left's reluctance to become complicit with power-broking. He had sat in a cabinet that had approved British manufacture of the atomic bomb; he did not disapprove of similar British involvement in the hydrogen bomb. His concern was with British influence at four-power talks to secure multilateral nuclear disarmament. So, despite overlapping ambiguities of expression and intent, he was never a unilateral disarmer and, therefore, was isolated from an increasingly significant trend within the party and the wider labour movement. It all came to a head at the Brighton conference of 1957 when, speaking on behalf of the executive, he famously insisted that those who wished unilaterally to renounce the bomb, without consultation with allies or others, would send a British foreign secretary 'naked into the Conference Chamber' (Foot, 2.574). He was taken to mean 'naked' as 'disarmed'. In fact, he clearly meant 'naked' as having no power to affect the dealings of others. That was 'statesmanship'. The rest was, and his words flayed the skin of those who adored him but disagreed with him on this, 'an emotional spasm' (ibid., 2.575). 
Jennie Lee clung to the view that his decline and fatal illness had their terrible origins in the bitterness of the rift here made. Michael Foot, who succeeded Bevan as MP for Ebbw Vale, was not immune from her wrath. Bevan himself, as in the 1959 general election, seemed to go out of his way to act as healer and reconciler, still adamant to the end that only the Labour Party, defeated for a third time in a decade, could rescue Britain from the vulgarity of a 'meretricious society'. To this end, despite private misgivings which were never allayed, he unstintingly supported Gaitskell's leadership and official party policy in these last years. At the party's inquest, in Blackpool in October 1959, he made one of his last great speeches, still invoking 'the language of priorities' as 'the religion of socialism' and still hammering home the message that 'the argument is about power... because only by the possession of power can you get the priorities correct' (Foot, 2.645). He was elected, unopposed, as deputy leader and treasurer of the party. 
The mind still flared, but even to the most casual eye Bevan's body was betraying him. An exploratory operation at the end of December 1959 revealed a malignant cancer in the stomach. He returned to Asheridge, ostensibly to recuperate. The full truth was kept from him. On several occasions he rallied and talked of a vigorous re-entry into public life, but on 6 July 1960, at Asheridge Farm, he finally succumbed and died; his ashes were scattered above Tredegar. 
Bevan's death established, at once, that widespread affection and respect for his life had caused a real sense of public grief. Press obituaries and a well-attended service in Westminster Abbey appeared to give him the final accolades of respectability and responsibility. Yet in his life itself nothing could have seemed less likely or less welcome. Aneurin Bevan was that rare being, a practical politician with a philosophy for his actions beyond the minutiae of political activity, which was, in turn, only the means to achieve social and cultural ends. When Bevan's petulance and egotism are assessed, along with his misjudgments and errors, his real substance as the pre-eminent British proponent of democratic socialism in the twentieth century outweighs everything. The NHS still survives as the last great, decidedly socialist, monument of the 1945 Labour government. His own legacy has been invoked, sometimes bewilderingly given his class-driven politics, by successive generations of Labour and new Labour leaders. His coruscating phrases are still mint fresh in the mouths of others; his political testament, 'In Place of Fear' (1952), as fragmented and filigree brilliant as the man himself, remains in use and in print. Some of the tales of past struggles were given new lustre by Michael Foot, whose two-volume life of Bevan (1962, 1974) is a literary masterpiece of filial piety and historical evocation. Jennie Lee, who survived him to become in 1965 minister for the arts in Harold Wilson's first government and went to the Lords as Baroness Lee of Asheridge in 1970, tended his flame in the very title of her autobiography, 'My Life with Nye' (1980). In 1972, on the open moorland above his valleys constituency, she dedicated four massively hewn standing stones to his memory. The memory did not fade. There were to be numerous streets and council estates and hospital wards in his name across Britain, and an evocatively demonstrative statue in the main thoroughfare of Cardiff, Wales' capital city, was erected in 1987. 
The centenary of Bevan's birth in 1997 was attended by extensive memorial celebrations in Wales and London, by further books and broadcasts about him, and by a national press row over the network television screening of a provocative BBC Wales screenplay by Trevor Griffiths which eventually won a Royal Television Society award. He could always cause trouble. He was a believer in beginnings over endings and this may yet, when the dust of his moment has finally settled, prove to be the source of his lasting appeal. 


@@@@@


doc= 30741


Abbott, Eric Symes (1906-1983), dean of Westminster, was born on 26 May 1906 at Nottingham, the younger son and second of three children of William Henry Abbott, schoolteacher, and his wife, Mary Symes, also a teacher. A Dame Agnes Mellor scholar at Nottingham high school, he won a further scholarship to Jesus College, Cambridge (of which he became an honorary fellow in 1966), to read classics. A second class in part two (1928) following a first in part one (1927) was probably to be accounted for by many hours on the river coxing the college first eight, winning a trial cap, and being president of the university branch of the Student Christian Movement. In 1928 he crossed Jesus Lane to Westcott House and there came under the single most formative influence in his life: B. K. Cunningham. He obtained a third class in part one of the theological tripos in 1929. 
Ordained in St Paul's Cathedral to serve at St John's, Smith Square (1930-32), Abbott was then requested by King's College, London, to become chaplain. So began the twenty-five years in which he was to give all his care and almost all of himself to students who were being prepared for ordination. He was also chaplain to Lincoln's Inn in 1935-6. In 1936, at the age of thirty, he accepted the wardenship of Lincoln Theological College with a staff that included a future archbishop of Canterbury. Here he shared his Anglican perception of priesthood with his students, opening up for them a way of interior faith, prayer, and self-discipline appropriate for the demands of parochial pastoral ministry. He was also canon and prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral (1940-60). 
The Second World War was coming to an end when Abbott was invited back to King's College as dean (1945-55). This unique position as dean of the whole college in harness with a lay principal, as well as being head of the department and faculty of theology and warden of the hostel for theological students in Vincent Square, enabled him to influence the post-war revival of the college as a whole, to build up the staff in theology, and to create a postgraduate one-year college at Warminster for the immediate preordination spiritual and pastoral training (Lincoln style) of King's ordinands. 
The total burden of this complex responsibility would have been more than enough; but to this public work was added private work of an exacting kind, a seemingly endless sequence of individuals drawn to him by his preaching and personality to seek spiritual guidance. This led to a vast correspondence (the 'apostolate of the post', as he called it). Even on holiday he would spend most mornings and evenings writing letters and the 'famous' postcards. It is not surprising that latent heart trouble which was to dog his later years was aggravated by his years in London. The invitation in 1956 to become the sixth warden of Keble College, Oxford (but the first to be elected by the fellows under a new set of statutes), undoubtedly prolonged his working life. He was made an honorary fellow in 1960. 
A colleague writing about the bracing effect of Abbott's four years at Keble commented: 'His main achievement was to give the college confidence in itself. He consolidated the college both in its internal and external relations. Though not an academic he understood and encouraged academic excellence' (private information). His swift intelligence, acute perception, and subtle wit, together with his accessibility, drew senior and junior members alike to consult him. An annual Eric Abbott lecture was later established at Keble in his memory. 
In 1959 came the invitation to be dean of Westminster. Abbott's vision of the abbey was of a great church in which all questing men and women, irrespective of faith and race, would 'see Jesus'. The theme for the celebration in 1965-6 of the 900th anniversary of the founding of the abbey was 'One People'. Events were planned to relate the abbey to the needs and aspirations of the modern world. The dean was present at almost all. 
Throughout his years as dean Abbott influenced the form and preparation of services for weddings, memorials, and celebrations of national independence. Three royal weddings prepared and conducted by him further deepened his pastoral relationship with the royal family. His presence, prayer, and preaching, his care for art, music, literature, and drama, enhanced the worship and work of the abbey during fifteen years -- years which for him included episodes of debilitating ill health. He became a freeman of the city of Westminster in 1973. In 1974 he accepted the need to retire, but continued his ministry to individuals from his home in Vincent Square. 
In 1966 he was appointed KCVO and made an honorary DD of London University. He was unmarried. He died at Haslemere on 6 June 1983. The stone that marks his grave in the abbey carries the inscription: 'Friend and counsellor of many, he loved the Church of England, striving to make this House of Kings a place of pilgrimage and prayer for all peoples. 'Pastor Pastorum''. 
Sydney Evans', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30742


Abercrombie, Michael (1912-1979), biologist, was born at The Gallows, Ryton, Dymock, Gloucestershire, on 14 August 1912, the third son in the family of three sons and a daughter of Lascelles Abercrombie (1881-1938), poet and critic, and his wife, Catherine (1881-1968), daughter of Owen Gwatkin, surgeon, of Grange-over-Sands. The Abercrombies were a distinguished family for, in addition to Lascelles, Michael counted among his uncles Sir (Leslie) Patrick Abercrombie, a pioneer of town planning, Rudolph (Rody), physician and field naturalist, and Charles, a businessman. Michael's brother David Abercrombie became a professor of phonetics in the University of Edinburgh. 
Abercrombie attended Liverpool College, and then from 1922 went to Leeds grammar school, proceeding as top Hastings scholar to Queen's College, Oxford, in 1931. At Oxford he read zoology under the tuition of Gavin de Beer. De Beer arranged for him to work for a period at the Strangeways Research Laboratory in Cambridge under C. H. Waddington with whom he began to study the early development of the domestic chicken by experimental methods, giving particular attention to the signals involved in laying down the body plan. He completed this work at the school of pathology in Oxford, where he shared a room with his friend and contemporary Peter Medawar. The work gained him a first-class honours degree in 1934. He could have extended his studies for a PhD but, at the time, it was not fashionable in Oxford to do so. During this period Abercrombie took an active part in the extensive programme of research on the degeneration of peripheral nerves then in progress in the zoology laboratories under the direction of J. Z. Young. 
In 1938 Abercrombie lectured in the zoology department at Birmingham University, while concurrently holding a research fellowship at Queen's College, Oxford. Here he met and (on 17 July 1939) married Minnie Louie (Jane) Johnson ('b'. 1909/10), a fellow zoology lecturer three years his senior. She was the daughter of Stanley Johnson, an electrical engineer. He moved to Birmingham on a Beit memorial fellowship in 1940 and then became a lecturer in 1945. His most important enterprise at this time was to inaugurate a series of biological texts entitled 'New Biology', published by Penguin Books, aimed at bringing advanced biology in an intelligible form to sixth formers and first-year biology students. Unfortunately both Abercrombies quarrelled, as had many others, with Lancelot Hogben, Birmingham's head of zoology. Thus in 1946 Abercrombie took a lectureship in the department of anatomy in University College, London, working under his old tutor, Gavin de Beer, the head of the embryology sub-department. He was reader in embryology from 1950 to 1959. 
It was here that Abercrombie began the research which made his international reputation, for it was his belief (not shared by de Beer) that embryological problems could be studied in the processes of wound repair, as they might occur in adult animals. His interest in wound healing led him to study cell movement. He was a pioneer in the study of the cellular interactions and cell movement in tissue culture, making particular use of time-lapse cinematography which enabled the visualization of the cells' activities to be greatly speeded up. He juxtaposed two actively growing cultures of fibroblasts -- connective tissue cells -- which showed that, when the cells migrating outwards from them came into contact with cells from the neighbouring piece of tissue, cell movement ceased. The discovery of this phenomenon, contact inhibition -- much less pronounced in cancerous cells than in normal -- led to his election to the Royal Society in 1958. It was the basis of his claim to become, first, titular professor of embryology at University College (1959-62) and then Jodrell professor of zoology and comparative anatomy (1962-70). In 1962 he also spent eight months in the Carnegie Institute of Embryology in Washington. 
Abercrombie had strongly left-wing opinions. He joined the Communist Party in 1932, but in due course the same humanity and sense of justice that had caused him to join the party caused him to leave it. His last appointment (1970-79) was to succeed Dame Honor B. Fell as the head of the Strangeways Research Laboratory in Cambridge, an appointment whose administrative obligations he coped with as well as a man could who derived no pleasure whatsoever from the exercise of power. He was firm, though, and looked after the interests of his staff. At the same time he was a fellow of Clare Hall. 
When the verdict of the market place brought 'new biology' to an end Abercrombie and his wife wrote and published a 'Dictionary of Biology' (with C. J. Hickman, 1950), a fine example of concision and clear writing. Abercrombie's work on contact inhibition continued and provided important insights on the control of cell movement. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Uppsala University and won the Ernst Bertner award for cancer research. He died at his home, 2 Bridge Lane, Little Shelford, Cambridge, on 28 May 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 30743


Abrahams, Harold Maurice (1899-1978), athlete and civil servant, was born at 30 Rutland Road, Bedford, on 15 December 1899, the youngest in the family of two daughters and four sons of Isaac Klonimus (1850-1921) of Vladislavovka in Russian-occupied Poland and his wife, Esther Isaacs, of Merthyr Tudful. Klonimus, who proclaimed himself a Lithuanian Jew, escaped to Britain and by 1880 had changed his name to Abrahams, in recognition of his father, Abraham Klonimus ('b'. 1810). 
Though Isaac Abrahams never mastered the script (and barely the speech) of his host country, he set up the Bedfordshire Loan Company in 1885 and was naturalized in 1902. In the county town, in addition to moneylending, he dealt as a certificated pedlar in jewellery, gold, and silver plate. Despite their tempestuous marriage Esther and he raised four remarkable sons. Adolphe, the eldest, after gaining firsts at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, became a consultant physician at Westminster Hospital and was knighted in 1939. Sir Sidney Solomon (Solly) Abrahams, who competed for Britain at both the Olympic celebrations at Athens (1906) and Stockholm (1912), was sworn of the privy council after serving as chief justice of Tanganyika and Ceylon. The third son, Lionel, became senior partner of his firm of solicitors and was coroner for Huntingdonshire. 
Harold Abrahams was sent to Bedford School, briefly to St Paul's, and afterwards to Repton, where he won the public schools' 100 yards and long-jump championships in 1918. His imagination had been fired in the summer of 1908, when he watched his brother compete in the fourth Olympic games at the White City stadium, London. He served briefly as a second lieutenant in 1919 and then went up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, to read law. If the road to popularity at university lies in never inculcating a sense of inferiority into one's contemporaries, Abrahams stood little chance of being popular. Athletically he swept all before him with three wins in the freshmen's sports at Fenners and was immediately selected for the sixth Olympic games in Antwerp. He stood 6ft 1/2in. and had a spare but muscular frame. He won a unique eight victories at the 100 yards, 440 yards, and long jump in the annual Oxford versus Cambridge sports. His election to the Hawks club was opposed due to a contribution by him to 'The Times', which the committee regarded as immodest. 'Chariots of Fire', a highly successful film on the life of Abrahams, stressed an antisemitic undertone of his time at Cambridge. Though he did not live to see the film, Abrahams, on his own testimony, would certainly have regarded such a portrayal as over-fanciful. 
Before the next Olympic games, held in the stade de Colombes in Paris in 1924, Abrahams trained assiduously with his north-country coach Sam Mussabini, a French Arab. For nine months they worked on the theory of perfecting the start, on arm action, control of the stride pattern, and a then-unique 'drop' finish of the torso on to the tape. As a stickler for accuracy, Abrahams would have regarded the portrayal of Mussabini in the stade de Colombes (whereas he remained anxiously in Britain) as an excess of cinematic licence. At the 1924 Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championship Abrahams won the 100 yards in 9.9 seconds but was still a fifth of a second outside the British record set the previous year by the great Scottish rugby and athletic hero and 440-yard champion Eric Liddell. In Paris the twenty-three eliminating heats to bring the seventy-five starters down to twelve semi-finalists were to be staged on Sunday 6 July and Liddell, a strong sabbatarian, felt impelled to confine himself to the 200 and 400 metres, in which he took the bronze medal in the shorter event and the gold medal for 400 metres in a time which gave him the metric world record. Abrahams equalled the Olympic record in the 100 metres in the second round with 10.6 seconds and next day, despite being badly 'left' in a poor start in the semi-final, came through (again in 10.6 seconds) to beat by inches the world record holder, Charles Paddock, from the USA. Abrahams later said that the next three-and-three-quarter hours were the worst in his life because now he knew he could win. At 7.05 p.m. he came out with the four Americans, Paddock, Scholz, Murchison, and Bowman, and the Oxford Rhodes scholar Arthur Porritt, from New Zealand. 
Abrahams was drawn in lane four and got a perfect start. He showed fractionally ahead at half-way and dropped on to the tape 2 feet clear of Scholz, with Porritt beating Bowman for third. His winning time of 10.52 seconds would under later rules have been returned as 10.5 but was rounded up to 10.6. Abrahams thus set three Olympic record-equalling performances in the space of twenty-six hours. In Paris there were no flag-raising victory ceremonies. His gold medal, sadly later stolen, was sent to him by post. In May 1925 Abrahams severely injured a leg when attempting to improve on his English native long-jump record of 24 feet 21/2 inches (7.38 metres), which had been set at Woolwich and which survived for more than thirty years. 
His athletic career ended, Abrahams applied his analytical mind to the bar, to which he had been called at the Inner Temple in 1924, and where he practised until 1940. He also engaged in athletics administration and journalism with the 'Sunday Times' (1925-67), and was a consummate radio broadcaster with the BBC for fifty years (1924-74). Against the stolid petty opposition of senior office-holders in various governing bodies, often athletes 'manques', he managed by sheer force of personality and with very few allies to raise athletics from a minor to a major national sport. His innovative mind and drafting ability enabled him to rewrite the AAA rules of competition which themselves transformed the rules of the International Amateur Athletic Federation. He was possessed of a fresh resonant voice, while his clear diction and wide vocabulary were models for any English speaker. 
Abrahams served as honorary treasurer (1948-68) and chairman (1948-75) of the British Amateur Athletic Board. In November 1976 he was elected president of the AAA. He was an unrivalled compiler of athletics statistics and was founder president of both the world and British associations in this field, the Association of Track and Field Statisticians (instituted in 1950) and the National Union of Track Statisticians (instituted in 1956). His 'Oxford versus Cambridge, 1827-1930' (compiled with J. Bruce-Kerr, 1931), which listed all the 7489 blues, inevitably resulted in the exposure of a number of self-appointed blues in the bars and clubs of the world. During the Second World War he was with the Ministry of Economic Warfare (1939-44) and then with the new Ministry of Town and Country Planning until 1963. He was secretary of the National Parks Commission (1950-63). He was appointed CBE in 1957. 
In 1936 Abrahams married Sybil Marjorie, daughter of Claude Pilington Evers, assistant master at Rugby School. She was a D'Oyly Carte singer and producer of light opera and died suddenly in 1963. During his fourteen years as a widower, Abrahams always carried a gold medallion bearing her effigy in profile. This he privately referred to as 'my real gold medal'. They had an adopted daughter and an adopted son. Abrahams died on 14 January 1978 at Chase Farm Hospital, Enfield, London. An English Heritage blue plaque was unveiled in 2007 at Hodford Lodge, 2 Hodford Road, Golders Green, Abrahams's London home at the time he won the Olympic gold medal in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 30744


Abramsky, Yehezkel (1886-1976), rabbinic scholar and Orthodox Jewish leader, was born on or about 7 February 1886 in Dashkovtsy, near Most and Grodno, Lithuania, the third child and eldest son of Mordecai Zalman Abramsky, a local timber merchant, and his wife, Freydel Goldin of Grodno. As a markedly promising Talmudic student he began while a boy the then usual peripatetic training at the 'yeshivoth' (seminaries) of Telz, Mir, Slobodka, and particularly at Brisk under Hayyim Soloveitchik, the teacher and mentor he always venerated: and he earned his certification as a rabbi before he was eighteen. He married in 1909 Reizel (died 1965), daughter of Israel Jonathan Jerusalimsky, head of the Jewish court at Iehumen, Russia. They had four sons. 
Abramsky's ability as a jurisconsult was quickly recognized in Russia, and he was successively rabbi of Smolyan, Smolevich, and Slutzk. With the Bolshevik revolution and increasing attempts to repress traditional Jewish observance and culture, Abramsky exerted himself to encourage its continuation -- for example, by surreptitious (albeit legal) arrangement for circumcisions. For the same purpose he was co-founder in 1928 of a Hebrew periodical -- the last in Russia -- 'Yagdil Torah', which after two issues was proscribed. The Soviet government understood well Abramsky's standing in Russian Jewry; and, partly concerned for its own reputation abroad, in 1926 and again in 1928 it refused him permission to leave and take up the rabbinate of Petah Tikvah in Palestine. Worse followed. Herbert Hoover, as president of the United States, sent an inter-faith commission to investigate religious freedom in Russia as a prerequisite to establishing closer relations with the USSR. Abramsky, when interviewed, had said nothing; his silence was construed by the authorities as defamation of the Soviet Union, and he spent months eluding arrest. He was apprehended in 1929 and the death sentence demanded, but he was condemned (without trial) to five years' hard labour in Siberia. 
Worldwide Jewish concern elicited diplomatic intervention, and in 1931, in exchange for six communists held by Chancellor Bruning's government in Germany, Abramsky was given a month to leave Russia. Two of his sons were retained as hostages, and to avoid endangering them Abramsky in 1935 declined to succeed A. I. Kook as Ashkenazi chief rabbi of Palestine. Anthony Eden, the British foreign secretary, personally intervened to secure their release in 1937, Abramsky having come to London in 1932 as rabbi of the right-wing Orthodox community (Mahzikey Ha-dath). He was naturalized a British subject in 1937. 
The United Synagogue, whose dominance within the Orthodox community was secured by act of parliament, invited Abramsky to head its ecclesiastical court. After undertakings that there would be no lay pressure for unacceptable relaxations of the law, he accepted and discharged his duties with exemplary conscientiousness until his retirement to Jerusalem in 1951. Notably, he tightened up the standards of kosher slaughtering; and he stood firm against conversions to Judaism of dubious sincerity for matrimonial purposes. 
Abramsky's clarity of exposition drew large audiences for his London discourses (delivered in Yiddish) on aspects of Jewish law: even more well attended were his twice-weekly lectures in Jerusalem 'yeshivoth', maintained until a few years before his death. As president of the Council of 'Yeshivoth', the Private Education League, and other national bodies he was no mere figurehead, and whenever he made representations to the Israeli government regarding the protection of religious interests, he was heard with unfailing respect. 
Abramsky's scholarly work followed traditional rabbinic methodology, ignoring external influences and parallels in, for example, Roman law. It was prodigious and fruitful. A memorial volume, published in Hebrew in Jerusalem in 1978, collected his Talmudic 'novellae' and 'responsa', but his major monument was the 24-volume 'Hazon Yehezkel', a commentary on the 'Tosefta' or 'supplementary' digest of Jewish law compiled 'c'.200 AD. Planned during the First World War, its approach was quite different from Lieberman's work which paralleled it in publication. The first volume appeared in 1925, the last in 1975; Abramsky had continued work on it in Siberia, smuggling it out on cigarette paper. In 1955 he was the first recipient of the Israel prize for literature; and he was the first commentator whose notes to the 'Talmud' were printed alongside the classical commentaries in his own lifetime. 
More significant than Abramsky's appointments and honours were his influence, his transparent saintliness, and his personal magnetism. Sir Robert Waley Cohen, lay leader of the United Synagogue and of an upper-class English background, recognized his sincerity and responded to it. And once, when an assimilated Jew, applying for a religious divorce, sneered at the 'medievalism' of Abramsky's court, he met with a dignified rebuke that elicited apology. His leadership in England partly stimulated more intense observance and wider familiarity with rabbinic sources in segments of the United Synagogue, but conversely it accentuated Orthodox disregard for the analogously reinvigorated Reform community. Besides his world stature in rabbinical scholarship, Abramsky was respected in Israel as the last outstanding representative of a Jewish cultural life that had for 400 years shaped the Jewries of Russia and Poland: and the crowd (estimated at perhaps 40,000) attending his funeral made it the largest ever seen in Jerusalem, where he had died on 19 September 1976. 
Raphael Loewe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30745


Adair, Gilbert Smithson (1896-1979), physiologist, was born on 21 September 1896 in Whitehaven, the elder child and only son of Harold Adair, manager of an iron ore mine in Cumberland, and his wife, Anna Mary Jackson, from Garstang. The family later moved to nearby Egremont. Adair was educated privately at home for several years and, encouraged by both parents, became absorbed in the area and its natural history, particularly at the sea-shore. A room in the house was set up as a laboratory, equipped with a microscope. In his early teens Adair was sent to Bootham, the Quaker school in York. There he found life spartan, even for his simple tastes. The school recognized his talents in biology and chemistry, and he successfully took the entrance scholarship examination at King's College, Cambridge, in 1914. He entered that college in 1915, obtaining a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1917. 
With his defective eyesight, Adair failed in his attempt to join the Friends' Ambulance Unit. He entered the Food Investigation Board to inquire into the then important problem of preventing wastage of imported food on cargo ships. He returned to King's College, Cambridge, as a research student in 1920 and joined the physiological laboratory, though he retained links with the Food Investigation Board which proved to be useful when a Refrigeration Research Station (later the Low Temperature Research Station) was established in Cambridge in 1922. Adair was granted cold-room facilities which he continued to use until his death. In 1923 he was elected to a research fellowship at King's College and published several major papers during his tenure, so that in 1928 the college made him an official fellow for five years, allowing him to concentrate on research. From 1931 to 1945 he was assistant director of research in the physiological laboratory, from 1945 to 1963 reader in biophysics, and from 1963 honorary fellow of King's College. In 1939 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. 
After early work on the diffusion of electrolytes in gels, Adair entered on what was to be his major field, the physical chemistry of haemoglobin and its interactions with simple gases. His work between 1924 and 1930 was the first to show that haemoglobin was a well-defined material with highly specific structure, unique molecular weight, and the capability of reacting stoichiometrically and reproducibly. In particular he is remembered for perfecting and simplifying the osmotic pressure method of measuring molecular weight, which was subsequently widely used by himself and by others throughout the world. By 1940 he had published some forty-five papers on the application of osmotic and membrane potential measurements to a variety of protein systems. From 1940 to 1977, although the volume of his output fell somewhat, he was in great demand from visiting scientists and PhD students, to whom he was always willing to demonstrate patiently and fully his latest developments. He was an excellent teacher. Many of his later papers were written in collaboration with visitors from all parts of the world. His last paper (with K. Imai from Japan) returned to his favourite subject, haemoglobin. 
In July 1931 Adair married Muriel Elaine ('c'.1900-1975), one of the three daughters of George Hardinge Robinson, a stockbroker from Southport. Muriel entered Girton College in 1918, and went on to obtain a research fellowship at Newnham, and a staff fellowship at Girton. At one stage she worked with Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins but eventually she turned to proteins and collaborated with Adair in many papers from 1930 onwards. She also accompanied him on climbing expeditions. They had no children. 
Although quiet and retiring, Adair made many friends. Climbing in the Lake District, in the Dolomites, and in Colorado, as well as around the university and college buildings in Cambridge in the earlier part of his life, was later replaced by an interest in his garden. Here he and his wife spent much time, encouraging nearly all forms of wild life (ducks and rooks excluded). Muriel died on 2 January 1975; Adair on 22 June 1979, in Cambridge. 
Paley Johnson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30746


Adams, Sir Grantley Herbert (1898-1971), prime minister of the Federation of the West Indies, was born on 28 April 1898 in Bridgetown, Barbados, the second of six sons (there was also a daughter) of Fitzherbert Adams, a primary school headmaster, and his wife, Rosa Frances Turner. Education mattered in his family and Adams won a scholarship to Harrison College and then the coveted Barbados scholarship. He entered St Catherine's Society, Oxford, in 1918, took part in undergraduate Liberal politics, played much cricket, and was president of the junior common room. He obtained third classes in classical honour moderations in 1921 and jurisprudence in 1923. 
After being called to the bar (Gray's Inn) in 1923, Adams returned home where he built a reputation as a shrewd, forceful barrister. He was also a leader writer for the conservative 'Agricultural Reporter', but as the West Indies sank ever deeper into the depression of the 1930s, his politics became more radical as he took up the cause of the Barbadian working man. In 1934 he was elected a member of the house of assembly for St Joseph, surprisingly beating a white planter; he soon proved to be as adept at politics as he was at the bar. After serious riots in July 1937, the radicals sent Adams to London to press for a royal commission to examine West Indian conditions. In 1939 the Moyne commission went to the Caribbean. 
This London visit had important consequences for Adams. He became friends with Labour Party members who were interested in the colonies, such as Sir R. Stafford Cripps, Arthur Creech Jones, and Rita Hinden; his vague but deeply felt radicalism was channelled into Fabian socialism. He also saw the need for a political party backed by a trade union. On his return he helped to found the Barbados Progressive League in 1938, from which were soon to spring the Barbados Workers' Union and the Barbados Labour Party which was led by Adams. 
Adams was appointed by the governor to the executive committee in 1942, and made leader of the house of assembly when the Barbados Labour Party won nine seats, a bare majority, in 1946. In 1954 Adams, who had become QC (Barbados) in 1953 and who was by then a respected Caribbean statesman, became premier. Yet when Barbados became independent in 1966, Adams and his party were in opposition after a defeat by the Democratic Labour Party. 
Despite his Barbadian preoccupations, Adams played his part in the wider world of cold war diplomacy in the immediate post-war years, the most successful of his life. He was in the British delegation at the first meeting of the United Nations in 1948 when he eloquently defended the British colonial record; he was appointed to the committee of experts of the International Labour Organization in 1949; he was president of the Caribbean Labour Congress and vice-chairman of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions when these bodies were fighting against communist domination. 
Even before the war Adams believed that the solution to the problems of the Caribbean colonies lay in a federation. After the war he played a leading part in the planning conferences at Montego Bay in 1947 and London in 1953 and 1956. He became leader of the new Federal Labour Party and the first and, as it turned out, the only prime minister of the Federation of the West Indies in 1958. For various reasons Jamaica and Trinidad, the most powerful members, dropped out, leaving behind the fatally weakened rump of the small islands and Barbados. The federation staggered on until 1962, and a frustrated and bitterly disappointed Adams returned to the parochial world of leading the opposition in Barbados. After increasing illness he resigned his seat in 1970. 
Adams belonged to that generation of English-educated nationalist politicians such as Norman Manley of Jamaica and Eric Williams of Trinidad who led their countries towards independence and ensured that they followed the Westminster model afterwards. In Barbados he broke the planter domination of society, encouraged economic diversification, and laid the foundations for a welfare state. 
In private life Adams was amiable and witty and he delighted in the post-war flowering of West Indian cricket. He married Grace Thorne, who was from a white planter family, in 1929; this was in itself a portent of social change. Their only child, Tom (1931-1985) ['see 'Adams, John Michael Geoffrey Manningham], was a prime minister of Barbados in the 1970s. 
Adams was appointed CMG in 1952 and knighted in 1957. In 1958 he received an honorary DLitt from Mount Allison. He died at Bridgetown on 28 November 1971. 
Donald Wood', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30747


Adams, Sir John Bertram (1920-1984), physicist and scientific administrator, was born on 24 May 1920 at 105 Canbury Park Road, Kingston, Surrey, the only son and younger child of John Albert Adams ('c'.1890- 'c'.1964) and his wife, Sarah Ethel Emily Searles (1890- 'c'.1970). He had a sister, Marjorie, who was eight years his senior. Their father had a good job working for Paquin's, a high-class London couturier, until the First World War but he never fully recovered from being badly gassed in action and after the war he was unemployed for long periods. Between 1931 and 1936 Adams attended Eltham College as a day boy, having won an entrance scholarship, but because of financial hardship in the family he left early and went to work at the Siemens laboratories in Woolwich. He continued his studies at the South-East London Technical Institute and obtained a higher national certificate in 1939. 
During the Second World War Adams worked at the Telecommunications Research Establishment, first at Swanage and then at Malvern. His particular responsibility was the development of microwave radar systems, and it was through this that his outstanding engineering skills first came to be recognized. 
On 23 January 1943 he married Renie, daughter of Joseph Warburton, engineer. She was at that time a flight officer in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force; they had one son and two daughters. In 1945 Adams moved to the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell where his exceptional ability again became quickly evident and in 1953 the director, Sir John Cockcroft, arranged for him to go to the newly formed high energy physics laboratory at the Conseil Europeen de Recherches Nucleaires (CERN), in Geneva. He went as a junior member of the team formed to build the world's largest elementary particle accelerator and before he left in 1961 he had served as director-general for a year. At Cockcroft's request Adams then left CERN to take charge of the development of Britain's controlled thermonuclear fusion programme. This again involved building a new laboratory, this time on a green-field site at Culham in Oxfordshire. Once again he created a splendidly effective research organization. 
Adams was appointed controller at the Ministry of Technology in the first Labour government of Harold Wilson, although he remained director of Culham. In 1966 he became member for research of the UK Atomic Energy Authority. Neither of these two appointments suited his talents particularly well and in April 1969 he chose to return to CERN to take charge of a project whose future, to say the least, was very uncertain. The proposal was to build a new giant accelerator on a completely new site somewhere in Europe. The British government initially refused to join this project. In less than two years Adams, in conjunction with Bernard Gregory, the then director-general of CERN, transformed the plan so that the accelerator could be built on the Geneva site and at a fraction of the originally estimated cost. Britain then joined the revised project and it went ahead. The accelerator was completed in just over five years from approval and within the originally estimated cost. In 1976 Adams became executive director-general of a unified CERN laboratory serving in harness with Leon van Hove who acted as director-general for research. The period from 1976 to 1981 was one of remarkable accelerator development at CERN. Completion of the world's first proton-antiproton collider in 1981 led ultimately to the award of the Nobel prize for physics to Rubbia and van der Meer in 1994 for the discovery of the intermediate vector boson. The large electron-positron project (LEP) was also approved by the CERN council in June 1981. When Adams's term of office as director-general ended in December 1981 he remained at CERN but ceased to play any significant role in its affairs. His experience and knowledge were, however, much sought after outside the organization both in Europe and in the United States. 
Adams's record both as an administrator and as an engineer is remarkable, especially considering the complexity of the work at Culham and Geneva. That this was done by one who did not have a university education is salutary. His achievements were recognized through the award of many honours and distinctions. They include honorary doctorates from the universities of Geneva (1960), Birmingham (1961), Surrey (1966), Strathclyde (1978), and Milan (1980); the Rontgen prize of the University of Giessen (1960); the Duddell medal of the Physical Society (1961); the Royal Society's Leverhulme and royal medals (1972 and 1977); and the Faraday medal from the Institution of Electrical Engineers (1977). He was elected FRS in 1963 and a foreign member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in 1982. He was appointed CMG in 1962 and knighted in 1981. He was a fellow of Wolfson College, Oxford (1966), the Manchester College of Technology, the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and the Institute of Physics. 
Adams died from lung cancer on 3 March 1984 at the Hopital Cantonal Universitaire, Geneva, near his home at Founex in the Swiss canton of Vaud, close to the mountains where he loved to walk and ski. He was cremated at Geneva on 8 March, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30748


Adams, John Bodkin (1899-1983), general practitioner and forger, was born on 20 January 1899 in Randalstown, co. Antrim, the elder son of Samuel Adams, watchmaker, and his wife, Ellen Bodkin (died 1943), formerly of Desertmartin, co. Tyrone. The younger son was born in 1903 and died of pneumonia in 1916. Shortly after John was born the family moved to Ballinderry Bridge, co. Tyrone, where he attended a Methodist day school. The family were strictly religious and worshipped regularly at a Plymouth Brethren meeting-place where the father frequently preached. In 1911 the family moved to Coleraine, mainly to permit Adams to study at a local academy. He qualified in 1917 for Queen's College, Belfast, and graduated in 1921. 
Adams became an ophthalmic house surgeon and casualty officer in Bristol Royal Infirmary, and then, responding to an advertisement for a 'Christian doctor assistant', joined an Eastbourne general practice. By relieving his partners of all night calls Adams was soon able to rent a modest house in Upperton Road and invite his mother to join him. The family reunion brought a revival of the religious pattern -- family prayers in the home and the advent of a 'Bible' class for the Young Crusaders. When his partners retired Adams was able to slot into the 'good life' of Eastbourne. He looked for a more suitable residence, and in 1930 for $5000 he acquired Kent Lodge, a Victorian villa later to be valued in the doctor's estates at $100,000. 
The charm and ebullience of the soft-spoken, loquacious, teetotal bachelor quickly led Adams into the homes of the wealthy. By 1955 he had established himself in hunting and fishing circles. Yet he did not ignore his poor patients. On the other hand signs of his avaricious nature were beginning to appear, and rumours began. In 1935 Mrs Matilda Whitton, a 72-year-old patient, had left Adams $3000. Relatives disputed the will but it was upheld by the courts. The rumours were revived between 1944 and 1955 during which period Adams received fourteen legacies totalling $21,600 from octogenarian patients. 
In July 1956 Mrs Gertrude Hullett, another of Adams's patients, died aged fifty. Heartbroken at the recent death of her husband, Mrs Hullett had often spoken to her solicitor and friends of her intention to take her own life. Adams was not present when she died and an autopsy established that she had swallowed a massive dose of barbiturates. The inquest jury found that she had committed suicide 'of her own free will', but in winding up the proceedings the coroner announced that the chief constable 'had invoked the aid of Scotland Yard to investigate certain deaths in the neighbourhood'. Mrs Hullett's will disclosed that she had left Adams a Rolls-Royce car and had previously given him a cheque for $1000 which he had 'specially cleared'. 
On 24 November 1956 Adams was arrested on a series of minor charges. Soon a further charge was added: 'That he did in November 1950 feloniously and with malice aforethought murder Edith Alice Morrell.' Refused bail, Adams spent the next 111 days in prison. Meanwhile, the bodies of two other patients were exhumed but only one of them was in good enough condition to decide the cause of death, cerebral thrombosis, which was that given by Adams on the death certificate. At the committal proceedings the crown maintained it was essential that evidence regarding the deaths of Mr and Mrs Hullett should be given and despite defence objections the magistrates agreed -- a decision which in 1967 led to a change in the law. 
Physically Adams seemed strong enough to withstand the trial but his facial appearance was against him. In good humour and smiling he resembled a genial Mr Pickwick but in sombre, grim moments he tended to appear quite capable of the crimes soon to be laid at his door. The trial was opened at the Old Bailey by the attorney-general, Sir Reginald Manningham-Buller. He first called four nurses who gave their version from memory of the treatment of Mrs Morrell six years earlier. Then the defence, conducted by F. Geoffrey Lawrence, produced a trump card: the nurses' actual notebooks, which gave a very different version. The seams of the crown's case had started to come apart, and worse was to follow. 
The chief medical witness, Arthur Henry Douthwaite, senior physician at Guy's Hospital, London, revised his theories in the witness box after admitting he had not seen the reports of three other doctors in Cheshire who had started Mrs Morrell on a course of heroin and morphia before she came under the care of Adams. Another expert, in answer to the judge, Patrick Devlin, said, 'I do not think it is possible absolutely to rule out a sudden catastrophic intervention by some natural cause'. The defence, perhaps wisely, decided not to put the talkative Adams into the witness box. In his summing up Devlin told the jury that the case for the defence was manifestly a strong one. The jury found Adams not guilty. 
On 26 July 1957 Adams appeared at Lewes assizes to answer the minor charges which remained on the calendar. Adams was charged with making a false statement on three cremation forms, drug offences, and forgery. He pleaded guilty and was fined $2400. As a consequence he was struck off the medical register, but four years later his name was restored and he returned to a flock of private patients. He died on 4 July 1983 in Eastbourne General Hospital of heart failure, after breaking a leg. He left an estate of $408,305, a sum which included substantial libel damages and the sale of Kent Lodge. 


@@@@@


doc= 30749


Adams, John Michael Geoffrey Manningham (1931-1985), prime minister of Barbados, was born on 24 September 1931 in St Michael, Barbados, the only child of Sir Grantley Herbert Adams (1898-1971), later prime minister of the Federation of the West Indies, and his wife, Grace, only daughter of Alexander Thorne, shipping agent, and his wife, Millicent. He was educated at the Ursuline convent, and at Harrison College in Barbados, and then at Magdalen College, Oxford, to which he was admitted after winning the Barbados scholarship in 1951. He obtained third-class honours in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1954. 
In 1954 Adams began to study law at Gray's Inn; he was called to the bar in 1959. While a law student, he worked as a producer in the overseas service of the BBC where he met Genevieve Turner, who was employed as a secretary. They were married in 1962. Genevieve was the daughter of Philip Turner, principal assistant solicitor (later solicitor) to the Post Office. There were two sons of the marriage. 
Adams worked for six months in the Gray's Inn chambers of Dingle Foot and then returned to Barbados in January 1963. After settling his family and setting himself up as a barrister in chambers he began his political career. He was secretary of the Barbados Labour Party from 1965 to 1969. He won a seat in the house in 1966 and was leader of the opposition from 1971 to 1976. He became prime minister and finance minister of Barbados in September 1976 and remained in that office until his death in 1985. 
Adams had a formidable task before him when he entered public life. He had to function under the shadow of his illustrious father's name and, in addition, he was faced with a redoubtable opponent, Errol Barrow, who led the Democratic Labour Party and was then prime minister of Barbados. But at the BBC he had developed the talents that made him the island's most skilful communicator. His oratory was such that he attracted large audiences to meetings of the assembly. And, while he excelled in parliamentary debate, he soon showed he was no mean opponent on the political platform. In addition, what helped him to win three by-elections and two general elections was his flair for organization. 
One of Adams's ambitions was to bring to reality his father's dream of a West Indies united and self-governing. He was actively involved in the Caribbean Community which sought to attain some of the late federation's objectives. He was in every sense a Caribbean man. He promptly sent military assistance to St Vincent when the premier, Milton Cato, asked for help in 1979 against a revolt in the Grenadines. And when the premier of Grenada, Maurice Bishop, was killed in 1983 and that island was threatened with a Marxist take-over, Adams joined with the leaders of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and persuaded President Ronald Reagan of the USA to assist them in a rescue mission. Adams regretted the decline of British influence. 
Adams was tall and handsome and possessed the common touch. He was fond of gardening and philately, bridge, and poker. He loved dancing and merrymaking, even to the extent of embarrassing his entourage. He drove himself hard at both work and play and slept only four hours a night. In due course his many-sided activities began to take a toll on his health. He made light of the first signs that should have warned him that his heart was beginning to feel the strain. Later he consulted a Harley Street specialist, who advised open-heart surgery late in 1984. Adams decided to postpone any such operation until he had completed pressing business abroad that would help him in the unceasing tasks of social reform and financial stability. However, he collapsed on the afternoon of 11 March 1985, at Ilaro Court, the official residence of the prime minister, and a medical certificate confirmed that his death that day was due to cardiac failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 30750


Adams, Mary Grace Agnes (1898-1984), television producer and programme director, was born on 10 March 1898 at Well House Farm, Hermitage, Berkshire, the elder of two daughters (her sister died aged three) and second of four children of Edward Bloxham Campin, farmer, of Hermitage, and his wife, Catherine Elizabeth Mary (died 1938), daughter of Edwin Gunter, farmer, of Alveston. Mary's mother brought up the three surviving children in Penarth, Wales, under conditions of great hardship; Mary's father died of consumption in 1910. A scholarship to Godolphin School, Salisbury, led to University College, Cardiff, where Mary Adams gained first-class honours in botany (1921). She then became a research scholar and Bathurst student at Newnham College, Cambridge (1921-5), and published papers on cytology. 
Mary Adams held tutorial and lectureship posts at Cambridge for extramural and board of civil service studies (1925-30). In 1928 she broadcast a series (published as 'Six Talks on Heredity', 1929), which proved a transition point. Gripped by the educational possibilities of the BBC, she joined its staff in 1930 as adult education officer. Her inspiring flair for teaching, especially the young, and organizational skills had a new outlet. She stayed in sound broadcasting until 1936: under the exactitudes of Sir John Reith, director-general of the BBC, she combined information with informality in obligatorily scripted programmes. She was appointed to the newly established television service in 1936, becoming the first woman television producer. An atmosphere of history-in-the-making, experimentation, and excitement prevailed, though the budget was minuscule. The headquarters was at Alexandra Palace, north London, and Mary Adams was in charge of education, political material, talks, and culture. She persuaded the eminent -- for example, C. E. M. Joad, S. Gordon Russell, Julian Huxley, and John Betjeman -- to appear on this alarming new medium, but with the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 the service was shut down. 
From 1939 to 1941 Mary Adams was director of home intelligence in the Ministry of Information and the years 1942-5 were spent working in North American service broadcasting, where she produced morale-boosting programmes -- for example, 'Transatlantic Quiz'. Returning to BBC TV in 1946, she was ever breaking new ground, bubbling with ideas, enlisting the services of the distinguished in arts and science for programmes, and cutting red tape. She was head of television talks (1948-54) and assistant to the controller of television programmes (1954-8). She stimulated others to achieve, and could spot and harness enthusiasm and talent. For example, in the early 1950s, the young zoology graduate David Attenborough (who at this stage had never seen television) realized, after a revelatory five-minute conversation with Mary Adams, the potential force of television for the future, joined the staff at Alexandra Palace, and went on to create and produce numerous ground-breaking wildlife series. Mary Adams herself promoted and produced many programmes (always with a purpose): cooking; gardening; art; intellectual quizzes, for example 'Animal, Vegetable, Mineral?' (1952-9, 1971); material for children, such as 'Muffin the Mule' (1946-55) and 'Andy Pandy' (1950-69, 1970-76); science, for example 'Eye on Research' (1957-61); and world celebrations, such as 'The Restless Sphere' with the duke of Edinburgh in International Geophysical Year (1957). The first to make medicine accessible to the public, she shook the medical profession out of its secretive complacency with such series as 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1949-51, 1952), 'Matters of Medicine' (1952-3, 1960), 'The Hurt Mind' (1957), and 'Your Life in their Hands' (1958-64). There were many repeats and revivals of her programmes. Her productive years from 1942 to 1958 could not have been so successful without her working relationship and friendship with Nora Wood, who skilfully manipulated an often chaotic environment to combine cheerful progress with a singular and telling output. 
When Mary Adams retired in 1958 she began a new career. The Consumers' Association, which had been established in 1957, resulted from her deliberations with Julian Huxley in 1937. She was its deputy chairman from 1958 to 1970, and induced a nervous 'Which?' magazine to produce the first comparative tests of contraceptives and a reluctant BBC to produce the first consumer programmes giving brand ratings. Simultaneously, she advised the BBC (and was, contrastingly, a member of the Independent Television Authority, from 1965 to 1970), wrote for 'Punch', and played far-sighted roles in organizations concerned with Anglo-Chinese understanding, the unmarried mother and her child, British railway design, British Medical Association planning, mental health, women's groups, telephone users, and eugenics. 
With science, as with the arts, she made people sit up, with ideas that were daring, in support of what was new, often with a strong feminist slant, and expressed with animation, even provocation. Spurning notes for public speaking, she arrived well informed, sensed the atmosphere, then, in a style that teased and delighted, injected serious and original proposals. She was a creative persuader at work, yet paradoxically indecisive at home. She was appointed OBE (1953), an associate of Newnham College, Cambridge (1956-69), and a fellow of University College, Cardiff (1983). 
Mary Adams married on 23 February 1925 (Samuel) Vyvyan (Trerice) Adams (1900-1951), the younger son of Samuel Trerice Adams, canon of Ely and rural dean of Cambridge. Her husband was Conservative MP for West Leeds (1931-45), an early determined anti-Nazi, and a radical reformer. He was adopted for the Conservative seat of Darwen in 1951, and earmarked for cabinet rank by Winston Churchill, but his untimely drowning on 13 August of that year denied this political resurgence. One daughter, Sally, was born of the marriage in 1936. 
In appearance Mary Adams was small, birdlike, always well dressed, with bright blue eyes and, in public, a knowing confidence. Her character, though full of contradictions, was magnetic. She was a socialist, a romantic communist, and could charm with her charisma, spontaneity, and quick informed intelligence. She was a fervent atheist and advocate of humanism and common sense, accepting her stance without subjecting it to analysis. These qualities ensured she was the centre of attention in a social setting, and she involved herself with all the right people. Yet a streak within compelled her to dread, then court, loneliness and it decreed that her marriage was to be less than happy: she could not live in harmony with herself, nor be truly supportive to those close to her who needed help. She had an unexpected, dry put-down humour. A stroke in 1980 affected her memory; when flummoxed and cornered by a social worker's banal and routine questions, she wriggled out of it with, 'If you want the details, you can always look me up in 'Who's Who''. She died in University College Hospital, London, on 15 May 1984, and was cremated at Highgate crematorium, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30751


Adams, Sir Walter (1906-1975), university administrator, was born on 16 December 1906 at Brighton, the son of Walter Adams, a builder's clerk, and his wife, Margaret Evans. He was educated at Brighton, Hove, and Sussex grammar school and at University College, London, where he read history, being awarded the BA degree with first-class honours in 1928, and where he was subsequently appointed to a lectureship in history. He married in 1933 Tatiana (died October 1975), daughter of Alexander Makaroff, lawyer; they had three sons and one daughter. 
In 1933 Adams resigned his lectureship in order to become general secretary of the Academic Assistance Council (later the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning), a body formed under the presidency of Lord Rutherford of Nelson to assist university teachers displaced on account of race, religion, or political opinion. The work gave Adams wide administrative experience as it involved the raising and administration of a fund of approximately $70,000, the establishment of local committees in nearly all British universities, and the making of contracts with government departments, national and international educational organizations, and universities all over the world, in order to help academic refugees to find posts. In this he was notably successful, and many refugee scholars later expressed their personal gratitude to him for his sympathy and practical help. In 1937-8 he served as secretary to a survey of the refugee question undertaken under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs and the Rockefeller Foundation. 
In 1938 Adams was appointed secretary of the London School of Economics (LSE) and after the outbreak of war had to cope with the problems of evacuating the school to Cambridge. In 1941 he was granted leave of absence to take up an appointment with the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office. From 1942 to 1944 he was in America as deputy head of the British Political Warfare Mission to the United States. In 1945 he returned to London as assistant deputy director-general of the political intelligence department, a post which he gave up the following year; he devoted the rest of his career to university administration. 
In 1946 Adams became the secretary of the newly formed Inter-University Council for Higher Education Overseas, and he was involved in the foundation of universities and university colleges throughout the British Commonwealth. This experience led naturally to his appointment in 1955 as principal of the newly established University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. This was to prove the most taxing assignment of his career, as the running of a multiracial university in Rhodesia in the 1960s became increasingly difficult, especially after the unilateral declaration of Rhodesian independence in 1965. Adams was caught between the desire to maintain the college as a multiracial institution and his belief that it was essential to maintain academic standards, even if this meant fewer black students. At the same time, he believed that the future of the college depended on remaining on good terms with the Rhodesian government. As a result he was criticized both by those who accused him of discriminating against black students and compromising with the government and by those who were against any kind of multiracial education at all. 
Adams was always a man who preferred compromise to confrontation and it was unfortunate for him that, when he left Rhodesia on appointment as director of the LSE in 1967, he was faced with some hostility among a section of the LSE students on account of his position in Rhodesia. This added to the student unrest characteristic of universities all over the world in 1967-9. Adams showed considerable dignity in the face of personal attacks and uninformed criticism and was also supported by the sympathy of several of the refugee scholars whom he had helped thirty years earlier and who were outraged at the suggestion that he was in any sense a racist. These disturbances, which were on a very small scale compared with those in many universities in Europe and the USA, soon died down, and Adams was able to resume the task for which he was most suited, of being an efficient and humane administrator, dedicated to scholarly values and academic independence. 
Adams published in collaboration with H. W. Robinson a scholarly edition of 'The Diary of Robert Hooke, 1672-80' (1935). He was appointed OBE in 1945 and CMG in 1952, and was knighted in 1970. He retired in 1974 and died suddenly on 21 May 1975 while on a visit to Salisbury, Rhodesia, where he had gone to receive an honorary doctorate from the university of which he had once been head. He also had honorary degrees from Malta and Melbourne. 
James Joll', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30752


Adeane, Michael Edward, Baron Adeane (1910-1984), courtier, was born on 30 September 1910 in London, the only son of Captain Henry Robert Augustus Adeane of the Coldstream Guards, who was killed in action in 1914, and his wife, Victoria Eugenie (died 1969), daughter of Arthur John Bigge (later Lord Stamfordham). He was educated at Eton College (1923-8) and at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he achieved a second class (first division) in part one of the history tripos (1930) and a first class (second division) in part two (1931). The college made him an honorary fellow in 1971. 
Adeane then joined the Coldstream Guards, and from 1934 to 1936 was aide-de-camp to two successive governors-general of Canada, the earl of Bessborough and Lord Tweedsmuir. In 1937 he was appointed equerry and assistant private secretary to George VI, and accompanied the king and queen on their visit to Canada and the United States in the summer of 1939. On 10 January 1939 he married Helen ('c'.1920- 'c'.1995), elder daughter of Richard Chetwynd-Stapleton, stockbroker, of Headlands, Berkhamsted. They had a daughter and a son. On the outbreak of the Second World War he rejoined his regiment, being promoted to major in 1941. From 1942 to 1943 he was a member of the joint staff mission in Washington with the acting rank of lieutenant-colonel. From 1943 to 1945 he served with the 5th battalion Coldstream Guards as company commander and second-in-command. In the battle of Normandy he had to take over command of the battalion, was wounded in the stomach, and mentioned in dispatches. In 1945 he returned to Buckingham Palace and for the remainder of the reign served as assistant private secretary to George VI. In 1947 he was a member of the royal party on their visit to South Africa, and in 1952, having been seconded to the staff of Princess Elizabeth, was with her in Kenya at the time of her father's death. The new queen decreed that he should continue as one of her assistant private secretaries, which he did until, on the retirement of Sir Alan Lascelles on 1 January 1954, he became her principal private secretary, retaining this office until his retirement in 1972. He was also keeper of the queen's archives (1953-72). 
The three main duties of the queen's private secretary are to be the link between the monarch and her ministers, especially her prime ministers, to make the arrangements for her public engagements and for the numerous speeches which she is called upon to make, and to deal with her massive correspondence. 
The first twenty years of the reign were marked by demands for an ever expanding programme of public engagements at home and abroad, and by an intrusive, and not always charitable, scrutiny of the queen and her family by the media. It was largely due to Adeane that the monarchy was able to adjust to these pressures, while retaining its essential dignity and mystery. Although some judged his advice to be unduly cautious and the speeches which he drafted for the queen to be lacking in imagination, he was able to avoid the controversies to which a more adventurous private secretary might have exposed a constitutional sovereign. In his dealings with the queen he was by no means sycophantic, but was not prepared to pressure her to do things which she did not want to, unless they were constitutionally necessary. Thus, although it was suggested that it would be appropriate in India if she adopted the customary national form of greeting with clasped hands, Adeane did not press the queen to do something which did not come naturally to her. In relations with governments he adhered rigidly to the principle that the sovereign must accept ministerial advice, especially from the prime minister. This may have deterred him from contemplating advising her to express a contrary view to Sir Anthony Eden at the time of the Suez crisis, or from resisting ministerial advice to keep Sir Anthony Blunt in his appointment as surveyor of the queen's pictures after his treachery as a spy had been unmasked. 
Adeane had to deal with six British prime ministers and with many more from Commonwealth countries as well as with their governors-general. He treated all with equal courtesy and respect and was invariably well briefed on their personalities and policies. These qualities showed to particular advantage during overseas tours. During these years the queen visited almost every country in the Commonwealth, several of them more than once, and many foreign countries, including most of those in western Europe. Adeane was responsible for the arrangements for all these visits. He also performed a notable service to the royal family by his compelling evidence to the select committee of the House of Commons on the civil list in 1971 outlining the queen's workload and commitments. He gave a vivid description of the volume of this workload and, in particular, of its relentless regularity. Adeane listed the formidable number of audiences, investitures, privy councils, and garden parties held during each year -- including the weekly audiences with the prime minister of the day and the numerous provincial visits to every county in the United Kingdom. He estimated that the queen had to set aside up to three hours a day reading cabinet papers, Foreign Office dispatches, and telegrams and communications from Commonwealth countries, as well as many personal letters. But above all he emphasized that, unlike ministers or indeed any one of her subjects, she could not look forward to a period of retirement. Her commitment to her job was lifelong and unremitting. This led later to the civil list's being reviewed annually and submitted to parliament in the same way as a departmental budget. 
Professor Harold Laski wrote in 1942: 'The Secretary to the Monarch occupies to the Crown much the same position that the Crown itself in our system occupies to the Government; he must advise and encourage and warn.... The Royal Secretary walks on a tight-rope below which he is never unaware that an abyss is yawning.... A bad Private Secretary, who was rash or indiscreet or untrustworthy might easily make the system of constitutional monarchy unworkable. ('Fortnightly Review', 158, July-Dec 1942)' By these criteria, Adeane was highly successful. 
In his style of work Adeane closely resembled his grandfather Lord Stamfordham, of whom it was said that he was 'a man of persistent industry, making it his practice to finish the day's work within the day' ('DNB'). Like him too, he was 'regarded by his colleagues with a love which perhaps never wholly cast out fear'. His wisdom, sense of humour, and discretion endeared him to other members of the royal family and their households, to whom his advice was always available. But he could also be severe on any lack of tact or competence. He was a popular member of several dining clubs, having an acute, but subtle, sense of humour; and although he enjoyed conversation, he would never gossip about the royal family. A totally concentrated listener, he rarely came away from such occasions without useful information which he stored in a capacious and accurate memory. 
Adeane was at heart a countryman, a fine but unassuming shot and a skilful fisherman, though his opportunities for indulging in either sport were limited. He was an enthusiastic gardener, on the roof of his house in Windsor Castle and in the small gardens of the house in Chelsea and the cottage in Aberdeenshire which he made his homes in his retirement. He also painted in watercolours and was a voracious reader of biography, history, and Victorian novels, especially those of Anthony Trollope. Modest, even spartan in his personal life, he nevertheless appreciated good food and wine and liked to smoke a good cigar. He was entirely free from social, religious, and racial prejudice. In appearance he was not impressive, being little over 5 feet 6 inches tall and having lost most of his hair in his twenties. Although he was apt to suffer from hay fever in the summer, his sturdy, compact frame withstood other complaints and he was rarely absent from his desk. A house on the south Spanish coast at Moacar gave him a week or two's relaxation during the August holiday period. 
On his retirement in 1972 Adeane acquired several directorships, including those of Phoenix Assurance, the Diners Club, the Banque Belge, and the Royal Bank of Canada. He was also appointed chairman of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments and served as the queen's representative on the board of the British Library. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and a governor of Wellington College. His honours came in a steady progression after the war until his retirement. He was appointed MVO in 1946, CB in 1947, KCVO in 1951, KCB in 1955, GCVO in 1962, GCB in 1968, and on his retirement in 1972 received the Royal Victorian Chain. He was sworn of the privy council in 1953 and made a life peer in 1972. As a member of the House of Lords he sat on the cross-benches but spoke rarely. His son, Edward, was private secretary to the prince of Wales (1979-85), the third member of the Bigge family to serve the royal family in this most intimate appointment. Adeane died in Aberdeen on 30 April 1984 of heart failure after enjoying two days' fishing on the Dee. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. It was characteristic of his modesty that, by his special request, no thanksgiving service was held in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 30753


Adrian, Edgar Douglas, first Baron Adrian (1889-1977), physiologist, was born in London on 30 November 1889, the youngest of the three sons (there were no daughters) of Alfred Douglas Adrian, civil servant, and his wife, Flora Lavinia, daughter of Charles Howard Barton. His eldest brother lived for only a few days, while the other, Harold, who showed great promise, died at the age of twenty-two. In 1903 Adrian went as a day boy and king's scholar to Westminster School. He started in classics, but moved to the modern side in 1906. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge in 1908 as a major scholar in natural sciences, and was placed in the first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos (1910) and in part two (1911). While at Cambridge, he became known for his skill in roof climbing and obtained a half-blue in fencing. He also acquired a taste for hill walking and mountaineering which remained with him all his life. 
On the academic side, Adrian was most influenced by his Trinity supervisor, Keith Lucas, a young physiologist of great distinction. Adrian first collaborated with Lucas and then continued on his own in a study of the nerve impulse, which won him a fellowship at Trinity College in 1913. At that time the Cambridge school of physiology was at the height of its fame, but housed deplorably. In a memoir on Lucas, Adrian has left an amusing account of the way in which Lucas, F. G. Hopkins, A. V. Hill, J. Barcroft, W. M. Fletcher, W. B. Hardy, G. R. Mines, and other distinguished scientists were crowded together into cellar rooms, which flooded so easily that the inhabitants had to walk about on duckboards. In addition, 'A side door led to a dark chamber in which all the frogs were kept and beyond this was the centrifuge driven by a large gas engine of obsolete design which shook the building and added the smell of warm oil and half-burnt gas to that of frog and rat. ('Memoirs FRS', 25, 1979, 12)' Some months before the First World War, Adrian decided to abandon research for a few years in order to complete his medical degree. He began clinical training at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, in the summer of 1914 and started in earnest at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in July 1914. After acquiring a medical degree he worked on nerve injuries and shell-shock, first at the National Hospital, Queen Square, and later at the Connaught Military Hospital in Aldershot, where he remained until the end of the war, in spite of strenuous efforts to get to France. Later, Adrian wrote that he owed his interest in clinical neurology to Sir Francis Walshe and to Sir Adolph Abrahams. 
In 1919 Adrian returned to Cambridge to work in the physiological laboratory and to Trinity College, where he looked after the medical students, as well as lecturing and demonstrating in the university. For a time he continued with analytical electrophysiology of the kind which he had started with Lucas. These researches led to some excellent papers, but Adrian was clearly dissatisfied with this line of work, as he referred later to getting bogged down in somewhat unprofitable experiments. In 1925 he started to use a valve amplifier built to the design of the American H. S. Gasser, who with Erlanger was the first to record nerve impulses with a cathode ray oscilloscope and valve amplifier. The cathode ray tubes that existed in those days had such low actinic power that they would have been useless for Adrian's purposes, but he got by initially with home-made capillary electrometers, and later made good use of the excellent mechanical oscilloscope devised by his young colleague, Bryan H. C. Matthews. With these relatively inexpensive instruments Adrian and his colleagues produced a series of outstanding papers. The initial breakthrough was made by Adrian working on his own, perhaps with some help from Sybil Cooper, but he was joined later in 1925 by Yngve Zotterman from Sweden, with whom he subsequently wrote three distinguished papers. Other important collaborations were those with Rachel Matthews on the eye, with Detlev W. Bronk on motor impulses, with Bryan Matthews on electrical waves from the sensory cortex (Berger rhythm), and much later with G. Moruzzi on the motor cortex and pyramidal tracts. The main conclusions are summarized in three short books, all written versions of lectures: 'The Basis of Sensation' (1928), 'The Mechanism of Nervous Action' (1932), and 'The Physical Background of Perception' (1946). 
Adrian's work with Zotterman (1925-6) established beyond doubt that the nerve impulse is invariant, and that the intensity of sensation is conveyed by the frequency of impulses and the quality by the type of nerve fibre in action. There are subtle qualifications to this last principle, but it still stands as a broad generalization. Another very important conclusion is that adaptation to a steady stimulus generally takes place peripherally and that some sense organs, like those concerned with touch, adapt rapidly, whereas others, like muscle spindles, adapt very slowly, or not at all. 
In 1927-8 Adrian and Bronk showed that there is only one kind of impulse in a motor nerve fibre as well as in a sensory one, and that the force of muscular contraction, like the intensity of sensation, is graded by varying the frequency of nerve impulses and the number of nerve fibres in action. 
During the early 1930s Adrian became increasingly interested in the way in which the nervous system might generate electrical rhythms and this interest led to the well-known papers, written with Matthews and Yamagiwa, which consolidated the initial work of Hans Berger and helped to found the important clinical subject of electroencephalography. During the Second World War, Adrian did important experimental work on vestibular receptors, the cerebellum, and the motor and sensory cortex. His last studies on the sense of smell (1937-59) rank as an important contribution to a fascinating problem. 
Adrian received many honours, including the Nobel prize, shared with C. S. Sherrington, in 1932, the OM in 1942, and a peerage in 1955. He was professor of physiology at Cambridge from 1937 to 1951, master of Trinity College from 1951 to 1965, foreign secretary of the Royal Society (1946-50), president of the Royal Society (1950-55), chancellor of the University of Leicester (1957-71), and vice-chancellor (1957-9) and chancellor (1968-75) of the University of Cambridge. He was president of the British Association in 1954 and of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1960-61. Adrian's tenure of all these offices is particularly remembered for the magnificent speeches that he made at important ceremonial occasions. He attended the House of Lords as regularly as his many academic commitments allowed, sitting on the cross-benches and speaking mainly on medical and scientific problems or university affairs. Adrian received honorary degrees from twenty-nine universities, and was an honorary or foreign member of an even larger number of academies and scientific societies. 
In 1923 Adrian married Hester Agnes Pinsent (1899-1966) ['see 'Adrian, Hester Agnes, Lady Adrian], daughter of Hume Chancellor Pinsent, a solicitor in Birmingham, and Dame Ellen Frances Pinsent, distinguished for her work on mental health, an interest later shared by her daughter. They had two daughters and a son, the physiologist Richard Hume Adrian, second Baron Adrian (1927-1995). After his wife's death, Adrian returned to live in Trinity College. He died in the Evelyn Nursing Home in Cambridge on 4 August 1977. 
A. L. Hodgkin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30754


Albery, Sir Bronson James (1881-1971), theatre director, was born at Greenhithe, Kent, on 6 March 1881, the second in the family of three sons of James Albery (1838-1889), dramatist, and his wife, Mary Charlotte Moore (1861-1931), actress, later Lady Wyndham. He was named after the American dramatist Bronson Howard. His father died when he was eight and he and his two brothers were brought up by their mother, who had returned to the stage when James Albery was no longer able to write. He was educated at Uppingham School and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1903. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1904 but his legal career was brief, though the intricacies of theatrical contracts would never defeat him. He married in 1912 Una Gwynn (died 1981), daughter of Thomas William Rolleston, of Glasshouse, Shinrone, Irish scholar, poet, and friend of W. B. Yeats. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Albery's first theatrical venture, with Allan Aynesworth at the Criterion in 1914, was Cyril Harcourt's comedy, 'A Pair of Silk Stockings'; they put on two other plays that year. The war, in which he served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve from 1917 to 1919, ended, for the time being, his connection with the theatre, but this resumed in 1920 with a revival at the Kingsway of 'The Knight of the Burning Pestle' by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher. In this production by Nigel Playfair, which originated at the Birmingham repertory theatre and ran for ninety-seven performances, the very young Noel Coward surprisingly played the grocer's apprentice. 
From his mother Albery inherited his business sense, for, although Mary Moore was primarily a comedienne, it was her drive that led Sir Charles Wyndham to enlarge his theatrical empire -- which began at the Criterion -- and to build Wyndham's in 1899 and the New in 1903. Mary Moore had played in 'David Garrick' with Charles Wyndham in many revivals, so it was understandable that Bronson Albery's next choice of production should be a musical version of the play at the Queen's in 1922. He would now be of great help to his mother in the running of the three family theatres, and in 1922 Lewis Casson and Sybil Thorndike began their association with him. Sybil Thorndike's performance in 'The Cenci' at a special matinee at the New convinced G. B. Shaw that she would be perfect for Saint Joan. With some misgivings, as it had a long cast and was, unfashionably, a costume play, in 1924 Albery agreed to do 'Saint Joan', which presently broke all existing records at the theatre. 
When Albery found the family theatres' atmosphere restricting he was glad to help to establish the Arts Theatre Club in 1927. Nor was he obsessively commercial; when he saw the Compagnie des Quinze at the Vieux-Colombier in Paris he decided that discerning London audiences should be given a chance to see these actors. In 1931 he brought them, in 'Noe', to the Arts and then to the Ambassador's realizing, as he told W. A. Darlington, that 'the venture must lose'. After his mother's death in that year, he and Wyndham's son, Howard, were in joint command of the three theatres. From the Arts he transferred to the Criterion in 1932 in Ronald Mackenzie's 'Musical Chairs', with John Gielgud. This was the beginning of an association that would do much for both actor and manager. During his years at the New -- in 'Richard of Bordeaux', 'Hamlet', 'Romeo and Juliet', 'Noah', and 'The Seagull' -- Gielgud built his unchallenged position, and Albery would be regarded as a manager of distinction and taste. Though after 1935 they no longer worked together, they remained friends; Gielgud had always found Bronnie to be encouraging and never unduly interfering, but he was also shrewd enough to withdraw from the production of a play by Emlyn Williams in which Gielgud appeared and which ran a week. 
During the Second World War, while the New Theatre housed the Old Vic Company in seasons of classical acting at its best, Albery was its joint administrator from 1942 to 1944 with Tyrone Guthrie. After this he would be increasingly a theatre committee man, serving on such bodies as the Arts Council from 1948, the British Council drama advisory committee (1952-61), and the Society of West End Theatre Managers, of which he was president from 1941 to 1945 and 1952 to 1953. As a reader of plays his wife was of great help; perhaps through her influence he presented in 1946 the semi-autobiographical 'Red Roses for Me' by Sean O'Casey. His manner was quiet; he gave an impression of shyness, though at the Garrick Club he was a popular member and a particularly keen bridge player. He was knighted in 1949 and was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. His son, Sir Donald Arthur Rolleston Albery, succeeded him in management. Albery died in London on 21 July 1971. On 1 January 1973 the New Theatre, the home of his greatest successes, was renamed the Albery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30755


Aldridge, John Arthur Malcolm (1905-1983), painter and gardener, was born near Woolwich, London, on 26 July 1905, the second of the three sons (there were no daughters) of Major John Barttelot Aldridge DSO of the Royal Field Artillery and his wife, Margaret Jessica Goddard, the daughter of a Leicester architect. His father died when he was three, and his mother subsequently married again and had a daughter. He won scholarships both to Uppingham School and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he obtained a second in classical honour moderations (1926) and a third in 'literae humaniores' (1928). At Oxford his diverse activities included both rugby and the Opera Club, but his interest in painting was already strong; with the intention of teaching himself to paint, he moved to Hammersmith in 1928. His work came to the attention of Ben Nicholson, who in 1930 invited him to exhibit in London with the Seven & Five Society. In 1933 he held his first one-man show, and a year later some of his paintings were chosen for the Venice Biennale. 
During the 1930s Aldridge was closely associated with a group which included Robert Graves, Norman Cameron, Laura Riding, Len Lye, and Lucie Brown, whom he was later to marry. Both Deya, Majorca, which Graves made his home, and Place House, Great Bardfield, Essex, bought by Aldridge in 1933, were centres of vigorous literary and artistic activity; these included productions of the Seizin Press. Aldridge notably illustrated Laura Riding's 'The Life of the Dead' (1934), and also designed the dust-jackets for most of Graves's novels. Towards the end of the decade he began to design wallpapers, as did Edward Bawden, then also living in Great Bardfield. In 1939 Aldridge's name was included among those artists whom the third Viscount Esher proposed should be exempted from military service. In 1940 he married (Cecilia) Lucie (Leeds) Brown, daughter of Isaac Ebenezer Leeds Saunders, a farmer of Clayhithe, near Cambridge. 
Between 1941 and 1945 Aldridge served in the Royal Army Service Corps and, after being commissioned, in the intelligence corps. During his time in north Africa and Italy, he made many drawings and watercolours, some of which are a valuable record of army and civilian life in wartime. He did distinguished work as an interpreter of air photographs. 
After demobilization, Aldridge returned to Great Bardfield and resumed both his painting in oils and the care of his garden. In 1949 William Coldstream, recently appointed head of the Slade School of Fine Art, invited him to become a part-time member of staff at the school. For the next twenty-one years, until his retirement in 1970, and although without any formal art school training himself, Aldridge proved a successful and much-liked teacher. In 1948 he first exhibited at the Royal Academy; he was elected an associate in 1954, and Royal Academician in 1963. He played an active part in the academy's affairs, serving several times on the hanging committee. Locally, he was one of the principal organizers of an interesting experiment in the 1950s, when a number of painters and designers living in or near Great Bardfield exhibited their work in their own houses. 
As a painter, Aldridge was primarily interested in landscape and vernacular buildings, particularly in Essex, abroad in Italy and France, and in Majorca, on visits to Robert Graves. He also produced some noteworthy still-life paintings, and a few portraits, including one of Robert Graves, which was later acquired by the National Portrait Gallery. His early work made a considerable impression; it had a freshness and directness, and the description 'stark and wiry' suits it well. This economical formality began to change during the 1930s and, after the war, he became more concerned with detailed, accurate representation, perhaps in part because he had little liking for the then fashionable abstract and decorative painting. His interest in gardening and painting ran closely together; as he wrote in 1959, he saw the development of a garden as 'a process which combines selection, precision and an understanding of the nature and possibilities of the materials in a way which is analogous to painting'. His friendship with the classical architect Raymond Erith was an important influence on him; a common passion for gardening drew him to near neighbours such as Sir Cedric Morris and John Nash. Following the dissolution of his first marriage in 1970 he married that year Margareta (Gretl) Anna Maria Cameron, widow of the poet (John) Norman Cameron and daughter of Dr Friederich Viktor Bajardi, Hofrat at Graz. She died early in 1983. There were no children of either marriage. 
Aldridge was a gentle, friendly man, of great charm, with a scholarly interest in painting, architecture, and gardening. In appearance he was tall and spare. He was a generous host in his beautiful Tudor house, in itself a work of art which owed much to the taste of his first wife, Lucie. It was there that he died on 3 May 1983. Examples of his work are in the Tate collection and in public galleries in Manchester, Leeds, and Aberdeen. 
Anne Whiteman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30756


Alexander, (Conel) Hugh O'Donel (1909-1974), chess player and cryptanalyst, was born in Cork on 19 April 1909, the eldest of four children of Conel William Long Alexander (1879-1920), professor of engineering at University College, Cork, and his wife, Hilda Barbara Bennett (1881-1964), of Birmingham. On his father's death the family moved to Birmingham, where he attended King Edward's School. After winning the British boys' championship in 1926, he was soon recognized as one of the future hopes of British chess. 
In 1928 Alexander went up to King's College, Cambridge, on a mathematics scholarship. By 1931 he was playing on top board for Cambridge, winning eleven games in succession. In 1932 he came second in the British championship. He left Cambridge with a first in 1931, but without the star indicating special distinction and so did not get a fellowship. This he rightly attributed to playing too much chess. However, Professor G. H. Hardy described him as the only genuine mathematician he knew who did not become a professional mathematician. Alexander married Enid Constance Crichton (1900-1982), daughter of Ronald William Neate, sea captain, on 22 December 1934. They had two sons (the elder of whom, Sir Michael O'Donel Bjarne Alexander (1936-2002), was British ambassador to NATO from 1986 to 1992). 
From 1932 to 1938 Alexander taught mathematics at Winchester and made his name in international chess. He played with success for England in the biennial international team tournaments, rising to first board at Buenos Aires in 1939. He came equal second with Paul Keres ahead of some of the world's best players at the Hastings Christmas congress in 1938 and won the British championship in the same year. He then became head of research in the John Lewis Partnership, London. 
In February 1940 Alexander joined Hut 6 (army and air force Enigma) at the Government Code and Cypher School (GCCS) at Bletchley Park, and he was quickly placed in charge of a watch. He moved to Hut 8 (naval Enigma) in March 1941, as deputy head under Alan Turing. Documents captured in the spring led to breakthroughs which enabled Hut 8 to solve the main Kriegsmarine cipher, codenamed Dolphin by GCCS, from August onwards. 
Alexander was outstanding at a Bayesian probability system invented by Turing, called Banburismus, which he considerably improved. Banburismus made the production of operationally useful decodes possible by greatly reducing the number of tests on the 'bombes' (high-speed key-finding aids), which were in very short supply until mid-1943. On Trafalgar day (21 October) 1941, with Turing and two colleagues, he made a very unconventional, but successful, appeal direct to Winston Churchill for some junior clerks, who 'for some mysterious reason seemed to be scarcer than University mathematicians' (Alexander, 30); without them, the breaking of Dolphin was being delayed for about twelve critical hours each day. 
Alexander became head of Hut 8 about November 1942, when Turing was in America, but had been the 'de facto' head for some time, since Turing was uninterested in administration. Alexander transformed Hut 8 into a highly efficient instrument for delivering decodes speedily to Hut 4 (naval section). He was 'a quite splendid head of Hut 8' (private information, S. Wylie) and 'a model manager [who] treated us cryptographers as colleagues and was remarkably tolerant of our foibles' (private information, R. Noskwith). But he also led the way in many technical developments, such as using U-boat short signals as 'cribs' (probable plain text, needed for bombe 'menus'), which solved a potentially catastrophic crisis in mid-March 1943, at the height of the battle of the Atlantic. Stuart Milner-Barry, from Hut 6, found him 'an ideal colleague' who 'always took the broadest view of the issues involved' (private information, S. Milner-Barry). 
When the US navy code-breaking unit, OP-20-G, assumed responsibility for breaking Shark (the Atlantic U-boats' cipher) at the end of 1943, Alexander undertook a range of tasks, mainly on machine ciphers. He played a major role, with OP-20-G, in solving traffic on the complex Coral cipher machine (JNA 20) used by Japanese naval attaches. Deciphered Coral signals from the Japanese naval mission in Germany yielded vital intelligence, especially on technical developments such as the advanced high-speed type XXI and XXIII U-boats and German jet aircraft. He was also chairman of an important committee dealing with a rewirable reflecting rotor ('D') for Enigma, which the Luftwaffe introduced in January 1944, and maintained a watching brief on Hut 8. 
Alexander formally transferred to the naval section in October 1944, to carry out research on the principal Japanese naval code, JN 25, which was something of an anticlimax after the excitement of naval Enigma. Although GCCS was largely left to tackle virtually obsolete versions of JN 25, which OP-20-G, being the leader in this area, decided to bypass, Alexander still put his best into the work, and devised new Bayesian scoring methods to counter the increasing complexities of the code. In mid-1945 he spent about six weeks as the head of the code-breaking section of HMS 'Anderson' in Colombo, where he helped to accelerate the supply of signals intelligence for the Eastern Fleet and to improve morale. 
Much is owed to Alexander and the Hut 8 code-breakers. Although without intelligence from naval Enigma the Kriegsmarine would still have been defeated in the long run, the cost in human life in the global conflict would have been even more terrible than it was. 
Alexander returned to John Lewis in late 1945 but, realizing that cryptanalysis was his true vocation, joined the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) (as GCCS became) in mid-1946. He was promoted to head of section H (cryptanalysis) in 1949 and, refusing promotion, remained in that post until his retirement. He promoted several new cryptanalytic techniques, and was a strong advocate of GCHQ's massive investment in computers. In chess, he was first at Hastings in 1946-7 and joint first with the grand master of the USSR, David Bronstein, in Hastings in 1953. But gradually his work lessened his participation in chess. 
GCHQ was very reluctant to let him go until 1971, when he was two years over retirement age. The National Security Agency (NSA), GCHQ's United States counterpart, held him in such high esteem that it then tried hard to recruit him. Fortunately, although tempted, he declined. The director of NSA recalled that he had already made a 'monumental' contribution to Anglo-American work on signals intelligence (private information, N. Gayler), and to this crucial part of 'the special relationship' between Britain and the United States. 
On retiring from GCHQ Alexander concentrated on writing about chess. He wrote several excellent books, and was chess correspondent of the 'Sunday Times', the 'Financial Times', the 'Evening News', and 'The Spectator'. A chess amateur all his life, had it not been for the war he might well have aspired to the world championship title. Mikhail Botvinnik (the world champion from 1948 to 1963, except for two brief periods) considered that 'with his urge for overcoming and taming opposition, with his enthusiasm for uncompromising struggle, Alexander pioneered the way for British players to modern, complicated and daring chess; chess players will never forget him' (private information). 
Alexander was that rarest of men: a superbly skilled cryptanalyst who was also an excellent manager. He also combined a razor-keen intelligence with considerable energy and enthusiasm. His exceptional technical skills, and his gifts of leadership, man management, and administrative ability, made him an inspiring head of both Hut 8 at Bletchley and section H in GCHQ. He became an almost legendary figure to the intelligence communities of Great Britain and the USA. He was appointed OBE (1946), CBE (1955), and CMG (1970). Hugh Alexander was a most vivid and attractive personality, who delighted his friends with his gaiety, humour, and warmth. A magnificent talker, he loved to argue but was ever ready to see his opponent's point of view. Alexander died at Cheltenham on 15 February 1974 and was buried at Solihull. 


@@@@@


doc= 30757


Alice, Princess, countess of Athlone (1883-1981), granddaughter of Queen Victoria and diplomatic service wife, was born Alice Mary Victoria Augusta Pauline at Windsor Castle on 25 February 1883. She was the elder child and only daughter of Prince Leopold George Duncan Albert, first duke of Albany (1853-1884), Queen Victoria's fourth and youngest son, and his wife, Princess Helen of Waldeck-Pyrmont (1861-1922). Her father died of haemophilia little more than a year after her birth and she was brought up by her mother at Claremont House, near Esher. Lewis Carroll, who met this other Alice with the Cecil family at Hatfield House when she was six, described her as 'a sweet little girl, though with rather unruly spirits' ('Letters', 2.743). She, too, had her reservations about their supposed friendship: 'He was always making grown-up jokes to us,' she confided, 'and we thought him awfully silly' (personal knowledge). 
On 10 February 1904 Princess Alice was married to the younger brother of the future Queen Mary, Prince Alexander of Teck (1874-1957) ['see 'Cambridge, Alexander Augustus Frederick William Alfred George]. A serving officer in the British army, he abandoned his German princely title in 1917, adopted by royal licence the family name of Cambridge, and was created earl of Athlone. 
Princess Alice's lifelong vivacity concealed anxiety and sorrow. Her brother, Prince Charles Edward, second duke of Albany, had at the age of fifteen been taken away from Eton College to be brought up in Germany as heir to his uncle, the reigning duke of Coburg. He entered on his unfortunate inheritance in 1900, fought for his adopted country during the First World War, and was deposed in 1918. He later became a fervent supporter of the Nazi regime. These events naturally distressed Princess Alice, whose heart was torn between patriotism and affection for an only brother. 
As wife of the governor-general of South Africa in 1923-31 and of Canada in 1940-46, Princess Alice proved a memorable proconsul in her own right: graceful, sympathetic, and perpetually amused. But tragedy struck again in 1928. Her son, Rupert Alexander George Augustus, Viscount Trematon ('b'. 1907), had inherited the haemophilia of his grandfather, Prince Leopold. He died of injuries in a motoring accident from which others might have recovered. A younger son, Maurice Francis George, had died in 1910 before he was six months old. There was also one daughter of the marriage, Lady May Helen Emma Cambridge ('b'. 1906), who married a soldier, Henry Abel Smith, governor of Queensland from 1958 to 1966. 
From their marriage until 1923 the princess and her husband lived in Henry III Tower, Windsor Castle. Later they had an apartment in Kensington Palace, with a country place at Brantridge Park, Sussex. Lord Athlone's death in 1957 dissolved a partnership of more than half a century but did not deflect his widow from a way of life both industrious and convivial. Well into her tenth decade, she remained an active patron of many institutions; the Royal School of Needlework and the Women's Transport Service earned her particular interest. Princess Alice's leisure hours were no less productive, and she would continue to knit even while walking up a mountain at Balmoral. 
A sense of adventure as well as of thrift led Princess Alice to travel about London by bus. For many years she similarly crossed the Atlantic each winter in a banana boat, combining her duties as chancellor (1950-71) of the University of the West Indies with a holiday in Jamaica. Several times she revisited South Africa and made the long journey to stay with her son-in-law and daughter in Australia. 
Although below middle height, Princess Alice had a patrician presence, with aquiline features, observant eyes, and a stylish sense of fashion. She was an engaging talker and needed little prompting to recall life at Windsor under Queen Victoria, whose unsuspected laughter still rang in the ears of her last surviving granddaughter almost a century later. Not all her memories were benign. She never forgave W. E. Gladstone for having cheated her family of a whole year's civil list when her father died a few days before the start of the fiscal year; or Sir Winston Churchill for filling her drawing-room with pungent cigar smoke during the Quebec conference of 1943. Some of these recollections she confided to an entertaining volume of memoirs, 'For my Grandchildren' (1966). Her views on public affairs were emphatic and not always predictable. When a colonial governor of radical bent expressed his belief in universal suffrage, she replied: 'Foot, I have never heard such balderdash in my life.' Yet she was the first member of the royal family publicly to advocate birth control, and like her cousin George V did not harbour a trace of racial prejudice. 
Princess Alice, the last surviving member of the Royal Order of Victoria and Albert, was also appointed GBE in 1937 and GCVO in 1948. She had many honorary degrees. She died on 3 January 1981 at Kensington Palace in her ninety-eighth year. After a funeral service in St George's Chapel, Windsor, her remains were buried at Frogmore. 
Kenneth Rose', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30758


Allen, Norman Percy (1903-1972), metallurgist, was born in Wrexham, north Wales, on 5 June 1903, the fifth of ten children, seven girls and three boys, of Sidney Edward Allen, an accountant in the borough treasurer's department at Wrexham, and his wife, Emily Eliza Davis. He was educated at Burton upon Trent Boys' Grammar School from 1913 to 1920. He was awarded the prestigious Linley open scholarship at Sheffield University, studied metallurgy there under Professor C. H. Desch, and graduated with a second-class honours degree in 1923. After a two-year spell in the university working on low melting point zinc base die-casting alloys he joined Swansea University College in 1925 to work on the porosity of copper and copper alloys. There he met Olive Gwendolen Williams, his future wife. She was a native of Swansea, where her father, J. H. Williams, was a tin-plate and metal merchant. In 1928 Allen joined Birmingham University as assistant lecturer, and he was married in 1929. There were two sons and one daughter of the marriage. 
At Birmingham, Allen studied the mechanism responsible for the porosity of commercial tough pitch copper. Allen showed that this was related to the presence of hydrogen in the melt in thermodynamical equilibrium with copper oxide present, and that on solidification this would lead to the evolution of hydrogen gas or steam, forming small blowholes. On the basis of this work Allen was awarded the DSc degree by Birmingham University in 1934. 
In 1933 Allen joined the Mond Nickel Research Laboratory in Birmingham, where he remained until 1944. He was second in command to Dr L. B. Pfeil. Apart from his administrative duties for the research programme as a whole, he was involved in a major research project on the transformation characteristics of low alloy steels, in particular on the effect of alloying elements such as nickel and chromium, which enabled steel to be hardened in thick sections on cooling from high temperature; this helped to economize on these strategic elements which were in short supply during the war. From 1939 he and his colleagues developed the Nimonic alloys suitable for high temperature applications in gas turbines. These alloys transformed the Whittle engine into practical reality, and even today remain the standard blading material for many aircraft and land-based gas turbine installations throughout the world. Allen made a major contribution to the speed with which these alloys became available for exploitation by engine designers. 
In 1944 Allen joined the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) as superintendent of the metallurgy division, and initiated a good mix of programmes, ranging from the academic to the applied. While he was conversant with the whole of the work going on, he was personally involved with a number of the projects. In 1963 Allen initiated the superconductivity project, aimed at promoting the application of superconductors in industry. 
The NPL was also very much involved in the development of materials for high temperature service. Systematic studies were carried out in the division on creep of Nimonic alloys for gas turbines, and on a variety of alloys used in power station components -- for example, superheater tubes and steam pipes. These careful and objective researches were a major factor which enabled the turbine designer to increase continually the size, operating temperature, and efficiency of the turbine units. 
Following the catastrophic failures of certain welded ships during the war, a long-term investigation was initiated in 1946 under Allen's leadership to determine the effects of alloying elements on the mechanical properties of pure iron. This work contributed significantly to improved steel making procedures in the late 1950s, and to an understanding of the complex mechanical properties. 
In 1966 Allen was appointed deputy director of the NPL and until he retired at the end of 1969 he was concerned with the administrative changes needed in the formation of the materials group which absorbed the metallurgy division. He received many honours, including election to the Royal Society in 1956, the Bessemer medal of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1965, and the platinum medal of the Institute of Metals in 1967. He was president of the Institution of Metallurgists in 1961-2, was made an honorary fellow of the Institute of Metals in 1971, and was appointed CB in 1966. He had honorary doctorates from Prague (1964) and Sheffield (1966). 
Allen was short and stockily built and his face was notable for the bushy eyebrows, the owlish glasses, and an ever present smile. He was full of energy, and worked at a pace which his staff sometimes found difficult to match. He was very good at stating a case, and he appeared to enjoy an argument. He was conscientious and a very hard worker, who set high standards. He did not tolerate anything slipshod in experimental work or argument. At home he took a full interest in his family and their development. He enjoyed walking and gardening and in his later years became an enthusiastic amateur painter. Allen died suddenly on 23 February 1972, at his home, 10 Firlands, Ellesmere Road, Weybridge, Surrey, when influenza brought on the failure of an already weakened heart. 
P. B. Hirsch', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30759


Amoroso, Emmanuel Ciprian (1901-1982), veterinary embryologist and endocrinologist, was born on 16 September 1901 in Port of Spain, Trinidad, the third child in the family of eight sons (one of them adopted) and three daughters of Thomas Amoroso, bookkeeper and later estate owner, and his wife, Juliana Centeno. After attending St Thomas's preparatory school, Trinidad, in 1913 he entered St Mary's College, Trinidad, and took the junior Cambridge certificate examination in 1917. Amoroso left school early after suffering an attack of typhoid which left him virtually blind in one eye. At the age of twenty-one he nevertheless arrived in Dublin where he enrolled in University College at the National University in Ireland. He supported himself at first by selling newspapers outside the main railway station and later by teaching anatomy. An outstanding student, he won several prizes and in the final medical examination he achieved the highest marks ever attained. He graduated BSc in 1926 and MB BCh BAO (Dublin) in 1929. He also found time to become a useful amateur heavyweight boxer. In 1930 he was awarded a travelling studentship which enabled him to undertake postgraduate studies in Berlin and Freiburg. To ensure that he could read scientific publications in the original text and to avoid any bias introduced by another translator, Amo, as he was by then universally known, began to learn all the European languages. He was to become a highly competent linguist. After his period of study in Germany he moved to University College, London, where his interest in experimental embryology was excited and in 1934 he obtained his PhD degree, the first of a bewildering array of higher degrees and fellowships from many parts of the world. 
In 1934 Amoroso joined the Royal Veterinary College as a senior assistant in charge of histology and embryology. Amoroso's most difficult task on joining the college was to overcome the racism of many of his academic colleagues who thought him 'not even the equal of that sprinkling of Asian students whom it was his duty to teach. Even his professor, James McCunn, turned against him, and the students were encouraged to do likewise' (Short, 7). The support of a handful of staff and outsiders helped Amoroso to survive this difficult period. 
On 21 March 1936 Amoroso began a short-lived marriage to Elsie Mary ('Peter') Pole 
(or Harvey; 'b'. 1903/4)
, daughter of Henry Pole, an accountant. There were no children. After his marriage failed he remained a private and rather lonely person. 
In 1948 Amoroso was appointed to the chair of physiology at the Royal Veterinary College and for a while also acted as professor of anatomy. In 1950 he became professor of veterinary physiology at London University. In 1957 he was elected FRS; he also held fellowships of the Royal College of Physicians (1966), Royal College of Surgeons (1960), Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (1965), and Royal College of Pathologists (1973). He became an honorary associate of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (1959) and of the British Veterinary Association. In 1964 he was awarded the MD of the National University of Ireland. He held numerous honorary doctorates. 
Amoroso's interests and research ranged over an extraordinarily diverse group of subjects including cancer and the first studies of the seried veins of the neck of the giraffe. However, his greatest contribution to knowledge lay in the field of reproductive biology, notably in studies of the structure and function of the placenta. He published many papers and stimulating reviews but much of his thought, philosophy, and work was encapsulated in his outstanding chapter in volume 2 of 'Marshall's Physiology of Reproduction' (3rd edn, ed. A. S. Parkes, 1952). Amoroso was awarded the Mary Marshall medal of the Society of Fertility and the Carl Hartman medal of the Society for the Study of Reproduction. It was, however, the presentation of the Dale medal by the Society for Endocrinology at the symposium on 29 September 1981 to honour his eightieth birthday which gave him particular pleasure and delighted his many friends and colleagues. 
Amoroso was a practical supporter of the learned societies with which he concerned himself and several benefited from his financial acumen. As a chairman of scientific meetings he was outstanding. He possessed the ability to distil complex arguments and to identify key facts from which he presented a lucid and elegant summary. His mastery of the English language was complete and generations of students were captivated by the literary flair of this man who was slightly larger than life with a touch of flamboyance -- cigar, pocket handkerchief, and bow-tie -- who referred to himself as an Afro-Saxon. He was an inspired teacher as well as research worker and set many others on the road to scientific success. Yet he had time for the less successful and did not forget the difficulties he faced in his early life or the help he received. It was an indication of the impact he made on students and on veterinary preclinical teaching that twenty years after his retirement and six years after his death a new award for outstanding veterinary preclinical research should be designated the Amoroso award. 
On Amoroso's retirement in 1968 the University of London conferred on him the title of emeritus professor and the Royal Veterinary College awarded him its highest honour by making him a fellow. In 1969 Amoroso was appointed CBE and in 1977 he received the Trinity cross, the highest national award of Trinidad and Tobago. Retirement only marked a further stage in his veterinary career and was followed by a series of visiting professorships and other posts in Santiago, Sydney, Nairobi, and Guelph and by a long period as special professor in the University of Nottingham. He was slowed only by incipient heart disease and continued to work at the Institute of Animal Physiology at Babraham before he died on 30 October 1982 at the home of some friends in Leeds. A memorial service was held at St Peter's Church, Babraham, on 6 January 1983 for his close friends and colleagues; this was followed by a memorial mass at the church of St Anselm and St Cecilia, Kingsway, London, on 28 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 30760


Amory, Derick Heathcoat, first Viscount Amory (1899-1981), industrialist and politician, was born on 26 December 1899 in London, the second son of Sir Ian Murray Heathcoat Heathcoat-Amory, second baronet (1865-1931), and his wife, Alexandra Georgina (died 1942), daughter of Vice-Admiral Henry George Seymour. Derry, as he was familiarly called, was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he achieved a third in modern history in 1921, and settled down to a business career in the family's textile business in Tiverton, Devon. In the course of the next quarter-century only war service really interrupted his work for John Heathcoat & Co., of which he became managing director, leading by example and -- like Stanley Baldwin -- placing a high value on traditional working relationships. His early biographer was, however, insistent that whereas Baldwin's Worcestershire inheritance was Anglican and feudal, Amory's in Tiverton was 'puritan, radical, nonconformist, squire-less'. The view from within the firm was that 'Mr Derry' was 'the born executive -- slow-moving, tenacious, patient, never deflected by personal considerations from what he held to be the general good' (Gore Booth, 19, 44). This liberal view of owners' responsibility within modern industry was powerfully reinforced when he made over a large part of his personal capital (and persuaded his wealthier elder brother to do the same) in order to create a trust fund for the benefit of Heathcoats workers. 
Amory's sense of duty took him on to the Devon county council for twenty years from 1932, where he chaired the education committee. He was also county commissioner for the Boy Scouts from 1930 to 1945. In the same spirit of support for the young he was later a leading advocate of the Outward Bound Trust, and secretary of the House of Commons' own scout troop. Amory served in the Territorial Army during the 1930s, and during the Second World War he was a staff lieutenant-colonel with the Royal Artillery, seeing action at Salerno. In 1944, responsible for training paratroops for the Arnhem landings, he insisted on taking part along with his trainees, and was injured and taken prisoner during the operation. 
In 1945 Amory stepped into the vacancy left by a cousin killed in action to become Conservative MP for Tiverton, his earlier Liberalism now abandoned in admiration for Churchill and an anti-socialism that had been enhanced by Labour's upsurge. He remained, though, an extremely moderate man with little of the fire of party politics in him -- the despair of Conservative Party image makers when he became chancellor. When appointed to his party's industrial policy committee in 1946 he moderated the conflicting views of other members, and transmitted to them the consensual, co-partnership approach to industrial relations that he had inherited and fostered at Heathcoats. He was thus an important, if inconspicuous, influence on the 'Industrial Charter' which the Conservatives published in 1947, a landmark in their recovery from the election defeat in 1945. His moderation even more clearly signalled his support, throughout his parliamentary career, for the abolition of the death penalty, a view shared by few tory leaders of his generation. 
Though Amory made only a limited impact within the opposition period of 1945-51, he was appointed to ministerial office as soon as Churchill regained power after the general election of 1951. His promotion was so surprising that he himself is said to have asked whether Churchill had really meant to send for Julian Amery. He served initially as minister of state for pensions (1951-3), where his moderate politics reassured voters fearing that the Conservatives intended to attack the new welfare state. He had already served as a representative of the war-disabled, on the pensions central advisory committee. Then after a short period as minister of state at the Board of Trade (1953-4), he joined the cabinet as minister of agriculture, fisheries, and food on 28 July 1954, after his predecessor Thomas Dugdale had been forced out over the Crichel Down affair. 
Churchill needed a reassuring presence at agriculture, preferably someone versed in the priorities of the countryside, and he found this in the member for Tiverton. Amory, with added responsibility for food policy, carried through the final demolition of wartime rationing as economic conditions improved, a policy that did no harm at all to the Conservative Party's chances of re-election in 1955. He also introduced and passed the 'Agriculture Act' (1957). This completed the long process of disengaging the industry from wartime controls and introducing the price support which remained in place for many years, a remarkable feat which was achieved without alienating either farmers or consumers. Eden kept him at agriculture throughout his premiership (1955-7), as more surprisingly did Macmillan when he succeeded Eden in January 1957. Though one of the cabinet critics of the Suez adventure, Amory loyally accepted the majority view. He was the only one of those whose names were mentioned in the press as Eden's ministerial critics who immediately denied the press reports and pledged his complete support for the prime minister and the invasion. 
A year later Macmillan suffered the resignation of his chancellor of the exchequer, Peter Thorneycroft, after the cabinet refused in January 1958 to agree to expenditure cuts deemed necessary to reduce inflation. He turned to Amory to restore business and party confidence in government policy. Macmillan probably also saw Amory as a more biddable chancellor than Thorneycroft had been, and knew that he would not cause him real difficulties as the government proceeded to reflate the economy in advance of the next general election, due in about two years. Amory therefore took over the Treasury on 7 January 1958, only a few weeks before a budget that was bound to be contentious, and with the previous team of Thorneycroft, Nigel Birch, and Enoch Powell tempted to criticize in order to justify their own departures. 
It says a good deal for the respect with which Amory was already regarded in the Commons and the financial press that the budget of 1958 was a personal triumph. He did enough to get the economy moving after a period of sluggish growth, but continued to proclaim his adherence to Thorneycroft's war on inflation. As his time at the Treasury went on, however, and under constant expansionist urgings from Macmillan, this hard-won early respect was partially lost, with a steady sequence of moves to free up credit. A second expansionist budget in 1959, cutting both interest and purchase tax when growth was already surging ahead, did something to ensure Conservative re-election in the following October, but reluctance to insist on remedial action when Macmillan still did not want to apply the brakes, either then or in his final budget in 1960, helped to prepare the way for the recession, credit squeeze, and major economic setbacks of 1961-3. It is only fair to add that Amory presided over a period of steady economic growth, low unemployment, and sustained business confidence, and that he shared with Macmillan, as a result of his experiences in Tiverton in the 1930s, an absolute abhorrence of unemployment. 
Amory remained at the exchequer until July 1960, having made it clear at the time of the general election in 1959 that he would retire from ministerial office when he was sixty, and to general amazement insisting on actually doing so. This was surprising in part because some Conservative MPs by then saw him as a potential successor to Macmillan, though whether such support would have survived the economic consequences of his Treasury policies during 1961 is far from clear. The premiership was in any event an outcome well beyond the ambitions of Amory himself, who stepped down in 1960 not just from the government but from his Commons seat too, making the break irrevocable. 
Amory was made a viscount in September 1960, on his departure from the Commons, and succeeded his brother as fourth baronet in 1972. He devoted the rest of his life mainly to public service, most prominently as chairman of the Medical Research Council (1960-61 and 1965-9) and as British high commissioner in Canada (1961-3). Latterly, his activities centred on Devon, where he became a deputy lieutenant in 1962, his other positions including the chancellorship of the University of Exeter, chairmanship of the Exeter Cathedral appeal, and presidency of the County Councils' Association. He also partially resumed his business career, as a director of ICI and chairman of Heathcoats. He died at his home, the Wooden House, Chevithorne, near Tiverton, on 20 January 1981. Since he was unmarried, the viscountcy became extinct, the baronetcy passing to his brother William (1901-1982). 
During a visit to India in 1957, Amory explained to an audience in Bombay: 'I began as a businessman, and it took me almost twenty years to get over my initial distrust of politicians, whom I had heard defined as people who always looked for trouble and found it, generally made wrong diagnoses and consequently applied wrong remedies.' He was a stocky, bespectacled, modest, and earnest-minded man, and the celebration of his career in the naming of a Yorkshire pub as the Jolly Minister (the inn sign depicting him on horseback, as minister of agriculture) was among the most improbable events of the 1950s. Yet he was easily the most prominent of the patient, committed, moderate, and trustworthy men who did so much in office to restore the Conservatives' credibility in the generation after 1945. It was also highly symbolic of those conservative times when, on his appointment as chancellor in 1957, he refused to move into 11 Downing Street, preferring to remain in his tiny bachelor flat in Pimlico. When a journalist suggested that he would have to secure the help of a sister-in-law with official entertaining, he replied in tones of horror, 'Good gracious, no. They all have husbands and they are far too busy' (Gore Booth, 183). 


@@@@@


doc= 30761


Anderson, Dame Kitty (1903-1979), headmistress, was born on 4 July 1903 in St Anne's, Lancashire, the only daughter and eldest of three children of John Herbert Anderson, and his wife, Lizzie Dawson. Her father moved from St Anne's to Middlesbrough as a chartered accountant in private practice. From the High School for Girls, Saltburn by the Sea, where she was head girl, Kitty Anderson went on to Royal Holloway College, London, the first girl from the school ever to win a university place. There she read history. In 1925 she went to the London Day Training College, and took a teacher's diploma. She had always wanted to teach, and indeed had announced her intention of becoming a headmistress on her first day at high school. In 1926 she took a post at a co-educational school in Hull, Craven Street secondary school, but in 1930 she went back to Royal Holloway, as Christie scholar, to work for a PhD in Elizabethan history. She received her doctorate in 1933. 
Kitty Anderson's next teaching post was at Burlington School, London, an old charitable foundation. There she very soon became second mistress. At the beginning of the Second World War, in September 1939, she left to become headmistress of King's Norton Grammar School, Birmingham. At first the school was divided between Birmingham and Gloucestershire, half of the girls and staff being evacuated. She had to divide her time between the two parts of the school. Nevertheless she was well known, as headmistress, not only for her excellent history teaching, but also for giving to the school a sense of unity and purpose. She stayed at King's Norton for five years, and then in 1944 became head of the North London Collegiate School, a direct-grant girls' school, and there she stayed until her retirement. 
During her twenty years at North London, Kitty Anderson became an outstanding figure in the educational world. She was a member of the Carr-Saunders committee on education for commerce from 1946 to 1949; president of the Association of Headmistresses from 1954 to 1956, and a member of the National Advisory Council for the Training and Supply of Teachers from 1953 to 1961. She was a member of the University Grants Committee (1959-61) and of the committee on higher education chaired by Lord Robbins (1961-3). In 1966 she became a member of the Public Schools Commission, under the chairmanship of John Newsom. This was a committee set up by government with an explicitly political task: 'To advise on the best way of integrating the public schools with the state system of education... and to create a socially mixed entry into the schools, in order to reduce the divisive influence which they now exert.' Much as she enjoyed the work on this committee, travelling round with congenial colleagues to visit various schools, the terms of reference can never have pleased her. For she aimed always, as far as possible, to separate party politics from education. And when the first report was published, in 1968, she, with two colleagues, T. E. B. Howarth and John Davies, signed a minority report. The committee as a whole, they argued, had concentrated too exclusively on the social divisiveness of public schools, taking social reform as their first priority. They had lost sight of two major educational goals: the provision of boarding education, and educational provision for the less able. The courage of refusing to sign the report was typical of Kitty Anderson, and the clearly stated grounds of her refusal equally characteristic. She was above everything interested in education, and she did not regard education as a kind of social manipulation. 
When, in 1965, she retired from the North London Collegiate, of which she had been an outstanding headmistress, despite her public commitments, she became chairman of the Girls' Public Day School Trust. No more happy appointment could have been made. She now had twenty-three direct-grant schools to look after. In 1965 the political threat to the direct-grant system was just apparent. She was its greatest defender. She took an astonishingly well-informed interest in individual schools, and became the friend and adviser of each of their headmistresses. 
Kitty Anderson was small and birdlike, full of energy, and a great talker. Words and laughter seemed to bubble out of her. But she also had the gift of instant sympathy, so that people readily confided in her. They always felt better for it. She was not only sensible, but reassuringly firm in her beliefs. All her life she took pleasure in a wide variety of things, including clothes, and school plays and concerts. It was this enthusiasm that made her both a great teacher and a valued friend. 
Kitty Anderson was appointed DBE in 1961. She became an honorary fellow of the College of Preceptors in 1966 and received an honorary LLD from Hull (1967) and a DUniv from York (1971). She retired from the trust, her health by now failing, in 1975. She went back to live in Yorkshire, and died in Northallerton on 15 January 1979. 
Mary Warnock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30762


Andrade, Edward Neville da Costa (1887-1971), physicist, was born on 27 December 1887, in London, the second child in the family of four sons and one daughter of Henry da Costa Andrade, solicitor, and his wife, Amy Eliza Davis. In 1897 he went to St Dunstan's College, Catford, where he was strongly encouraged by his headmaster, C. M. Stuart, who had been a research scientist. In 1905 he won a scholarship to study physics under F. T. Trouton at University College, London, where he gained first-class honours in physics in 1907. He stayed on to do research on the flow of solid metals under stress, a subject which remained a lifelong interest. His first paper, entitled 'The viscous flow in metals, and allied phenomena', published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' in 1910, was a landmark in the science of the mechanical properties of solids. 
An 1851 Exhibition scholarship took Andrade to Heidelberg in 1910, to work under Philipp Lenard and Carl Ramsauer on the electrical properties of flames. That year in Germany was a supremely happy time for him, where in the light-hearted company of Ramsauer and other friends, Andrade enjoyed the coffee-shops and inns and weekends in the countryside, as well as very active science. He took his PhD at Heidelberg in 1911 and returned to England. In 1913 he went to Manchester to study under Ernest Rutherford. There he began work on the measurement of the wavelength of gamma rays from radium, but on the outbreak of war in 1914 left to become an officer in the Royal Garrison Artillery; he eventually became a captain. He served in France in 1915-17 and was mentioned in dispatches, and from 1917 worked in munitions. In 1917 he married Katherine Barbara, daughter of Thomas T. Evans, a tea merchant in Manchester; they had two sons, Trevor John, who became a group captain in the RAF, and Edward Anthony, who became a doctor of medicine but died in a car accident in 1967. 
At the end of the war Andrade was awarded a DSc of London University. In 1920, on Rutherford's recommendation, he became professor of physics at the Ordnance College, Woolwich (later the Military College of Science). Eight years later he became Quain professor of physics at University College, London and the central period of his scientific life began, during which he built up and sustained for many years an outstanding research school in the physics of solids and liquids, which produced many classic papers on the growth and plastic glide of metal single crystals, on the origin of cracks in glass, and on the viscosity of liquids. Among his many students were Francis Crick and Leonard Rotherham. In 1923 Andrade published 'The Structure of the Atom', which ran to several editions. He was elected into the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1935. 
In 1936 Andrade's first marriage broke up and in 1938 he married (Kathleen) Mona, daughter of W. D. Martin and widow of Clennell Anstruther Wilkinson, the biographer and great friend of Andrade, who had died in 1936. Andrade had strong literary interests which brought him into contact with T. S. Eliot, W. Somerset Maugham, and Walter de la Mare. He wrote and published poetry, and began a second major career as a historian of science, especially of the work of Robert Hooke, and as a collector of historic scientific books. 
Much of Andrade's time in the Second World War was taken up with work for the Ministry of Supply, where he became known as an 'inverted Micawber' -- waiting for something to turn down -- in the face of all the odd inventions that were then flooding into the ministry for his attention. But he also found time to appear on the BBC's The Brains Trust, with C. E. M. Joad and Commander A. B. Campbell, which he greatly enjoyed. After the war Andrade returned at first to his position at University College, but then, in 1950, accepted a directorship in the Royal Institution. This was an unfortunate appointment for him and a series of bitter disputes led him to resign in 1952. 
Subsequent to his resignation Andrade returned to his researches on the flow of metals, working from 1957 as a senior research fellow at Imperial College, where he continued at full pace. Even in the weeks immediately before his death he was busy drafting a paper for the Royal Society describing his latest results. The flow of matter remained his major lifelong scientific interest and he produced some remarkable mathematical expressions which represent these processes much as Hooke's law represents elastic deformation. The discovery of these mathematical equations of viscosity and creep must have been a great satisfaction to him, not least because Robert Hooke was the admired hero in Andrade's own memorable Wilkins lecture, given before the Royal Society in 1949. 
Known as Percy to many in the scientific world, Andrade was of smallish build, very neat, and always impeccably dressed in a fairly formal style. He enjoyed dinner parties, provided that the wines were excellent, and was a most witty, occasionally sharp-tongued, conversationalist. 
Andrade received an honorary LLD from Edinburgh (1950) and honorary degrees of DSc from Durham (1952) and Manchester (1956). He was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. From 1943 to 1945 he was president of the Physical Society. He was the editor for physics for the fourteenth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' and from 1945 to 1952 was science correspondent of 'The Times'. 
Andrade died in a nursing home in London on 6 June 1971. 
Alan Cottrell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30763


Andrews, Sir (William) Linton (1886-1972), newspaper editor, was born on 27 May 1886 in Hull, Yorkshire, the youngest of the four children (three sons and one daughter) of William Andrews (1848-1908), author, editor, and librarian of the Royal Institution, Hull, and his wife, Jeanie Leslie Carnie (died 1892). In 1895 William Andrews married Jennie Straker (died 1902). Linton Andrews was educated at Hull grammar school and at Christ's Hospital, London. He wrote leader-page articles for the press while still at school. The classical master at Christ's Hospital wanted him to take holy orders, and was disappointed when he turned his back on an academic course; but he was eager to enter journalism and at sixteen joined the staff of the 'Eastern Morning News' in Hull. Even so, he never lost his love of the classics. 
From Hull, Andrews moved to Huddersfield and later to Sheffield, where he became a reporter on the 'Sheffield Telegraph'. He contributed to other journals, including the 'Globe' and the 'Echo', and by the time he was twenty he had saved enough to enable him to spend a year studying and working as a freelance in Paris. When he returned to England it was as a leader writer on the 'Sheffield Evening Mail'. Thereafter he worked in Portsmouth, Nottingham, London, and Dundee before joining up in the first week of the First World War. Throughout that struggle he served with the 4th battalion of the Black Watch. In 1915 he married Gertrude (died 1958), eldest daughter of Alexander Douglas, of Dundee, director of a timber firm, and stepdaughter of James Kenyon, a grain merchant in India. There were no children of the marriage. While fighting on the western front he kept up a stream of articles as an unofficial war correspondent. His soldier's description of the battle of Neuve Chapelle won the attention of Lord Northcliffe. This led to a staff appointment on the 'Daily Mail' after the war. 
Andrews spent five important years on the 'Daily Mail'. Then, in 1923, he returned to his native Yorkshire to edit the 'Leeds Mercury', which had just been bought by the Yorkshire Conservative Newspaper Company, owner of the 'Yorkshire Post'. In his hands the 'Mercury' reflected his keen interest in affairs and in the life of the region. Almost daily he wrote a personal commentary -- 'It seems to me' by W. L. A. 
Throughout the war Andrews had kept a diary, which helped to provide material for a book, 'Haunting Years' (1930), a vivid account of his experiences serving with his unit through the ordeal of the battle of the Somme and the third battle of Ypres. Two light books during his years as editor of the 'Mercury' were 'Wayside Pageant' (1933), in which he collaborated with A. P. Maguire, and 'Yorkshire Folk' (1935), an engaging analysis of the county character. After his retirement he wrote other books, including 'Problems of an Editor' (1962) and 'Linton Andrews, the Autobiography of a Journalist' (1964). 
In 1939 the 'Leeds Mercury' was merged with the 'Yorkshire Post', which had been edited with courage and distinction for twenty years by Arthur Mann. To Linton Andrews fell the task of knitting together two papers that were markedly different in style and tradition. Could the combined paper satisfy two such disparate readerships? The answer came in a circulation substantially exceeding those of both papers added together. 
To the 'Yorkshire Post', with its long record of independence of spirit, Andrews added his own personal touch: his lively response to news, his liking for people and for keeping in close contact with his readers, his fairness of mind and love of close, but never acrimonious, argument. He was conscious of the reputation the 'Yorkshire Post' had gained as a great, influential paper of opinion, and he strove constantly to maintain this reputation. Two of the qualities that made him an outstanding editor were public spirit and tireless industry. He was utterly dedicated to the work of seeking out the truth and interpreting it to his readers. He watched parliamentary reports jealously to ensure that they presented the arguments used by all sides. 
Andrews was assiduous also in keeping in touch with political leaders. In a tribute after his death Lord Butler of Saffron Walden wrote of his own frequent contacts with him over the years, and added: 'I knew no editor in whom I could put greater trust than Linton Andrews'. Sir Winston Churchill described him as 'a great and justly respected editor'. 
Despite the heavy preoccupations of editorship Andrews found time to serve many good causes, regional and national. In particular, he worked strenuously for the raising of newspaper standards and the education and welfare of journalists. He was a founder of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors, of which he became president (1952-3). He played a leading part in devising the scheme for the training of junior journalists; he was described as the 'father' of this scheme. He campaigned for the establishment of a press council, and, when that council was formed, he became its first vice-chairman and later served as chairman from 1955 to 1959. Over the years he filled many other offices. He was president of the Institute of Journalists (1946), chairman of the editorial committee of the Newspaper Society (1943-50), chairman of the council of the Bronte Society (1940-70), a member of the court and council of Leeds University (1943-59), and a devoted worker for cancer research. 
For his services to his profession and in other fields Andrews was knighted in 1954, and, a year later, Leeds University made him an honorary LLD. In 1967 he was honoured with a DLitt by Emerson College, USA. Andrews died in Leeds on 27 September 1972. 
W. T. Oliver', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30764


Ardizzone, Edward Jeffery Irving (1900-1979), artist and writer, was born on 16 October 1900 in Haiphong, French Indo-China. He was the eldest child of Auguste Ardizzone (died 1942), a naturalized Frenchman of Italian parentage, an employee of the Eastern Extension Telegraph Company and his wife, Margaret (1875-1959), the daughter of Edward Alexander Irving, assistant colonial secretary at Singapore. Unusually for a young woman at the time, Margaret Irving had studied painting at Colorossi's in Paris before her marriage. Auguste and Margaret Ardizzone had four further children, two daughters and two sons, all French by birth; Edward Ardizzone became a naturalized Englishman in 1922. Taken to England in 1905, Ardizzone spent his childhood in East Anglia at various residences, often under the charge of his maternal grandmother when his mother was away in the Far East. His early education was with a governess in East Bergholt and then at Ipswich grammar school, where he was badly bullied. In 1912, after another family move to Wokingham, he became a boarder at Clayesmore School. This slightly unorthodox, undenominational school has been seen as an odd choice for one who was brought up, and remained, a Roman Catholic, but it was here that his growing interest in drawing and painting was encouraged. Furthermore, his housemaster, the novelist Desmond Coke (1879-1931), was later to play a useful role in helping him to find commissions as a freelance artist. 
After leaving school in 1918, and trying twice unsuccessfully to enlist, Ardizzone spent six months at a college of commerce in Bath and for several years afterwards worked as a clerk in Warminster and London. His lengthiest employment was with the Eastern Telegraph Company in London, where his father had bought no. 130 Elgin Avenue, which was to become the family home for over fifty years, figuring frequently in Ardizzone's illustrations and on his personal Christmas cards. During his period of clerkship he attended Bernard Meninsky's evening classes at the Westminster School of Art, devoting his weekends to painting. In 1926, following a gift of $500 from his father, he gave up his job to concentrate upon a career as a professional artist. On 2 April 1929 he married Catherine Josephine Berkley (1904-1992), the daughter of William Cuthbert Anderson, chief auditor of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In the years up to 1939 Ardizzone worked hard as both painter and graphic artist. In a series of one-man shows, first at the Bloomsbury Gallery and then at the Leger Galleries, his very personal, domestic vision received considerable praise. Working chiefly in his favourite medium of watercolour, but also in oils and lithography (for monochrome prints), he celebrated the local life of his quarter of London, Maida Vale: recreations in its parks and along the Regent's Canal, the bonhomie of its pubs and its night-life. He brought to these scenes a mixture of affection, wit, and gentle satire which places him firmly in the tradition of Thomas Rowlandson. 
Ardizzone's deep appreciation of the values of narrative art is reflected too in his illustrations of this period: the lengthy suite of pen-drawings for his first major commission, 'In a Glass Darkly' by J. Sheridan Le Fanu (1929), drawings for the 'Radio Times' (which, with 'Punch', was to be a regular source of income), advertising copy for the whisky merchants Johnnie Walker, and picture books which he wrote and illustrated himself. The first of these, 'Little Tim and the Brave Sea Captain' (1936), arose from stories told to his own family. It draws on memories of the harbour at Ipswich and upon his liking for ships and the sea, and in its bold integration of word and picture it stands out as one of the most significant picture books of the age. (It was, too, an early example of colour offset lithography. Its spacious folios were printed in the United States, where the text was hand-lettered by Grace Allen Hogarth, an editor at the Oxford University Press New York office.) The complete colour draft of this first book is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. His next book, 'Lucy Brown and Mr Grimes' (1937), was less successful, and had to be recast for American publication. 
At the start of the Second World War in 1939 Ardizzone was serving in an anti-aircraft regiment, but in 1940 he was appointed an official war artist and was attached to the British army's general headquarters at Arras. A published record of his experiences during the German invasion of France is to be found in his book 'Baggage to the Enemy' (1941), just as his further work during the North African and Italian campaigns is recorded in his 'Diary of a War Artist' (1974). Over 300 watercolours from this time are housed at the Imperial War Museum. 
After the war Ardizzone resumed his freelance career with great energy. He regularly exhibited drawings, watercolours, and lithographs at the Leicester Gallery and at the gallery of his friend Freddy Mayor; he undertook a variety of commissions, ranging from a watercolour portrait of Sir Winston Churchill to a notable series of covers for 'The Strand' magazine, and advertising brochures for Ealing Studios and Messrs Guinness; and he illustrated nearly 200 books, winning the Library Association's Kate Greenaway medal in 1957 for 'Tim All Alone' (1956). His chosen medium for these varied from the line and wash drawings which he made for his own picture books, to pure line, as in his intensely imagined drawings for poems by Walter de la Mare and by his friend James Reeves, and to more elaborate processes, such as the lithographs and stencilled drawings done for the Limited Editions Club of New York. 
The foundation for this prolific output was Ardizzone's complete mastery of the drawn line. Although he claimed that 'the born illustrator' should work from copies rather than from life, his sketchbooks testify to his continuous dedication to catching with his pen the significant moments of the life around him. Out of such constant practice there grew a body of finished work that pictures with grace and with a deceptive ease the scenes and incidents of anything from mechanized war to a child's dream of toyland. Only towards the end of his life was there any slackening of his fluent control of the drawn line. On the death of his widow, Catherine, in 1992 his sixty-four sketchbooks were accepted by the government in lieu of inheritance tax and deposited in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
In addition to his creative work, Ardizzone was an instructor in graphic design at the Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts, London. Then, after a tour of south India for UNESCO in 1952, training students in silk-screen printing, he became visiting tutor in etching and lithography at the Royal College of Art. Such variety of occupation was congenial to him, for he loved company and was held in much affection by a wide circle of friends. He also loved good food and wine, a taste reflected in his designing of menu covers for restaurants and catalogues for wine shippers, and in his writing and illustrating wine notes for the Royal College of Art. 
In 1960 Ardizzone retired from teaching and spent more time in Kent, where he bought a house at Rodmersham Green, Sittingbourne. In 1972 he and his wife moved there permanently. He was elected ARA in 1962 and RA in 1970, serving on the hanging committee in 1969 and 1971. Among the many honours he received were appointments as CBE in 1971 and royal designer for industry in 1974. Despite declining health, he continued to work at painting and illustrating until his death of a heart attack at his home, 5 Vine Cottages, Rodmersham Green, on 8 November 1979. He was buried at Rodmersham church on 11 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 30765


Armfield, Maxwell Ashby (1881-1972), artist and writer, was born at Ringwood, Hampshire, on 5 October 1881, the eldest of the three children of Joseph John Armfield, a milling engineer, and his wife, Margaret Maxwell, a lineal descendant of the earls of Nithsdale. The Armfields were a Quaker family and Maxwell was educated at the Friends' school at Sidcot and then at Leighton Park School, near Reading, before going to the Birmingham School of Art, then under the direction of E. R. Taylor, a friend of John Ruskin and William Morris. He immediately entered the life class and was taught by Henry Payne, who introduced him to the work of Fra Angelico, and Arthur Gaskin, who stimulated his interest in tempera painting; his first essay in this medium was a painting (1897) based on Maurice Maeterlinck's 'Aglavaine et Selysette'. During these years he came into contact with the Pre-Raphaelite and symbolist movements, which, together with such publications as 'The Poster', were to influence him most directly as a decorative painter and illustrator. 
In September 1902 Armfield went to Paris, where he enrolled at the Academie de la Grande Chaumiere under Gustave Courtois and Rene Menard; he made friends with the sculptor Gaston Lachaise, and with Keith Henderson, with whom he and Norman Wilkinson, a fellow student from Birmingham whose entry Armfield contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', shared a studio. During a visit to Italy with Henderson he met Geoffrey Whitworth, who described him thus: 'He is very quiet in manner, but at the same time has much dignity. He dresses in black velvet, with a silken orange-red bow tie which he has stencilled with patterns in gold.' At the Paris Salon in the autumn of 1904 he exhibited 'Faustine', a painting inspired by a poem of Algernon Charles Swinburne's, which was purchased by M. Blanc but given to the Musee du Luxembourg. 
Armfield returned to London and embarked on the series of one-man and group exhibitions which was to mark his career. At the Rowley Galleries in 1906 he shared an exhibition with Gaston Lachaise, contributing 'A note on the revival of painting in tempera' to the catalogue, under the pseudonym E. Grant-Stuart; this was the first time that he had used a pseudonym, though later in life, particularly in the 1940s, when he was to write extensively on eastern religions and mysticism, the subterfuge of public anonymity was to appeal to him greatly. In 1907 he shared an exhibition at the Fine Art Society with other members of the Birmingham group, including his former teachers Henry Payne and Arthur Gaskin, as well as Joseph Southall, the leading figure of the tempera revival; that year he also had his first exhibit at the New English Art Club. 
Armfield's interest in the theatre, which had been fostered by Wilkinson and Whitworth, was reinforced by his marriage, on 20 January 1909, to the disabled playwright and author (Anne) Constance Smedley (1876-1941), daughter of W. T. Smedley, a chartered accountant, and Annie Elizabeth Duckworth. From this time until her death on 9 March 1941, Max and Constance worked very much in tandem; 'The Flower Book' (1909) was the first fruit of this collaboration, which involved not only the writing and illustrating of books but also a deep involvement with the theatre. From their first home at Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire, they founded the Cotswold Players, then in London the Greenleaf Theatre, and later, in the United States, the course for community drama and the summer school of theatre at Berkeley, California; in all these projects they tried to revive the spirit of medieval drama as well as to create a new interest in the art of minstrelsy. Constance led him to become a Christian Scientist and to an active involvement in pacifist politics, of which his illustrations to 'The Ballet of the Nations' (1915) by Vernon Lee were a direct result. 
During these years Armfield wrote several books, most importantly 'A Manual of Tempera Painting' (1930), and painting occupied only a limited amount of his time. Later he was to say that his mature style dated from the time of his wife's death; his first major painting from this period, 'Red Tape and Sealing Wax' (1942), depicted a Nijinsky-like nude breaking all bonds and striding off into the unknown. At this time his belief in Christian Science was superseded by an exploration of esoteric eastern religions, and Mary Baker Eddy's triadic law of category became transformed into a new law, 'Rhythmic Vitality, Form and Colour', which was to govern his approach to painting for the remaining thirty years of his life. 
The post-war years were difficult for artists working in a traditional vein. However, Armfield lived long enough to see the revival of interest in the styles to which he had adhered; the Fine Art Society's 'Homage to Maxwell Armfield' exhibition (1970) and ninetieth-birthday exhibition of his recent paintings (1971) provided a triumphant culmination to a long and creative life. 
Armfield died, childless, at Warminster, Wiltshire, on 23 January 1972. Throughout his life he painted many self-portraits, one of which, of 1901, is in the Birmingham City Art Gallery. 
Peyton Skipwith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30766


Armitage, Sir Arthur Llewellyn (1916-1984), jurist and university administrator, was born on 1 August 1916 at Town Gate, Marsden, Yorkshire, the elder son of Kenyon Armitage (died 1972), master draper of Oldham, and his wife, Lucy Amelia Beaumont (died 1968). He attended Oldham Hulme grammar school and in 1933 he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, to which he remained passionately devoted for the rest of his life. Having obtained a first class in both parts of the law tripos and a distinction in the LLB, he spent two years at Yale University on a Commonwealth Fund fellowship and in 1940 was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, of which he later became an honorary bencher. In the same year he married Joan Kenyon ('b'. 1916), daughter of Harold Marcroft, yarn agent, of Oldham. They had two daughters. From 1940 to 1945 he served in the King's Royal Rifle Corps, attaining the rank of temporary major. 
In 1945 Armitage accepted the offer of a law fellowship at Queens'. He was senior tutor of the college when, in 1958, at the age of forty-two, he was elected president. Queens' had fine buildings but few endowments and Armitage had to husband the college's resources with care. At the same time he was an effective university lecturer in law, his main interest being criminal law. He edited, with J. W. C. Turner, a casebook on criminal law and took an active part in establishing the department of criminal science, the forerunner of the Cambridge Institute of Criminology. He was also one of the editors of four editions of the practitioners' book 'Clerk and Lindsell on Torts'. 
Armitage's lecturing was noted for both its clarity and its physical vigour; his class watched with fascination as he twisted his body round the podium and often seemed about to crash to the floor. His college supervisions concentrated on basics: 'this is a book; it works on the hinge principle' (private information). His style became the object of much mimicry among his devoted pupils. 
Armitage did not neglect the practice of criminal law. For twenty years he served as justice of the peace on the Cambridge city bench and from 1965 to 1971 was deputy chairman of Huntingdon (later Huntingdon and Peterborough) quarter sessions. In the field of public service, he had cut his teeth from the mid-1950s as a chairman of wages councils, later chairing the committee on the pay of postmen and the Agricultural Wages Board for England and Wales. No committee concerned with the penal system or with universities seemed to be complete without him. 
In the 1960s Armitage served on the advisory committee on grants to students and the UNESCO advisory mission for the development of the University of the West Indies. This was the period of expansion of universities following the Robbins report and henceforth Armitage was in the thick of it. From 1967 to 1971 he served on the influential lord chancellor's advisory committee on legal education (the Ormrod committee) and later chaired that on legal education in Northern Ireland. In 1967-8 he was president of the Society of Public Teachers of Law. 
From 1965 to 1967 Armitage served his turn as vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge. In that capacity he came into contact with Humphrey Cripps who had financed a large new building for his own college, St John's, at the north end of the Backs and now accepted Armitage's invitation to provide an even larger building for Queens' at the south end. Before the building was begun, however, Armitage, who had become known in universities outside Cambridge through his membership of the University Grants Committee, was invited to become vice-chancellor of Manchester University, the largest non-federal university in Britain. Having ensured that the Cripps benefaction was secured for Queens' he accepted. He could not resist making frequent visits to Cambridge and was happy to serve as chairman of the governors of the Leys School there. 
From 1974 to 1976 Armitage was chairman of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals of the UK universities, and was knighted in 1975. He also served both on the council of the Association of Commonwealth Universities and on the Inter-University Council for Higher Education Overseas. After his removal to Manchester, the amount of government work increased, for he was clearly regarded as a safe pair of hands. From 1973 to 1979 he was chairman of the National Advisory Council for the Training and Supply of Teachers and from 1976 to 1979 chairman of the committee on the political activities of civil servants. 
Armitage gave up his vice-chancellorship in 1980 after ten years in office. That year he became chairman of the social security advisory committee, but probably the committee which brought him most into the public eye was the one that he chaired on lorries, people, and the environment. The committee reported in December 1980 and there was a white paper in December 1981 (command paper 8439). It concluded that it would serve the public interest to accept the economic benefits to be derived from heavier lorries, while reducing their adverse effects. It therefore proposed increases in the weight, though not the size, of lorries, and recommended an expansion of bypasses on lorry routes. 
Armitage was a gregarious man of great energy, who exuded optimism. He was physically large, with prominent bushy eyebrows, well depicted in the portrait by Ruskin Spear in Queens' College. He played golf vigorously. He was an honorary LLD of the universities of Manchester (1970), Queen's, Belfast (1980), Liverpool (1981), and Birmingham (1981). In 1968 he was made a member of the Venezuelan order of Andres Bello, first class. He died on 1 February 1984 at his home, Rowley Lodge, Kermincham, near Holmes Chapel, Cheshire, and his ashes were interred in St Botolph's Church, Cambridge. He was survived by his wife and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 30767


Armstrong, William, Baron Armstrong of Sanderstead (1915-1980), civil servant and banker, was born in the Salvation Mothers' Home, Mare Street, Clapton, London, on 3 March 1915, the elder son of William Armstrong, of Stirling, and his wife, Priscilla Hopkins. Both his parents were Salvation Army officers, his father having previously been an apprentice blacksmith. He was brought up in an austere and fundamentalist religious atmosphere, and his childhood involved frequent moves as his parents' postings took them around the country. He received his secondary education at Bec School in Tooting, London, from which he won an open scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford, where he studied from 1934 to 1938, and obtained a double first in classics. 
Armstrong entered the civil service in October 1938 as an assistant principal in the Board of Education. Soon spotted as a 'high-flyer', by 1940 he had become assistant private secretary to the president of the Board of Education. He was then moved into the newly formed security executive, set up to deal with so-called 'fifth column' threats. He married in 1942 Gwendoline Enid, daughter of John Bennett, a company director, of Putney; they had one son and one daughter. In 1943 he became private secretary to the secretary of the war cabinet, Sir Edward Bridges. From that time Armstrong was always near or at Whitehall's centres of power. After the war he transferred to the Treasury, being put in charge of the machinery of government branch as an assistant secretary in 1946. Then, from 1949 to 1953, he was principal private secretary to three successive chancellors of the exchequer -- Labour's Sir Stafford Cripps and Hugh Gaitskell, and the Conservative R. A. Butler. In this crucial post he gained invaluable experience of central economic policy making and crisis management; and playing a linkman role in the budget process, he was on five occasions responsible for the co-ordination and (to a great extent) the writing of the chancellor's budget speech. 
Armstrong went on to hold key policy jobs in the Treasury: under-secretary in overseas finance (1953-7), dealing with sterling, the balance of payments, and external financial problems, and then (1958-62), as third secretary and Treasury officer of accounts, he ran the complex home finance division, concerned with government borrowing and lending, monetary policy, and the budget. He was clearly marked out for the topmost posts, but even so his appointment in 1962 as the joint permanent secretary to the Treasury, in charge of economic and financial policy, aged only forty-seven, was a dramatic and exceptionally rapid promotion in which he leap-frogged over several more senior officials. The prime minister, Harold Macmillan, seems to have been dissatisfied with the Treasury's traditional outlook and to have looked to Armstrong as a 'new broom'. Accompanying his promotion was a radical reorganization of the Treasury -- based largely on a blueprint drawn up by Armstrong himself and Otto (Sir Richard) Clarke -- designed to make that department a modern instrument of government and better perform the functions of economic planning and management. 
Armstrong was permanent secretary to the Treasury from 1962 to 1968, developing a close and influential relationship with Reginald Maudling, Conservative chancellor from 1962, and Labour's James Callaghan in 1964-7. Accepting the dominant Keynesian policy framework of the period, his approach as a policy adviser was analytical, logical, and undogmatic. Ministers relied heavily on his cool and objective advice and on his skills as an operator of the Whitehall machine. To civil service colleagues he could appear informal, friendly, and approachable, but always with a certain ultimate reserve. Some 'insiders' found him enigmatic, however, and felt that underneath his calm and detached exterior there was an inner struggle, with strong, even excitable, feelings held in check. (For instance, it is known that in 1956 Armstrong, disgusted by the Suez operation, contemplated resignation but instead wore a black tie to work for some weeks as a gesture of protest against the Eden government's actions and to let off steam.) 
Because there were more economic policy crises than triumphs during Armstrong's six years as head of the Treasury his record has come in for criticism, and some blame for failures of policy in that period has fallen to him. Critics argue that he should have stepped in to restrain Maudling in mid-1964 when the Conservatives' pre-election boom led to a major balance of payments crisis, and that he (and the Treasury) should have taken a strong pro-devaluation line when the new Labour government came into office later that year. Armstrong liked to say that the civil servant's job was to bring the politicians face to face with what he called 'ongoing reality'. But he always played his cards close to his chest, and even close colleagues were never sure what he personally thought about policy issues or what advice he was giving to ministers in private. In May 1965 he told Callaghan that the government would be lucky to avoid devaluation, and despite the prime minister's ban on all mention of the term, he saw to it that there was some quiet contingency planning and a devaluation 'war book' prepared. He made clear to ministers in October 1966 (a year before the exchange rate finally went) that the decision to apply for membership of the Common Market made devaluation unavoidable. 
Armstrong deserves credit for his role in holding the Whitehall machine together during the first years of Harold Wilson's Labour government, elected in 1964, in the face of strong fissiparous pressures, including the creation of the Department of Economic Affairs under the volatile George Brown, and an influx of politically committed and sometimes prickly economic advisers (such as Thomas Balogh and Nicholas Kaldor). He did apparently see a role for a planning department and went to considerable trouble to try to make the Department of Economic Affairs experiment work, but insiders say that he was determined that the Treasury would remain the most powerful department -- and in reality, there was little chance of the Treasury not coming out on top in the interdepartmental struggle. 
In May 1968 Armstrong took over as head of the home civil service, becoming the first permanent secretary of the newly formed Civil Service Department that November, when responsibility for managing the civil service was hived off from the Treasury. Armstrong stands out as one of the great reforming heads of the civil service in the twentieth century, making a huge contribution of leadership in the exacting years of change after the 1968 Fulton report ('Parl. papers', 1967-8, 18, Cmnd 3638). He deliberately cultivated a higher public profile and made himself more available to the media than his predecessors in the job, giving interviews and taking part in discussions on television and radio, and addressing civil service unions' conferences. At the Treasury, too, he had been accessible to the press: he gave Samuel Brittan much help with his book 'The Treasury under the Tories' (1964). He was, within limits, something of an 'open government' man, believing that senior civil servants should be prepared to explain the workings of government and even join more in public debate on policy matters. He was largely responsible for the system of green papers, consultative documents, the first of which appeared in 1967. 
Armstrong described the Fulton report as an 'ice-breaker' or a 'catalyst', providing an opportunity for reform ideas to come through. His own private evidence to the committee had included ideas about reforming the structure of government and introducing executive agencies which were far-reaching and ahead of their time. While anxious to carry through what he believed were some long overdue reforms, he also felt that some of the contemporary attacks on the civil service were unfair (particularly the then fashionable allegations about mandarin 'amateurism') and it needed to be defended. The critics who blame civil service sabotage and obstruction in general, and Armstrong in particular, for what they interpret as the half-hearted and patchy implementation of the report's proposals after 1968 tend to exaggerate the extent to which the Fulton committee report provided a coherent and practicable programme for 'reform', and tend to downplay the limitations of Armstrong's freedom of movement. The vested interests of the main civil service unions were one important constraint. There was little sustained top-level political and ministerial interest. There was also weighty opposition from certain permanent secretaries to parts of Fulton. But Armstrong's achievements included the creation of the Civil Service College to boost training; improvements in personnel management, spearheaded by the Civil Service Department; the reorganization of the civil service grading structure, abolishing the old and rigid system of classes and aiming to provide better opportunities for scientists and other professionals; and encouragement given to modern management methods and techniques. 
Since the 1940s Armstrong had been fascinated by the machinery of government, and during his time as head of the civil service political and official interest in 'reorganizing the machine' was at its height. Armstrong backed the creation of huge merged 'super-ministries' such as the Department of the Environment and the Department of Trade and Industry. He also supported the creation of the Central Policy Review Staff in 1970, Edward Heath's 'think tank'. Later, by the mid-1970s, politicians and top officials became much more cautious and sceptical about the benefits of structural redesign in central government. 
William Armstrong's role in the Heath government extended far beyond his formal responsibilities as head of the civil service -- and in some ways beyond what was strictly proper for any civil servant. Hankering after a central role in economic policy making again, he was able to establish a close rapport with the prime minister and carve out a place as his chief adviser and confidant. This was helped by the fact that Heath distrusted the Treasury and increasingly directed the government's economic strategy from no. 10. As unemployment rose and Heath became convinced of the need for economic and industrial expansion prior to entering Europe, Armstrong was put in charge of the small group of officials who, in the winter of 1971-2, worked in great secrecy on a dramatic policy 'U-turn', including public spending increases and preparations for what became the interventionist 1972 'Industry Act'. Then, he was one of the chief architects of the statutory incomes policy introduced at the end of 1972. He became an active participant, on behalf of the prime minister, in talks with the employers and trade unions. Armstrong and Heath resented the tag 'deputy prime minister' which union leaders pinned on him, but the label did in a way symbolize what was happening in the government. The 1972-4 period was probably the apogee of Armstrong's influence, but his role as the prime minister's right-hand man and unusual political visibility generated considerable controversy. 
Armstrong was increasingly drawn into the political arena, and his complicity in government policy grew all the greater. He made what he later admitted to have been a bad mistake when, on 17 January 1973, he appeared sitting on the platform alongside the premier at Heath's Lancaster House presidential-style televised press conference at which was announced 'stage two' of the government's incomes policy. As the economic and political crisis engulfing the Heath government intensified in the winter of 1973-4, Armstrong urged a tough line with the striking miners and even gave advice on the highly party political matter of election timing (telling Heath that an early election would be 'running away from the issue'). Insiders describe him as playing more of a political than a civil service role, and Armstrong himself was later to admit to misgivings, saying that he had stepped out of line and that his relationship with prime minister Heath had 'got slightly askew' (Hennessy, 238). 
Armstrong was removed from the scene at the height of the crisis, in February 1974, when his health suddenly broke down. He soon recovered but decided to leave the civil service, his early retirement being announced in April 1974. This prevented any awkwardness with the incoming Labour government, for he had in effect become too closely identified with the policies and the person of Edward Heath to make the transition constitutionally expected of civil servants from working for a government of one party to serving its successor. 
In 1974 Armstrong joined the board of the Midland Bank, and the following year he became the bank's chairman. He was no mere distinguished figurehead, but acknowledged that it was difficult for an outsider like himself, coming to a bank chairmanship late in life and without professional banking experience, to make any distinctive impact on such a major financial institution. Nevertheless he made a real contribution to boardroom policy and he was also active in meeting staff on frequent visits to the group's offices at home and overseas. In 1978 he became chairman of the Committee of London Clearing Bankers, playing a leading role in the City campaign against the proposals of the left wing of the Labour Party to nationalize the banks. 
Armstrong was appointed MVO in 1945, CB in 1957, KCB in 1963, and GCB in 1968. He was sworn of the privy council in 1973 and made a life peer as Baron Armstrong of Sanderstead in 1975. He was made an honorary fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, in 1963, and Imperial College, London, in 1977. He received honorary degrees from many universities, including Oxford (1971), Sheffield (1975), City (1974), and Heriot-Watt (1975). 
William Armstrong was one of the great public servants of the twentieth century. His rise was meteoric, but in proportion to his abilities. He deployed his considerable powers of analysis and intellect, his creative energy and inventiveness, unswervingly in the service of his political masters and what he perceived to be the public good. He was a modest and private man. At Oxford he had become an agnostic, but later reached a real and deep personal religious faith. Armstrong died suddenly in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 12 July 1980, having lived latterly at The Downs, The Warren, Ashtead, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30768


Ashbridge, Sir Noel (1889-1975), broadcasting engineer, was born on 10 December 1889 in Wanstead, Essex, the fourth son and youngest child of John Ashbridge, solicitor, of Wanstead, and his wife, Sylvia Moore. He was educated at Forest School, Snaresbrook, Essex, and King's College, London, where he graduated in engineering. 
Following graduation he spent a period of engineering training with Yarrow & Co., and British Thomson-Houston, before entering service with the Royal Fusiliers in 1914. In 1916 he was commissioned in the Royal Engineers and was one of the first operators of wireless equipment in the front line in France. Later in the war he transferred to instructional and research work in telecommunications. 
In 1919 he joined the Marconi Company as one of the wireless development team at Writtle in Essex, which, early in 1922, constructed the famous 2MT (Two Emma Tock) transmitter, from which the first wireless entertainment programmes were broadcast, before the formation of the BBC at the end of the same year. Five members of this team were soon to join the BBC and assume senior engineering positions: among these were Peter Eckersley, who became the BBC's first chief engineer in February 1923, and Ashbridge himself, who joined Eckersley as assistant chief engineer in January 1926. Three years later, in 1929, he succeeded Eckersley as chief engineer. On 17 July 1926 he married Olive Maude (died 1948), daughter of Rowland Strickland, merchant, of Erith, Kent. They had two daughters. 
The next few years saw a rapid expansion of the BBC's engineering activities under Ashbridge's guidance and his achievement was recognized with a knighthood in 1935. He had already, in 1934, been made a knight of the Danish royal order of Dannebrog for his work in advising a number of European countries on the setting up of broadcasting services. 
At about this time the possibility of television broadcasting was coming to the fore and he was a member of the 1934 Selsdon committee investigating this. In 1935 Ashbridge saw and approved a demonstration of the all-electronic television system invented by Isaac Shoenberg and this resulted in the following year in the establishment by the BBC of the world's first regular high-definition television service. 
The Second World War years brought new responsibilities for Ashbridge and the BBC engineering departments under his direction. Radio broadcasting had a vital role to play in terms of information and maintenance of public morale, both within Britain and overseas, and this had to be effected while offering the least possible opportunity for enemy aircraft to use the transmissions for navigational purposes. The television service was closed down for the duration of the war, but some planning had to be done for its future resumption and Ashbridge was a member of the 1943 committee set up for this purpose under the chairmanship of Sir Maurice Hankey. 
In 1943 Ashbridge was appointed deputy director-general of the BBC, while maintaining a role as chief adviser on engineering matters. With a reorganization of senior management in 1948, he relinquished the post of deputy director-general and was appointed director of technical services. In this position he supervised the very rapid and far-reaching expansion of radio and television services in the immediate post-war years. This period also saw the re-establishment and extension of international co-operation in the broadcasting field, and in 1950 Ashbridge was the BBC engineering division representative at an international meeting in Torquay which formed the start of the European Broadcasting Union. 
During the war years he had been elected president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers for the 1941-2 term, and in 1948, with Harold Bishop, he delivered its Faraday lecture on the subject of television. He retired from the BBC in 1952 after twenty-six years' service. Following this, he spent seven years on the board of the Marconi Company. 
Throughout his career, Ashbridge was breaking new ground, his decisions forming the basis for the pattern of broadcast engineering that was later adopted. As a man he was quiet, precise, and modest, tackling all problems with common sense and realism. He applied himself with the highest professional standards, and demanded the same of his colleagues in the BBC engineering division. 
Outside the professional sphere Ashbridge was a man of broad interests, a sailor, a keen follower of cricket, and a lover of music. Nevertheless, his abiding concern was with engineering matters, and the years spent in a more diffuse field as deputy director-general were not wholly to his taste. As a leader he was much liked and respected, in return showing equal respect for his staff at all levels. He was certainly intolerant of carelessness and insincerity, but was always ready with advice and encouragement when needed. The excellence of the engineering effected under his direction bears witness to his capacity for extracting the best from his colleagues. Ashbridge died on 4 June 1975 at Birchwood House, a nursing home in Speldhurst, Kent. 
T. B. McCrirrick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30769


Ashford, Margaret Mary Julia (1881-1972), child writer, was born on 7 April 1881 at Elm Lodge, Petersham, Surrey, the eldest of the three daughters of William Henry Roxburghe Ashford (1836-1912), a former official of the War Office, and his wife, Emma Georgina (1842-1917), daughter of George Walker, an industrialist of Eastwood, Nottinghamshire. Daisy was the sixth child of her mother, who was previously married to Henry Langley (died 'c'.1879), a cornet in the 11th hussars, with whom she had eloped and with whom she had two daughters and three sons while living in Ireland. Daisy was brought up in a cheerful and affectionate family atmosphere in which all the children were encouraged to write. She was largely educated at home except for one year attending a convent at Haywards Heath, the Priory of Our Lady of Good Counsel, at the age of seventeen. By this time she had long since completed 'The Young Visiters', the work by which she is remembered. 
Daisy Ashford dictated her first work to her father at the age of four. 'The Life of Father McSwiney', a 4000-word fictitious biography of a Jesuit priest, reflected the ethos of a family strongly influenced by the beliefs and practices of the Roman Catholic church. In 1889 the Ashfords moved from Petersham to Southdown House, Lewes. There she dictated two romances, 'A Short Story of Love and Marriage' (1889) and 'Mr. Chapmer's Bride', now lost. She then embarked on the first book written in her own hand, the story of an aspirant to high society in late Victorian England. 'The Young Visiters, or, Mr. Salteena's Plan' combines the characteristics which mark all Daisy Ashford's work: acute observation (of food and clothes as well as people), a gift for narrative, unconscious humour, and poor spelling. This was followed by a play, 'A Woman's Crime' (not extant), and two stories, 'The True History of Leslie Woodcock' (1892) and 'Where Love Lies Deepest' (1893). In the latter the darker side of life predominates, as it does in 'The Hangman's Daughter' (1894-5). This was her longest story and the one which in later life she considered to be 'the greatest literary achievement' of her youth. In 1898 she went to school and the hope she had nourished when writing 'The Hangman's Daughter' of 'becoming an authoress' evaporated. 
When she left school Daisy Ashford returned home to five years of leisure. In 1904 the family moved to Bexhill and soon afterwards she followed her sister Vera, an art student, to London, where she worked as a secretary. Later she ran a canteen in Dover as part of the war effort. After her mother's death in 1917, she and her sisters were sorting out her papers, and they came across a box containing their childhood writings. 'The Young Visiters' was soon identified as the funniest of these. In the following year Daisy lent the manuscript to her friend Margaret Mackenzie, who showed it to Frank Swinnerton, a reader and editor at the publishers Chatto and Windus. It was while working at the British legation in Bern that Daisy learned that Chatto wanted to publish her book. 'The Young Visiters' appeared, with a preface by J. M. Barrie, on 22 May 1919. Although some reviewers questioned its authenticity, most -- among them A. A. Milne and Robert Graves -- were delighted with it. 
The book was an immediate commercial success. It was reprinted eighteen times in the year of publication and also found success in America where sales were enhanced by the widespread though unfounded belief that Barrie himself had written the story. It was dramatized by Margaret and Susy Mackenzie in 1920, made into a musical in 1968, and into a film in 1984. Illustrated editions appeared in 1949 and 1984. 
Daisy Ashford, a shy and unworldly person, was touched but astonished by her new-found fame. She explained her feelings in the preface she wrote for 'Daisy Ashford: her Book' (1920): 'I can never feel all the nice things that have been said about 'The Young Visiters', are really due to me at all, but to a Daisy Ashford of so long ago that she seems almost another person'. 'Daisy Ashford: her Book' contained 'The Hangman's Daughter' and three others of her stories, as well as one by her sister Angela, 'The Jealous Governes'. 
In January 1920 Daisy married James Devlin (died 1956), whom she had met while working at a Catholic soldiers' club in Bexhill. They had two daughters and two sons, the elder of whom died in 1955. For some years they farmed cut flowers at Framingham Pigot, near Norwich, and then for a year they ran the King's Arms Hotel, Reepham. In 1939 they settled at Hellesdon, Norwich. Daisy Ashford returned to writing in old age, beginning an autobiography. She later burned the entire manuscript in a fit of spring cleaning. She died on 15 January 1972 in Hellesdon. In 1983 some of her early stories were reprinted in ''The Hangman's Daughter' and other Stories', in which 'The Life of Father McSwiney' was published for the first time. 
Hugo Brunner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30770


Ashley, Laura (1925-1985), dress designer and interior decorator, was born on 7 September 1925 at Dowlais, near Merthyr Tudful, south Wales, the eldest of the four children (two daughters and two sons) of Stanley Lewis Mountney, a civil servant, of Raleigh Avenue, Wallington, Surrey, and his wife, Margaret Elizabeth Davis. She was educated at Elmwood School, Croydon, and at the Aberdare Secretarial School, before becoming a secretary in the City of London at the age of sixteen. In the latter years of the Second World War she served in the Women's Royal Naval Service. After the war she worked at the London headquarters of the Women's Institute. 
During the war Laura Mountney had met Bernard Albert Ashley (1926-2009), who was to become both her husband and her close business partner. Born on 11 August 1926 at 99 Beechdale Road, Brixton Hill, London, the son of Albert Ashley, grocer, and his wife, Hilda Maud, 'nee' Woodward, he was educated at Whitgift Middle School, Croydon, and was working as a clerk in the City at the time of their marriage, at St Mary's, Beddington, Surrey, on 23 February 1949. They had two sons and two daughters. In the early 1950s Laura Ashley designed tea towels, which Bernard printed on a printing machine he had designed and developed in an attic in Pimlico. A small mill was opened in Kent to produce a greater range of products, but a disastrous flood ended this venture. In the early 1960s Laura persuaded Bernard that they should seek to develop in her native Wales and the two, with their three eldest children, explored mid-Wales and fell in love with it. They determined to start afresh in Montgomeryshire and in 1963 began in a small way at Machynlleth. Soon afterwards they moved to the old railway station at the village of Carno, which became the headquarters of the large international empire of Laura Ashley plc. The area was suffering rural depopulation, which government grants aimed to stem. The Ashleys took full advantage of this financial support. They developed in an area that had virtually no industrial background, recruiting their workforce from women whose sewing and cutting experience was entirely domestic and from men whose knowledge of machines was largely confined to those of the farmyard. 
What was initially lacking in skill was more than made up for by wholehearted enthusiasm, ingenuity, and co-operation. The Ashleys regarded their workforce as an extension of the family; their friendly, concerned approach ensured great loyalty and support. The factories worked for only four and a half days a week, as Laura believed that people should have time for leisure and their families, especially when tackling repetitive tasks. Jobs were provided at all levels -- from the factory floor to the boardroom -- in what was once regarded as a remote if beautiful area. Retail subsidiaries of the company later sold from the Ashleys' shops in four continents. 
The Ashleys had complementary personalities and talents and were each other's sternest critics. Bernard, a man of immense energy, drive, and flair, was also a skilled engineer, designer, and printer. Restless and volatile by temperament, he found in the outwardly calm and composed Laura the ideal rudder to direct his energies. He was well known for his outbursts of rage, often including pulling telephones from their sockets (it was said that British Telecom had to warn him that they would have to refuse to carry out repairs if he continued), and he was frequently domineering and overbearing towards her. She was offered an OBE in 1975, but refused the honour because none was offered to him. 
Laura Ashley was essentially a revivalist in her approach, drawing her inspiration from nature and ideas of the past. She was never a designer in the formal sense: rather, she would frequently describe a design for other people to implement, or she would produce an old design, the result of her many researches, and would demonstrate how to change it slightly or modify its colouring. She had her own design philosophy, and the lifestyle she projected profoundly influenced the attitudes of her time. Her childhood recollections of periods of time spent with relations living close to the Welsh rural scene bordering the area of Dowlais influenced her greatly. She believed that most people yearned for a more natural lifestyle than had come to be accepted in modern industrial and urban society. In her clothes, furnishings, and interior decorations she put forward a style which was simpler, kindlier, and more romantic than her contemporaries projected. She revived many of the discarded designs of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 
Laura Ashley was an active partner in an enterprise which contradicted the trends of the times. When the mini skirt was in full flower she advocated the maxi skirt, which she considered infinitely more attractive. In an age when designers were emphasizing the tougher side of human nature, she pointed to its pretty, peaceful, and generous side. Personally she was nearly always dressed in a skirt and blouse. 
Although there were aspects of a large international company, with its annual turnover of $130 million, which Laura Ashley did not relish, the resourcefulness and realism of her business attitude deserve emphasis. The Ashleys moved abroad to develop the business in Europe. They lived in a French chateau in Picardy and had a town house in Brussels. They also had homes in the Bahamas, London, and Wales. Bernard Ashley enjoyed the trappings of wealth, such as his ocean-going yacht, moored at St Tropez, with a permanent skipper and crew. Laura Ashley was by contrast a very private person with a profound belief in Christian values and the family as the bases of civilized life. She died on 17 September 1985 in hospital in Coventry, following head injuries sustained in a fall down the stairs of her daughter's Cotswold house. 
Bernard Ashley continued to run the company after her death. He was knighted in 1987, having embarked on a rapid expansion of Laura Ashley outlets overseas, but soon ran into difficulties, which he blamed on a succession of chief executives. After a boardroom coup he became non-executive chairman in 1991 and finally stepped down as chairman of Laura Ashley Holdings in 1993. He resigned as a non-executive director in 1998 when the company was taken over by the Malaysian conglomerate MUI Asia. Meanwhile in 1990 he married Regine Burnell ('b'. 1945), a Belgian photographer, and they divided their time between Brussels and houses in Wales, Provence, and Malta. In 2000 he founded Elanbach, a textile printer. He also had interests in country house hotels in Wales and the United States. He died of cancer at his home in Wales, Rhydoldog, Cwmdauddwr, Rhayader, Powys, on 14 February 2009, and was survived by his second wife and his four children. His funeral was at the parish church in Carno on 24 February. 
Emlyn Hooson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30771


Askey, Arthur Bowden (1900-1982), actor and entertainer, was born on 6 June 1900 at 29 Moses Street, Liverpool, the elder child and only son of Samuel Askey (died 1958), secretary of the firm Sugar Products of Liverpool, and his wife, Betsy Bowden (died 1949), of Knutsford, Cheshire. Six months after his birth the family moved to 90 Rosslyn Street, Liverpool. Arthur was educated at St Michael's council school (1905-11) and the Liverpool Institute for Boys (1911-16). His social life centred mostly on the church. Apart from Sunday services there were Sunday school, the Band of Hope, the Scripture Union, and choir practice. He started in the choir as a probationer and was paid 3died a month. Eventually he became head boy. What he later described as his 'most memorable performance' (Hirst, 89) occurred when the lady chapel of Liverpool Cathedral was consecrated and he sang solo to a large, distinguished audience which included the archbishops of Canterbury and York. 
As a schoolboy Askey's summer holidays were spent at Rhyl in north Wales. There he regularly watched the performances of a pierrot troupe called the Jovial Jesters, who performed three times a day on a small wooden stage on the sands. Askey was fascinated by this act and would arrive well before each performance and sit on the sands as close to the stage as he could get. Of this troupe 'I can honestly say the 'Jovial Jesters' gave me the bug for show business,' he later recounted (Askey, 20). 
When he was sixteen Askey went to work at the Liverpool corporation education office at a salary of $10 a month. After the outbreak of war in 1914 he was often asked to sing to wounded soldiers and as well as solos he sometimes sang duets with Tommy Handley, another Liverpudlian destined for show business stardom. In June 1918 he became a private in the Welch regiment. His army career was short-lived because when peace came in November he was demobilized and returned to the education office. 
He still retained the desire to build a career in entertainment, especially in a concert party. As often as possible he would cross the Mersey to the Olympian Gardens at Rock Ferry, where touring shows appeared each week. He memorized his favourite items, especially the jokes. Later he spent his summer holidays at Douglas on the Isle of Man, where there were no fewer than four concert parties and he could again add to his repertory of jokes and comic songs. He also entered and won prizes at talent competitions. He started his own amateur concert party called The Filberts and joined another as the pianist. 
In 1924 Askey's well-received performances as an amateur finally gained him an offer of his first professional job as a comedian in a concert party called Song Salad. This led to offers of work in pantomimes, the first being 'Babes in the Wood' at the Theatre Royal, Torquay, at Christmas 1925, which was followed by many more. 
On 23 March 1925 Askey married (Elizabeth) May (died 1974), daughter of Walter Swash, a publican. They had one daughter. May toured with him in Song Salad for a short time before retiring from performing. In 1926 they moved to London and Askey was introduced to a branch of the entertainment business which was to be his main source of income for the next twelve years -- after-dinner entertaining. There were masonic lodges, city companies, staff dinners, Central Hall concerts, and Sunday league shows. The fee was anything from 2 to 5 guineas and sometimes he would appear at as many as three in one night. 
In 1938 Askey joined Powis Pinder's Sunshine concert party at Shanklin, Isle of Wight, where he performed successfully for the next eight years. In 1938 the BBC also engaged him for a new radio show called 'Band Waggon', in which his partner was Richard Murdoch. The show, first broadcast in January 1938, was an enormous success and its innovative style was perhaps Askey's greatest contribution to the entertainment business. His 'Times' obituary was headed 'Pioneer of the craft of radio comedy' and he and Murdoch were the 'first entertainers to exploit radio as a medium for comedy in its own right' ('The Times', 12). The broadcasts were followed by a tour of music-halls and performances in the London Palladium in 1939. Richard Murdoch then joined the Royal Air Force, bringing 'Band Waggon' to an end. He was, however, given leave to appear with Askey in four films, 'Band Waggon', 'Charlie's Big-Hearted Aunt', 'The Ghost Train', and 'I Thank you'. 
After 'Band Waggon' Askey appeared in a number of successful musical shows in London's West End -- 'The Love Racket' (1943), 'Follow the Girls' (1945), 'The Kid from Stratford' (1948), 'Bet your Life' (1952), and 'The Love Match' (1953) -- as well as a string of popular radio shows such as 'Arthur's Inn', 'Hello Playmates', and 'Askey Galore'. He also appeared in many more films, including 'Back Room Boy', 'King Arthur was a Gentleman', 'Miss London Limited', and 'Bees in Paradise', and toured Australia in 1949-50. In 1969 he was appointed OBE and in 1981 CBE. In 1974 he became the first celebrity to have been twice the subject of the television show 'This is your Life'. 
Arthur Askey stood just 5 feet 3 inches and was able to use his lack of height for much humour. He always wore glasses and in his earlier and prime professional days had red hair. He was always smartly dressed except when portraying a character. He was a busy little comedian given to extravagant gestures and darting movements, and was perhaps at his best in a large theatre production such as pantomime and musical comedy. 
In later years Askey suffered from generally poor health, and he had a heart attack in 1978. He had both legs amputated in 1982. He died in St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 16 November 1982. His autobiography, 'Before your Very Eyes', was published in 1975. 
Richard Murdoch', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30772


Assheton, Ralph, first Baron Clitheroe (1901-1984), politician and businessman, was born at Downham Hall, Clitheroe, on 24 February 1901, the second of four children and only son of Sir Ralph Cockayne Assheton, first baronet (1860-1955), of Downham Hall, and his wife, Mildred Estelle Sybella (died 1949), daughter of John Henry Master JP of Montrose House, Petersham, Surrey. His family could trace its descent for more than a thousand years and had sent more than twenty of its members to the House of Commons since 1324. They were British landowners who, though never entering the highest ranks of nobility, had survived the Wars of the Roses and the English civil war, retaining and enlarging their estates. Assheton was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1923. On 24 January 1924 he married Sylvia Benita Frances (died 1991), daughter of Frederick William Hotham, sixth Baron Hotham. They had two sons and two daughters; one daughter died at birth. 
Assheton was called to the bar at the Inner Temple (1925). He soon, however, felt the pull of the City and became a member of a firm of stockbrokers in 1927. He was a devout Anglican and represented the diocese of Blackburn in the church assembly from 1930 to 1950. He was also high steward of Westminster from 1962 to his death. 
Assheton had been an active Conservative at university and at a by-election in 1934 entered the House of Commons as member for Rushcliffe, Nottinghamshire. He soon made his mark by his knowledge of economics and finance. He was appointed parliamentary private secretary to W. D. Ormsby-Gore, then minister of works and later at the Colonial Office (1936-8). This led to his being appointed a member of the royal commission on the West Indies (1938-9). On the outbreak of war Assheton was appointed parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Labour and National Service, a post which he held until 1942, despite Sir Winston Churchill succeeding Neville Chamberlain as premier. In 1942 he was first promoted to parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Supply and, from December, to financial secretary to the Treasury, 'the mounting block to the cabinet'. Assheton proved his worth dealing with the immense problems connected with wartime finance. He was sworn of the privy council in 1944. 
In 1944, with a general election looming, Churchill asked Assheton to become chairman of the Conservative and Unionist Party organization. During the war years the Conservative Party had declined in strength; there had been 400 agents in 1939, but by the time Assheton took over there were only 100. He fought hard touring the constituencies to revive Conservative philosophy very largely on a private enterprise and orthodox financial basis. None the less the Conservatives were defeated in 1945 and Assheton lost his own seat. He was, however, elected in the same year as Conservative member for the City of London and returned to the House of Commons as a front-bench speaker on financial and economic affairs. He also became chairman of the public accounts committee (1948-50). When the City of London was disfranchised in 1950 he won back the Labour-held seat of Blackburn West for the Conservatives. He held the seat in 1951 and was generally expected to be included in the cabinet. In fact he was offered only the junior post of postmaster-general, which he declined. He accordingly returned to the back benches, where he was chairman of the select committee on nationalized industries. Assheton was a strong supporter of the Suez group and in 1954 voted against the decision to withdraw from the Suez Canal zone. In 1955 he retired from parliament and accepted a hereditary peerage as Baron Clitheroe. He succeeded to a baronetcy in the same year. 
After this Assheton devoted his career to business and held a large number of directorships, the most important of which were Borax Consolidated, the Mercantile Investment Trust, and a joint deputy chairmanship of the National Westminster Bank. He was a council member of the duchy of Lancaster (1956-77) and was appointed KCVO in 1977. He continued to take a considerable interest in international affairs and more particularly those of central Africa. He was a director of Tanganyika Consolidated and made a strong speech in the House of Lords urging support for Moise Tshombe's Katanga administration, which the United Nations was seeking to integrate into the new Congo Republic. He showed himself a diligent landlord in Lancashire and took a keen interest in local affairs. He was lord lieutenant for Lancashire in 1971-6. 
Assheton was very much what Sir Winston Churchill, following Disraeli, once described as 'an English worthy'. He had a keen intellect and great experience of financial and economic matters but he lacked the more theatrical gifts of politicians. His economic opinions were of an orthodoxy unfashionable until Margaret Thatcher's administration in 1979. He has been well described as 'the right man in the right place at the wrong time'. Assheton died on 18 September 1984 at his home, Downham Hall, and was succeeded in the baronetcy and the barony by his elder son, Ralph John ('b'. 1929). 
Julian Amery', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30773


Astor, John Jacob, first Baron Astor of Hever (1886-1971), newspaper proprietor, was born at the family mansion on East 33rd Street, New York, USA, on 20 May 1886, the second surviving son of William Waldorf Astor, first Viscount Astor of Hever Castle (1848-1919), and his wife, Mary (Mamie) Dahlgren Paul (died 1894), of Villa Nova, Philadelphia. His elder brother was Waldorf Astor, second Viscount Astor (1879-1952). His baptismal names were those traditionally given in every generation to one boy in each branch of the family descended from John Jacob Astor (1763-1848), who emigrated from Germany in the aftermath of the American War of Independence and through general trade and, later, investment in Manhattan property, became the richest citizen of the new nation. William Waldorf was the great-grandson of the founder of the dynasty. He had little sympathy with east-coast society, which he regarded as brash and uncivilized. His sympathies and tastes lay on the other side of the Atlantic and, in 1890, he moved with his family to Britain. Determined that his sons should be brought up as English gentlemen, William Waldorf sent them to Eton College and New College. But John had set his heart on a military career and after only a year at Oxford he was commissioned into the 1st Life Guards. He was an outstanding athlete, the leading sportsman of his year at Eton and equally at home on horseback and on the tennis court. However, racquets was his real game and in the 1908 Olympics he won a gold medal in the doubles and a bronze in the singles. Soon after this he went with his regiment to India, where, in 1911, he was appointed aide-de-camp to the new viceroy, Charles, Baron Hardinge. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Captain Astor volunteered for the British expeditionary force and went to France as a Household Cavalry signalling officer, even though his connections could easily have secured him a safe staff job. In October 1914 he was wounded at Messines and invalided home. While in Britain he renewed acquaintance with Lady Violet Mary Mercer Nairne (died 1965), recently widowed on the death of a fellow officer, Lord Charles Mercer Nairne, younger son of the fifth marquess of Lansdowne. They were married on 28 August 1916. Violet was the youngest daughter of Gilbert John Elliot, fourth earl of Minto (1845-1914), Hardinge's predecessor as viceroy of India. On returning to the front Astor displayed a courage which was of the phlegmatic rather than the impulsive kind and as commander of the 520th household siege battery he distinguished himself in several engagements and was awarded the Legion d'honneur. When the 'big push' came in September 1918 his unit came under heavy attack at Cambrai and Astor's right leg was shattered by a shell. Gangrene set in rapidly and it was only amputation in a field hospital that saved his life. 
John Jacob, though always quiet and self-deprecating, returned a hero. His father immediately vacated his beloved Hever Castle, Kent, so that John Jacob and his family could have a suitable home. William Waldorf's warm feelings for his younger son were undoubtedly reinforced by his estrangement from his elder son, Waldorf, furious at his father's acceptance of a peerage in 1916. John Jacob made strenuous efforts to close the rift but to no avail, and it was some years before he and his brother were fully reconciled. 
John Jacob was not the kind of man to be satisfied with quietly enjoying life on his Kentish acres, and was certainly not going to be regarded as a semi-invalid. He worked so hard at 'breaking in' his artificial limb that he was soon able to take on younger men at squash -- and beat them. Determined to play a part in national life, he became Conservative member of parliament for Dover in October 1922 and continued to represent the constituency for twenty-three years. However, unlike his elder brother, he was not a political animal, and sought some other influential vehicle for his wealth and enthusiasm. His father had owned the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and 'The Observer' and the latter weekly was now being run very successfully by Waldorf and its editor, James Garvin. They found themselves frequently in trenchant rivalry with Lord Northcliffe, who used 'The Times', his flagship paper, to champion his own views vigorously. When Northcliffe died in August 1922, his will decreed that John Walter, whose family had owned 'The Times' from its foundation until 1908, should have the first option to buy, but Walter did not possess the $1.5 million necessary to do so. Northcliffe's brother Lord Rothermere now seemed all set to take over the 'Thunderer'. Then, enter Major Astor. He was determined not to see 'The Times' fall back under Harmsworth control and wanted, as he said, 'to secure as far as possible the continued independence of one great journal, and through it the perpetuation of the highest standards of British journalism' (Astor, 945). In December 1922 he acquired a 90 per cent shareholding and became co-proprietor with Walter. Astor and Walter reappointed as editor Geoffrey Dawson, whom Northcliffe had sacked; thereafter, they left him to get on with his job unencumbered by proprietorial directives. 
Astor took the same attitude towards the BBC. As a member of the parliamentary committee set up in 1923 to devise the procedures and regulations which should control the new phenomenon of broadcasting, he argued strongly for independence from government control and strongly supported the first director-general, John Reith. In his memoirs Reith recorded a minor incident very typical of Major Astor. Reith had been called upon to address the tories' 1922 committee at a time when the BBC was coming under prolonged attack in the press. Expecting a rough ride, the speaker diffidently entered the room. Immediately 'J. J. Astor from a seat near the front came up and shook hands; I was sure he did this deliberately' (Reith, 185-6). 
During the general strike Astor was determined that the 'Thunderer' should not be silenced. He personally marshalled a crew of office staff, friends, and family to get the presses rolling. For the seven days of the strike, while other newspaper offices were paralysed, Astor's band of volunteers produced a slimmed-down 'Times' and John Jacob was very proud of being able to boast 'We never closed'. During the Chamberlain years 'The Times' was closely associated with appeasement and was accused of being hand-in-glove with John Jacob's brother and the so-called Cliveden set. John Jacob stuck resolutely to his policy of editorial non-intervention, despite his waning confidence in the government. Astor's reticence over the international crisis was all the more surprising because he enjoyed a close friendship with Winston Churchill, who often came to Hever on painting trips during his wilderness years. In his fifties John Jacob also took up painting just as, having an abhorrence of being idle, he added archery, golf, and organ-playing to his pastimes. 
Not that there was much danger of his finding the days to drag. Astor presided over a family of three sons and a growing crop of grandchildren. He was for several years a very active president of the Empire (later Commonwealth) Press Union. He was heavily involved in ex-servicemen's charities, and his own experiences alerted him to the plight of those who had fought for their country and subsequently found themselves in difficulties. He created jobs on the Hever estate for men disabled in war. He made a point of collecting his own 10's'. a week pension as a demonstration to others who were reluctant to accept what they mistakenly regarded as charity. The Middlesex Hospital was the principal recipient of his benevolence. Over the many years of his active involvement with it he donated, among other gifts, $300,000 for a nurses' hostel and $450,000 for a medical school. 
The outbreak of a second major war created a fresh batch of problems for 'The Times', and Astor was always on hand to organize, advise, and encourage the diminished and overstretched workforce. He was determined that a newspaper which had not been gagged by trade unions in 1926 was not going to be silenced by a mere German dictator. Nor was it, even when a direct hit demolished the editorial and administrative offices in September 1940. War saw Astor once more in military mode, this time as commanding officer of the 5th City of London (press) Home Guard. By this time he had become a highly respected elder statesman of the newspaper world, and his determination not to desert the capital (his town house was in Carlton House Terrace) for the quiet and safety of the country only served to enhance his reputation. Perhaps because he had always given his services quietly and unostentatiously, many years passed before he received national recognition. It came in the form of a barony in the 1956 new year's honours. Even then John Jacob thought hard and long about accepting the peerage. He was concerned that doing so might reflect on the independence and integrity of 'The Times', though his aloofness from the editorial process ensured that the award could not be seen as being made for political services rendered. Nevertheless, from this time Lord Astor began to transfer his interest in the newspaper to his sons Gavin and Hugh. 
Astor found it difficult to come to terms with change in post-war society. While his sons could see the need for new techniques and presentation styles, Lord Astor and some members of his senior 'Times' management could not share their vision. In an information industry spawning international, multimedia corporations, an eventual change of ownership was probably inevitable, but the Astors held on until 1966 before selling to the Thomson group. Maintaining stately homes and large estates was also becoming difficult. At one stage Lord Astor contemplated giving Hever Castle to the National Trust, as Waldorf had done with Cliveden in 1942. Negotiations went badly, and closed when John Jacob walked out of a meeting saying, 'I was under the impression we were trying to reach a gentleman's agreement. As far as I can see there is only one gentleman present' (Wilson, 328). For Lord Astor that was very strong language. In 1958 a devastating flood caused massive damage to the buildings and cost the estate millions in repairs and new precautions. Four years later the government of Harold Macmillan, a close family friend, introduced new death duties on the overseas holdings of British residents. Since most of the family's income came from trust funds in America, Lord and Lady Astor were faced with the choice of living (and specifically dying) abroad or seeing their children encumbered with impossible debts. In autumn 1962 they moved to a house at Pegomas, near Cannes. 
For a quintessentially English couple this was a heartbreaking wrench. Lady Violet survived it by less than three years. Lord Astor characteristically made the best of his exile, building holiday homes so that all his friends could visit him and even sponsoring the local boule championship. 
In appearance John Jacob Astor was almost the epitome of the English country gentleman -- a slender figure of erect, military bearing with a keen eye and a neatly clipped moustache. He died on 19 July 1971 at Cannes, and was buried at Hever. He was succeeded in the title by his eldest son, Gavin Astor. In addition to Gavin and Hugh, Astor had a third son, John (1923-1987), who was regarded as the 'brains' of the family. He served as a navigator with Coastal Command during the Second World War and was Conservative MP for Newbury from 1964 to 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30774


Auchinleck, Sir Claude John Eyre (1884-1981), army officer, was born at Aldershot on 21 June 1884, the elder son and eldest of four children of Colonel John Claude Alexander Auchinleck, of the Royal Artillery, who died when Claude was eight, and his wife, Mary Eleanor, daughter of John Eyre. As the son of a deceased officer he qualified for a foundation place at Wellington College but his mother was hard pressed to pay even the reduced fee of $10 a year. Accustomed to hardship at home or with his mother's relations in Ireland, Auchinleck acquired a lifelong indifference to personal comfort. He passed into the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, just high enough on the list to secure a posting to the Indian army, where in 1904 he was commissioned into the 62nd Punjabis. He displayed a marked aptitude for learning local languages, and soon developed a close rapport with the ordinary soldiers of the Indian army. 
On the outbreak of the First World War, Auchinleck as a captain accompanied his regiment to Egypt, where he first saw action in repelling the Turkish attack on the Suez Canal in February 1915. From 1916 to the end of the war he served in Mesopotamia, taking part in the desperate attempts to relieve Kut al-Amara and at one point commanding his depleted battalion. Promoted brigade major to the 52nd brigade, he took part in the victorious advance to Baghdad in operations characterized by appalling conditions, defective medical supplies, and faulty tactics. Though appointed to the DSO (1917) and thrice mentioned in dispatches, his promotion after 1918 was slow. In 1921 he married Jessie, daughter of Alexander Stewart, civil engineer, of Kinloch Rannoch, Perthshire. 
Auchinleck passed at the Staff College, Quetta, in 1919, attended the inaugural course at the Imperial Defence College in 1927, and as a full colonel returned to Quetta as an instructor from 1930 to 1932. In 1933 he took over command of the Peshawar brigade, which was immediately involved in operations against the upper Mohmands, followed by another campaign in 1935. Auchinleck displayed professional competence and skill in improvisation in one of the most difficult forms of warfare; in consequence he was promoted major-general and in 1936 became deputy chief of the general staff in India. In 1938-9 he was a key member of the Chatfield committee on the modernization of the Indian army. Here he evinced his progressive belief in the feasibility of replacing British officers by Indians. 
Early in 1940 Auchinleck was posted to England to prepare 4th corps for eventual dispatch to France but, as an expert in mountain warfare, was precipitately sent to Norway, after the disastrous opening of the campaign, to take command of the land forces in the Narvik area. Auchinleck's insistence on the provision of essential supplies, artillery, and air cover irritated Winston Churchill, then first lord of the Admiralty, and was symptomatic of their relations. The general's forebodings were justified in that under-equipping and tragi-comic mismanagement continued to dog operations, which were overshadowed from the outset by the German attack in the west on 10 May. Narvik was duly retaken, only to be speedily abandoned. Auchinleck's report to the war cabinet, stating that the French contingent had impressed him more than the British, was not well received. 
Nevertheless Auchinleck was at once instructed to form 5th corps for the defence of southern England against invasion, and in July 1940 he was promoted general officer commanding, southern command, where he experienced considerable friction with his successor at 5th corps, Lieutenant-General B. L. Montgomery. In November, when the immediate threat of invasion had passed, Auchinleck was promoted full general and appointed commander-in-chief in India. This was perhaps a surprising transfer from an active to a secondary, support theatre, but India's military importance was increasing. It was the potential source of many divisions equipped from local manufacturing resources which were badly needed in the Middle East and the Far East; it might become a target for Japanese aggression; and its internal unrest needed handling by a respected Indian army veteran. Auchinleck won Churchill's approval by promptly dispatching a force to help put down the rebellion of Rashid Ali in Iraq. The prime minister decided that the Auk, as he was known, had the necessary drive after all, as well as the other professional and personal attributes which he admired. Churchill also decided that Auchinleck must take over as commander-in-chief Middle East, where Sir A. P. Wavell, in his opinion, was too exhausted to achieve the desperately needed victory. Consequently, when operation Battleaxe failed in June 1941, Churchill ordered Wavell and Auchinleck to change places. 
Auchinleck had been warned by successive chiefs of the Imperial General Staff, Sir John Dill and Sir Alan Brooke, that Churchill would expect an early offensive and quick results, and that if he could not provide them he must very diplomatically explain why. Unfortunately Auchinleck was a bluff, uncompromising soldier, unable or unwilling to learn diplomatic finesse. After a brisk exchange of signals he bluntly told Churchill: 'I must repeat that to launch an offensive with the inadequate means at present at our disposal is not, in my opinion, a justifiable operation of war.' To all Churchill's relentless pressure and cajolery he returned a bleak factual explanation of the desert army's unreadiness for battle. From London, the reinforcements in troops, tanks, and guns seemed more than adequate (particularly in the light of the enemy's deficiencies as revealed by Ultra intelligence); but in Auchinleck's judgement the troops required training and acclimatization, while the tanks and guns were inferior to the enemy's. 
On this occasion Auchinleck got his way. Not until 18 November did Eighth Army open operation Crusader by advancing round the southern flank of the axis forces' position on the Italian frontier. General Sir Alan Cunningham intended to drive towards the besieged Tobruk, so forcing Rommel to defend his communications on ground not of his own choosing, whereupon he would be defeated by the superior numbers of the British armour. An extraordinarily confused situation developed, in which tanks and armoured cars milled about the desert desperately trying to retain cohesion and restore order in an unusually dense 'fog of war'. Units of the axis forces and Eighth Army became interspersed and layered upon one another in a remarkable fashion. As the battle appeared to swing against him, with Rommel's bold dash towards the Egyptian frontier, Cunningham lost his nerve and began to talk of retreat. Warned of this situation, Auchinleck flew up to the front, restored confidence, and ordered the offensive to be renewed. Shortly afterwards he relieved Cunningham, replacing him with his deputy chief of staff from Cairo, Neil Ritchie, initially as a temporary measure to avoid changing the corps commanders. 
The immediate outcome was an impressive victory. Tobruk was relieved and Rommel forced to retreat into Cyrenaica with the loss of 20,000 prisoners and masses of 'materiel'. In February 1942 however, Rommel, having received reinforcements, unexpectedly counter-attacked, driving the Eighth Army out of Benghazi and back to the Gazala line with its right flank on the sea about 35 miles west of Tobruk. 
As in the previous year, Auchinleck was placed under increasing pressure from Churchill to mount a new offensive, now with the urgent need to contribute to the relief of Malta by seizing axis-held airfields. In these circumstances Auchinleck was unwise in his adamant refusal to fly to London to explain his case that offensive operations before 1 June might risk defeat and the loss of Egypt. Churchill and the war cabinet were unsympathetic: Auchinleck was instructed to attack before 1 June only to be pre-empted by Rommel on 26 May. 
Auchinleck offered another hostage to fortune in retaining Ritchie as Eighth Army commander despite private warnings that he lacked the quality and experience to stand up to Rommel, and also lacked the confidence of his corps commanders, W. H. E. Gott and C. W. M. N. Norrie -- both senior to him and more experienced in command. Auchinleck in effect got the worst of both worlds: he expressed confidence in Ritchie, yet tried to control him at long distance by feeding him detailed advice before and during the Gazala battle. More serious still, as conclusively shown by Field Marshal Lord Carver, Ritchie was correct in his diagnosis of Rommel's intended line of attack round the south of the British defences, and Auchinleck wrong, despite his access to Ultra. As a consequence of Auchinleck's misjudgement, Norrie's armoured brigades were not concentrated to check and defeat Rommel's initial attack as they might otherwise have been. Auchinleck's Ultra intelligence, which revealed Rommel's severe logistic problems and shortage of tanks and fuel, also caused him to urge Ritchie to seize the initiative for which he was later to be blamed as over-optimistic. 
The outcome of the Gazala battle was a clear-cut defeat. Tobruk surrendered and the Eighth Army was driven all the way back to the line of El Alamein. Auchinleck at this late stage in the battle (25 June) removed Ritchie and assumed command himself. Despite Auchinleck's excellent intelligence of Rommel's weaknesses, dispositions, and intentions, there is little evidence that he displayed exceptional skill in his execution of counter-attacks, which all petered out ineffectually. Nevertheless his resolution and calm contributed to the defensive success. By mid-July Rommel's advance had been decisively halted, and his diaries reveal that he had come close to total defeat. By early August Churchill had decided to remove Auchinleck, replacing him with Montgomery -- news which Auchinleck heard on 8 August. 
Montgomery's sweeping criticisms of his predecessor sought to deny Auchinleck any credit either for checking Rommel or for bequeathing a feasible defensive plan. By the end of July the defensive layout of minefields and field fortifications was indeed well in hand. Montgomery was certainly unjust in telling Churchill a few days after he had taken command that Auchinleck had no plan and in the event of a heavy attack intended to retreat to the Nile delta. 
On the other hand Montgomery's buoyant personality did inject new confidence into a tired army, and he did make significant changes to the plans he inherited. In particular he realized immediately that if all available reserves were called up from the delta, he would be able to man a continuous line of defence as far south as Alam Halfa. On that ridge he would reinforce his left flank and threaten any enemy attempt to turn it by a counter-attack. All contingency plans for insuring against failure were cancelled. Ironically, Auchinleck was dismissed by Churchill for refusing to be pressured into a premature offensive, whereas Montgomery took several additional weeks to prepare his offensive which began on 23 October. 
Auchinleck was hurt by the manner of his removal and refused relegation to the command in Persia and Iraq. Consequently he spent nearly a year idle in India before again becoming commander-in-chief there on Wavell's promotion to viceroy in June 1943. 
Though deprived of responsibility for the conduct of operations against the Japanese, Auchinleck bore the burden of the vast expansion of the Indian army and its war industry. He had to provide bases, troops, and supplies for the Burma campaign, and also assist the Chinese and American forces in that theatre. His immense prestige in the Indian army was a great asset in this task. He was one of the few British generals to gain the respect of the American 'Vinegar Joe' Stilwell but, unlike Wavell, was too conventional a soldier to sympathize with Orde Wingate's unorthodox methods and exorbitant demands on Indian resources. 
In 1945 Auchinleck was appointed GCB, and in the following year was promoted field marshal, but these honours were overshadowed by a personal tragedy. His wife left him for another senior officer at general headquarters and they were divorced in 1946. They had no children. Jessie had found her husband's long office hours and dedication to work tiresome and ultimately intolerable. Her departure left a void in the field marshal's life which he filled by working harder than ever. 
Auchinleck's last phase in India proved tragic in an even deeper sense. He had hoped that India, and hence his cherished Indian army, would remain united, but he quickly realized that partition of the country and the army was inevitable. He knew that considerable time would be needed for peacefully reconstituting two dominion armies without the steadying influence of British officers, the great majority of whom would wish to retire. Partition in 1948 would have been difficult enough, but the sudden decision of the new viceroy, Viscount Mountbatten of Burma, to bring forward independence to 15 August 1947, made Auchinleck's task impossible. The Indian army itself was deeply affected by religious conflict and rapidly disintegrated as an organized force. The meagre British military and police forces were powerless to prevent the massacres that accompanied the partition of the Punjab. 
After independence Auchinleck decided to stay on as supreme commander of the Indian and Pakistan forces. He was openly criticized by some Indian leaders as being too favourable to Pakistan, and beneath a polite facade his relations with Mountbatten were increasingly strained. In September 1947 Mountbatten asked him to resign, and he left India on 1 December in a mood of bitterness and despair after forty-four years' service. He refused a peerage lest the honour be associated with the events that he considered to be dishonourable. 
After retiring from the army Auchinleck led an active life, frequently revisiting India on business. His numerous appointments included those of governor of Wellington College (1946-59), president of the London Federation of Boys' Clubs (1949-55), vice-president of the Forces Help Society and the Lord Roberts Workshops, and chairman of the Armed Forces Art Society (1950-67). He characteristically refused to join in the battle of the memoirs, but in 1967 presented his personal papers to Manchester University, convinced that history would eventually do him justice. 
Auchinleck had a most attractive personality; he detested all forms of pomp, display, and self-advertisement; but his simple tastes in personal matters did not inhibit him as a generous and entertaining host. His former private secretary, Major-General Shahid Hamid, has described Auchinleck in his element among his Indian soldiers: 'There is nothing dominating or overbearing in his character at all... His mental energy, enthusiasm, good temper and driving power are immense... He has become a legend in his lifetime' (Hamid, 68). 
In 1968, when over eighty, Auchinleck left England to live in an unpretentious flat in Marrakesh. There he received visitors and spent his time painting, fishing, and walking. He had received honorary LLDs from Aberdeen and St Andrews universities in 1948 and from Manchester in 1970. He had many other honours, among which were OBE (1919), CB (1934), CSI (1936), GCIE (1940), and GCB (1945). He was among the ten field marshals of the Second World War honoured by a memorial in the crypt of St Paul's in November 1976. He died in his home, Villa Rikighou, rue Liafid Ibrahim, Marrakesh, Morocco, on 23 March 1981. 
Brian Bond', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30775


Auden, Wystan Hugh (1907-1973), poet and writer, was born at 54 Bootham, York, on 21 February 1907, the youngest of three children (all sons) of George Augustus Auden (1872-1957), general practitioner, and his wife, Constance Rosalie, 'nee' Bicknell (1869-1941). His parents were devout high Anglicans, especially his mother, who had trained as a missionary nurse before meeting Auden's father when both were at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. Dr Auden, who was gentle and phlegmatic, had read natural sciences (and won a gold medal) at Cambridge, and was widely learned in medicine, psychology, classics, and archaeology and published articles on all these subjects; he read Norse myths and legends to his son, and believed (perhaps mistakenly) he was descended from Icelanders. In 1908 Dr Auden was appointed the first school medical officer of the city of Birmingham (and later became professor of medicine at the university there), and was among the first medical officers in Britain to use psychoanalytic insights and techniques; Auden first read Freud in his father's library. Constance Auden, who was severe and volatile, had taken a degree in French, with a gold medal, from London University; she encouraged her son to share her musical tastes and to learn to play the piano. Wystan's eldest brother, George Bernard Auden (1900-1978), was a farmer with few intellectual interests; Wystan was closer to the second son, John Bicknell Auden (1903-1991), who became a distinguished geologist. 
At Birmingham the family lived in the suburb of Solihull, and became friendly with E. R. Dodds and other teachers at the university. Mrs Auden's 'bete noire' was the modernist bishop of Birmingham, Ernest William Barnes, who had tried to suppress Anglo-Catholic practices in his diocese. Auden's earliest religious memories were of mysterious rites in which he carried the incense-boat. 
When the First World War broke out Dr Auden signed up for the Royal Army Medical Corps and during the next four years his family saw him only on rare visits home. Wystan and his brother John remained at home with their mother until September 1915 when both brothers were sent to St Edmund's School in Hindhead, Surrey. Until the end of the war Mrs Auden lived in lodgings; during school holidays she and her sons stayed with members of their family or visited rustic places in England and Wales. During these years Wystan Auden fell in love with lead-mining machinery, which he first read about in books and then observed during holiday visits -- to the Blue John mine at Castleton, near Sheffield, for example. He hoped to become a mining engineer. At school he was untidy and mildly subversive, athletically unskilled but intellectually distinguished. He amused himself at the piano and by collecting scientific specimens, and he impressed the other boys with sexual information picked up from his father's library. He was elected president of a newly formed literary society at school in 1920, but had no special literary interests. 
After Dr Auden returned from the war in 1918 the family moved to a house in Harborne, another Birmingham suburb, and began taking holidays in the Pennine hills, where they stayed in farmhouses in Wescoe and Derwentfolds, near Threlkeld. In 1919 they visited the recently abandoned mines at Rookhope, where the desolate industrial landscape excited a Wordsworthian visionary intensity in the twelve-year-old Wystan Auden. He recalled this experience in poems and essays throughout his life, variously describing it as a vision of Edenic innocence and of his consciousness of a guilty loss of Eden. 
Auden's last months at St Edmund's, in 1920, were a 'period of ecclesiastical 'schwarmerei'' (Auden, 'Forewords and Afterwords', 517) when, as he recalled later, his religious enthusiasm was stimulated by his sexual attraction to the school chaplain, the Revd Geoffrey Newman. (Auden had been aware of his homosexuality since childhood, and it became the source of much friction between himself and his mother.) By the autumn his religious enthusiasm had begun to fade, although he still thought of himself as a believer when he began at Gresham's School, Holt, a self-consciously modern school that emphasized science over the classics. Morality was governed by an 'honour system' in which pupils were expected to control their impulses, report their own infractions, and report the infractions of others who failed to do so. Auden later wrote: 'The best reason I have for opposing Fascism is that at school I lived in a Fascist state' ('The Old School', ed. G. Greene, 1934, 17). 
Auden's best friend at Gresham's was Robert Medley, later a painter. In March 1922 he and Medley were walking across a salt marsh near the school when Medley made some irreligious remarks and Auden replied with annoyance. In an attempt to change the subject, Medley asked Auden if he wrote poetry. Auden had never done so, but instantly felt that he had a vocation to become a poet; he later said that the experience had the force of a revelation. In the next few months his religious faith dropped away quietly; he only gradually became aware of its loss. 
Wordsworth was Auden's first poetic mentor, followed by others whose work he found in the school library, notably Walter de la Mare, W. H. Davies, and George Russell (AE). In 1923 he discovered Hardy and read and imitated almost no one else for a year, after which he discovered Edward Thomas and also began imitating, although to a lesser degree, Emily Dickinson, A. E. Housman, and Robert Frost. In summer 1925, after finishing at Gresham's, he made his first trip abroad, with his father, to the Salzburg Festival, then to Kitzbuhel, where they stayed with a family acquaintance, Hedwig Petzold, whose daughter Christa later helped Auden find a house to buy in Austria in 1957. 
Auden entered Christ Church, Oxford, in October 1925, with a scholarship in natural science. After a few months he switched to modern Greats (philosophy, politics, and economics), then, at the start of his second year, to English. Because there was no English tutor at Christ Church he was sent for tutorials with the young Nevill Coghill, at Exeter College. A few months earlier Auden had discovered T. S. Eliot's poetry and had almost immediately adopted an exaggeratedly modern and discordant version of Eliot's style in place of the traditional lyric styles of his more youthful verse. 
During a visit to London late in 1925 Auden was reintroduced to Christopher Isherwood, who became his closest friend and collaborator during the next fourteen years. (They had known each other slightly at St Edmund's, where Isherwood had been two years ahead of Auden.) Auden hero-worshipped Isherwood at this time, sent him his manuscripts, and accepted many of his suggestions for revising them; their friendship was intermittently sexual but they were never in love with each other. 
Auden also made close friendships (the most lasting of them with Stephen Spender) and impressed his contemporaries with his total lack of interest in socially prominent students or in political or any other organizations. He kept his door closed against intrusion and worked hard at his poems and less hard at his studies, although his miscellaneous erudition and slightly comic oracular style tended to dazzle his contemporaries. His favourite walk was around the gasworks, and he cultivated an obscurely eccentric manner. He was reputed to keep a starting pistol in his rooms, and was an entertainingly indecorous guest on visits to the families of his friends. The green eyeshade that he sometimes wore in his darkened rooms contributed to his reputation for eccentricity, but he drew the curtains and wore the eyeshade (in later years, dark glasses) because his eyes were acutely sensitive to light. He was tall, gangly, awkward, pale, smooth-faced, unkempt, and without personal dignity; he wrote a few years later, 'My face looks like an egg upon a plate' (W. H. Auden, 'Letters from Iceland', 1937, 202). His closest friends recognized the shyness and vulnerability hidden beneath a manner that in his early years was sometimes comically extravagant, in later years sometimes comically dictatorial, and although he was impressively resilient as a writer, and let almost no personal crisis distract him from his work, he always remained unassertive and self-deprecating in his intimate relations. 
At the end of his first year at Oxford Auden co-edited the 1926 edition of 'Oxford Poetry' with another undergraduate, Charles Plumb, who had been chosen by the publisher, Basil Blackwell, and who invited Auden to collaborate with him; in the following year Blackwell chose Auden to edit the 1927 volume, and Auden chose his friend C. Day-Lewis as co-editor. He also published intermittently in undergraduate magazines, and in June 1927 submitted the manuscript of a book of poems to T. S. Eliot at Faber and Gwyer. Eliot turned it down, but said he would be interested to follow Auden's work. During summer 1927 Auden travelled with his father to Yugoslavia, where he wrote 'The Watershed', the first of his poems that he later wished to preserve. His style now largely freed itself from the influence of Eliot as it had earlier freed itself from Hardy, and he had matured to the point where it was now unmistakably his own. In summer 1928 Spender hand-set about thirty copies of Auden's first book, a small pamphlet entitled 'Poems'; the closing pages were printed by a commercial printing shop when Spender's hand-press broke down. 
After leaving Oxford with a third-class degree in 1928 Auden spent three weeks in Spa, Belgium, where he was psychoanalysed by Margaret Marshall, a friend (and later the first wife) of his brother John, who apparently tried to help him shed his homosexuality. Probably as part of the same effort, he soon afterwards became engaged to marry Sheilah Richardson, a young nurse in Birmingham. In the autumn he left for a year in Berlin, paid for by an allowance from his parents. He lived with an upper middle-class family in a Berlin suburb until about Christmas 1928, then moved to a Berlin slum for the next six months of his stay. There he met John Layard, an English anthropologist and disciple of the American psychologist Homer Lane, and absorbed (without entirely taking seriously) Layard's versions of Lane's doctrines about the psychosomatic causes of disease and the need to liberate one's sexual and other impulses. After Auden returned to England in July 1929 he broke off his engagement and resolved to accept his homosexuality. 
The major work of Auden's year in Berlin was 'Paid on Both Sides: a Charade', a rewritten and expanded version of a dramatic sketch he had written in the summer shortly before leaving England. Eliot accepted this for his magazine 'The Criterion', and then accepted for Faber and Faber (the later name of Faber and Gwyer) Auden's first regularly published book, entitled 'Poems' like the 1928 pamphlet printed by Spender. The book appeared in 1930 and contained 'Paid on Both Sides' followed by thirty short poems; a revised edition appeared in 1933 with seven of the original poems replaced. 
Auden spent much of autumn and winter 1929-30 in London, working intermittently as a tutor. When his allowance ended early in 1930 he took a job as a schoolmaster at Larchfield Academy, Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, a small and undistinguished preparatory school; C. Day-Lewis had held the job there earlier, and apparently suggested that Auden apply for it. Auden found the school dreary and the boys mostly dim, but made close friendships and used fantasy versions of it as the setting for much of his phantasmagoric long poem 'The Orators' (1932). During the summers and at Christmas he visited Isherwood and Spender in Germany. 
'Paid on Both Sides' was the first of a series of long, mostly dramatic works that Auden wrote each summer during the next few years. In summer 1929 he and Isherwood collaborated on a long serio-comic play in verse and prose, 'The Enemies of a Bishop', which they left unpublished. In 1930 Auden wrote another play in verse and prose, 'The Fronny' (now lost), based loosely on the travels of Francis Turville-Petre, a dissolute young English anthropologist whom they had met in Berlin. Neither of these plays was written with any prospect of being performed. Then, in 1932, Auden was invited to write for the Group Theatre, an experimental theatre company founded by Auden's schoolfriend Robert Medley and Rupert Doone, a dancer with whom Medley was living. The company was made up of volunteer and amateur actors and had a vague programme of performing new and old plays in a variety of styles that would integrate acting, dancing, singing, and visual effects. Doone invited Auden to write a ballet-drama in which Doone could take the silent role of a dancer. Auden obliged with 'The Dance of Death', a brief revue in deliberately unpolished verse and prose that was partly a satire on modern fashion and partly a send-up of revolutionary opposition. It was published in 1933 and was performed by the Group Theatre in 1934 and 1935. 
Auden had taken no interest in politics at Oxford, but became aware of social unrest in Berlin in 1928-9, and began writing poems that foretold apocalyptic social change. Until 1932 he was more interested in D. H. Lawrence's fantasies about psychological leadership than in any practical politics, and the central theme of 'The Orators' (as he wrote in the foreword of a 1966 reissue) 'seems to be Hero-worship, and we all know what that can lead to politically'. In the latter months of 1932 he began writing about social change in Marxist and visionary terms; he wrote a poem in the voice of a communist organizer, 'Comrades who when the sirens roar' ('Comrades' was revised in 1936 to 'Brothers'); and briefly thought he was in the midst of what he called a conversion to communism. Unlike Spender, Day-Lewis, and Isherwood's novelist friend Edward Upward, however, he was never tempted to join the Communist Party, and told friends that he was a bourgeois, not a revolutionary. For the next few years he publicly adopted socialist political views, while he privately remained intrigued by visionary leadership as exemplified by T. E. Lawrence; this idea he finally renounced (more publicly than he had ever held it) in the figure of the climber who destroys himself and his followers in 'The Ascent of F6' (1936). 
Auden moved in autumn 1932 from Larchfield to the Downs School, Colwall, Herefordshire, a modern preparatory school where pupils and teachers liked his unconventional and comic classroom techniques and he enjoyed his classes and his friendships. In June 1933, sitting on the school lawn with three other teachers, he experienced what he later called a 'vision of Agape' in which: 'I felt myself invaded by a power which, though I consented to it, was irresistible and certainly not mine. For the first time in my life I knew exactly -- because, thanks to the power, I was doing it -- what it means to love one's neighbour as oneself. (Auden, 'Forewords and Afterwords', 69)' Most of his verse until this time was reticent and mysterious in manner, although he had also begun writing some vigorous satiric verse in the style of Burns; after this experience he increasingly wrote in accessible, lyric styles that drew easily on ballad and sonnet traditions. His characteristic clipped, foreboding style was already so well known that the young Gavin Ewart could expect readers to understand the point of the title of his respectful parody of Auden's manner, the poem 'Audenesque for an Initiation' ('New Verse', December 1933). 
Auden's theatrical interests flowered at the Downs, where he produced Jean Cocteau's 'Orphee' and an adaptation of 'The Deluge' from the Chester mystery plays, and wrote, composed, and produced a musical revue with a cast made up of the entire school and staff. He also continued his work for the Group Theatre. In 1934 he rewrote 'The Fronny' as 'The Chase'; Isherwood suggested so many changes that the two rewrote the play as 'The Dog Beneath the Skin', published in 1935 and performed by the Group in 1936. 
From about 1933 until 1937 Auden was in love, at first distantly, later intimately, with Michael Yates (1919-2001), a former Downs pupil who was now at Bryanston School; he remained a close friend of Yates (who became head of design for the independent television companies Associated Rediffusion and London Weekend Television) and his wife, Margaret (Marny), for the rest of his life. In later poems such as 'The Cave of Nakedness' he alluded to Yates as a remembered 'sacred image' (there are similar allusions in 'First Things First' and 'Since'). In 1935 Auden married Erika Julia Hedwig Grundgens (1905-1969), daughter of Thomas Mann, in order to provide her with a British passport, as her German citizenship was about to be revoked by the Nazis. (She had asked Isherwood to marry her for this purpose, but he was reluctant, and passed the role on to Auden.) Auden translated some lyrics for Erika Mann's cabaret 'Die Pfeffermuhle' in 1936, and remained in cordial contact with her for some years; they never divorced and she left him a small legacy when she died in 1969. 
In autumn 1935 Auden left the Downs School to work in London for the General Post Office film unit, a group of artists, writers, and musicians organized by John Grierson to make documentary films on social themes. Among the unit's films for which Auden wrote verse commentaries were 'Coal Face' and 'Night Mail'. Other members of the unit who became Auden's close friends were the composer Benjamin Britten and the painter William Coldstream; Auden and Coldstream, partly in reaction to the earnest socialist propagandizing of the unit's films, devised an aesthetic for themselves in which the artist should be a reporting journalist concerned with the unique particularity of his subjects, rather than a seeker after symbols, myths, movements, and generalities. 
After five months with the unit Auden resigned to work as a freelance writer. In spring 1936 he spent a month collaborating with Isherwood in Portugal on their play 'The Ascent of F6', published and performed the same year with music by Britten. He heard from Michael Yates that Yates, with three other Bryanston pupils and a schoolmaster, planned to spend a week in Iceland in August. Auden had been passionately interested in the Icelandic sagas since childhood (echoes of the sagas occur in 'Paid on Both Sides' and his other early works), and he now arranged for Faber and Faber to commission him to write a travel book about Iceland. He invited Louis MacNeice to collaborate; at Oxford MacNeice had been a distant acquaintance, but he and Auden became close friends when MacNeice was teaching at Birmingham (where Auden lived with his parents when he was not teaching or travelling). Auden sailed to Iceland in June and stayed for three months; MacNeice and the party from Bryanston joined him in August; after the rest of the Bryanston group returned to England, Yates, MacNeice, and Auden stayed on for two more weeks. During the trip Auden and MacNeice began work on the prose and verse of 'Letters from Iceland' (1937), and finished the book in London at the end of the year. While Auden was away 'Look, Stranger!', his second published collection of short poems, appeared; its title was chosen by his publishers when Auden's postcard suggesting the title 'The Island' failed to reach London in time. He hated the published title and had it changed to 'On this Island' for the American edition. 
While in Iceland Auden heard that civil war had broken out in Spain, and late in 1936 he decided to volunteer as a soldier for the Spanish republic, then realized that he did not wish to kill, and resolved to volunteer instead as a medical worker. He left for Spain in January 1937, hoping to drive an ambulance, but on his arrival in Valencia the republican authorities put him to work in the censor's office, where he wrote (and perhaps broadcast) propaganda. After at most four weeks in Valencia he travelled north to the front, then returned to England less than two months after departing; he had originally planned to spend at least four months in Spain. 
Auden was deeply unsettled by his experiences in Spain. He said almost nothing about it at the time, other than a remark to Spender to the effect that political expediency was no justification for lies, but he was dismayed to discover how far Stalin's agents were directing the policies of the republic, and was troubled to find the churches closed by the government. He did not think of himself as a Christian, but he began to realize that churches, and what happened inside them, mattered greatly to him, and an explicitly religious note began to enter his poems and prose. Immediately after his return to England, however, he felt morally obliged to defend the republic against its Nazi and fascist enemies; he added a few lines of political uplift to the ending of 'The Ascent of F6' and arranged to publish his propagandistic poem 'Spain' as a sixpenny pamphlet, giving the royalties to an organization providing medical aid for the Spanish republic. About the same time his lyric poems developed a new emotional intensity and verbal simplicity, both in the love poems he wrote to Michael Yates (including 'The Dream' and 'Lay your sleeping head, my love') and in the serio-comic songs he wrote to be set by Benjamin Britten (including 'Stop all the clocks, cut off the telephone' and 'O tell me the truth about love'). 
Auden taught at the Downs School for one more term in spring 1937. While in Dover in August he and Isherwood wrote the first version of another play, 'On the Frontier', a melodrama about two European nations at war. He spent much of the autumn in Harborne compiling 'The Oxford Book of Light Verse' (1938), but made frequent visits to London for broadcasts and readings. In November he was awarded the king's gold medal for poetry, as the result of a recommendation by John Masefield, at this time poet laureate. 
Commissioned by his American publisher, Random House, and by Faber and Faber to write a travel book on the Sino-Japanese War, Auden and Isherwood left for China in January 1938, and spent about four months in Hankow (Hankou) and travelling near the war zones. They briefly visited Japan, crossed the Pacific (and rewrote 'On the Frontier', performed later that year with music by Britten), and spent two weeks in New York in July before returning to England. They found New York exhilarating and made plans to return later for an indefinite stay. 
During autumn 1938 Auden spent much of his time in Brussels, sometimes with Isherwood, where they worked on their book about China, 'Journey to a War' (1939). Auden wrote an imposing sequence, 'In Time of War', in which vast historical changes were compressed into the scale of sonnets. In January 1939 he and Isherwood sailed for New York. On their journey they told each other that they had lost interest in writing propaganda, no matter how worthy the cause, and although Auden worked actively during the next few years for refugee and other relief causes, he never again wrote the explicitly political poems that had helped establish his reputation. 
Auden told his brother John that he had fallen into despair in the months before he arrived in New York: he was convinced that he could never be loved. In New York Auden found a new commitment to his art -- expressed most strikingly in the first poem he wrote after his arrival, 'In Memory of W. B. Yeats' -- and new happiness and energy. In April 1939, after a public reading, he met and fell in love with Chester Simon Kallman (1921-1975), a Brooklyn College student who was the second son of a Jewish dentist whose parents had emigrated from Latvia. Auden wrote a group of visionary poems about this experience, among them 'The Prophets' and 'Like a Vocation', and regarded the relationship between Kallman and himself as a marriage. Kallman was literate, musical, and extravagantly witty as a mimic and gossip; Auden learned to love opera through Kallman's example. Later in 1939 he wrote his first libretto, 'Paul Bunyan' (performed with music by Britten, 1941), adapting the legends of an American lumberjack hero. Within a few weeks after Auden and Kallman met, Auden decided to remain in the United States and become an American citizen. New York, he said, gave him the isolation he needed to write, and much of his work at this time had a dry, spare tone and expressed the voluntarily lonely outlook of existentialist thought. 
After Auden had taught for a month at St Mark's School, Southboro, Massachusetts, he and Kallman spent summer 1939 travelling through the American south and west. During a month in Taos, New Mexico, Auden wrote 'The Prolific and the Devourer', a collection of prose aphorisms on literature and politics that he left unfinished, perhaps because he soon rejected the pacifism he had expressed in the manuscript. After a visit to Isherwood, who had moved to California after a few months in New York, Auden and Kallman returned to New York at the end of August. A day or two after the start of the Second World War Auden wrote 'September 1, 1939', a poem he later rejected because he found its inflated rhetoric more suitable to the poetry of Yeats than to his own. 
In autumn 1939 Auden settled into his new life in America. He compiled a selection of his lyric poems from the past few years and gave the book a title, 'Another Time' (1940), implying that the poems were from a period of his life that had now ended. In October he moved to a flat in Brooklyn Heights and began teaching a course in poetry for the League of American Writers, a left-wing group that he joined but later left in disgust over its support of the Hitler-Stalin pact. Despite the outbreak of war, he told friends (and suggested in print) that he believed that humanity was inherently good and that a just society was inevitable. Then in November he went to a German-language cinema in Manhattan and was profoundly disturbed by the murderous shouts of the audience in support of a Nazi newsreel about the conquest of Poland. During the next few months he began thinking seriously about the Christianity he had discarded in adolescence, and explored his changing beliefs in a long poem in rhymed octosyllabic couplets, 'New Year Letter', and a sonnet sequence, 'The Quest', both published in 'The Double Man' (1941; published in Britain as 'New Year Letter'). During this period he and Isherwood were attacked in parliament for staying in America during the war; Auden had informed the British embassy in Washington that he was ready to go back but was told that only technically qualified personnel were needed. In October 1940, at about the time he finished 'The Double Man', he returned to the Anglican fold through the protestant Episcopal church of the USA. His Christianity was at first deeply influenced by Paul Tillich, Reinhold Niebuhr, and other representatives of a Lutheran tradition that emphasized matters of social justice and private conscience. 
Also in October 1940 Auden moved a few streets away in Brooklyn Heights to a house that he shared at first with Benjamin Britten, Peter Pears, and the American writer George Davis, later with other writers including Carson McCullers, Paul and Jane Bowles, Golo Mann, and Richard Wright. Although the rooms in which Auden lived were notoriously chaotic throughout his adult life, he was strictly punctual in his habits and reliable in financial matters. He kept the accounts for the house in Brooklyn Heights, collected rents and paid bills, and enforced a code of manners that forbade political discussion at the dinner table. He began teaching courses for adults at the New School for Social Research in New York and made his living from extensive freelance reviewing. 
In July 1941 Auden suffered a severe emotional crisis when Kallman withdrew from their sexual relationship, saying that he could no longer endure Auden's demand for faithfulness, and adding that he had already been unfaithful. A month later Auden's mother died, and the two losses were closely linked in his mind. Although he had returned to the Anglican communion almost a year earlier, Auden dated the start of his serious religious belief to the period after Kallman's defection. Before this time, as he implied in a review of the American poet Louise Bogan ('Partisan Review', July-August 1942, 339), he had based his religion on moments of visionary intensity and on his theological reading; now it was based on his understanding of his own inner furies. He recalled in an essay on his return to the church that he had been 'forced to know in person what it is like to feel oneself the prey of demonic powers, in both the Greek and Christian sense' ('Modern Canterbury Pilgrims', ed. James A. Pike, 1956, 41). 
Auden maintained his protective relation to Kallman for the rest of his life, and continued to pay most of Kallman's expenses. Aside from his relation to Kallman, his emotional life was focused on a series of affairs that lasted at most a year or two. One of these affairs, in 1946-7, was with a young woman, Rhoda Jaffe, whom he portrayed as Rosetta in 'The Age of Anxiety' (1947). 
In the academic year 1941-2 Auden taught in the English department at the University of Michigan; in the spring semester he was joined by Kallman, who began working towards an MA degree there. After many delays Auden was called up for conscription into the American army in September 1942, but was rejected on what were called medical grounds, because of his homosexuality. He expected to spend the next year working on his Christmas oratorio, 'For the Time Being' (which Britten was to set, but eventually did not), but was offered a lectureship at Swarthmore, a Quaker college in Pennsylvania. He taught there (and intermittently at the nearby Bryn Mawr College) for the next three years, and after finishing 'For the Time Being' wrote a verse commentary on 'The Tempest', 'The Sea and the Mirror' (both poems published in 'For the Time Being', 1944; UK, 1945). He also compiled a retrospective collection of his work that was published in the United States as 'The Collected Poetry of W. H. Auden' (1945) and in Britain, with longer works omitted, as 'Collected Shorter Poems, 1930-1944' (1950). 'The Sea and the Mirror' was in part a meditation on romantic and Christian ideas of poetry, and much of the thought that went into the poem was later systematized in his first book of critical prose, 'The Enchafed Flood: the Romantic Iconography of the Sea' (1950; UK, 1951). 
Auden was recruited in spring 1945 to work as a civilian research chief in the United States strategic bombing survey, which studied the effects of allied air bombing on Germany and Japan. He and his friend the novelist James Stern spent the summer in southern Germany conducting interviews and writing reports; he visited England at the start and end of his trip. Settling in New York in the autumn, he resumed his freelance life, and he supplemented his income by teaching a semester at Bennington College, Vermont, in 1946; at Mount Holyoke College, Massachusetts, in 1950; at Smith College, Massachusetts, in 1953; and by delivering lecture courses in New York, including a year-long series of lectures on Shakespeare at the New School in 1946-7. His home in New York, until 1951, was a small apartment in Greenwich Village where he lived alone. 
In 1944 Auden had begun 'The Age of Anxiety: a Baroque Eclogue' (1947; UK, 1948), a verse dialogue among three men and women set mostly in a New York bar, and did not finish it until early 1947. Later in 1947 Igor Stravinsky invited him to write the libretto for 'The Rake's Progress', an opera based on Hogarth's engravings. Auden and Kallman wrote an elegant libretto in neo-classical style. The opera was performed in Venice in 1951, with the chorus coached in English pronunciation by the librettists. 
Auden and Kallman visited Europe together in spring and summer 1948, and spent about six weeks on Ischia. The Italian landscape impressed Auden as being remarkably like the Pennine landscape that he had loved as a child, and he combined them into the setting of the first poem he wrote in Italy, 'In Praise of Limestone'. This, like much of Auden's work in the next few years, was a poem in conversational style that celebrated the ordinary human scale and the ordinary human body; Auden was finding a subject matter as different as possible from that of his modernist predecessors, Yeats and Eliot. His religious beliefs became less influenced by radical protestantism, and more by Catholic and Anglo-Catholic theology that focused on the body, on ritual acts, and on the collective act of worship in the eucharist. He began planning 'Horae canonicae', an ambitious, encyclopaedic sequence of seven poems on the canonical hours that he wrote between 1949 and 1954. Before the sequence was complete, one of its poems became the title-poem of his collection of lyrics 'Nones' (1951; UK, 1952). The full series, together with a serio-comic sequence of seven poems about the natural world, 'Bucolics', appeared in his next collection, 'The Shield of Achilles' (1955). 
Every summer from 1948 to 1957 Auden and Kallman rented a house together on Ischia, joining other artists (among them Sir William Walton) who lived on the island for all or part of the year. Also among them was the young German composer Hans Werner Henze, for whom Auden and Kallman wrote two librettos, 'Elegy for Young Lovers' (1959) and 'The Bassarids' (1966). Auden fell into the habit of writing his poems during the summers in Europe and his prose during the winters in New York. In 1951 Auden and Kallman began living together in a loft in lower Manhattan; in 1953 they moved to an apartment on St Marks Place where Auden lived each winter until 1972. As his reputation continued to grow in America, Auden increasingly took on a public role in the literary world: he was editor of the Yale series of 'Younger Poets' from 1947 to 1959; served as a judge for many literary prizes; edited an anthology, 'The Faber Book of Modern American Verse' (1956); and became a mentor to younger writers. He worked closely with an early-music group, the New York Pro Musica Antiqua, and occasionally read verse at their performances in New York and Oxford. 
In 1955 Auden was nominated as professor of poetry at Oxford, the only teaching post in the university appointed by an election in which all MAs are eligible to vote. The election campaign (conducted by the candidates' supporters) became a symbolic struggle between modern and traditional approaches to literature (the latter represented by Auden's opponents, Harold Nicolson and the Shakespearian scholar G. Wilson Knight). Auden was generally supported by the undergraduates, who had no vote, but he was attacked by older dons and some journalists who had never forgiven him for leaving Britain in 1939. He won the election, but suffered a few weeks of panic at the prospect of delivering his inaugural lecture. In the event, the lecture, published as 'Making, Knowing and Judging' (1956), was a great success, and Auden's three annual lectures for the rest of his five-year term were highly popular and he was valued by dons and students for his freely given friendship and advice. He collected his Oxford lectures and other essays, reviews, and aphorisms in a long book of prose, 'The Dyer's Hand' (1962; UK, 1963). 
Auden's summers in Ischia were an arcadian interlude that he knew must inevitably end. He spent winter 1956-7 in Ischia instead of New York because he had sublet his New York home in the mistaken belief that he would be obliged to stay in Europe to give his Oxford lectures. In June 1957 he won an Italian literary prize worth 20 million lire (about $12,000 or $33,000) and four months later used the money to buy a small farmhouse in Kirchstetten, in lower Austria. Ever since his year in Berlin in 1928-9 he had been interested in German literature and thought, and now wanted to spend his summers in a German-speaking country with an opera house nearby; Kirchstetten was an hour by train from Vienna. After spending part of summer 1958 in Ischia, Auden moved into the house in autumn 1958. This was the first house Auden had ever owned, and he told friends that he wept with joy when he stood in the garden. 
A new collection of his verse, 'Homage to Clio' (1960), was marked by the mild, sometimes monochromatic manner in which Auden now wrote about the same dark themes of public and private violence that had been present in his earlier work. His theology was again influenced by the German protestant tradition, especially in the work of Dietrich Bonhoeffer, who had been killed by the Nazis in 1945 and who had proposed a 'religionless Christianity' that focused on human suffering rather than on miracles and myths. The depths of Auden's poems at this time and later were not widely recognized until many years after his death, but his next collection, 'About the House' (1965; UK, 1966), had a more exuberant tone, especially in its opening sequence of fifteen poems about his Austrian house, 'Thanksgiving for a Habitat'. This was the first of his books containing sequences of seventeen-syllable 'haiku' poems, a form he used intermittently for the rest of his life and had learned while translating Dag Hammarskjold's posthumously published 'Markings' (1963). (Hammarskjold had been friendly with Auden and was known to have favoured him for the Nobel prize, which Auden was expected to receive in 1964, but apparently lost when he refused to rewrite the passages in his introduction to 'Markings' hinting at Hammarskjold's megalomaniacal tendencies.) 
Auden spent winter 1964-5 in West Berlin as part of an artists-in-residence programme funded by the Ford Foundation. At the invitation of his British publisher he compiled a retrospective volume of his work, 'Collected Shorter Poems, 1927-1957' (1966), with many of his best-known poems omitted or heavily revised; the changes prompted complaints by critics who believed that he had altered his work because he no longer held his earlier left-wing positions. However, in the preface to the book he argued (apparently truthfully) that he had dropped poems he regarded as 'dishonest': he had never believed the positions they expressed, but had adopted them because they had seemed rhetorically effective. A 'Collected Longer Poems' (1968) followed, with only minor revisions to earlier texts. A brief prose book, 'Secondary Worlds' (1968), was based on a lecture series. 'A Certain World: a Commonplace Book' (1970) was a collection of quotations and commentary that he described as a kind of autobiography. 
In 1963 Kallman had decided to remain in Europe during the winters instead of returning with Auden to New York. The two continued to summer together in Austria, but Kallman now wintered in Athens. Auden's life in New York became increasingly lonely, and his public manner became progressively more crotchety and eccentric. At the same time his deeply and intricately lined face (apparently the combined effect of smoking and a genetic predisposition to wrinkling) became widely familiar to television viewers and readers of news magazines. 
The verse in Auden's collection 'City without Walls' (1969) was among his most vivid and energetic, but the verse in 'Epistle to a Godson' (1971) was slighter and less memorable. About 1969 Auden began to tell English friends that he wanted to live in a community, and hinted that he hoped he might return to his Oxford college, Christ Church, in the same way that E. M. Forster had returned to live at King's College, Cambridge. Early in 1972 he was offered an honorary studentship at Christ Church, with a cottage in the college grounds in which to live. He arrived at Oxford in the autumn, but it proved noisier and more crowded than during his professorship; the dons who welcomed him found that he was no longer the brilliant conversationalist they remembered. Auden was now ill and unhappy, and began writing about his readiness to die. On his way back to Oxford after a summer at Kirchstetten, Auden died of heart failure at the Altenburgerhof Hotel in Vienna during the night of 28-29 September 1973. He was buried on 4 October in Kirchstetten, and in London a memorial stone was placed in Westminster Abbey a year later. His last poems were published posthumously under the title that he had chosen for his next collection, 'Thank you, Fog' (1974); he had already typed a page that dedicated the book to Michael and Marny Yates. The most important deposits of Auden's papers are in the Berg collection of the New York Public Library and in the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas, Austin. 
Auden's massive output was written with unmatched virtuosity in a vast range of verse forms, and covered an encyclopaedic range of experience and emotion. During his lifetime he was generally regarded as a major poet, but the emotional directness and accessibility of much of his work seemed slightly suspect to modernist critics who valued difficulty and obscurity in the arts, and he was thought to be of lesser stature than Yeats or Eliot. His work was uneven, marked by frequent shifts in form and style, and by intermittent false starts and near-failures; but, as he argued in lectures and essays about other writers, consistency is a quality of minor writers, not major ones, and many of his finest poems were written to correct or refute poems he had written earlier. 
After Auden's death his reputation increased as modernist theories of art lost some of their force. Some literary historians described him as the first writer of the postmodern period. In 1994 Auden's work gained sudden popularity when the film 'Four Weddings and a Funeral' included a reading of his poem 'Funeral Blues'. (It was written in 1936 as an ironic lament for a politician in 'The Ascent of F6', and rewritten in 1937, retaining only the first eight lines, to mourn the end of a love affair with either Michael Yates or another former pupil, David Impey.) A pamphlet of ten of Auden's love poems, published a few months after the film was released, sold almost 300,000 copies in the English-speaking world and was translated into a half-dozen other languages. After the attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September 2001 'September 1, 1939' was widely circulated across the internet and reprinted in newspapers and magazines. At the start of the twenty-first century Auden's stature had reached the point where many readers thought it not implausible to judge his work the greatest body of poetry in English of the previous hundred years or more. 


@@@@@


doc= 30776


Aylmer, Sir Felix (1889-1979), actor, was born on 21 February 1889 at Alexander House, Corsham, Wiltshire, the second child in the family of five sons (one of whom died as a child) and one daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Edward Aylmer-Jones, Royal Engineers, and his wife, Lilian Cookworthy. He was educated at Magdalen College School and Exeter College, Oxford, where he took second classes in both mathematical moderations (1909) and physics (1911). After an undergraduate attachment to Oxford University Dramatic Society he decided to join the stage, to his parents' displeasure. 
Aylmer began a course of stage training under the celebrated teacher Rosina Filippi. His first professional appearance was as a two-line Italian stooge with E. Seymour Hicks at the Coliseum in 1911, just after his twenty-second birthday. He then appeared in 'Romeo and Juliet' at the New Theatre and in two memorable Shakespearian productions by Harley Granville-Barker in 1912 at the Savoy. In 1913 he joined the company of Barry Jackson at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. This splendid training was interrupted by the First World War, in which Aylmer served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, hurrying back to the Birmingham stage and his wife as soon as hostilities had ceased. During the war he had married Barry Jackson's niece Cecily Minnie Jane (died 1975), daughter of Robert Taaffe Byrne, managing director of the Leyland of Birmingham Rubber Company. They met when he played Prospero to her Miranda and after the war they appeared together again as Sir Peter and Lady Teazle. They had one daughter and two sons. 
During the following years Aylmer was seen in many West End plays, including 'The Doctor's Dilemma' by George Bernard Shaw (Kingsway, 1926) and 'The Flashing Stream' (Lyric, 1938). He also appeared in plays in New York, such as 'Loyalties' by John Galsworthy (Gaiety, 1922), produced by Basil Dean, and 'The Last of Mrs Cheyney' by Frederick Lonsdale (Fulton, 1925). Some of his greatest successes were in the parts of members of the professions of law and diplomacy. For John Drinkwater in 1928 he played at the Royalty a king's counsel in the long-running comedy 'Bird in Hand' by Drinkwater. This was followed by the role of a councillor of state in 'Jew Suss' adapted from Lion Feuchtwanger's novel 'Jud Suss' (Duke of York's, 1929), and then that of a crooked solicitor in the 1934 revival at the Sadler's Wells and the Shaftesbury of 'The Voysey Inheritance' by Harley Granville-Barker. He was also the judge in Enid Bagnold's 'The Chalk Garden' (Haymarket, 1956). Diplomats that he played included the foreign office official in the 1954 production of 'The Spider's Web' by Agatha Christie. 
Aylmer was not fond of Shakespeare. He once confided: 'I am a bit of an anti-Shakespearian. I acknowledge his greatness, of course -- but, you know, Shakespeare has done so much harm to actors. He has been responsible for so much work that is artificial and unreal that in my time he has seemed a machine for manufacturing ham actors who do not understand the psychological contents of the parts and the poetry. Everyone has to do Shakespeare if they want to make a reputation but it seems to me that they seldom do their best work in his plays. He stretches an actor's emotional range, of course -- but then so do Ibsen and Strindberg. (private information)' Aylmer preferred G. B. Shaw, whom he first met very early in his career. He played in Shaw repeatedly and indeed appeared in three different parts in 'Saint Joan' alone. 
Not one to enthuse about the rapport normally enjoyed by stage actors with a live audience, Aylmer preferred the medium of the film. He claimed that the work the film actor had to do, under the close-up of the camera's pitiless eye, called for a greater skill than anything required on stage. He appeared in a number of supporting parts in large-scale films for American directors: Plautius, a Roman converted to Christianity, in 'Quo vadis?' (1951); Isaak of York, the Jewish father of Elizabeth Taylor's Rebecca in 'Ivanhoe' (1953); Merlin to Mel Ferrer's King Arthur in 'Knights of the Round Table' (1953); and, in spite of his antipathy to Shakespeare, two memorable performances in productions by Laurence Olivier, namely Polonius in 'Hamlet' (1948) and the Archbishop in 'Henry V' (1944). Television too brought him fame: he appeared with Hugh Griffith in the popular comedy series entitled 'The Walrus and the Carpenter', and as Father Anselm with Derek Nimmo in 'Oh Brother!', a successful series about life in a monastery. 
In 1959 he published a book, 'Dickens Incognito', in which he outlined the controversial argument -- now fully accepted -- that Dickens had an affair with Nelly Ternan, a young actress. Although Graham Storey conclusively rebutted its suggestion that they had a child who was given for adoption, Claire Tomalin has praised 'the originality and cleverness of the other part of Aylmer's detective work' (Tomalin, 302). The book created a sensation. However, the bubble burst within a week as other Dickens lovers pounced on a flaw in his argument and found gaps in his research. Contemporary criticism might have humiliated a lesser man but it was met by Aylmer with rueful amusement and perfect sang-froid. He was not deterred from writing a second book, 'The Drood Case', which was published in 1964. 
Aylmer gave great service to his profession as an outstanding president of the British Actors' Equity Association from 1949 to 1969. In his official capacity, he criticized in 1963 the dirty and insanitary conditions still existing even in some West End theatres. He was also vice-president of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art when the principal, John Fernald, resigned in 1965 after a disagreement on policy with the council. In 1950 Aylmer was appointed OBE for his services to the stage, and in 1965 he was knighted. 
Having spent some time in Germany as a student, Aylmer later translated a number of plays from German. One of his favourite hobbies was composing limericks, clerihews, and verse for newspaper competitions. In this he vied with his son Ian, and together they won several prizes. His daughter, Jennifer, was for several years connected with the British Theatre Museum in London. A stroke precipitated Aylmer's retirement to his country house near Cobham, where he continued to live until shortly before he died, at a nursing home, Crann Mor, Pyrford, Surrey, on 2 September 1979. 
Derek Nimmo', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30777


Ayrton, Michael (1921-1975), artist and writer, was born at 3 Hamilton Terrace, St John's Wood, London, on 20 February 1921, the only child of Gerald Gould (1885-1936), poet and journalist, and his wife, Barbara Bodichon Ayrton Gould (1886-1950), politician and sometime chairman of the Labour Party, and whose maiden name he adopted on becoming a practising artist. His early childhood was much influenced by his maternal grandmother, Sarah (Hertha) Ayrton, and his uncle, the distinguished Jewish writer Israel Zangwill, whose son, the eminent psychologist Oliver Zangwill, had considerable influence on him. 
Ayrton attended a co-educational private school but left at an early date. He was later educated at the Hall School in Hampstead, London ('c'.1927-1932), and The Beeches, a progressive boarding-school at Greater Felcourt in Sussex ('c'.1932-1935). At The Beeches, when aged fourteen, he had a brief affair with the French mistress, which resulted in her dismissal back to France and the traditional summons of the father by the headmaster. Gould was so relieved by the reason for his summons that he immediately removed his son from the school, terminated his formal education, and encouraged his artistic talents. 
This early end to Ayrton's formal education undoubtedly contributed to his relentless autodidacticism which was to spur the massive erudition which made him such an effective broadcaster on the BBC's long-running and immensely successful programmes The Brains Trust and 'Round Britain Quiz'. It also made him so formidable an opponent of academics in general and art historians in particular, who were foolish enough to patronize and underestimate the teenage school-leaver who never went to university. His first published work was a ferocious George Grosz-like anti-Nazi cartoon in 'Labour'. 
From 1936 to 1939 Ayrton studied painting informally in Vienna and Paris, working briefly under Pavel Tchelitchew, and he attended Heatherley's Art School and various other art schools in London. He travelled to Spain, saw some of the siege of Barcelona during the Spanish Civil War, and spent the summer of 1939 with fellow painters and friends Michael Middleton and John Minton at Les Baux-de-Provence in France. After the outbreak of war he returned to London, had his first exhibition at the Zwemmer Gallery, and, with Minton, during leave from the RAF, executed the designs for John Gielgud's 'Macbeth', staged in 1942. Sir Hugh Walpole became an early patron, and, via Sir Kenneth Clark, Ayrton was given a modest job by the War Artists' Advisory Committee. He was invalided out of the RAF in 1942 and shared an exhibition with Minton at the Leicester Galleries in London. 
The relationship with Minton was of great intellectual value to both artists and was personally extremely close and intense, but it eventually became difficult, as the homosexual Minton probably fell in love with the heterosexual Ayrton who was unable to reciprocate Minton's feelings. For several years in the 1940s Ayrton shared a house in All Souls Place, London, behind Broadcasting House, with his lover, Joan Walsh (1919-1994), who changed her name by deed poll to Joan Ayrton, and the composer-conductor Constant Lambert, who became a close friend and collaborator. This menage attracted, among others, John Arlott, Margot Fonteyn, Norman Douglas, William Walton, and Dylan Thomas. From 1942 onwards Ayrton's life was marred by ill health, borne with much stoical courage, and his career as an artist developed from a precocity noted by such distinguished elders as Wyndham Lewis (for whom Ayrton acted for some time as visual amanuensis) to a versatile fruition which never brought the honours, the critical acclaim, or the financial success enjoyed by many of his contemporaries. 
In this respect, in a country and society which still regards amateurism as a professional advantage, Ayrton suffered from his relentless curiosity, his considerable eclecticism, and his formidable erudition, backed by a strong physical presence which many persons of weaker intellect or personality found intimidating. In fact, his handsome head with long, straight, swept-back hair and full beard, the powerful torso of the sculptor, and the mellifluous voice of a born teacher and conversationalist were compellingly attractive. What left him, at the height of his career, with a single honour -- a doctorate from Exeter University (1975) -- and no official recognition from the British 'art establishment' was the view, commonly held, that his exceptionally varied output was the sign of a jack of all trades. Possibly his lack of critical favour was accentuated by his youthful, undoubtedly intemperate but characteristically closely argued attack on Picasso and the received wisdom which surrounded Picasso's every doodle with adulation. In fairness, while Ayrton never recanted, he did, in two subsequent essays of equal brilliance, ameliorate his earlier views. All three essays -- 'The master of pastiche' (1944), 'A reply to myself' (1956), and 'The Midas minotaur' (1969) -- are collected in his book 'The Rudiments of Paradise' (1971). 
For more than three decades Ayrton practised as a painter, sculptor, draughtsman, engraver, portraitist, stage designer, book illustrator, novelist, short-story writer, essayist, critic, art historian, radio and television broadcaster, and cinema and television film-maker. While inevitably in an 'oeuvre' so prodigious he occasionally let slip work that was not of the first rank, there was in fact none of these trades of which he was not the master. 
Ayrton's principal exhibitions, other than regular dealers' selling shows in Britain, Europe, the USA, and Canada, were at Wakefield City Art Gallery (and subsequently on tour) in 1949, the Whitechapel Art Gallery in London in 1955 (a retrospective), the Philadelphia Museum of Art in 1963, the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa (a regional tour) in 1965, Reading City Art Gallery in 1969, the Bruton Gallery, Bruton, Somerset, in 1971, the University of Sussex, Falmer, in 1972, Portsmouth City Art Gallery (and subsequently on tour) in 1973, and the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia in 1973. 
The most important exhibition in Ayrton's lifetime, however, was 'Word and image' -- a remarkably inventive show devoted to a comparison of the work of Ayrton and Wyndham Lewis, showing the interrelationship not only of the two artists and their styles but also of their writings as well as their visual work. This was held in 1971 at the National Book League, London, four years before Ayrton's death. The major retrospective exhibition which he should have had in his lifetime occurred only posthumously in 1977 at the City of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, and subsequently on tour; in 1981 there was a substantial touring exhibition which visited the Bruton Gallery in Somerset and the National Museum of Wales in Cardiff, among other places. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s a series of small exhibitions in various dealers' galleries and the publication of a definitive biography have in fact enhanced his reputation during a gradual favourable reassessment of the so-called neo-romantics of the 1940s and 1950s. Stylistically he was, in his occasionally spiky, distorted visions, a typical English neo-romantic -- sharing a view of both landscape and the human figure with, among others, Minton, Graham Sutherland, Robert MacBryde, and Robert Colquhoun. His sense and use of distortion in and of the human body was most noticeable in his sculpture -- particularly in the later work and especially in the minotaurs, who seemed to embody the disproportions and the pain of his own body as it slowly succumbed to progressive bone disease. 
Ayrton's visual work, apart from his portraits, tended to be thematic, with certain ideas and images either obsessively recorded or constantly recurring. The discovery of Greek landscape and mythology was to haunt his work until he died. (He travelled extensively in Greece and the areas which were part of the Hellenistic world.) Daedalus and Icarus, Talos, and above all the Minotaur inspired much of his finest work, which ranged from pencil sketches to huge bronzes. For Armand Erpf, a benevolently eccentric American millionaire, he created in 1968 at Arkville in New York state a gigantic maze built of brick and stone, with a 7 foot bronze minotaur and a 7 foot bronze of Daedalus and Icarus in two central chambers. 
Ayrton had several, beneficial, obsessions. One, present throughout his working life, was the mechanics of human and animal flight; hence his interests in Icarus, the bones of birds, and related matters. Hector Berlioz preoccupied him for years and inspired sculptures, paintings, a memorable short story, and a remarkable BBC television programme which he devised and narrated. Mirrors also fascinated him and, with their infinite variety of and capacity for reflections, dominated his later sculpture where he mingled bronze, polished metal sheet, and perspex to extraordinary effects. For the two years before his death he had been working on a major BBC television series on the multiple possibilities of mirrors and their imagery in life, art, mathematics, philosophy, and astronomy. 
Ayrton's literary output was as varied as his visual work. He was a fine critic (he was art critic of 'The Spectator' from 1944 to 1946) and published books on subjects ranging from 'British Drawings' (1946) and 'Hogarth's Drawings' (1948) -- via several collections of distinguished essays, notably 'Golden Sections' (1957) and 'The Rudiments of Paradise' (1971) -- to a pioneering scholarly monograph, 'Giovanni Pisano, Sculptor' (1969), which had an introduction by Henry Moore. 
As a poet Ayrton showed notable talent in the fragmentary 'The Testament of Daedalus' (1962), which was a foretaste and forerunner of his subsequent novel, 'The Maze Maker' (1967), and he published posthumously in 1977 'Archilochos', a translation (with the assistance of Professor G. S. Kirk) of the seventh-century BC Greek poet who wrote in the Parian script. This book, containing Ayrton's last published words, was illustrated by his own characteristically spiky etchings done in the last eighteen months of his life. 
Ayrton produced one collection of short stories, 'Fabrications' (1972), influenced by Jorge Luis Borges in the tricks they played with time, history, and memory, but entirely Ayrtonian in their dry wit, originality of imagination, and a wholly beneficent solipsism deriving not from personal vanity but from the indubitable fact that his own experiences, serendipities, and ideas were genuinely of greater creative interest to himself and others than the notions and characters of most other people, Giovanni Pisano and Hector Berlioz excepted. Some of the ideas in 'Fabrications' sprang from the memories and experiences of Ayrton's maternal grandfather, Professor William Ayrton, an internationally renowned electrical engineer and gold medallist of the Royal Society. (His maternal grandmother, Hertha Ayrton, had herself received the Royal Society's Hughes medal in 1906.) 
Ayrton's two novels, 'The Maze Maker' and 'The Midas Consequence' (1974), were both an integral part of his visual life. The former, a virtuoso account of the lives of Daedalus and Icarus, deals with mythology, Crete, the minotaur, the excitement of flight, and, above all, the genius of the 'maker', of the artist as master craftsman. 'The Midas Consequence' is an equally virtuoso performance, dealing with the joys and pitfalls of being a prolific, omni-talented, and internationally revered modern artist. The hero, Capisco, is obviously -- too obviously, for the unwary -- based on Picasso. He is, of course, far more than that and he is, in part at least, Ayrton, but ultimately he is the paradigmatic artist and genius, enriched and pampered by society but, in the end, the property and prey of that same society. 
Ayrton was a man who travelled widely throughout his life, was blessed by considerable domestic felicity, was a much loved member of the Savile Club, and had a large number of friends. He married, on 28 November 1952, Elisabeth Balchin ['see 'Ayrton, Elisabeth Evelyn (1910-1991)], daughter of the writer Douglas Walshe, who had three daughters from her first marriage, to the writer Nigel Balchin (1908-1970). In the same year he moved with his wife, who was a distinguished authority on English cooking, a superb hostess, and herself a writer, to Bradfields, a beautiful sixteenth-century country house in Essex, formerly the property of the publisher and poet Sir Francis Meynell. Bradfields was Ayrton's principal home, social centre, and studio until his death in 1975. Michael and Elisabeth Ayrton had no children together but Ayrton was a devoted and loving stepfather. 
Ayrton was massively industrious and prolific but, without being either self-conscious or boastful about it, divided his life -- once he had established home, family, and studio at Bradfields -- between work and play. While in the country he worked hard at his multifarious disciplines and then gave over the weekends to highly intellectual house parties with an endless supply of guests, who fed his prodigious appetite for knowledge and whom he entertained with his own dazzling near monologues, while Elisabeth provided sumptuous meals of genuine English 'haute cuisine'. These were based almost entirely on poultry, game, joints of meat, and whole fish, as Ayrton could not abide stews, casseroles, or other dishes in which food was concealed in any way. He had to be able to 'see' what he ate, a minor foible more than compensated for by his genuine craftsman's skill as a carver of meat as well as sculpture; and the sight and sound of Ayrton acting as host to Henry Moore or to George Steiner, for whom he created a magnificent chess set, is not lightly forgotten. 
Ayrton was, while most happily married, no respecter of marriage as an institution and had indeed married Elisabeth by removing her from her husband. Immensely attractive to women, he had a considerable number of affairs both before and after his marriage, and he tended, after intense spells of work in the country, to travel alone to London for a few days in pursuit of both the intellectual stimulus of the capital and the pleasures of sexual adventure. It was a mark of his seductive personality and charm that no one much minded the way of life he deemed essential to his creativity. In the last years of his life he suffered increasingly from a highly debilitating form of ankylosing spondylitis which made it difficult for him to walk but did not prevent his sculpting in a sitting position and exploiting an exceptionally powerful torso, not entirely dissimilar to those of his minotaurs. After almost dying from an undiagnosed diabetic neuropathy, he made a virtually complete recovery and was planning a range of new work when, on 16 November 1975, he died of a sudden heart attack in his London flat. He was buried at the parish church at Hadstock, Essex. His wife survived him. Examples of Ayrton's work are to be found in the Tate collection; the National Portrait Gallery and Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia; the Reading Museum and Art Gallery; the Portsmouth City Museum and Art Gallery; and the City Art Gallery, Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 30778


Bacon, Sir Edmund Castell, thirteenth baronet and fourteenth baronet (1903-1982), landowner, was born on 18 March 1903 at 18 Cadogan Square, London, the only son and fifth of six children of Sir Nicholas Henry Bacon, twelfth and thirteenth baronet (1857-1947), of Raveningham Hall, Norfolk, and his wife, Constance Alice (died 1962), younger daughter of Alexander Samuel Leslie-Melville, of Branston Hall, Lincolnshire. He was descended from Sir Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper to Queen Elizabeth I. Educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, he subsequently studied farming and estate management. In 1936 he married Priscilla Dora, daughter of Colonel Charles Edward Ponsonby, later baronet and MP for Sevenoaks. They had one son and four daughters. 
During the Second World War, Bacon commanded the 55th (Suffolk yeomanry) anti-tank regiment of the Royal Artillery in Normandy and Belgium. He was mentioned in dispatches and appointed OBE in 1945. In 1947 his father died leaving him 4000 acres in Norfolk and 10,000 acres in Lincolnshire, a unique collection of English watercolours, and the collection of John Staniforth Beckett with its Dutch landscapes. Bacon also succeeded to his father's titles, becoming thirteenth baronet, of Redgrave (created in 1611), and fourteenth baronet, of Mildenhall (created in 1627). The family had a long tradition of public service, and in 1949 Bacon was appointed lord lieutenant of Norfolk, a post he held until 1978. His period of office ended with the successful silver jubilee appeal in 1977. Norfolk was one of the few counties which exceeded its target. 
In 1953 the eastern counties of Britain suffered from the severest of weather and tidal surges, and Norfolk took the fullest brunt of them. Bacon energetically organized relief forces and headed a county relief appeal fund. No other county raised such a large sum in proportion to its population, and nowhere else were the funds so promptly distributed to the sufferers. It was this practical administrative ability which later enabled Bacon to spearhead the campaign for the crucial refurbishment of Norwich Cathedral after 1956; he was high steward at the cathedral from 1956 until 1979. His religious beliefs were deeply held but they were more a positive moral conviction than an exact allegiance to one particular doctrine of Christianity. When he was made an honorary freeman of Norwich, he said that nothing had given him so much satisfaction as the part he played safeguarding the structure of the cathedral for the next generation. 
Bacon's interests in agricultural concerns were put to the test in the management of his own substantial estates. These enterprises and a family property company in London allowed him to develop a shrewd business sense, and led to appointments at both local and national level. He was president of Eastern Counties Farmers, the country's second largest agricultural co-operative, until 1973. As chairman of the British Sugar Corporation during an eleven-year period of rationalization (1957-68), he was able to introduce new company policy without causing the kind of conflicts within the labour force which became so prevalent in the next decade. His most demanding job was as chairman in 1966-71 of the agricultural National Economic Development Committee (Neddy), whose purpose was to stabilize agricultural markets. Towards the end of his life he was awarded the Royal Agricultural Society's gold medal for distinguished services to agriculture. 
A director of Lloyds Bank, and president of the Norfolk branch of the Magistrates' Association for twenty-nine years, Bacon also played an active part in the founding of the University of East Anglia, where he was pro-chancellor from 1964 to 1973. He was awarded an honorary DCL there in 1969. Bacon proved to be a skilful chairman during the period of student unrest and demonstrations in the late 1960s, when he presided over critical meetings calmly and steadfastly. In 1969, following the unilateral declaration of independence in Rhodesia, Bacon provided much behind-the-scenes support for his friend, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, the governor. 
Although Bacon lived and looked like a country squire (he was happiest dressed in baggy, very old cavalry-twill trousers), he was a versatile man with wide interests. Hugely built, with hunched shoulders and sharp blue eyes, he endeared himself to people by his simple charm. In 1965 he was appointed KBE and in 1970 he was among four new knights of the Garter, the first baronet ever to be so honoured by the queen. He died on 30 September 1982 at the County Hospital, Lincoln. He left estate valued at $855,542, and was succeeded in the baronetcies by his son, Nicholas Hickman Ponsonby Bacon ('b'. 1953). 


@@@@@


doc= 30779


Powell, Olave St Clair Baden-, Lady Baden-Powell (1889-1977), leader of the world Girl Guide movement, was born on 22 February 1889 at Stubbing Court, near Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the third child and younger daughter of Harold Soames (1855-1918), and his wife, Katherine Mary Hill (1851-1932). Her father, an educated and artistic man, had been able to sell his family business, the Brampton Brewery Company, in his early thirties, and thereafter was able to live comfortably off his investments. Her mother, a conventional, fashion-conscious woman, was her husband's opposite, and increasingly they lived separate lives. As her parents moved almost every year from one large rented property to the next, until settling at Grey Rigg, Lilliput, near Bournemouth, and as she received almost no formal education except through a German governess, Friede Dentzelmann, she had a lonely and emotionally confusing childhood. Not conventionally beautiful, and less favoured than her sister in her mother's affections, trust in her father was shattered by his affair with her first female role model, Jean Graham, who had been acting as her informal tutor. Spending much of her childhood in the country, she grew up an athletic and sporting young woman, naive in worldly matters and inexperienced emotionally, with little sense of personal direction. She was much influenced by Sybil Mounsey-Heysham, a Soames family friend, a woman of eccentric dress and masculine habits, reputed to be the third best duck shot in England. Throughout her life, Olave was attracted by vigorous, athletic, unaffected, independently minded women, with whom she would quarrel on occasion. In 1911 she was briefly engaged to her cousin Noel Soames. 
In January 1912, while accompanying her father on a cruise on the SS 'Arcadian', she met Lieutenant-General Sir Robert Baden-Powell (1857-1941), hero of the defence of Mafeking during the South African War and founder of the Boy Scout movement. Although he was thirty-two years her senior, they were immediately attracted to one another and had become secretly engaged by the end of the voyage. Despite Baden-Powell's briefly doubting the wisdom of his actions, a public engagement was announced, and the couple were married on 31 October 1912 at St Peter's Church, Parkstone, Dorset, to the disapproval of their surviving parents. Each brought complementary qualities to what became a happy, companionate marriage. For her husband, Olave brought a vigorous, unaffected, and youthful independence of spirit combined with an unquestioning belief in his individual genius and heroic status. For her, Baden-Powell was an ideal older man whom she could both support and defer to, and who gave a focus and purpose to her life for the first time. They had three children, Peter, Heather, and Betty. 
Upon her marriage Olave gave herself totally and unquestioningly to the work of her husband and the two movements he had founded, the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides. She did voluntary work at the scout recreation hut at Etaples in France during the early part of the First World War. At the same time she built up her own position within the Girl Guides: moves that created tensions with her sister-in-law Agnes Baden-Powell, its first president. In early 1916 she assumed a leading role, first as county commissioner for Sussex (which she systematically reorganized along scout lines), then as chief commissioner for the United Kingdom from the end of that year, and finally as chief guide of the British empire from 1918. She also at times chaired the executive committee of the Girl Guides' Association in the absence of her husband. As a result she increasingly dominated the work of the association nationally in the period of its most rapid expansion, principally through her selection of women to take up the position of county commissioners across the country. Internationally she was also influential as head of the overseas department from January 1920. As with the earlier expansion of the Boy Scout movement between 1908 and 1910, the dramatic growth of the guide movement after 1916 created considerable personal tensions within the headquarters among the small and intimate band of strong-minded leading women at what one historian has called 'the Court of Queen Olave' (Jeal, 478). In disputes over policy, Olave was able to refer to the authority of her husband; on matters of personnel, he usually deferred to her intuitions. 
From the late 1920s Olave Baden-Powell became less closely involved with the running of the UK association and spent more time supporting the international work of her husband, a role confirmed by her election as world chief guide in 1930, paralleling Baden-Powell's own position as chief scout of the world. She travelled extensively, initiated the guide and scout cruises, and ministered to the needs of her now elderly husband. In addition she had responsibility for an extended family, following the suicide of her sister Auriol early in 1919. Having settled at Pax Hill, Bentley, Hampshire, in January 1919, Olave ran a relaxed, rural household, supported by a loyal staff, ministering to her husband, five or six children, and a continuous stream of scout and guide guests. On the one hand, it was a happy unfussy, slightly eccentric community; on the other, Olave made some of the mistakes of her own mother, in clearly preferring her younger daughter, and showing a deep disappointment that her son could not live up to the heroic qualities of his father. Her dislike of sophistication and fashion, and the wholesomeness of the domestic environment, created difficulties in late adolescence for two of her children, and she was never reconciled to her son, Peter, whose funeral in 1962 she did not attend. On moving to Kenya in October 1938, the Baden-Powells settled at Paxtu, Nyeri, where Olave nursed and supported her husband until his death in January 1941. 
As a widow of fifty-two, Olave had to rebuild her life. At first she was completely distraught, unable to attend his funeral. After initially engaging in voluntary work with the East Africa Women's League, she returned to the UK in September 1942, determined to devote the remainder of her life to sustaining her husband's work and reputation. This she did continuously and energetically until forced into semi-retirement by diabetes in 1970. In many ways this was her greatest achievement. As world chief guide, she had no defined authority in any national association or within the world organization. Nevertheless, her presence was always sought as an increasingly matriarchal figure for both movements, a role she fulfilled with charm, vigour, and charisma. Equally at ease with a small group of children or at a large adult international gathering, she was able to communicate the ideals of scouting and guiding and the unique vision (as she saw it) of her late husband in ways that remained in the minds of those present throughout their lives. Aided by a phenomenal memory for individuals, she maintained a vast ungrammatical and idiosyncratically typed correspondence from the grace-and-favour apartments she had accepted in Hampton Court Palace in December 1942. It is estimated that she travelled 488,000 miles between 1930 and 1977. 
In personal terms Olave Baden-Powell had an almost completely untrained intelligence, which she combined with powerful intuitions, and an uncomplicated directness and eloquence, which had little patience with complexity or ambiguity. She had little time for discussions about details, policies, or bureaucratic structures. A lover of animals (but not cats), who delighted in the outdoor life and country dancing, and had a talent (if little used in later life) for the violin, she was not a reading woman. A conventional Anglican, although impatient -- like her husband -- of denominational detail, she nevertheless used mediums to communicate with the spirit of her husband after his death. In political terms, she shared some of the prejudices of her age and class as she grew older. But from the moment of their meeting in 1912, her values were those of her husband as expressed through scouting and guiding. Not surprisingly some of the changes introduced to update the scout movement in the 1960s were distressing to her, especially alterations in the wording of the scout laws and promise. As a result, she donated a considerable portion of her husband's archive and personal effects to the Boy Scouts of America, whom she thought more appreciative of his memory, and, possibly as a recognition of the fact that they had largely paid for her travel as world chief guide. In August 1973 she moved into a nursing home at Birtley House, near Guildford, Surrey, where she died on 25 June 1977. After her funeral at Bentley church on 1 July, her ashes were interred in her husband's grave at Nyeri, Kenya, in August. She had been created GBE in 1932 and received many other national honours around the world. There is a joint memorial tablet in Westminster Abbey. 
Although she always presented herself as simply the vehicle of her husband's vision, Olave Baden-Powell made her own distinctive contribution in two main ways. First, as a young woman of little formal education, she demonstrated to a whole generation of women (many of whom were unmarried) after 1918 that they could be constructive and effective as workers with girls and young women without having to subscribe to all the conventional constraints of Edwardian gentility in forms of dress and behaviour. Whatever the ambiguities of guiding's message for women (and it had many variants around the world), it remained a movement for girls and young women led by women of all social ranks and opinions. Although not uncontested, Olave Baden-Powell significantly aided that development as an enthusiast and role model. Second, in her later life, as an international ambassador on behalf of the ideals of her late husband after 1942, she supported and sustained the reputations of both movements as instruments of international harmony and reconciliation, so that despite the enormous cultural and political differences between national associations, almost all their members could affirm that what they had in common was more important than what distinguished them one from another. 


@@@@@


doc= 30780


Bader, Sir Douglas Robert Steuart (1910-1982), air force officer, was born at St John's Wood, London, on 21 February 1910, the younger child and younger son of Frederick Roberts Bader, a civil engineer working in India, and his wife, Jessie McKenzie. He was educated at St Edward's School, Oxford, where he was a scholar, and at the Royal Air Force College, Cranwell, where he was a prize cadet. He finished second in the contest for the sword of honour at Cranwell, and his confidential report described him as 'plucky, capable, headstrong'. 
Bader was commissioned in August 1930 and was then posted as a pilot officer to 23 fighter squadron at the RAF station at Kenley. He was an exceptional pilot and was selected, with another officer from the squadron, to fly the pair for the RAF at the Hendon air display in 1931 before a crowd of 175,000. As a young officer, he was good looking and charming. He was also determined and dogmatic, and could be thoroughly 'difficult'. He was, however, a natural leader, fearless and always eager for a challenge. While he could be brusque and impatient, he was socially at ease in any company. He was intensely loyal to the causes he cared about and to his friends. 
Bader was twenty-one when on 14 December 1931 he crashed on Woodley airfield, near Reading. Both legs had to be amputated in the Royal Berkshire Hospital, where his life was saved. He was later transferred to the RAF Hospital at Uxbridge. Six months after his operations he was walking unaided on his artificial legs. 'I will never use a stick', he said. 
He was discharged from the RAF in the spring of 1933. That summer he became a clerk in the Asiatic Petroleum Company (later Shell Petroleum) in the City, and on 5 October 1933, discreetly at Hampstead register office, he married Olive Thelma Exley, the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Ivo Arthyr Exley Edwards RAF (retired), and Olive Maud Amy Addison, 'nee' Donaldson. Four years later, on 5 October 1937, there was a religious ceremony at St Mary Abbots church, Kensington. There were no children of the marriage. 
Bader was re-engaged by the RAF in November 1939, two months after the outbreak of the Second World War, and on 7 February 1940 he was posted to 19 fighter squadron at Duxford, near Cambridge, as a flying officer. Within six weeks he was appointed to command A flight in 222 squadron. As a flight lieutenant, he saw action with the squadron at Dunkirk. Promotion continued, and on 24 June 1940 he was posted to command 242 (Canadian) squadron at Coltishall, in Norfolk. He led the nearby Duxford wing with this unit with signal success throughout the battle of Britain; he was appointed to the DSO on 13 September and awarded the DFC a month later. 
Bader's advocacy of his much misunderstood 'big wing' tactics served to fuel the controversy which existed between the air officers commanding nos. 11 and 12 groups of Fighter Command -- Keith Park and Trafford Leigh-Mallory -- and between the commander-in-chief, Sir Hugh Dowding, and the deputy chief of the air staff, Sholto Douglas. The controversy was further inflamed by Leigh-Mallory's decision to ask Bader to accompany him to the high-level tactical conference held at the Air Ministry on 17 October 1940 with Douglas in the chair. In March 1941 Bader became the first wing commander flying at Tangmere, in Sussex, and led his three Spitfire squadrons with notable success in the frequent offensive operations over northern France. His aggressive leadership was recognized with the award of a bar both to the DSO and the DFC. The French Croix de Guerre and the Legion d'honneur followed. There were three mentions in dispatches. With his official score of twenty-three enemy aircraft destroyed, Bader was shot down on 9 August 1941 near St Omer in the Pas-de-Calais and was a prisoner of war until he was released from Colditz in April 1945. He made repeated attempts to escape, refusing repatriation on the grounds that he expected to return to combat. 
After the armistice the 'legless ace' was promoted to group captain and posted to command the North Weald sector in Essex. From here he led the victory fly-past over London on 15 September 1945. He retired from the RAF six months later and in July 1946 rejoined the Shell Company; eventually he was managing director of Shell Aircraft Ltd (1958-69). He flew himself to many parts of the world, often taking his wife with him. An outstanding games player before his accident, he played golf on his tin legs to a handicap of four. 
Paul Brickhill's biography of Bader, 'Reach for the Sky' (1954), was followed by the film bearing the same title with Kenneth More playing Bader (1956). This brought the battle of Britain pilot worldwide fame. Notwithstanding this, his unsung work for the disabled continued apace, and in 1956 he was appointed CBE. 
Bader, who lived mainly in London, retired from Shell in 1969 and from 1972 to 1978 was a member of the Civil Aviation Authority. He accepted several non-executive directorships, maintained his long-established connections with Fleet Street, and continued with his numerous public speaking engagements. Latterly, his principal business base was as a consultant to Aircraft Equipment International at Ascot. 
Bader's wife died in London on 24 January 1971 after a long illness. Two years later, on 3 January 1973, he married Mrs Joan Eileen Murray, the daughter of Horace Hipkiss, a steel mill owner. In the same year was published 'Fight for the Sky', Bader's story of the Hurricane and the Spitfire. Having been knighted in 1976 for service to the public and the disabled, he died in London on 4 September 1982, while being driven home through Chiswick after speaking at a dinner in Guildhall. He was FRAeS (1976), an honorary DSc of Queen's University, Belfast (1976), and deputy lieutenant of Greater London (1977). 
P. B. Lucas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30781


Bagnold, Enid Algerine (1889-1981), novelist and playwright, was born at Borstal Cottage, Rochester, Kent, on 27 October 1889, the elder child and only daughter of Major (later Colonel) Arthur Henry Bagnold (1854-1943), a military engineer, and his wife, Ethel (1866-1931), daughter of William Henry Alger, who inherited a large chemical and fertilizer factory at Cattedown and became mayor of Plymouth. Her younger brother, with whom she was close, was Ralph Alger Bagnold (1896-1990). Enid Bagnold spent three years of her childhood in Jamaica, where her father was posted, and then lived at Woolwich, before going to Prior's Field school, Godalming, run by the stimulating Mrs Leonard Huxley. 
Enid Bagnold was a tomboyish, dramatic, outdoor, beautiful girl who soon escaped the conventionally respectable life of her parents by taking a flat in Chelsea, and for several years she studied art under Walter Sickert. She made friends easily among members of the marginally Bohemian set, including Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, who sculpted her. In 1912 she met James Thomas (Frank) Harris (1856?-1931), then aged fifty-six, who employed her as a journalist on his magazine 'Hearth and Home', and with whom she had her first love affair. 
In the First World War Bagnold worked as a nurse in a London hospital, and described her experiences in 'A Diary without Dates' (1918, 2nd edn 1978), imagining herself writing to Antoine Bibesco, the Romanian diplomat whom she loved for many years with an unrequited passion. Within half an hour of the book's publication she was sacked by her matron for indiscipline, but it had an instantaneous success, H. G. Wells describing it in 'The Dream' (1924) as one of the most human books written about the war. 
Enid Bagnold thus achieved fame while still in her twenties, and her ambition never slackened. Her vitality, humour, audacity, and grace made her an exhilarating companion. She was ebulliently communicative, in talk as in writing, as lavish with words as a pianist is with notes, loving the inexhaustible variety of human experience as much as the language which expressed it. She was, however, too fond of the great and grand to be taken seriously by the literary establishment (apart from Sir C. O. Desmond MacCarthy, one of her closest friends), and in the view of one critic she remained 'a brilliantly erratic amateur'. Her literary strength lay in her gift for narrative, dialogue, and domestic scenes, for which she drew extensively on her own experience and the characters of her friends. 
On 8 July 1920 Bagnold married Sir (George) Roderick Jones (1877-1962), chairman and managing director of Reuters. 'Their partnership', wrote her biographer Anne Sebba, 'was marked by loyalty, not fidelity, respect but not passion', but for their children, three sons and a daughter, Enid's affection was unstinting. Her intimate friend Vita Sackville-West wrote of her in an unpublished poem: '
I never loved you, Enid, save as a friend, 

But as a friend I loved you nearly, dearly, 

You wild rash girl, so young, less flesh than bones, 

And then came Jones, and flesh succumbed to Jones 

And domesticity destroyed you in the end. 
(MS poem at Sissinghurst)' In London the Joneses entertained generously, and it was there, in a study designed for her by Sir Edwin Lutyens, and at their Sussex home, North End House, Rottingdean, that she wrote joyfully but intermittently, having no need to write for money. 
Her first novel, 'The Happy Foreigner' (1920), describing her experiences as a Voluntary Aid Detachment nurse in France, was followed by 'Serena Blandish' (1924), about a poor girl in search of a rich marriage. Then came a book for children, 'Alice and Thomas and Jane' (1930), and in 1935 she published her best known book, 'National Velvet', the story of a butcher's daughter who wins a piebald horse in a raffle and, disguised as a boy, wins the Grand National. In 1944 it was made into a hugely successful film, with the youthful Elizabeth Taylor in the starring role. Her next novel, which she and many others considered her best, was 'The Squire' (1938), a daringly outspoken description of the relationship between a mother (unmistakably herself) and the child to whom she gives birth. 
In 1941 Bagnold wrote her first play, 'Lottie Dundass', about a stage-struck typist who dies of a heart attack after her first and only performance. It was an instant success in America and England, and Enid thereafter devoted her talent to the theatre, apart from one more novel, 'The Loved and Envied' (1951), a story of high life clearly based on her friend Lady Diana Cooper, and her autobiography (1969). As a dramatist she had several failures, including 'Gertie' (1952), 'The Last Joke' (1960), and most disastrously, 'Call me Jacky' (1967), but in compensation she enjoyed one major triumph with 'The Chalk Garden' (1955), which ran in London for two years and was described by Kenneth Tynan as possibly the finest English comedy since those of William Congreve, and one critical success, particularly in America, with 'The Chinese Prime Minister' (1964). She involved herself intensively (too intensively for many of the actors and directors) in the production of all her plays, and continued writing until late in her eighties, when she reworked 'Call me Jacky' into 'A Matter of Gravity' (1975). Her last published books were a selection of her poems (1978) and 'Letters to Frank Harris and other Friends' (1980). 
Enid Bagnold's husband died in 1962, and the last years of her life, despite the devotion of her children, became increasingly lonely. She needed regular injections to dull the pain of her arthritis, but she remained gallantly active, describing herself, characteristically and truthfully, as 'an old lady masking a sort of everlasting girl inside'. She was appointed CBE in 1976. 
Enid Bagnold died of bronchopneumonia on 31 March 1981 at 17a Hamilton Terrace, London. Her ashes were buried at Rottingdean, Sussex, after her cremation at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 30782


Bagrit, Sir Leon (1902-1979), industrialist, was born on 13 March 1902 in Kiev, Ukraine, the younger son and second of three children of Manuel Bagrit, jewellery designer and jeweller, and his wife, Rachel Yousopovich. The family left Russia when he was a small child and arrived in London from Belgium in 1914. Bagrit knew no English then, but mastered it quickly, and soon gained a school prize for English literature at St Olave's School in Southwark, whose headmaster, W. G. Rushbrooke, took a close personal interest in the development of his many-sided gifts. These included music, and playing the violin in an orchestra helped him through the precarious early adult years. 
After reading law at Birkbeck College, London University, Bagrit joined Messrs W. & T. Avery, manufacturers of weighing machines. He had no formal training in engineering but possessed an exceptional understanding of engineering and related matters which was vitally important to his subsequent career. 
In 1926 he married Stella, daughter of Simon Feldman, businessman, and his wife, Rebecca. The couple had two daughters and seven grandchildren, to whom Bagrit was closely attached. 
In 1927 Bagrit became general manager of a competitor, Herbert & Sons, leaving in 1935 to set up his own firm, B. & P. Swift, again in the weighing machine business, in order to exploit his own technical innovations. Its abilities were soon harnessed to the war effort, in aviation and other fields. In 1947 B. & P. Swift was acquired by Elliott Brothers (London) Ltd, of Lewisham, an old-established and substantially larger company, which had emerged from the war without a clear view of its future. Bagrit first became joint managing director, and not long afterwards sole managing director. At this point his undoubted flair for engineering was put to its greatest test, as he resolved to base the company's future on the introduction of automatic control as extensively as possible. He paid many visits to the United States, where important wartime developments had taken place and many of the basic ingredients of what subsequently became known as automation systems were already available. 
If automation were to be introduced successfully over the widest possible field, a number of decisions of principle were vital in order to make the best use of financial and human resources. Particularly in the United States, licences were available to enable the firm's own large development effort to be concentrated elsewhere. Financial and organizational control over the multitude of facets involved in the business could be assured only by the creation of a large number of divisions or subsidiary companies under separate managements responsible for their success and controlled by a rigid system of budgets and monthly accounts -- an approach which is commonplace today, but which Bagrit pioneered in Britain. 
The company rapidly became successful, and in 1957 a merger with other, smaller, companies led to the establishment of Elliott-Automation Ltd, of which Bagrit was first deputy chairman and managing director, and from 1963 onwards chairman and managing director. He expanded the group's activities into Europe and other overseas territories. The company attracted investors in the United States and was one of the early UK stocks to be traded there in the ADR (American Depository Receipt) market. Bagrit's recognition in the City brought him part-time directorships, notably (in 1963) of the early technology-oriented investment trusts, Electronic Trust and Technology Investment Trust, which were later merged. 
In 1967 Elliott-Automation, which by then employed about 24,000 people, was acquired by the English Electric Company, of which Bagrit became a deputy chairman. About a year later the English Electric Company was in turn acquired by the General Electric Company, and while Bagrit remained chairman of the company (later known as GEC-Elliott Automation Ltd) until 1973, he soon retired from an active role. 
What distinguished Bagrit from other successful industrialists was his early recognition of the far-reaching problems in social and other fields which automation would bring about. He was confident that they could be solved, but not without active and detailed preparation. His thoughts were made public in 1964 through his Reith lectures entitled 'The age of automation', which were subsequently published as a book (1966). He had great breadth of vision and in business was more concerned with the broad sweep than with the detail, much of which he was happy to delegate to colleagues; however, there is no doubt of his ability to master detail when he considered it important. This approach left him time to pursue his many other interests. He was a director of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, from 1962 to 1970, and the founder of the Friends of Covent Garden, of which body he was chairman from 1962 to 1969. After his death Lady Bagrit created the Markova-Bagrit scholarship at the Royal Ballet School in London. 
Bagrit was a notable collector in the field of visual arts. His close interest in the development of Israel centred particularly on the Haifa Technion (of whose British Friends he was president from 1962 to 1975), and on the Israel Museum. Lady Bagrit established a chair in his name for computer-aided design and scientific research development at Ben Gurion University. 
Bagrit was knighted in 1962. He was a member of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research from 1963 to 1965, and a member of the Advisory Council on Technology from 1964 to 1969. In 1965 the Royal Society of Arts awarded him the Albert medal for his work in the application of automation to industry. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Surrey (1966) and Reading (1968). Bagrit died in London on 22 April 1979. 
E. O. Herzfeld', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30783


Baillie, Dame Isobel (1895-1983), singer, was born on 9 March 1895 in the border town of Hawick, Roxburghshire, Scotland, the youngest in a family of a son and three daughters of Martin Pott Baillie (died 1903?), a master baker, and his wife, Isabella Douglas. She was baptized Isabella Douglas and known as Bella. The family moved to Newcastle upon Tyne when she was five. Not long afterwards they moved to Manchester, where Bella attended the board school in Princess Road. There her voice was noticed when she sang a verse of a hymn as a solo. She had always enjoyed singing at home but had received no tuition until her headmaster encouraged her. She won a scholarship to Manchester high school, where music was a low priority. 
Bella left school at fifteen to work in a music shop in Fountain Street, Manchester, where she was put in charge of the piano roll department. After that she worked in the gas department of Manchester town hall. At this period the headmaster at the board school persuaded Bella's mother to let her study singing seriously. She went once a week to Jean Sadler-Fogg, a former pupil of Blanche Marchesi and the wife of the Halle Orchestra's organist Charles Fogg and mother of the composer Eric Fogg. Mrs Sadler-Fogg took her pupil to sing to Marchesi, whose only remembered comment was 'That F could be better'. Bella was unable to pay Mrs Sadler-Fogg's fees, but paid her back when she began to get engagements. At fifteen she sang in her first performance of Handel's 'Messiah' in a church in Stretford. Gradually she was invited to sing in churches and church halls throughout Lancashire and in parts of Yorkshire. 
On 31 December 1917 Bella married Henry (Harry) Leonard Wrigley (1891-1957), a cotton trader, whom she had met before 1914 at a local concert where she sang and he recited 'The Green Eye of the Little Yellow God', the popular ballad by John Milton Hayes. At the time of their marriage he was on sick leave from France. Two days after the wedding he returned to the trenches, where he was wounded at Ypres. Their daughter Nancy was born in December 1918. Shortly afterwards Bella calculated that her earnings from singing exceeded her town hall salary, so she decided to devote all her time to singing. One of her first professional engagements in 1920 was in a popular ballad concert broadcast from Manchester's first local radio station in Trafford Park, before the BBC was founded. She also wrote, asking for an audition, to Hamilton Harty, who had in 1920 been appointed conductor of the Halle Orchestra. Harty interviewed her, having already heard her sing in songs by Eric Fogg at a recital, and engaged her to sing the wordless soprano part in Alfredo Casella's symphonic suite 'The Venetian Convent' at a Halle concert in the Free Trade Hall, Manchester, on 17 November 1921. Harty then engaged her for Haydn's 'The Creation' and for a performance of 'Messiah', the first time Handel's oratorio was broadcast. She became indelibly associated with 'Messiah'. Baillie reckoned she had sung in it over a thousand times -- on thirty-three occasions with the Royal Choral Society in London and nearly thirty times with the Halle. Her 'I know that my redeemer liveth' was justly admired for its serenity and purity, but equally memorable were her declamation of the Christmas music and the crystalline clarity of her 'Rejoice greatly'. Only once, for John Tobin, did she add ornamentation to the vocal line, but she strongly disapproved of this later fashionable practice, considering that it detracted from both the flow of the vocal line and the devotional meaning of the text. 
Harty advised her to sing as Isobel Baillie, saying that Bella Baillie led people to expect 'a music hall or musical comedy artist'. He also advised her to study in the summers of 1925 and 1926 with Guglielmo Sommer in Milan; but before that she had been engaged by Sir Henry Wood for six Promenade Concerts in the Queen's Hall in 1923, her London debut. One of them was a Wagner night shared with Lauritz Melchior when he was still a baritone. Although she was principally associated with oratorio, to which her light silvery tone and superb clarity of enunciation were ideally suited, she also sang arias by Mozart and Micaela's arias from Bizet's 'Carmen' and, with Wood conducting, sang Elsa in a concert performance of Wagner's 'Lohengrin' in Leicester. Her participation in Wagner aroused the displeasure of Harty, who, in a letter written in 1928 after she had sung in the closing scene of 'Gotterdammerung', remonstrated with her that 'in music of this type you are quite out of the picture and merely a source of gratification to your enemies' (Baillie, 29). Nevertheless, he later engaged her for a Wagner concert in Bradford and to sing in the 'Meistersinger' quintet. On 24 January 1938, on the insistence of Hyam Greenbaum, she sang Isolde, with Walter Widdop as Tristan, in two performances of act II that were televised (afternoon and evening) from Alexandra Palace. She wrote in her autobiography, 'I was far from being a natural Isolde but I enjoyed every minute of the adventure' (ibid., 115). 
Isobel Baillie's only operatic appearance in Britain was at Covent Garden in the coronation season of 1937, when the 1774 Paris version of Gluck's 'Orphee' was conducted by Fritz Reiner. But she did not step on the stage. She sang one aria during the ballet from the orchestra pit. She sang Marguerite in many concert performances of Gounod's 'Faust' throughout Britain, but in 1940, on a tour of New Zealand, she sang the role on stage in sixteen performances. In 1929, with the tenor Francis Russell, she recorded the act I love duet from Puccini's 'Madama Butterfly'. 
The core of Isobel Baillie's career was in Britain between 1920 and 1974, the year she made her last recording to mark her forthcoming eightieth birthday. She first sang at the Three Choirs festival in 1929 at Worcester ('Messiah') and performed at eighteen of these festivals thereafter, and sang under Elgar's baton in his 'For the Fallen' at Worcester in 1932 and in 'The Apostles' and 'The Kingdom' elsewhere. On 6 September 1950 she sang in the first performance of Herbert Howells's 'Hymnus paradisi' at Gloucester. Other British composers with whose music she was associated included Sir George Dyson, in the first performance of whose 'The Canterbury Pilgrims' she sang the Wife of Bath on 19 March 1931, Gerald Finzi (whose 'Dies natalis' was the only work she sang with Sir John Barbirolli's Halle), and Harty. She frequently sang Harty's 'Ode to a Nightingale', and gave the first performance of his 'The Children of Lir' in London on 1 March 1939. She was a regular soloist at the Leith Hill Festival at Dorking, conducted by Ralph Vaughan Williams, and sang in his works at the Three Choirs festival; she was also one of the sixteen soloists for whom he wrote his 'Serenade to Music', given in Sir Henry Wood's golden jubilee concert at the Royal Albert Hall on 5 October 1938. It was recorded a few days later, thereby preserving her marvellous ascent to top A on the words 'sweet harmony'. Her last major recording was in Vaughan Williams's 'A Sea Symphony' in 1953, ending (apart from the 1974 disc) a career in the studios extending from a test recording made on 19 February 1924. 
Isobel Baillie's repertory was wider than was often supposed, including many works by J. S. Bach, Berlioz, Brahms, Dvorak, Gurney, Kodaly, Mendelssohn, Rakhmaninov ('The Bells' as well as songs), Schubert, Schumann, Strauss, Szymanowski, Tchaikovsky, and Wolf. In addition she sang a vast number of popular ballads. On 27 July 1933 she was the first British artist to sing at the Hollywood Bowl, in a concert conducted by Harty. This was her American debut. In the autumn of 1937 she sang in London in Brahms's 'German Requiem' and Beethoven's ninth symphony conducted by Arturo Toscanini. 
During the Second World War Isobel Baillie sang for the Entertainments National Service Association in military bases, camps, and factory canteens. In December 1941 she performed with Kathleen Ferrier for the first time, in 'Messiah' at Lytham St Anne's. She was the soprano in 'Messiah' in Westminster Abbey in May 1943 when Ferrier made her legendary first London appearance. They became good friends and recorded duets by Purcell and Mendelssohn. 
After the war Isobel Baillie went back to New Zealand in 1948 for recitals, returning home via Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Penang, in all of which she gave recitals. She sang in the cathedral at Washington, DC, in 1949 and toured South Africa (after flying there in the Comet) in 1953. After her virtual retirement in 1955 she gave lecture recitals and master classes throughout the world. She had begun to teach at the Royal College of Music in 1952 on the invitation of its director, Sir George Dyson; he then persuaded her to join the permanent teaching staff, of which she was a member from 1955 to 1957. In 1960-61 she was visiting professor of singing in the department of music at Cornell University, and on her return to England was asked by Sir Keith Falkner, with whom she had often sung and who was now director of the Royal College of Music, to rejoin the college staff; she remained for three years from 1961 to 1964. She also taught for many years at the Manchester School of Music in Albert Square, run by John Grierson, one of her regular accompanists. She returned to Cornell in 1980 at eighty-five to lecture with, it was said, 'very impressive vocal examples'. In 1982 she published her autobiography, 'Never Sing Louder than Lovely', valuable for its details about the singing of 'Messiah' and for vivid pen-portraits of her colleagues. It ends with the words 'It has been a wonderful life and I would do it all again' (Baillie, 145). She attracted audiences not only by the beauty of her voice, with its secure technique and impeccable diction, but also by her friendly personality and her red-gold hair and lovely complexion. She personified the best in British oratorio singing. She was appointed CBE in 1951 and DBE in 1978. 
After Isobel Baillie's husband retired from the cotton trade in 1945 the couple moved from their cottage in Silecroft, in the Breast of Blackcombe, above Barrow in Furness, to Trimmings, Gracious Street, Selborne, Hampshire. He died in 1957. Baillie later lived in St John's Wood, London, before returning to Manchester, where she died from heart failure at the Withington Hospital on 24 September 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 30784


Baker, Sir Geoffrey Harding (1912-1980), army officer, was born at Murree, India, on 20 June 1912, the only son and youngest of the five children of Colonel Cecil Norris Baker CIE (1869-1934) and his wife, Ella Mary Hutchinson. His father was in the Northamptonshire regiment but bad health restricted his later career to staff appointments. He had been chief paymaster in China during the Boxer uprising. Baker was educated at Wellington College, Berkshire, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, where he was senior under-officer and won the sword of honour. Tall and fair-haired, he was called George the Swede by his friends: thereafter he was George. 
Commissioned into the Royal Artillery in 1932, Baker went with the 11th field brigade from Aldershot to Meerut in 1935. In 1937 he was given his 'jacket' in F (Sphinx) battery, Royal Horse Artillery (RHA), at Risalpur. As part of the 4th regiment RHA the battery went to Egypt on mobilization. After attending the Middle East Staff College Baker became brigade major Royal Artillery, 4th Indian division, which fought against the Italians in Eritrea. He was at the battle of Keren and won the MC (1941) for his services in the field. After instructing at the Staff College he was promoted lieutenant-colonel GSO1 at the headquarters of the Eighth Army. He was heard to criticize the failure to concentrate artillery for maximum fire effect, and welcomed the change of policy at El Alamein. He remained on the staff until the Sicilian campaign when he commanded the 127th field regiment, 51st Highland division. 
Baker was posted home in 1944 to headquarters, twenty-first army group, as brigadier, general staff, and remained in this demanding post until the end of the war. In 1946 he married Valerie Stirling Hamilton, army officer, daughter of Major John Leonard (Ian) Lockhart, of the Royal Hampshire regiment; they had two sons and a daughter. After commanding the third RHA at Munsterlager in the British army of the Rhine (1950-52), he was promoted director of administrative planning in the War Office. When Field Marshal Sir A. F. Harding became governor of Cyprus in 1955 he selected Baker to be chief of staff and director of operations against the dissident organization EOKA. Baker had to operate at many levels, including general headquarters, Middle East, and as well as working with Foreign and Colonial Office staffs oversaw subordinate district security committees which co-ordinated the work of all agencies. Baker showed flair for getting a variety of people to work together on agreed priorities and for evolving sound plans. Although his task was complicated by the Suez operation in 1956 Baker's contribution to pacifying Cyprus, involving twelve major army units, was considerable. 
While serving as major-general, chief of staff, southern command, in 1961 Baker was selected for the new post of chief of staff contingencies (Liveoak) at Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers in Europe (SHAPE). Liveoak was set up to deal with the four-power confrontation in Berlin; there the Russians supported, by a surprise show of force, East German measures to restrict emigration to the West. Baker's task was complex and internationally delicate, for stakes being played for over Berlin in 1961-3 were high. 
Baker returned to the War Office in 1963 as vice-chief of the Imperial General Staff and lieutenant-general, and his tour was prolonged owing to the abolition of separate service ministries in 1964. He helped to evolve new staff procedures in the Ministry of Defence. After a brief respite as general officer commanding-in-chief, southern command (1966-8), Baker was appointed chief of the general staff in 1968. By then, general retrenchment in defence was following the financial crisis of 1967, and garrisons overseas were being reduced. Baker proved an excellent choice. Trusted and liked, he commanded complete loyalty in the army. In the higher councils of defence he helped to heal the divisions between the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force over the carrier controversy. His sound advice was given in the best way. He was a complete master of committee procedure. Modest, always approachable and courteous to subordinates with problems, he radiated confidence through the sound and sensible advice he gave. Otherwise he let his staff get on with their work without interference. 
When the army was committed in Ulster in August 1969, Baker's experience in Cyprus gave him a sure touch. His advice to politicians was sound and he guided commanders on the ground in a constructive way. His visits to Ulster did much to sustain morale and support the troops in carrying out often distasteful duties in the glare of television publicity. Baker was the first of a new type of senior officer, expert in his own field, and enjoying the respect of civil servant, diplomat, politician, and journalist alike. Always calm and capable of sound compromise, he was a man for the time, bringing the army through a period of change yet preserving the best of the past. 
On retirement in March 1971 Baker was made field marshal, having been master gunner, St James's Park, since 1970 and colonel commandant Royal Artillery since 1964. He had been appointed OBE (1943), CBE (1946), CB (1955), CMG (1957), KCB (1964), and GCB (1968). He became constable of the Tower in 1975 and was a freeman of the City of London. He was a governor of Wellington and Radley colleges. Baker died at Wellington College on 8 May 1980. 
R. H. Whitworth', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30785


Baker, Sir George Gillespie (1910-1984), judge, was born in Stirling on 25 April 1910, the only child of Captain John Kilgour Baker, of Stirling, and his wife, Jane Gillespie. Baker's mother, whom he did not remember, died in 1914. His father, a captain in the Cameron Highlanders, was killed in 1918. He had remarried shortly before his death. Baker's upbringing thus became the task of relatives who, though devoted, were unable to afford him the advantages of normal family life. His childhood was lonely. This gave him a lasting sensitivity to the needs of children, a quality which served him well in later years when it became his lot to deal with the child casualties of broken marriages. He was in due course sent to Glasgow Academy and thence to Strathallan School in Perthshire. For his further education he moved south to Oxford, but he retained throughout his life a gentle Scottish accent which led to his nickname of Scottie. He became a senior Hulme scholar at Brasenose College and a pupil of the redoubtable W. T. S. Stallybrass, later principal of Brasenose. He obtained a first class in jurisprudence (1930) and a second class in the BCL (1931). He attempted but failed to obtain a fellowship at All Souls. 
Baker had always wanted a career at the bar. He joined the Middle Temple, of which he was elected a Harmsworth scholar, and was called to the bar in 1932. His resources other than his own abilities were limited. Work in London was then scarce. He joined the Oxford circuit and there sought and gradually acquired a small, good general practice. 
But, as with those of almost all his generation, Baker's prospects of steady professional advancement were shattered in 1939 by the outbreak of war. Baker, though by this time married and a father, at once volunteered and joined the Royal West Kent regiment as a private. He was later commissioned into the Cameronians. He served successively in Africa, Italy, and Germany, his services winning him a military OBE in 1945. After an unsuccessful foray into politics as Conservative candidate for Southall in the 1945 election and a short spell of service at Nuremberg on the British War Crimes Executive, he returned to the uncertainties of post-war practice at the bar, by this time the father of three sons. His determination never faltered. His work returned and indeed increased so rapidly, again largely on circuit, that he was well justified in taking silk in 1952. Two small recorderships had already come his way: Bridgnorth and Smethwick. Then in 1952 he became recorder of Wolverhampton, an important appointment. 
In 1954 Baker was elected leader of the Oxford circuit, a post which he greatly valued, discharged with great tact and skill, and held until his appointment to the High Court bench in 1961, when he was knighted. By that time his judicial qualities had manifested themselves not only in his recorderships but in his chairmanships of successive government committees between 1956 and 1961. His practice had lain mainly in the fields of criminal and general common-law work. He had done some but not a great deal of divorce work. His appointment to the High Court bench came as no surprise, but his assignment to the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division did. His qualities, thus already manifested, soon justified the appointment. He was patient, courteous, sensitive, and above all decisive. But, as with many of his judicial contemporaries in that division, he found the state of the law cruel and the hard-fought, bitter, defended divorce cases of the time exceedingly unattractive. He welcomed the changes in the law of divorce in 1969, especially the abolition of the concept of matrimonial offence. He also welcomed the changes made in 1970 regarding the redistribution of matrimonial property on divorce. Little did he then realize that it would fall to him as president of the newly created Family Division to secure the smooth transition from the old law to the new. 
Baker's appointment to that post in 1971 came more as a surprise to him than to his friends, though there were other contenders. At the same time he was sworn of the privy council. He proved a superb administrator and with the support of a younger generation of judges soon welded the new division into an effective and efficient unit. Though technically he had no control over divorce work done in the county courts, the deep respect which he commanded enabled him to improve their efficiency. He, like others, was disappointed in his ambition to see the creation of a unified family court and also by the bitterness with which disputes over custody, access, and the division of matrimonial property continued to be conducted. 
Baker retired in 1979, giving tiredness as his reason. That this was true was not surprising. He in fact retired to nurse his wife, Jessie Raphael McCall, whom he had married on 30 August 1935, and to whom he showed lasting devotion. She was the daughter of Thomas Scott Findlay, nurseryman, of Glasgow. The marriage was one of great happiness and produced three sons (one of whom became a High Court judge). Baker was deeply devoted to his children and grandchildren. The breakdown in his wife's health some years before his retirement laid a great and continuous burden on him until her death in 1983. Thereafter he sought to mitigate his loneliness by accepting a government invitation to investigate the operation of the emergency laws in Northern Ireland, a task not without danger to himself but which he discharged with characteristic thoroughness, courageously criticizing some aspects of that policy. 
Baker's deep personal integrity was founded on his staunch Presbyterian faith. He sometimes seemed shy and diffident, but was a profoundly kind man. Amid all his activities he found time for innumerable interests outside the law, especially in the field of education. His college made him an honorary fellow in 1966. He became a governor of Strathallan School, of Epsom College, and of Wycombe Abbey. He was an active bencher (1961) of the Middle Temple and was appointed treasurer in 1976. His recreations included golf and latterly fishing. But the heavy burdens he had carried for so long eventually took their toll. Early in June 1984 he suffered a stroke and he died on 13 June 1984 at Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, Middlesex. 
Roskill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30786


Baker, John Fleetwood, Baron Baker (1901-1985), civil engineer, was born on 19 March 1901 at Liscard, Cheshire, the younger child and only son of Joseph William Baker (1872-1958), etcher and watercolour painter, and his wife, Emily Carole Fleetwood (1874-1952). Baker was educated at Rossall School, Lancashire, from 1915 to 1920, and from there he won an open mathematical scholarship to Clare College, Cambridge, where he read mechanical sciences. He was placed in the first class in the tripos (1923). In January 1924 he found employment as an assistant to Professor A. J. Sutton Pippard in an investigation into the structural problems of airships. The work went well, and a year later Baker transferred to the Royal Aircraft Works, Cardington, as a technical assistant in the design department; he resigned in 1926 to join Pippard as an assistant lecturer at University College, Cardiff, but he continued to spend time at Cardington. The work was concerned essentially with the determination of elastic stresses in the main transverse space frames of airships, and Baker's publications from this period show the great complexity of the investigation, and the drudgery it involved. These few years may be viewed as an apprenticeship served by Baker. 
Baker married, in 1928, Fiona Mary MacAlister (died 1979), the daughter of John Walker, cotton broker in Liverpool. There were two daughters. The next eight years, 1928-36, saw Baker make a first start in his life's work, although it was, as it turned out, a false one. The steel industry set up the steel structures research committee in the late 1920s to try to bring some order into the multitude of conflicting regulations governing the design of steel-framed buildings. The committee had many eminent members from industry, government, and academe, and Baker was appointed as technical officer to the committee, although he was prevented by a severe illness (probably tuberculosis) from taking up his post until January 1930. Three volumes (1931, 1934, and 1936) record the theoretical and experimental findings of the committee, and many of the papers in them were written by Baker. His contributions were recognized immediately, and he was awarded the Telford gold medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1932, and appointed to the professorship of civil engineering at Bristol in 1933. 
However, at the end of this work Baker realized that the elastic method of structural analysis could never serve as the basis of a rational design method for steel structures. The actual elastic state of a structure is extremely sensitive to accidental imperfections, and cannot, in any real sense, be predicted. What can be predicted with great accuracy, however, is the collapse load of a ductile structure, and Baker's work was directed from 1936 onwards to the development of the plastic method of design. (When a ductile structure is, hypothetically, overloaded, it suffers large but controlled deflections resulting from the plastic deformation of the material.) In only twelve years the appropriate British standard was altered (in 1948) to permit design by plastic collapse methods. A spectacular application of the new ideas had been made in the meantime to the design of the Morrison air-raid shelter (for which Baker received official acknowledgement from the Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors); Baker was scientific adviser to the Ministry of Home Security from 1939, and was concerned with many aspects of air-raid precautions, as he described in his 'Enterprise versus Bureaucracy' (1978). 
In 1943 Baker moved to Cambridge University as a fellow of Clare College and professor of mechanical sciences and head of the engineering department, where he built up a substantial research team working on problems of structural design. At the same time he completely revised the educational programme of the department, succeeding in constructing new buildings, doubling the teaching staff, and greatly expanding research activity in all fields of engineering (including management studies). He served on several university committees, the council of the Institution of Civil Engineers, the University Grants Committee, and other national bodies. He wrote a two-volume account of elastic and plastic methods of design, 'The Steel Skeleton' (1954, 1956), and, later, a two-volume text, 'Plastic Design of Frames' (1969, 1971). He retired from his chair in 1968. 
Before and after his retirement Baker's advice was constantly sought on senior university appointments, both in the UK and in the Commonwealth. His advice was also sought by industry, particularly on practical design problems of steel structures, and he was at various times a director of four industrial companies, including one heavy engineering firm and a large firm of structural engineers. He took part in an inquiry for the Ministry of Transport into the feasibility of adding a road above the rail track of the old Forth Bridge, and in another inquiry for the Central Electricity Generating Board into the cause of the collapse of the Tyne crossing towers. 
Baker's pioneering work on the plastic theory of structures was recognized academically by the award of eight medals (including the royal medal of the Royal Society in 1970), by twelve honorary degrees, by election as FRS in 1956 and as a founder FEng in 1976, by honorary fellowship of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and by honorary membership of the Royal Institute of British Architects. He was a fellow and vice-president of the Institution of Civil Engineers and fellow of the Institute of Welding. He was appointed OBE in 1941, knighted in 1961, and made a life peer in 1977. Baker died in Cambridge on 9 September 1985, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 30787


Balcon, Sir Michael Elias (1896-1977), film producer, was born on 19 May 1896 at 116 Summer Lane, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the youngest son and fourth of five children of Louis Balcon ('c'.1858-1946) and his wife, Laura Greenberg ('c'.1863-1934). His parents, Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe, had met in England. Louis Balcon described himself as a tailor, but seems rarely to have practised his trade. He preferred to travel, especially to South Africa, where his brother-in-law had settled, leaving his wife to bring up the children as best she might. Michael Balcon's childhood, in his own words, was 'respectable but impoverished' (Balcon, 2). Despite poverty, all the children were given a good education. Balcon himself won a scholarship in 1907 to George Dixon Grammar School in Birmingham, where his scholastic career, so he later claimed, was 'undistinguished' (Balcon, 5). Even so, he hoped to follow his elder brothers to university, but to his disappointment the family's financial needs obliged him to leave school in 1913 and work as apprentice to a jeweller. When war broke out he volunteered for service, but was turned down owing to defective eyesight. In 1915 he joined the Dunlop Rubber Company's huge plant at Aston Cross, known as Fort Dunlop, and he rose to become personal assistant to the managing director. 
After the war a friend, Victor Saville, whose family was in show business, invited Balcon to join him in setting up a film distribution company. Together they formed Victory Motion Pictures; the chairman, and financial backer, was Oscar Deutsch, a rich scrap-metal dealer who later founded the Odeon cinema chain. In 1921 Saville and Balcon moved to London, opening an office in Soho, and in 1923, with backing from Deutsch and a prominent London distributor, C. M. Woolf, they produced their first feature film, a melodrama called 'Woman to Woman' (1923). It starred a then popular Hollywood actress, Betty Compson, and was directed at Islington Studios by a leading British director of the period, Graham Cutts. The film was a screen hit. On the strength of it, Balcon and Cutts took a lease on Islington Studios and formed Gainsborough Pictures. The studio, recently vacated by the Hollywood company Famous Players-Lasky (later to become Paramount), was small but well equipped and fully staffed. The staff included an ambitious, highly versatile young man called Alfred Hitchcock. 
That same year, 1924, Balcon married on 10 April Aileen Freda Jacobs, 'nee' Leatherman (1904-1988), daughter of Beatrice Leatherman, born in Middlesex, but brought up in Johannesburg. In 1946 she was appointed MBE for her war work. Their marriage was happy and lasted until Balcon's death. They had two children: Jill Angela Henriette Balcon (1925-2009) and Jonathan ('b'. 1931). Jill Balcon, who became an actress, married future poet laureate Cecil Day-Lewis; their son, Daniel Day-Lewis, also became an actor. 
Under Balcon's leadership Gainsborough earned a reputation for high-quality films, often with cosmopolitan themes. Several of them were shot at the giant Universum Film studios in Berlin, where Balcon established a good working relationship with the great producer Erich Pommer. In 1925 Balcon gave Hitchcock his first chance to direct with 'The Pleasure Garden', filmed in Germany and Italy. Gainsborough often featured matinee idol Ivor Novello in such films as 'The Rat' (1925), directed by Graham Cutts, and 'The Lodger' (1926), directed by Hitchcock. 
In 1928 Gainsborough was relaunched as a public company. On the board, along with Balcon and C. M. Woolf, was Maurice Ostrer, one of the Ostrer brothers who controlled Gaumont-British, which was fast becoming Britain's largest film company. Gainsborough was now in effect an outpost of the Gaumont empire, and Balcon found his independence steadily eroded. In 1931 he was appointed head of production at Gaumont's Lime Grove Studios in Shepherd's Bush, while still overseeing production at Islington. In both capacities he reported to the Ostrers. It may have been the ambiguity of his status, as much as the pressures of running two studios, that contributed to a nervous breakdown late in 1931. 
Over the next five years Gaumont and Gainsborough, under Balcon's guidance, produced some of the most popular British films of the period in a wide range of genres. Hitchcock, enticed away from Gainsborough a few years earlier, now rejoined his old boss and hit his stride with such classics as 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1934), 'The 39 Steps' (1935), and 'Sabotage' (1936). There were musicals with Jessie Matthews, including 'Evergreen' (1934) and 'First a Girl' (1935); Ben Travers's Aldwych farces and the comedies of Jack Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge; historical biopics starring the actorly George Arliss; stylish thrillers ('Rome Express', 1932); romantic comedies ('The Good Companions', 1933); horror vehicles for Boris Karloff, temporarily lured from Hollywood ('The Ghoul', 1933); big-budget science-fiction spectaculars ('The Tunnel', 1935); war movies ('I was a Spy', 1933); and ambitious costume dramas such as 'Jew Suss' (1934) and 'Tudor Rose' (1936). 'Jew Suss', a project especially dear to Balcon's heart, represented a rare attempt to circumvent the stifling British censorship and denounce, under a historical guise, the antisemitic policies of Nazi Germany. 
Many technicians and actors who were fleeing Nazi oppression found refuge at Gaumont-British, with Balcon's active encouragement. Among them were the brilliant, autocratic art director Alfred Junge, and the cinematographers Gunther Krampf and Mutz Greenbaum, as well as director Berthold Viertel and the producer Hermann Fellner. The actor Conrad Veidt, under pressure from the Nazis to make films for the Reich, only escaped from Germany thanks to Balcon's direct intervention. 
In the teeth of scepticism from the Gaumont board, Balcon backed the documentary pioneer Robert J. Flaherty to make 'Man of Aran' (1934), although Flaherty's maverick working methods left the studio with little control over the production. The shoot, remote and uncontactable off the west coast of Ireland, went wildly over-schedule and over-budget, and the film never recouped its cost. According to the director Michael Powell, when faced with Flaherty 'Mickey Balcon, protesting feebly, was as helpless as the Wedding Guest with the Ancient Mariner' (Powell, 237). In the trade, 'Man of Aran' became known as 'Balcon's folly', but Balcon always remained proud of having backed the film. 
Though Gaumont and Gainsborough productions generally did well in Britain, they rarely found much favour in the USA. The Ostrers, noting the flashier successes of Alexander Korda, became obsessed with the perennial mirage that haunts British film producers -- the dream of cracking the American market. In 1936 Balcon was sent to Hollywood for several months to scout talent and forge links with the big studios. Never at ease in the movie capital, he returned home with relief, only to find the Gaumont empire near collapse. The Ostrers' erratic financial policies and ambitious export drive had led to a financial crisis. The Lime Grove Studios were closed down, staff were laid off, and in November Balcon left to join MGM, who were setting up their British operation at Denham. 
The eighteen months Balcon spent at MGM were probably the unhappiest of his career. He clashed with the autocratic Louis B. Mayer, and during his stint at Denham as nominal head of production he produced only one film: 'A Yank at Oxford' (1938), an inanely Hollywoodized view of British university life. Luckily at this juncture his old friend Reginald Baker, an accountant who had helped him raise the money to lease Islington, invited Balcon to produce films at Ealing Studios. Baker and his colleagues on the board of Associated Talking Pictures, who owned Ealing, were dissatisfied with the studio's production head, the theatrical impresario Basil Dean, and were looking for a replacement. Balcon was offered the job, and he readily accepted. 
At Ealing, a small, almost cottage-like studio, Balcon found his spiritual home. Under his benevolently paternalistic rule it developed into the nearest the British film industry ever came to a studio after the classic Hollywood pattern. Like, for example, Warner Brothers in the 1930s, Ealing had its roster of personnel -- directors, writers, and technicians -- on permanent salary, its pool of actors, its recurrent thematic preoccupations, and from all these there was derived a very recognizable house style of film-making that was to a large degree Balcon's own personal creation. Despite its tiny capacity -- even at its most productive, the studio never managed to turn out more than six feature films a year -- Ealing became the most famous British film studio in the world. 
Balcon, who always liked to surround himself with a trusted team of associates, brought to Ealing several former colleagues from Gainsborough and Gaumont. Among them were his elder brother Chandos, who acted as his right-hand man, the technical expert Baynham Honri, the script editor Angus MacPhail, the screenwriter Sidney Gilliat, and the director Robert Stevenson. There was also a promising young assistant director, Penrose Tennyson, whom Balcon soon allowed to direct his first film. Regrettably, Tennyson died in a flying accident in 1941, having directed only three films. 
With characteristic caution, Balcon initially produced a spread of films broadly similar to those made under Basil Dean. Among them were the studio's biggest moneyspinners, the George Formby comedies, though Balcon himself liked neither the films nor their star. But with the outbreak of war the character of Ealing began to change. Balcon brought in several of the film-makers who had worked with John Grierson in the British documentary movement of the 1930s, most notably Alberto Cavalcanti and Harry Watt. Under their influence Ealing's war films took on a downbeat, even truculent tone, devoid of flag-waving bombast and sceptical of the competence of the top brass. 'The Next of Kin' (1942), a vivid dramatization of the slogan 'Careless talk costs lives', angered Churchill, but was released at the insistence of the War Office. Others in the same vein included 'The Foreman Went to France' (1942), 'Went the Day Well?' (1942), 'Nine Men' (1943), and 'San Demetrio London' (1943). 
During the war Balcon himself adopted an embattled stance, tilting with unconcealed relish at the obstructive red tape of government ministries and fighting his corner against the ambitions of rival film companies. A frequent target for his barbs was the encroaching Rank Organisation, headed by flour millionaire J. Arthur Rank, which had grown in a few years to become the dominant force in the British film industry, swallowing among others Gaumont-British and the Odeon cinema chain. But Ealing, lacking distribution muscle, was too small to stand alone. In 1944 Balcon and Baker (who acted as the studio's financial head) performed a deft volte-face and struck a financing and distribution deal with Rank. 
Backed by Rank's ample resources, Ealing entered into its finest period. Balcon expressly set out to make films 'reflecting Britain and the British character'. There was the occasional venture into national epic ('Scott of the Antarctic', 1948), classic adaptation ('Nicholas Nickleby', 1947), romantic costume drama ('Saraband for Dead Lovers', 1949), and even once, brilliantly, the supernatural ('Dead of Night', 1945). The studio also explored distant territory. The footloose Harry Watt shot 'The Overlanders' (1946) in Australia and 'Where No Vultures Fly' (1951) in east Africa. But Ealing, and Balcon himself, always seemed more at home with small-scale, realist films that followed the documentary-influenced tradition of the war years, such as the East End domestic drama 'It Always Rains on Sunday' (1947); the archetypal police procedural, 'The Blue Lamp' (1950), which first introduced the reassuring figure of Dixon of Dock Green; or 'Mandy' (1952), a sensitive, unsentimental study of a deaf child and her parents. 
In 1948, with Ealing at the peak of its creativity, Balcon was awarded a knighthood for his services to British cinema. From this period, too, date the films for which he and his studio will always be best remembered: the classic Ealing comedies. Starting with 'Hue and Cry' (1947), in which a gang of boys hunt down crooks across the bomb-sites of post-war London, these films present a vision of controlled anarchy, often benevolent, as in 'Passport to Pimlico' (1949) and 'The Lavender Hill Mob' (1951). But from time to time a darker note tinged the humour, as in Robert Hamer's elegantly ruthless 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' (1949), or Alexander Mackendrick's sharp political satire 'The Man in the White Suit' (1951) and his Gothic black comedy 'The Ladykillers' (1955). 
Hamer and Mackendrick were two of those who benefited from Balcon's policy of fostering young talent; others were the directors Charles Frend, Charles Crichton, Seth Holt, the screenwriter T. E. B. Clarke, and the cinematographer Douglas Slocombe. Throughout his career he believed in nurturing and encouraging promising young men (rarely women), giving them generous opportunities and leaving them free to develop their abilities within a supportive environment. Monja Danischewsky, Ealing's witty and gregarious publicity officer, referred to Ealing as 'Mr Balcon's Academy for Young Gentlemen' (Danischewsky, 'White Russian', 133). Production decisions were reached at the 'round table' conferences, attended by all the senior personnel with Balcon presiding benignly. He often let himself be overruled by majority opinion, with the standing joke, 'Well, if you fellows feel so strongly, on my head be it' (Fluegel, 7). 
There were limits to his tolerance, though. Jokes about sex or religion, or any radical criticism of British institutions, were rarely allowed to creep into Ealing's films. In this, they reflected Balcon's own character. In many ways he cut an anomalous figure as a prominent film producer: an essentially shy man, he retained a strangely unworldly innocence in many matters (especially regarding sex), and a personal modesty almost unique in his profession. His politics were moderately left-wing, and though he enjoyed comfort, his lifestyle was anything but ostentatious. As he pointed out, 'I have never owned a yacht, a racehorse or even a swimming-pool. Neither do I smoke cigars' (Balcon, 220). 
In the late 1940s J. Arthur Rank began to withdraw from the day-to-day running of his organization, handing over to his managing director, the far less sympathetic John Davis. The relationship between Ealing and Rank became strained, and in 1955 the connection was severed. Ealing Studios were sold to the BBC, and Balcon led his depleted team to a corner of the MGM studio at Borehamwood, where for a few years they lived out a shadowy afterlife as Ealing Films. The last Ealing film appeared in 1959. 
Balcon's involvement with the British film industry was not yet over. In 1959 he became chairman of the newly formed Bryanston production company, and in 1964 of British Lion. Always open to new ideas, he was proud to be associated with the British new wave in such films as 'Saturday Night and Sunday Morning' (1960). But in neither company was he able to exercise the same hands-on control of production that he had enjoyed at Ealing, and at British Lion in particular he sometimes felt himself to be little more than a figurehead. In 1966 he resigned, and became chairman of the British Film Institute production board, funding low-budget experimental work. He remained in this post well past his seventy-fifth birthday, continuing his lifelong practice of helping and encouraging young film-makers. 
In his private life, Balcon was an avid theatre- and opera-goer and he enjoyed travel, especially to Italy. He had a wide circle of friends, and loved to dispense hospitality at Upper Parrock, the fifteenth-century house set on a Sussex hilltop near the Kent border where he and his wife had lived since the Second World War. It was there that he died peacefully at the age of eighty-one on 17 October 1977. He was cremated and his ashes were buried at Upper Parrock. 


@@@@@


doc= 30788


Balogh, Thomas, Baron Balogh (1905-1985), political economist, was born in Budapest, Hungary, on 2 November 1905, the elder son and elder child of Emil Balogh, director of the transport board, Budapest, and his wife, Eva, daughter of Professor Bernard Levy, of Berlin and Budapest. He was educated in the city's Modelgymnasium, from which so many other distinguished emigre Hungarians graduated. After studying law and economics at the universities of Budapest and Berlin, he went in 1928 to America for two years as a Rockefeller fellow at Harvard University. 
Balogh served in the research departments of the Banque de France, the Reichsbank, and the Federal Reserve before he went to England. J. M. Keynes, who once said he could hear more of what was going on from Balogh in an hour or two than he himself could pick up during several days in London, published his first article in the 'Economic Journal' and helped him to his first job in England with the banking firm of O. T. Falk & Co. in 1932. 
While a lecturer at University College, London, between 1934 and 1940, Balogh wrote for the National Institute of Economic and Social Research his 'Studies in Financial Organization' (1947). He was naturalized in 1938. Against high-level opposition he went in 1939 to Balliol College, Oxford, as a lecturer. In 1945 he was elected to a fellowship, which he held until 1973, and in 1960 became a university reader. He was one of the founding members of the Institute of Statistics at Oxford. 
In the 1950s Balogh turned his attention increasingly to the problems of the economically underdeveloped countries. As adviser to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (1957-9) he used an afforestation project to design a series of ambitious development plans for the countries round the Mediterranean. Planting trees remained one of his hobbies. The demand of Dominic Mintoff (then prime minister of Malta) for integration with the United Kingdom appealed particularly to Balogh's economic philosophy, and he was deeply disappointed when the negotiations failed. 
Harold Wilson worked with Balogh throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, and in particular on the preparation for the 1964 election. One of Balogh's lines of argument was that a Labour government would be heavily committed to a policy of faster growth, sustained by a strong incomes policy and supported by more state intervention in industry. He thought that the Treasury would not be capable of carrying out such a policy, and this led to the call for a separate ministry of expansion or planning. These ideas were the origin of the Department of Economic Affairs. 
After Labour's victory in October 1964 Balogh was brought into the Cabinet Office as adviser on economic affairs, with special reference to external economic policy. Some of Balogh's greatest contributions in Whitehall stemmed more from his uncanny knowledge of everything that was going on than from contributions to committee work, where his criticisms, though scintillating, were too radical. When Wilson's government was defeated in June 1970 he retained his close personal contacts with Harold Wilson, spent more time in Oxford at both Balliol and Queen Elizabeth House, and returned to writing. 
Balogh retired from his Oxford readership in 1973 and became a fellow emeritus of Balliol; he was a Leverhulme fellow in 1973-6. But he was about to enter a new career. In 1974 he was made a minister of state at the Department of Energy and, as a life peer, which he had been created in 1968, its spokesman in the House of Lords. The theme of his maiden speech was the need for a tougher incomes policy, while investment and innovation were carried out, and for stricter foreign-exchange controls. He played a key role in the creation of the British National Oil Corporation and was its deputy chairman from 1976 to 1978. 
Balogh was awarded an honorary doctorate by his old university Budapest in 1979, and an honorary degree by York University, Toronto. He married in 1945 Penelope (died 1975), daughter of the Revd Henry Bernard Tower, vicar of Swinbrook, Oxfordshire; she was the widow of Oliver Gatty. She became a distinguished psychotherapist, and they had two sons and a daughter (there was also a daughter from the previous marriage). This marriage was dissolved in 1970. In the same year Balogh married Catherine Storr (1913-2001), daughter of Arthur Cole, barrister, Lincoln's Inn. She was a psychologist and prolific author, particularly of children's books, and previously the wife of (Charles) Anthony Storr, psychiatrist, with whom she had three daughters. 
Balogh had a flamboyant mind and considerable moral courage. He was neither a systematic thinker nor a popular figure; indeed, he seemed to court hostility. To his friends he showed unbounded loyalty. He died on 20 January 1985 at his home, Flat 3, 12 Frognal Gardens, Hampstead, London. 
Paul Streeten', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30789


Baring, (Charles) Evelyn, first Baron Howick of Glendale (1903-1973), colonial governor and Commonwealth diplomat, was born in Manchester Square, London, on 29 September 1903, the third son of Evelyn Baring, first earl of Cromer (1841-1917), and his second wife, Lady Katherine Georgiana Louisa Thynne (1865-1933), daughter of the fourth marquess of Bath. He was educated at Winchester College and New College, Oxford, where he graduated with first-class honours in history in 1924. 
Almost from birth Baring was destined -- and from an early age saw himself as destined -- for imperial service. While still a young boy he had visited his father, then consul-general in Egypt, in Cairo. He joined the Indian Civil Service in 1926, serving as an administrative officer in the United Provinces, first at Lucknow and later at Meerut. His work led him to his lasting interest in field administration, the problems of custom and religion, and the need for agricultural development. Indian service also took him in 1929 to South Africa as secretary to the Indian government's agent-general, and there Baring first came face to face with racial problems, which provided him with valuable experience for the future. In 1929 he returned to India for a tour of duty in the turbulent North-West Frontier Province, but in 1933 ill health forced him to return to Britain. Indifferent, at times poor, health was to dog him for the rest of his life; a damaged liver obliged him to become a teetotaller and he suffered frequent periods of exhaustion. 
In Britain, Baring joined the family banking firm, working with trainee bankers. This experience of City of London life, which he did not particularly enjoy, was nevertheless subsequently to prove very useful, both in his governorship of Kenya and with the Commonwealth Development Corporation, providing him with some insight into and contacts with the world of finance. Later he left Barings to become a director of Sudan Plantations, concerned with cotton growing in Sudan, work that he found more congenial. On 24 April 1935 Baring married Lady Mary Cecil (Molly) Grey (1907-2002), elder daughter of the fifth Earl Grey. They had one son and two daughters. 
Being unfit for military service Baring joined the staff of the Foreign Office after the outbreak of war in 1939, his duties being concerned with Egypt, in particular the Egyptian economy. In Whitehall his abilities were recognized and in 1942, while still only thirty-eight years old, he was offered the appointment of governor of Southern Rhodesia. The territory had been given full internal self-government in 1923, with government in the hands of the white resident community who elected their own prime minister and produced their own administrative officials. The role of the governor, although a London appointee, was therefore in practice limited to tactful diplomacy and example. The white community was seeking to entrench its privileged position; Baring's views were the reverse, essentially liberal, and it was greatly to his credit that he managed to develop a close and friendly relationship with the territory's prime minister, Sir Godfrey Huggins, despite their differing views on the best future for Southern Rhodesia. Here Baring urged co-operation with the two northern Colonial Office territories, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, while Huggins remained cautious, fearing that an eventual amalgamation might prejudice Southern Rhodesia's white rule. In the day-to-day exercise of his governorship Baring took especial interest in African affairs, local customs and structures, African agriculture, and social development. These interests led to criticism from some among the white settler community, with whose blunt, at times rough, political voice Baring was always ill at ease. 
In 1944 Baring was appointed high commissioner to the Union of South Africa, an appointment diplomatic in its aspect of relations with Pretoria, but also gubernatorial in that the high commissioner was, in practice, governor of the protectorates of Bechuanaland, Basutoland, and Swaziland. These territories had not been included in the Union of South Africa in 1910, but their incorporation had remained an aim of the union government. Baring's day-to-day diplomatic work with the union government remained smooth (and was facilitated by the visit of the royal family in 1947-8) while Field Marshal Smuts remained in power. With the victory of the Nationalist Party under Dr D. F. Malan in 1948 difficulties arose, Nationalist racial policy with its early apartheid legislation being sharply criticized in Britain, where the Labour Party had come to power in 1945. 
In the Smuts period Baring passed on the British government's reservations over South Africa's desire to move towards an annexation of the League of Nation's mandate territory of South-West Africa, and, after some negotiation, he secured the supply of South African uranium for Britain's nuclear weaponry. The question of the three 'high commission' territories, however, was irreconcilable. At first Baring feared that the Churchill government might give the territories to Pretoria, despite clear local opposition. Later, especially after the return to power of the Nationalists, his fears centred on London's expressing such firm opposition to any transfer that the Commonwealth relationship with Pretoria would be damaged, possibly lost. 
The issue was complicated by the marriage of the young Bechuanaland Bamangwato prince, Seretse Khama, to an English woman, at a time when one of the Malan government's early apartheid measures was to forbid mixed marriages. Opinion in the union, as expressed in the white media, was strident on the subject. Seretse's uncle Tshekedi, acting chief of the Bamangwato, also opposed the marriage but was soon faced with dwindling tribal support, Seretse himself becoming increasingly well regarded. Pretoria saw the issue as an added incentive for annexation. Baring's advice to a London where several changes of ministers added to the confusion was that British policy should be that of the lesser evil: Seretse should not succeed to the chieftainship, as British recognition would damage fatally relations with Pretoria and bring about conflict in Bamangwato society. Events were to prove him wrong on this, and the credit due to him for his rural development policies in the three territories has been overshadowed by criticism of his views on the Seretse issue. 
In 1952, the year after his return from Pretoria, Baring received the most difficult and testing appointment of his career, the governorship of Kenya just at the moment of the outbreak of the Kikuyu Mau Mau uprising. The period of his governorship, 1952-9, saw first the containment and then the virtual extinction of Mau Mau; fundamental political change, despite the Mau Mau troubles; impressive economic development; and programmes prepared for a massive expansion of African agriculture. Supported by a Colonial Office in London as anxious as he to see a return to order and development, Baring played the lead role in the last three of these ongoing events. From the start Baring appreciated that lasting peace could be secured only with at least the acquiescence, if not the full support, of the majority of the colony's population. In order to secure this Baring's experience and personal interests led him to devote much of his time and energy to economic development, which he saw as essential for the success of political change. Successive constitutional changes in the colony followed, providing for ministerial participation in the government by members of all races and extension of African representation in the legislature. Such developments were not welcomed by many of the European settlers, with whom Baring often found it as difficult to deal as he had in Southern Rhodesia. By diplomacy and tactful argument, however, he was able to secure the co-operation of the more liberal settler spokesmen, notably Michael Blundell. 
The colony's remarkable economic development, which owed much to specific government intervention, together with the ending of unequal racially based salary scales in the public services, served to create an emerging African middle class which could appreciate that real political change had begun and would accelerate, and among the African peoples generally, including the Kikuyu, the realization that violence was unnecessary and undesirable. 
Perhaps singly the greatest achievement of Baring's entire career was in Kenya's African agriculture, where he secured funds from Britain and the World Bank for the Swynnerton Plan, a total revolution in African farming based on redistribution, consolidation, efficient farming, and the opening up of new areas for cash crops, all aimed at creating self-sufficient peasant family holdings with one or more cash crops. The development of this policy was facilitated by emergency legislation resulting from the Mau Mau uprising, which provided the government with powers for compulsory resettlement of Mau Mau detainees in areas of the government's choice and of agricultural potential. By 1959 a highly successful African farmer class was growing cash crops previously reserved for European farms. 
Baring found the role of governor of a colony at a time of a violent and bloody uprising exceedingly difficult and uncongenial. He himself suffered periods of debilitating ill health. The white farmers and some of the military, police, and administration felt that he was too weak. Nevertheless he was convinced that Mau Mau had to be fought and suppressed. He firmly believed that Jomo Kenyatta had been its instigator, and that Kenyatta's trial, despite highly dubious witnesses and a controversial conviction, had been just. He held that, in governing a turbulent country, a strong and efficient secretariat and provincial administrative officers loyally supported by the governor were as important as the military and police. However, a number of senior Kenya administrative officers, faced with daily violence in their districts, were deliberately less than frank with him (and with his attorney-general and police commissioner) when continuing systematic excesses leading to torture and deaths were committed by their local security forces. In particular, these centred on locally recruited police and home guards, and in the huge, overcrowded, and insanitary detention camps through which some 70,000 Kikuyu were processed for rehabilitation. The most notorious example was the attempt to conceal from Baring the true facts of the Hola prison camp scandal, where eleven prisoners were killed by prison staff. Baring believed the initial story that he had been given and advised the Colonial Office that the prisoners had died from drinking poisoned water. Later, revelation of the real cause created a major political and parliamentary crisis in London. It can justly be argued that Baring, in his conviction that Mau Mau was evil and had to be suppressed, did not exercise a proper supervision of the administration, which he believed he had to support to the hilt. He also authorized the establishment of emergency courts for a wide variety of capital crimes, some relatively minor, in which procedures, on occasions mass trials, were more brutally arbitrary than just, with a very large number of death sentences imposed. 
This necessary criticism of one aspect having been made, overall Baring's governorship of Kenya was one of the most important and outstandingly successful in the decades of decolonization, well summarized in his 'Times' obituary: 'he found it a land of danger and left it a land of hope' (12 March 1973). And it was for him a personal pleasure that in the last days of his governorship he saved, at considerable risk to himself, an Indian girl from drowning off the Kenyan coast. For this gallantry he was awarded the queen's commendation for brave conduct. 
In 1960 Baring became deputy chairman of the Commonwealth Development Corporation, succeeding as chairman later in the year. Here his wide experience and personal prestige enabled him to secure funds from the British government, the World Bank, and other European governments for a series of partnerships for development projects. Among them were the Kenya Tea Smallholders scheme and the Swaziland Usutu Forests, which he had helped to start earlier in his career. Other programmes included tobacco curing in Malawi, wattle tanning in Tanzania, oil palm in Sarawak and the Solomon Islands, together with help for smallholders, loans to public utilities, and assistance to manufacturing and processing industries in a number of countries -- the range of the corporation's work being extended beyond the Commonwealth. 
Baring was tall and distinguished in appearance, patrician -- at times a little aloof -- in style, and often a poor speaker. He was a very devout Christian. He possessed great strength of character and determination, at times ruthless but with his high intelligence ready to consider new ideas; ill health could, however, make him at times difficult to work with and slow to reach decisions. He was appointed KCMG in 1942, KCVO in 1947, GCMG in 1955, and KG in 1972. Baring received a hereditary barony in January 1960, taking the title of Lord Howick of Glendale. He had a passion for physical exercise, a characteristic that led to a fall while rock climbing and his death on 10 March 1973 in the Alnwick Hospital, Alnwick, Northumberland. He was buried in Howick churchyard, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30790


Barnard, Howard Clive (1884-1985), educational historian, was born on 7 June 1884 at 11 King Edward Street in the heart of the City of London, the only child of Howard Barnard, journalist, and his wife, Sarah Ann Haggis. During the eighteenth century his ancestors established a firm of silversmiths in the City of London, and so became associated with the Goldsmiths' Company. Barnard was sixth in a direct line going back to about 1760 to become 'by patrimony' a member of this company and a freeman of the City. He was educated at University College School, London, when it was still in Gower Street, and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was a senior Hulme scholar. After taking third classes in both classical honour moderations (1905) and 'literae humaniores' (1907) he was awarded a post-graduate scholarship for a further four years of study. This enabled him to pursue his interest in geography at the London School of Economics and to become a wandering scholar for a year, primarily at the universities of Heidelberg and Caen, where he perfected his German and French. Back at Oxford, he took a diploma in education with distinction and completed a BLitt thesis, 'The educational theory and practice of the Port-Royalists', which was published two years later by the Cambridge University Press as 'The Little Schools of Port-Royal' (1913). At twenty-nine, he had embarked on what was to be a prolific literary career. Meanwhile, he married in 1910 Edith Gwendolen (died 1956), daughter of John Wish, a civil servant. They had a son and a daughter. 
Barnard's career as a schoolmaster got under way in 1911. At Manchester grammar school, Chatham House School in Ramsgate, and Bradford grammar school, he served as assistant master, being variously responsible for teaching German, English, and geography. Then in 1925 he moved to the headmastership of Gillingham grammar school, Kent, guiding it through a rapid expansion during his twelve years there. In 1937, at a time when it was unusual for a practising teacher to take up a professorship, he moved to the chair of education at Reading; but by then his distinction as a scholar ran parallel with his distinction as teacher and headmaster. 
As scholar and historian, Barnard had been given stimulus and encouragement by his association with King's College, London, where, by a liberal interpretation of the term, he considered himself a part-time 'advanced student'. It was through his connection with King's College, and in particular with professors John Dover Wilson and J. W. Adamson, with both of whom he struck up a close friendship, that he became an MA (education) and DLitt of London University. 
In 1918 Barnard brought out 'The Port-Royalists in Education', and in 1922 'The French Tradition in Education', which remains a classic. It covers the period from the Renaissance to the eve of the French Revolution, exploring in detail the work of educationists and educational institutions, and impresses by its range and depth alike. Four further books, 'Madame de Maintenon and Saint-Cyr' (1934), 'Girls at School under the Ancien regime' (1954), 'Fenelon on Education' (1966), and 'Education and the French Revolution' (1969), testify to his unflagging interest in French education and became standard works on the subject. Other notable books are 'Principles and Practice of Geography Teaching' (1933), 'A Short History of English Education, from 1760 to 1944' (1974), a textbook well known to generations of students, and a splendid autobiographical account of his Victorian childhood, 'Were those the Days?' (1970). 
Ease of scholarship and an enviable limpidity of style characterized both his writing and lecturing, and Barnard was warmly admired by students and colleagues alike. By nature he was modest, detached, slightly impersonal. He lived to be the 'grand old man' of the university, but typically denied that there was any merit in being old. 
For more than thirty years after his retirement Barnard regularly returned to the university to play the organ in the great hall. In the same hall, Reading University conferred an honorary DLitt on him in 1974; and it was there that family, students, friends, and colleagues held a commemorative service shortly after he died in a nursing home near Godalming, Surrey, on 12 September 1985 at the revered age of 101. 
Raymond Wilson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30791


Barnes, Alfred John (1887-1974), politician, was born on 17 July 1887 at 3 Gordon Terrace, Plaistow, West Ham, London, the youngest of seven children of William Barnes, a docker and coffee-house keeper, and his wife, Lucinda Margaret Smith. At the age of eight he lost a leg in a fairground accident. He was educated at the Star Road Boys' School, an elementary school between Manor Road and Barking Road, Canning Town, at the Northampton Institute from 1905, and at the London County Council School of Arts and Crafts. After serving his apprenticeship he became a skilled designer and worker in precious metals. He established his own silversmith's business, which he relinquished in 1922 when it was earning him an income in excess of the $400 a year he was paid on his election to parliament. 
The grim poverty of the majority of inhabitants of east London was graphically described by the author Jack London in his book 'The People of the Abyss' (1902), but Barnes learned about conditions of employment in the nearby docks from his father who, though he became a foreman, had joined the strike of 1889 for the dockers 'tanner'. His craft training had generated in him a search for realistic solutions to the problems he confronted, and from an early age he sought to improve the living conditions of the people of east London through co-operation and political action. In 1908 he joined the Stratford Co-operative Society and the Independent Labour Party (ILP). 
Barnes was an industrious and reliable person who gained widespread respect for his integrity of character. These qualities ensured his quick promotion. Already by 1910 he was secretary of the East London Federation of the ILP. He was elected to the management committee of the Stratford Co-operative Society in 1914 and became its president in 1915. In 1920 he played a major part in the founding of the London Co-operative Society, and served as its first president from 1920 to 1923. He was also a council member of the National Union of Gold, Silver, and Allied Trades. On 5 March 1921 Barnes married Leila Phoebe Real ('b'. 1900/01), whom he met through his silversmith business; she was the daughter of Charles Real, an engraver of Pitsea, Essex. There were three daughters of the marriage. 
The circumstances of the First World War gave Barnes the opportunity to achieve one of his aims -- the establishment of a Co-operative Party with representatives at Westminster and on local councils. Co-operative congresses as early as 1897 had voted in favour of such an organization, but the hesitation of societies whose members were adherents of the Liberal Party delayed the implementation of the resolution. By 1917, however, co-operators were in 'revolt from one end of the country to another' (A. J. Barnes, 'The Political Aspects of Co-Operation', 1922, 14) because of the unfair treatment received from the coalition government and its subordinate authorities as regards taxation (of dividends); allocation of supplies; representation on wartime fuel and food committees; and unjust decisions from military tribunals which exempted many owners and managers of small businesses from military service but denied similar concessions to managers of co-operatives. At the Swansea Co-operative Congress early in 1917 Barnes seconded a resolution calling for the establishment of a Co-operative Party. This won nearly unanimous support. At the 1918 general election the party fielded ten candidates, but only one was elected. He was elected to the Co-operative Party's national committee in 1920, and was its chairman from 1924 to 1945. 
At the general election of November 1922 Barnes was elected as MP for East Ham South, one of four Co-operative Labour candidates to be returned to parliament. On the opposition benches at Westminster they were swamped by 138 MPs who were elected on the straight Labour Party ticket. Barnes, again always the realist, recognized that the situation had changed. At the Cheltenham congress of the Co-operative Party in 1927 he supported the continued existence of the party but acknowledged that its future lay in general support for the Labour Party, of which it became, in effect, a wing. 
Barnes won steadily increasing, if unspectacular, recognition from his colleagues in the Parliamentary Labour Party because of his pleasant manner and transparent sincerity. Between his election to the Commons in 1922 and the loss of his seat at East Ham South in the general election debacle of Labour of 27 October 1931, he was appointed parliamentary private secretary to William Graham at the exchequer (1922-4), Labour whip (1925-30), and junior lord of the Treasury from 11 June 1929 to 23 October 1930. 
In the general election of November 1935 Barnes regained his seat at East Ham South and retained it until his voluntary retirement in 1955. Although he followed the Labour Party line in domestic politics, in the late 1930s co-operative society and party members, led by Barnes and Sydney Elliott, editor of the Co-operative Press Sunday newspaper, 'Reynolds News', took an independent position. They favoured the creation of an anti-aggression 'peace pact' of all peace-loving members of the League of Nations to resist fascist states that violated the sovereignty of other countries. At a big peace demonstration in London's Hyde Park on 19 September 1937 Barnes declared that the National Government was loading Britain with the burden of armaments, without a realization of the road by which peace could be secured. Elliott's proposed United Peace Alliance was, however, defeated when put to the vote at the Co-operative Congress in June 1938. He held no ministerial office during the Second World War, but remained active in the co-operative movement. He was a founder of the People's Entertainment Society and, in conjunction with Stafford Cripps, the Anglo-Chinese Development Society. 
Barnes is chiefly remembered for his piloting through parliament of the 'Transport Bill', one of the major projects of nationalization of the post-war Attlee Labour government. He was appointed minister of war transport on 3 August 1945 and, when the department changed its name, minister of transport in 1946. The aim of the 'Transport Act', 1947, was to bring inland transport under comprehensive control through the British Transport Commission. This had supervision of the six executives for the six different forms of publicly owned transport, of which the railway executive was the most important. Barnes had little difficulty in gaining approval for the nationalization of the railways, as both Lloyd George and Churchill had advocated it as early as 1918. He had less success with his plans for the control of road freight haulage through the road haulage executive. On 12 March 1947, in a memorandum to the cabinet, he reported that: 'No feature of the 'Transport Bill' raises so much opposition as the proposal to limit 'C' licence holders [those who used their own vehicles for moving their own freight] to a distance of forty miles from their base', and that a deputation of hauliers he had interviewed were 'taking root and branch opposition to this part of the Bill' (TNA: PRO, CAB 128/9). Barnes removed the 40 mile limit from the bill; but in doing so he roused the ire of his own back-benchers, who saw the concession as undermining the transport integration objectives of the legislation. 
For the management of the new undertakings established under the 'Transport Act', 1947, parliament adopted the policies of Herbert Morrison, lord president of the council. These took the form of the 'corporatism' exemplified by Morrison's 'London Passenger Transport Act', 1933, rather than of the 'mutualism' (workers' and transport users' participation) advocated by the Co-operative Party. In his 'Socialisation and Transport' (1933) Morrison had urged that members of publicly owned boards should be appointed by the minister responsible 'primarily on suitable grounds of competence' ('Socialisation and Transport', 157) as by these means 'Parliamentary action against a Board would be reduced to the minimum -- which is much to be desired' (ibid., 174). However, adopting the Morrisonian approach left Barnes to confront back-bench opinion that it perpetuated the purely 'commodity' status of labour and denied workers a sense of involvement in the industry and the enjoyment of their full citizenship rights. 
After his 'Transport Bill' had passed through all its stages Barnes supported cautious consolidation of the public ownership measures so far achieved. He was one of the members of the cabinet who, on 7 August 1947, favoured the postponement of the introduction of the 'Steel Bill' to the session 1948-9. He knew that the workforce in the steel industry was less committed to public ownership than were those employed in the coalmines or on the railways. On the other hand Barnes's more left-wing colleagues believed that 'he who controlled the citadel of steel would control shipbuilding, the motor industry -- in effect British industry as a whole'. In the event, to placate the left the 'Iron and Steel Bill', which became law at the end of 1949, was a compromise measure which Barnes loyally supported. 
In the general election of 25 October 1951 Barnes retained his seat with a large majority, but nationally the Conservatives secured a narrow majority and returned to power. The Churchill government rushed through the 'Transport Act', 1953, which provided for the return to private ownership of the road transport assets of the road haulage executive. The former minister of transport, who held that office for a longer period of time than any of his predecessors, was powerless to prevent the undermining of an important part of his main legislative achievement. He was now sixty-five and in the ensuing months felt that he was less needed in the Commons than he had been. He decided to retire from parliament at the end of the 1954-5 session. 
In the 1930s Alfred Barnes's main hobby was caravanning with his wife and daughters. They toured the Essex coast until they found a site at Walton on the Naze, where he bought 2 acres of land as a parking place. On his retirement in 1955 he bought the adjacent Eastcliff Hotel, and more land on which he developed a holiday caravan site. The rooms of the hotel were converted into flats, one for his wife and himself and one each for two of his daughters. The third daughter lived in the USA with her American husband. In 1957 he was elected as independent -- as all the councillors in that area were elected -- to the Frinton and Walton urban district council. He died in his flat overlooking the North Sea, at Brenalwood, Hall Lane, Walton on the Naze, on 26 November 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30792


Barnes, John Morrison (1913-1975), toxicologist, was born in Sheffield at midnight on 11-12 January 1913, the elder son and elder child of Alfred Edward Barnes, later professor of medicine in the University of Sheffield, and his wife, Janet (Jessie) Morrison. Barnes's younger brother, (Harry) Jefferson Barnes (died 1979) was knighted on retirement from the Glasgow School of Art. John Barnes, after education at Repton School, went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1930; he was awarded a scholarship in 1932, and took first classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1932 and 1933), specializing in pathology in part two. In 1933 he entered Sheffield medical school, gaining conjoint and Cambridge qualifications in 1936 -- MB, BChir, MRCS, LRCP. 
After a residency in Sheffield, Barnes took a house surgeonship at the Wingfield-Morris Orthopaedic Hospital in Oxford, which led to a Nuffield research fellowship in orthopaedics (1938-42). This was an important step, for it led to training under H. W. Florey in the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, in research on the lymphocyte, and then to work with Josep A. Trueta on wound drainage and arterial spasm, and to Barnes's becoming honorary director of the Medical Research Council (MRC) burns unit at Oxford. His war service in the Royal Army Medical Corps was as a specialist pathologist in the biology section of the chemical warfare experimental station at Porton Camp, conducting research under the direction of Paul Fildes and D. W. W. Henderson. By 1947 he had been trained in experimental pathology, and had worked on shock, and on the toxicity of venoms, bacterial toxins, and the tannic acid used in the treatment of burns. 
The MRC, during the secretaryship of Sir Edward Mellanby, decided in 1947 to establish a toxicology unit to undertake research in the general field of toxicology as it applied to chemical hazards in industry and agriculture. This was in response to the increasing number of enquiries from industry about the safety or otherwise of new chemical substances. Barnes was appointed the first director. The unit was initially housed at Porton, but with the need for expansion moved in 1950 to Carshalton. At the time of his appointment, toxicology hardly existed as a discipline, but was seen as a series of routine investigations into 'ad hoc' problems, which was of little scientific interest. It was Barnes's life work to reveal its scientific potential, and to establish the value of analysing the general mechanisms by which bodily injury may be brought about as the best basis for rational decisions about control procedures. The study began with work on liver damage caused by beryllium, and on an insecticide and a weedkiller which were both widely used. It was followed by studies on DDT, tin compounds, dinitrophenol, the nitrosamines, the Senecio alkaloids, the groundnut fungal product aflatoxin, lead, dieldrin, mercury, and neuropathies and other damage due to industrial solvents. To such work was added fundamental research, usually of a biochemical type, on general mechanisms. 
At the same time there was continuing service on MRC committees -- those on toxicology (of which he was secretary for thirteen years), food adulterants, fungicides and insecticides, detergents, lung cancer, non-explosive anaesthetics, cancer of the tropics, and occupational health. The topics reflected the growing attention paid to toxicology both medically and politically, which owed much to Barnes's leadership in showing how to tackle extremely varied problems with scientific rigour. In turn this led to much other advisory work, especially for the World Health Organization, for which the toxicology unit became a reference centre. 
In 1941 Barnes married Ruth Eleanor, daughter of the Revd Edward Joseph Northcote-Green, of Oxford. There were three children: the eldest, Andrew Nicholas, trained in chemistry; the second, Stephen Edward, became a consultant paediatrician in Salisbury; and the youngest, Rachel Elizabeth, married R. E. McGavin. Barnes was appointed CBE in 1962. He died on 24 September 1975 in the Atkinson Morley Hospital, Wimbledon. 
Barnes combined great steadiness of character and a dry humour with extreme modesty and a detestation of pretentiousness of any kind. He concealed his own achievements and resisted being proposed for the Royal Society. A very hard worker, he listed his recreations as 'none'. He could seem rather austere and formidable, and yet those who came to know him, or better still to work with him, found him sensitive and supportive. He had a very good eye for new talent, enjoyed bringing on younger investigators, and never took his share of appreciation for their achievements. After his death British toxicology had advanced enough to justify the formation of a British Toxicology Society, which was largely due to the initiative of his colleagues and pupils. One of their early actions, after a well-supported appeal, was to establish the John Barnes lecture in his memory. 
W. D. M. Paton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30793


Barnetson, William Denholm, Baron Barnetson (1917-1981), newspaper proprietor and television executive, was born in Edinburgh on 21 March 1917, the eldest child in the family of three sons and one daughter of William Barnetson, estate agent, of London and Edinburgh, and his wife, Ella Grigor, daughter of Dr Moir, medical practitioner, of Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh. He was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and at Edinburgh University. Study there was interrupted by the nineteen-year-old Barnetson's decision to become a freelance correspondent reporting on the Spanish Civil War. From Spain he returned to university and then in the space of one week in July 1940 he married Joan Fairley, daughter of William Fairley Davidson, publican, of Edinburgh, and Agustina Bjarnarson of Iceland, took his MA degree, and began service in the army. 
Throughout the Second World War Barnetson served in anti-aircraft command, and reached the rank of major. As the war came to an end he was seconded for special duty on the reorganization of West German newspaper and book publishing in the British zone. He was responsible for helping to launch 'Die Welt' and for choosing as a suitable person to be its subsequent publisher an ambitious young German -- Axel Springer, who was to become one of West Germany's most influential newspaper proprietors. After returning to Edinburgh he joined the 'Edinburgh Evening News' and from 1948 to 1961 was successively leader-writer, editor, and general manager -- combining these duties with extramural lecturing at the university, and speaking and debating on radio and television. 
It was Barnetson's habit to go into his office early each morning to thump out his leaders, articles, and speeches on his own typewriter -- a habit he never forsook. On one such occasion, there walked into the deserted office a passenger, fresh from the night sleeper from King's Cross, who announced himself as Harley Drayton. This was the financier who already ruled a formidable commercial empire and was about to expand his interests in publishing. In Barnetson, Drayton recognized a man of integrity, a working journalist capable of moving into the management of a newspaper empire. A famous partnership had been born. 
In 1962 Barnetson was made a director of United Newspapers. In the next four years he drew up a strategic plan for the morning, evening, and weekly provincial papers United already owned in Preston, Leeds, Doncaster, Northampton, and elsewhere. On Drayton's death in 1966 Barnetson succeeded him as chairman and, within three years, doubled the size of United by the acquisition of Yorkshire Post Newspapers, as well as acquiring 'Punch' magazine. He recognized the value to his companies of good contacts with the professional and commercial worlds, and in the 1970s the Bill Barnetson lunches at the Savoy, attended by royalty, archbishops, cabinet ministers, diplomats, financiers, academics, and fellow newspapermen became an established part of the London social scene. 
Meanwhile his interests and his directorships continued to grow. From 1976 he was deputy chairman of British Electric Traction; he sat on the boards of Hill Samuel, Trusthouse Forte, Argus Press, and the Press Association. From 1973 he was a member of the 'Times' Trust; when Atlantic Richfield acquired 'The Observer' in 1976 he became chairman, and from 1979 he was an influential chairman of Thames Television. At one time, reference books listed forty-two organizations with which he was associated. 
One of his outstanding contributions to the newspaper world was achieved in the years 1968-79 when he was chairman of Reuters. During this time the agency's turnover rose from $6 million to $73 million and the foundations were laid for Reuters's technological development from a simple news agency into the worldwide business and economic information service that catered for almost every financial market in the world. Reuters brought out to the full the visionary, the shrewd manager, and the leader in Barnetson. 
Amid all this activity he found time to spend weekends with his wife and family of one son and three daughters, at their home, Broom, in Crowborough, Sussex, where he could enjoy his books and his gardening. But there were increasing demands on his energies: the Open University, Press Council, English National Opera, Queen's Silver Jubilee Appeal, and St Bride's Church in Fleet Street received his personal support and encouragement. And through it all, the thumping of the typewriter keys and the puffing at a king-size briar pipe went on. Ceaseless activity seemed to suit him. For a somewhat bulky person he was surprisingly light of step, and this lent a pronounced sense of cheerful urgency to his movements. His working philosophy in dealing with all his many interests was simple: 'I leave the man on the spot to get on with the job. But he must know that I am available here all the time' (private information). Barnetson was knighted in 1972 and made a life peer in 1975. He died in Westminster Hospital on 12 March 1981. 
Edward Pickering', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30794


Barraclough, Geoffrey (1908-1984), historian, was born in Bradford, Yorkshire, on 10 May 1908, the eldest of three children (all sons) of Walter Barraclough, a prosperous wool merchant of that city, and his wife, Edith Mary Brayshaw. He was educated at Ackworth School (1917-19), Colwall (1919-21), 'which made a lifelong rebel of me', Bootham School in York (1921-4), and Bradford grammar school (1924-5). At seventeen he went to work in the family firm of O. S. Daniel & Co., selling essential oils in Europe. 'Whatever essential oils may have been', he wrote, 'I soon discovered that they were not essential to me.' In 1926 he won a scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford, where he developed an interest in medieval history, winning first-class honours in history in 1929. Graduate work followed at Munich (1929-31), where he took his new bride, Marjorie Gardiner; they had one son, Alan ('b'. 1930). 
In 1931-3 Barraclough moved to the English School at Rome and did research on the papacy. His first books, 'Public Notaries and the Papal Curia' (1934) and 'Papal Provisions' (1935), were intended to correct what he regarded as the provincialism of English medievalists. 
In 1934 Barraclough won a fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, and in 1936 moved to St John's College, Cambridge. He also published 'Medieval Germany' (2 vols., 1938), and became editor of 'Studies in Medieval History', designed to introduce English readers to German scholarship. By the age of twenty-nine he was the leading authority on German medieval history in the English-speaking world. 
When the Second World War began, Barraclough joined the Enigma project at Bletchley Park, first as an employee of the Foreign Office, and later as a squadron leader in the Royal Air Force. In Bletchley's Hut 3 he became 'first of the watch', presiding over the horseshoe table where Luftwaffe dispatches were read during the battle of Britain. In 1941 he was sent to the Mediterranean, and in 1944 was seconded to France. At the war's end he was in the Air Ministry at London. 
During the war Barraclough wrote 'The Origins of Modern Germany' (1946), which offered a historian's long view of the German problem. The book was widely read, and the policy it recommended was adopted by Britain and the United States. 
In 1945 Barraclough became professor of medieval history at Liverpool. He divorced his first wife and married Diana Russell-Clarke; they had two sons, Nigel ('b'. 1947) and Giles ('b'. 1948). Diana was the daughter of Edward Russell-Clarke, barrister, of the Inner Temple. The new family moved to an Elizabethan house 18 miles from Liverpool, and lived there from 1945 to 1956, a decade of happiness and peace in Barraclough's life. At Liverpool he founded a programme in archival administration, where a generation of British archivists was trained. He published 'The Mediaeval Empire' (1950), 'Cheshire Charters' (1957), and 'The Earldom and County Palatine of Chester' (1953). Barraclough also developed a new interest in applying history to present problems, and contributed to 'The Listener', the 'New Statesman', 'The Observer', and the 'Manchester Guardian'. A collection of essays appeared as 'History in a Changing World' (1955). He was also active in the Historical Association, of which he was president in 1964-7. 
In 1956 Barraclough was offered the Stevenson research chair at the University of London formerly held by Arnold Toynbee, and the directorship of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. His task was to publish an annual 'Survey of International Affairs', a labour which he disliked. In 1962 he quit his job, and returned to St John's College, Cambridge, where he wrote his most successful book, 'An Introduction to Contemporary History' (1964). 
Increasingly restless, Barraclough took flight to America, teaching at Texas (1965) and San Diego (1965-8). He was married a third time, to Gwendolyn Lambert, and in 1968 moved to Brandeis. There he recovered stability in his life, publishing 'The Medieval Papacy' (1968). There were no children of this marriage. 
In 1970 Barraclough was called to Oxford as Chichele professor of modern history and a fellow of All Souls. There, things went badly again. Barraclough felt confined by the curriculum, oppressed by the ambience of All Souls, and disliked by colleagues who expected him to resume a narrow speciality in medieval history. 
After two years of strife, Barraclough abruptly left Oxford and returned to Brandeis, remaining there from 1972 to 1981, his most prolific period. He published 'The Crucible of Europe' (1976), a history of the ninth and tenth centuries; 'Management in a Changing Economy' (1976), an application of history to economic planning; 'Main Trends in History' (1976), a survey commissioned by UNESCO; ''The Times' Atlas of World History' (1978); 'Turning Points in World History' (1979); 'The Christian World' (1981); and 'From Agadir to Armageddon' (1982). He wrote abundantly for 'The Nation', the 'New Republic', and the 'New York Review of Books'. 
Barraclough was lionized in Boston, and became a famous figure in American universities. He dressed in a wool tattersall shirt, an old tweed jacket, drab necktie, ancient Oxford bags, and gleaming British walking shoes. He walked rapidly with a curious rolling gait, his bald head cocked oddly to one side, and his round, ruddy face veiled by blue clouds of smoke from a battered pipe. 
Honours cascaded upon Barraclough, from everywhere but Britain. 'His reputation in Europe and the United States... was enormous,' an English colleague wrote, but 'British colleagues, especially in his later years, tended to view his achievements rather more coolly.' His contribution was to enlarge the historian's territory beyond the boundaries of the nation state, and to expand the temporal context of history from the study of the past to the study of change. His work inspired young scholars throughout the world. 
In 1981 Barraclough retired from Brandeis, and moved to Williams College, and in 1982 he taught at Munich. There he fell severely ill of lung cancer. He returned to his second wife, Diana Barraclough, in Burford, Oxfordshire, and resumed a project on Cheshire charters which he had put aside thirty years before. As he neared the end of that last labour, he died at his home, Sylvester House, Witney Street, Burford, on 26 December 1984. 
D. H. Fischer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30795


Bartlett, (Charles) Vernon Oldfeld (1894-1983), journalist and broadcaster, was born on 30 April 1894 at Westbury, Wiltshire, the second of the three children and only son of Thomas Oldfeld Bartlett, bank manager, of Swanage, and his wife, Beatrice Mary Jecks. He was educated at Blundell's School at Tiverton but psoriasis forced him to leave early. He was sent to live abroad and acquired a fluent mastery of the main European languages that later stood him in good stead as a foreign correspondent. 
In the First World War, Bartlett was in hospital recovering from a wound when his regiment (the Dorset) suffered an early poison gas attack. Later in 1915 he was the only man pulled out alive when his dugout received a direct hit. He was invalided out of the army with a burning conviction that further world wars must be prevented. He found work in Fleet Street, joining the 'Daily Mail' as a general reporter. In 1917 he married Marguerite Eleonore (died 1966), the Belgian refugee daughter of Henri van Bemden, a well-to-do food merchant of Antwerp. They had two sons, the younger of whom died in 1970. 
Also in 1917 Bartlett joined Reuters which later sent him to cover the Paris peace conference, and in 1919 he became a foreign correspondent for 'The Times', reporting the turbulent post-war diplomatic developments from Geneva, Berlin, Rome, and Warsaw. With his international experience and his repugnance of war it was a natural step for him to become, in 1922, the director of the London office of the League of Nations, a post he held until 1932. 
Bartlett was an early broadcaster, at first occasionally about the work of the league, and later analysing general international developments in a weekly series, 'The Way of the World'. He became an outstanding communicator to whom a rising generation owed its interest in foreign affairs. The BBC 'Yearbook' for 1931 noted: 'By his unobtrusive charm and his respect for truth and a certain quality of fair play which is inherent in his work, Mr Bartlett has made of international affairs a subject of general interest'. 
That quality of fair play sometimes got Bartlett into trouble. In October 1933 Nazi Germany walked out of the disarmament conference at Geneva and left the League of Nations. Bartlett was far from pro-Nazi, but broadcasting on the BBC, which had employed him full time since October 1932, he made the immediate comment: 'I believe the British would have acted in much the same way as Germany has acted if they had been in the same position.' 
This remark provoked an immediate political storm. There were violent protests from the prime minister, J. Ramsay MacDonald, and other MPs, as well as in the press. Bartlett himself said he received thousands of letters, the overwhelming majority in support. The BBC told him it would be easier for him to continue broadcasting if he were not on the staff, adding that the politics of any newspaper he joined might affect the frequency of his broadcast invitations. Bartlett therefore resigned, rejecting a lucrative offer from the Labour 'Daily Herald' in favour of a smaller one from the more moderate 'News Chronicle'. Yet, by what he regarded as cowardly treatment, it was several years before he was asked to broadcast again. 
For the next two decades Bartlett travelled widely as the 'News Chronicle's' diplomatic correspondent. In 1938, after Chamberlain at Munich yielded to Hitler's demands over Czechoslovakia, he stood as an Independent Progressive candidate opposed to the appeasement policy in the by-election at Bridgwater, then a safe Conservative seat. With no party machine to support him, though he had a number of keen volunteers, he won Bridgwater, and held it until 1950. He contributed usefully to debates on foreign affairs, but the role of an independent member was perhaps too lonely for one so gregarious by nature. 
During the Second World War, Bartlett's broadcasting skill was put to good use. He spoke three times a week to America and often in French and German. His 'Postscripts', after the 9 o'clock home news, were wise, compassionate talks, often including touches of sardonic humour, and they did much to sustain domestic morale. For a time he served as British press attache in Moscow. At one Kremlin dinner, emboldened by vodka, he responded to a toast to the press by declaring that without a free press there could not be a free people. Stalin commented: 'That young man talks too much.' 
After retiring from the 'News Chronicle' in 1954 Bartlett worked as a journalist in Singapore and in 1956 he was appointed CBE. In 1961 he moved to a farm in Tuscany where he produced wine and continued to write books -- twenty-eight altogether. His first had been an autobiographical novel (1929) about calf love in pre-war Berlin. Others were about foreign affairs and his travels in south-east Asia, Africa, and Europe, and especially about his beloved Tuscany. An autobiography, written when he was forty-three, provides revealing insights into European diplomacy between the wars. 
Bartlett's wife died in 1966 but three years later he made a happy second marriage, to Eleanor Needham (Jo), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Theodore Francis Ritchie DSO, Royal Army Medical Corps, and widow of Walter Menzel, of the International Committee of the Red Cross. Bartlett died at Yeovil, Somerset, on 18 January 1983. 
Leonard Miall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30796


Bates, Herbert Ernest (1905-1974), writer, was born on 16 May 1905 at 51 Grove Road, Rushden, Northamptonshire, the eldest of the three children (two sons and a daughter) of Albert Ernest Bates (1879-1949) and his wife, Lucy Elizabeth, 'nee' Lucas (1878-1972). He came from a family of shoemakers; his maternal grandfather's craftsmanship was renowned, and his parents also followed the trade. As he was to write later, he: 'grew up in an atmosphere of intense respectability... My parents were never a farthing in debt; great was the pride they took, as my grandparents did, in paying their way... My father pursued his passion for nature and the countryside, and incidentally fostered my own.' Rushden, which became Evensford in his fiction, was to carry much imaginative weight, and a love of nature was to become, next to writing, the absorption of his own life. After his death it was written that 'as he wrote he gardened and as he gardened he wrote'. 
From a local school Bates failed his public-school entrance examination but won a free place at Kettering grammar school, where he stayed until he was just over sixteen. Here he was inspired to be a writer by his English master, Edmund Kirby, to whom he later dedicated two books. He achieved a third class in the joint Oxford and Cambridge university certificate but was dissuaded from a university education by his father. This decision influenced his later literary output as a 'self-made' writer of character, rather than of ideas (Baldwin, 44). He was thenceforth always outside literary circles and untouched by modernism. 
At sixteen Bates became a reporter for the Wellingborough branch of the Northampton 'Chronicle', and then a warehouse clerk for a leather merchant in Rushden. It was here that he began to write in earnest. Although he rejected his parents' Methodism and indeed all organized religious beliefs in his early twenties, he had poetry on a religious theme published in 'The Kettering Reminder', and indeed he first saw himself as a poet. His early verse is imbued with a Romantic sensibility typical of Georgian poetry. This exposure led to a weekly column written under the name Boy Blue called 'At the Sign of the Rainbow' which lasted for four months. During this time he was reading Chekhov, Maupassant, Flaubert, and Turgenev, and writing his first novel, 'The Two Sisters' (1926), which after being rejected nine times was accepted by Edward Garnett at Jonathan Cape, who mistook Bates, writing as H. E. Bates, for a woman. This novel was experimental in its narrative of 'emotion states punctuated by moments of crisis' (Baldwin, 65). Garnett came to act as his chief reader and literary adviser, and Bates was to continue under his tutelage until Garnett's death in 1937. Bates was later to pay his own touching and memorable tribute in his 'Edward Garnett: a Personal Portrait', published in 1950. For some twenty years, and for about as many books, Cape was to be Bates's publisher. His sales, however, claimed Cape, never earned fully the advances he paid against them. 
Bates followed his first success to London and worked briefly, at Garnett's instigation, in the children's department of John and Edward Bumpus, booksellers. His book 'The Seekers', a children's fantasy, was promoted by the Bumpus brothers in their Christmas catalogue. This job was his last formal employment. From now on he devoted himself entirely to writing. Short stories, the work for which he will be remembered and revered, were appearing in the 'New Statesman' and the 'Manchester Guardian'. During these early years Bates lacked confidence and struggled for inspiration. A collection of short stories, 'Day's End', was published in 1928; and in 1929, more traditional than 'Two Sisters', came 'Catherine Foster', the plot of which is borrowed from 'Madame Bovary'. Only with 'Charlotte's Row' (1931) did Bates begin to find his own voice, drawing on his father's past and his Northamptonshire upbringing. 
On 18 July 1931 Bates married Marjorie Helen (1909-2004), known as Madge, the daughter of a soldier, Herbert Henry Cox, whom he had met in Rushden. Madge provided Bates with the security he craved as a writer. They settled in Little Chart, Ashford, Kent, which was to provide much inspiration for books on gardening. They had two sons and two daughters. One son, Richard, was later to make for himself a distinguished career in television and was to adapt for that medium many of his father's most successful novels and short stories. 
Bates displayed a new confidence in his work in the 1930s, such as 'The Fallow Land' (1932), a tale of rural life. Marriage acted as a stabilizing force, and Bates began to solidify his position within the tradition of rural fiction with 'The Poacher' (1935), and proved an unsentimental and yet lyrical chronicler of the country. Occasionally relegating character to scene, he was at his best when the mood of character and nature were symbolically fused. His stories about Uncle Silas (1940), a Rabelaisian nonagenarian peasant farmer, based on his uncle Joseph Betts, were very popular. Bates also published nature essays in 'Through the Woods' (1936) and 'Down the River' (1937), both of which expressed early environmentalist opinions. 'Spella Ho' (1938) was the industrial counterpart to the rural novels. Finances were tight, so Bates also wrote a regular column, 'Country life', for 'The Spectator', and reviews for the 'New Clarion' and 'John O'London's Weekly'. His collection of short stories 'The Woman who had Imagination' (1934) brought him critical acclaim, and with the further collection, 'Cut and Come Again' (1935), Bates was firmly established as one of the most gifted short-story writers. The latter volume remains his greatest achievement in the genre. He wrote about technique in 'The Modern English Short Story: a Critical Survey' (1950). 
The Second World War was for Bates the turning point of his career. During 1941 he was recruited, without precedent, to the Royal Air Force as a morale-boosting short-story writer -- officially a flight lieutenant to public relations, Air Ministry. He was granted unusual freedom of movement at Oakington near Cambridge and a year later had become squadron leader and, under the pseudonym Flying Officer X, author of 'The Greatest People in the World' (1942). These stories immortalized air force pilots. The eventual publishing success was enormous and Cape at last had a financially rewarding H. E. Bates in his list. But after a wrangle with Cape over royalties (Cape maintained that as a civil servant Bates should receive very little), Bates transferred allegiance to Michael Joseph, who remained his publishers for the rest of his life. His first book for them was 'Fair Stood the Wind for France' (1945), hailed as a masterpiece in America, but lacking the depth of his other work. 
In addition to the Flying Officer X stories, Bates's output during the war was prolific, including 'The Bride Comes to Evensford' (1943). Under the impetus of war and the sudden flowering of popular success Bates was now to write a long series of best-sellers. Chosen by book clubs, reissued by Penguin, translated throughout the world, made often into films, titles still famous after a generation came from him in extraordinary succession. 'The Purple Plain' (1947), 'The Jacaranda Tree' (1952), and 'The Scarlet Sword' (1950) derived from his travels in India and Burma with the Royal Air Force. He returned again to Northamptonshire for 'The Sleepless Moon' (1956) and 'Love for Lydia' (1952), a historical novel and perhaps his most accomplished. In 'The Face of England' (1953) he showed concern for the direction of change in Britain after the devastation of war, and he revised 'O More than Happy Countryman' (1943) and 'In the Heart of the Country' (1942) as 'The Country Heart' (1949), setting out his love for rural England. 
Bates scaled the heights of popularity and success with 'The Darling Buds of May' (1958), which began an earthy series of rusticity for which he may be best remembered. 'Darling Buds' was Bates's response to what he called the 'bony, steely, wiry, unbending time' of the welfare state years, and to the critics who had 'ignored or slighted' his work (Baldwin, 198). The critics despised the carnivalesque Larkin family, but in his autobiography Bates rose in their defence: 'the books are as English as puns, steak and kidney pudding and Canterbury Tales of Chaucer'. The novels were filmed as an enormously popular television series in 1991. 
Great affluence came to Bates late in life, but illness and overwork gradually took their toll. There was a sense that final, popular, works such as 'A Moment in Time' (1964) and 'A Crown of Wild Myrtle' (1962) were artistically weak; and 'The Wedding Party' (1965) was 'one of the least happy of his collections of stories' (Baldwin, 214). In February 1966 he suffered two heart attacks and a bout of pneumonia. He continued to write, producing the experimental 'The Distant Horns of Summer' (1967) and 'The White Admiral' (1968), the best of his children's books, which dramatized warfare among wasps, moths, and bees in Flying Officer X style. He also produced three volumes of memoirs, two books on gardening, and a handful of magazine articles. He was made CBE in 1973. After being admitted to the Kent and Canterbury Hospital in January 1974, Bates died on 28 January of kidney failure and related complications. He was cremated in a private ceremony. His poetry was finally collected in 'Give them their Life' in 1990. 
Critics place Bates's reputation as lying firmly with his short story collections. Descending from both the Romantic and the naturalistic literary traditions, Bates fused these sensibilities in an original and commanding way. Remaining detached from moral, philosophical, political, and religious preoccupations of the twentieth century, Bates was always more concerned with individuals rather than with movements, with established techniques rather than with experiment. Often neglected, Bates contributed to a vital tradition in twentieth-century literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 30797


Batten, Edith Mary (1905-1985), welfare worker and educationist, was born in London on 8 February 1905, the third of the four children and elder daughter of Charles William Batten, general draper, of High Street, Wandsworth, London, and his wife, Edith Wallis, daughter of Robert Black, of Chelsea, London. The family moved to Southport in 1916, where Mollie Batten was educated at the Southport High School for Girls. In 1925 she gained a BSc in chemistry at the University of Liverpool. 
Returning in 1925 to London, where her father died, Mollie Batten had to find work and took a clerical job in an office in Piccadilly, later moving to McVitie and Price's Hendon factory, where she became an assistant to the personnel officer. From here she was dismissed owing to a disagreement with management over the treatment of a worker. In 1928 she became secretary of the Invalid Children's Aid Association branch in West Ham. Residing in the St Helen's Settlement, Stratford, she became a member of the Church of England, being prepared for confirmation by the vicar of Barnet, the Revd Leslie Hunter. During this time she attended evening classes at the London School of Economics and gained a BSc (Econ) degree in 1932. 
Mollie Batten was appointed warden of the Birmingham settlement in 1933 and soon became a nationally recognized pioneer in the training of social workers and youth workers. She helped to rebuild and expand the settlement's premises and was responsible for changes in its constitution, which brought the warden and staff representation on to its council. In 1937-8 she was a JP for the city of Birmingham. 
In 1938 Mollie Batten became organizing secretary of the British Association of Residential Settlements. The 'Hire Purchase Act' (1938) owed much to evidence she had collected. She became a member of the Ministry of Labour's Factory and Welfare Advisory Board in 1938, and in 1940 she joined the ministry itself. She had a particular concern for the welfare of workers outside working hours. In 1942 she was appointed to the Manpower Services Board and was involved in the call-up of women in the London area. Offered a permanent civil service appointment, she nevertheless resigned in 1947 and went to St Anne's College, Oxford, where she read for a theology degree, gaining a second-class honours BA in 1949 (MA, 1953). 
This and her past experience splendidly equipped Mollie Batten to become principal of William Temple College in 1950. The college, which she moved from Hawarden, Flintshire, to Rugby in 1954, was a memorial to the archbishop and was initially to be a theological college for women. Under Mollie Batten's imaginative guidance, and with the unflagging support of her old friend Leslie Hunter, now bishop of Sheffield and chairman of governors, it became a unique centre for the study of the secular realities of modern society in the light of Christian faith. There were resident students on two- and three-year courses for the Cambridge diploma and certificate in religious knowledge. But large numbers of men and women came on short courses from industry, social work, education, administration, and the civil service. Mollie Batten's wide field of contacts in these areas enabled her to bring in a steady flow of distinguished speakers to stimulate penetrating yet practical thought on the topics in hand. To avoid a tendency to heavy cigarette smoking she took to smoking a small pipe while listening to lectures. Sadly, the churches failed to perceive the value of the college or to support it in any way, although the growing number of industrial chaplains found in it and in its principal an important resource. Engagements with the World Council of Churches, with the church in Canada and in Hong Kong, and contacts in Germany nevertheless demonstrate an impressive reputation outside Britain. 
Mollie Batten retired to London in 1966 but continued in part-time research work for the church assembly's board for social responsibility. After moving to Midhurst, Sussex, in 1969 she played an active part in the diocese of Chichester and the neighbouring diocese of Portsmouth, presiding in the latter over a working party on the south Hampshire development plan. She was sometime chairman of the Chichester constituency Labour Party. 
Mollie Batten was a lifelong supporter of the Anglican Group for the Ordination of Women. Her vigorous intellect, innovative spirit, warmth of character, and infectious enjoyment of life evoked exceptional responses of loyalty and affection. She was appointed OBE in 1948. She died at the Cottage Hospital, Midhurst, on 27 January 1985. She was unmarried. 
S. W. Phipps', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30798


Bawden, Sir Frederick Charles (1908-1972), virologist and plant pathologist, was born on 18 August 1908 in North Tawton, Devon, the younger son and youngest of the three children of George Bawden, relieving officer and registrar of births and deaths, and his wife, Ellen Balment. In 1911 his parents became master and matron of the Okehampton poor-law institution -- the workhouse. Early observation of poverty there probably helped to establish Bawden's sympathetic social outlook, while the large institutional garden, mainly devoted to potatoes, may have led to his subsequent interest in agriculture. 
Bawden was educated at Okehampton grammar school and Queen Elizabeth School in Crediton. With help from a Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries scholarship he went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and studied botany, chemistry, and physiology. He obtained a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1928, and the diploma in agricultural science in 1930. In the latter year, having already worked for two years on cereal rusts, he started work at the Potato Virus Research Station (Cambridge) as assistant to R. N. Salaman. That apprenticeship led logically to his subsequent posts: virus physiologist at Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, in 1936, head of the department of plant pathology in 1940, its deputy director in 1950, and its director in 1958. 
Bawden was known primarily as a virus worker; he isolated one of the first virus preparations for which reasonable claims of purity could be made, and wrote 'Plant Viruses and Virus Diseases' (1939). However, although he did no research on fungus infections other than his early work on rusts, he had a lifelong interest in them. They occupied as much space as virus infections in his 'Plant Diseases' (1948). He discussed them in several articles and condemned the tendency to segregate specialists on different infective agents into different departments or institutes. Bawden's approach to viruses was broad-minded. He published papers on their chemical, physical, and serological properties, and on their classification, multiplication, and physiological effects. He knew more chemistry than most plant pathologists, but recognized that much of what passed for knowledge in the 1930s about nucleic acids and proteins was baseless. 
After the end of the Second World War many students from the less economically developed countries went to Rothamsted for training in plant pathology. Although Bawden welcomed them enthusiastically, he was critical that many were not given jobs in their speciality when they returned home. During frequent visits to India, the Caribbean, and some African countries he gained experience of tropical agriculture; he demonstrated that tropical crops were not as healthy as farmers and governments thought and that when a diseased state was recognized its cause was often wrongly attributed. He disliked formal visits or demonstrations of elaborate equipment: he preferred to get into the field to see crops and discuss them with farmers. He served, often as chairman, on several committees concerned with tropical agriculture. 
Bawden was a pragmatist. He argued that researchers who understood that the primary object of farming was to produce food knew more about needs and possibilities than anyone else. He criticized aspects of British agricultural research policy -- especially the customer-contractor principle which was introduced in the 1970s. He was delighted that projects which he supported in spite of criticism, such as freeing the King Edward potato clone from paracrinkle virus, and the synthesis of pyrethrin analogues, were ultimately extremely profitable. During his directorship Rothamsted grew beyond its previous bounds in size and staff. He realized, however, that getting research applied was often harder than doing it, and in this respect he contrasted agriculture unfavourably with medicine. 
Bawden took a keen interest in the manner of the presentation of research. He had a sharp eye for ambiguity, prolixity, and illegitimately general statements. In spite of a humorous, cheerful, and friendly manner, he could be blunt. Apart from the routine of ensuring that there was a supply of test plants he made little use of assistance and insisted on doing all virus assays himself. As a rule that meant doing them out of normal working hours. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1949, served on many of its committees, and was treasurer from 1968 to 1972. He was knighted in 1967, had honorary degrees from Hull, Bath, Reading, and Brunel universities, and was a member of several foreign academies. 
On 6 September 1934 Bawden married Marjorie Elizabeth, a childhood friend and also a botanist, the daughter of Alfred Alderman Cudmore, agricultural engineer. They had two sons. He died in Luton and Dunstable Hospital on 8 February 1972. 
N. W. Pirie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30799


Beadle, Sir (Thomas) Hugh William (1905-1980), judge in Southern Rhodesia, was born in Salisbury on 6 February 1905, the only son and eldest of three children of Arthur William Beadle, later secretary to the Southern Rhodesian treasury, and his wife, Christiana Maria Fischer. Educated at Salisbury Boys' School and Milton high school, Diocesan College, Rondebosch, and Cape Town University, Beadle, after his BA and LLB degrees, proceeded in 1928 as a Rhodes scholar to Queen's College, Oxford. He played rugby and tennis for his college, boxed for the university, flew in its air squadron, and graduated with a second-class BCL (1930). He later became an honorary fellow of Queen's College, although in 1968 there was an attempt to strip him of his fellowship. 
After practising at the Bulawayo bar from 1930, Beadle was elected in 1939 as MP for Bulawayo North, a seat he held until 1950 for the United Party led by Godfrey Huggins. After a period of military service from 1939 to 1940 as temporary captain in west Africa, Beadle's limitless energies were harnessed by Huggins, whom Beadle served from 1940 to 1946 as parliamentary private secretary, acting also as deputy judge advocate-general. Beadle was appointed minister of internal affairs and justice in 1946, the year he took silk, and was appointed OBE. In 1948 he also took on the education and health ministry. In 1950 Beadle became resident high court judge in Bulawayo. He was created CMG in 1957. 
Beadle was a learned, fair but also adventurous judge, restrictively interpreting the scope of the criminal law. Conservative politically, he yet rejected racialism, taking the opportunity in 'Mehta v. City of Salisbury' (1961), a case involving exclusion from public swimming-baths on racial grounds, to reject South African case law, because of that country's racial policy. Africans, however, viewed Beadle more as the chairman of a tribunal which upheld the detention of nationalist politicians during the 1959 emergency. 
In 1961 Beadle became chief justice of Southern Rhodesia and therefore legal adviser to the governor. Knighted in the same year, and privy councillor from 1964, Beadle presided from 1964 over the Southern Rhodesian appellate division, giving judgments generously interpreting the recently introduced Rhodesian declaration of rights. Particularly notable was his invalidation of an act of the legislative assembly seeking to avoid the necessity of declaring a new emergency by extending the period of preventive detention. Had a unilateral declaration of independence (UDI) not occurred Beadle would have been remembered as a Commonwealth chief justice who upheld individual liberty. 
Determined to avert UDI, Beadle incessantly initiated procedures for compromise. On UDI in 1965 he moved into the residence of the governor, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, advising him and British ministers, 'inter alia', on the crucial gubernatorial instruction that all those responsible for law and order should carry on with their normal tasks, an injunction assuring the regime of obedience by state servants and effectively giving it legitimating institutions without the embarrassment of replacing the judges. Beadle accompanied the governor to the talks held in November 1966 on HMS 'Tiger'. He incurred the disapproval of Harold Wilson who thought him 'spineless' for failing to help pressurize Ian Smith, the Rhodesian leader, into adhering to his undertaking that he would advise his cabinet to support the 'Tiger' solution. 
The judges had avoided pronouncing on the regime's validity until September 1966, when two of them upheld its detention of Daniel Madzimbamuto, a nationalist politician, on grounds of necessity. On appeal, in January 1968, Beadle temporized, holding the detention invalid on a technicality, asserting that the judges still sat under the 1961 constitution, denying the regime 'de jure' status, and yet simultaneously holding that the regime was a 'de facto' government which the Rhodesian courts must recognize. 
In February and March 1968, in litigation about Africans sentenced to death before UDI for terrorist offences on facts that would have grounded murder charges, Beadle upheld the regime's power to carry out executions on the basis that a lawful government could have taken such action. Because Ian Smith's minister of law and order had told the court that he would not observe any judgment by the judicial committee of the privy council, Beadle refused leave to appeal to the judicial committee and declined to stay the execution. When the queen, acting on the Commonwealth secretary's advice, commuted the death sentences to life imprisonment, Beadle, arguing that Rhodesia was self-governing, refused to recognize her exercise of the prerogative of mercy. On Beadle's return to Government House, the governor asked him to pack his bags, and the regime began hanging Africans convicted before and after UDI. Two judges resigned, Beadle's reasoning having made it clear that the courts only sat and their decisions were only enforceable with the acquiescence of the regime. 
Beadle unequivocally recognized UDI in September 1968, when he held that the Smith regime had attained 'de jure' status as the lawful government of an independent state by reason of a successful revolution. He asserted it his duty to declare this the law, and to choose whether to continue in office under the 1965 UDI constitution, stating he was remaining as chief justice because the existing judges would best preserve the rights of citizens. Subsequently Beadle accepted office under Smith's 1969 constitution, which contained arrangements designed indefinitely to postpone African majority rule. After retirement in 1977, Beadle sat for three years as acting judge in trials under the special criminal procedure for serious 'terrorist' cases, carrying the death penalty. 
A short, stocky man of ruddy complexion with a toothbrush moustache, Beadle had a blunt manner, looking hard at all whom he encountered. His drive and enthusiasm were overwhelming, whether at work, in charitable activities, or as a courageous hunter and fisherman. He had a warm family life and many friends. In 1934 Beadle married Leonie, daughter of Cecil John Barry, farmer, of Barrydale, Cape Province; they had two daughters. His first wife died in 1953 and the following year he married Olive, daughter of Major Staley Jackson OBE, chief native commissioner, of Salisbury. After her death in a car accident in 1974 he married in 1976 Pleasance Johnson. 
Assessment of Beadle depends on the evaluator's predilections. 'Devious' to Harold Wilson, vicar of Bray to British officials, 'white supremacist' to African nationalists, Beadle's own view was that he did his best for his country in a time of difficult choices. His self-confidence, optimism, and drive to get a solution led him to act as go-between, to ever new formulas for compromise, and to entanglement with the regime. Identifying his country's interests with preservation of the kind of Rhodesia he had spent his political career building, rather than with any need for transition to African majority rule, Beadle ultimately saw loyalty to the usurping regime as necessary to avoid radical political reconstruction. Beadle died in Johannesburg on 14 December 1980. 
Claire Palley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30800


Beaglehole, John Cawte (1901-1971), historian, was born in Wellington, New Zealand, on 13 June 1901, the second of four sons (there were no daughters) of David Ernest Beaglehole, a clerk, and his wife, Jane Butler. He grew up in a crowded quarter of the youthful city. Like most of his contemporaries, he enjoyed the benefits of a state education, first at Mount Cook School, then at nearby Wellington College. But the chief formative influence of his boyhood was the modest family home. Both his parents were discriminating readers and to his English-born mother he owed a lifelong interest in music. A brief apprenticeship to the book trade preceded his entry to Victoria University College, the institution to which he was happily affiliated for most of his career. He was active in student affairs, wrote poetry, edited the annual magazine, and assiduously read history. Graduating MA in 1924, he won a postgraduate scholarship for his thesis on William Hobson, first governor of New Zealand, served briefly as assistant lecturer, and left for England in 1926. 
To a colonial, as Beaglehole boldly proclaimed himself, London was both fulfilment and challenge. He gloried in the libraries and bookshops, he revelled in the music, and gradually he responded to the shabby elegance of Bloomsbury where he lodged. On the debit side social inequalities troubled him, he was irked by the airs of some academic superiors, and he found difficulty in choosing a subject. At last, with help from Harold J. Laski, whom Beaglehole thought friendly enough to rank as a colonial, he joined University College to undertake research in colonial history. His thesis, completed in 1929, gained him a PhD, but he could not find a publisher and there seemed no prospect of employment. The only course, he reluctantly concluded, was to return home. He had been cheered by the appearance, under an American imprint, of 'Captain Hobson and the New Zealand Company' (1928), a version of his MA thesis. Now he was encouraged by a commission to write a book on Pacific exploration. 
For some years after his return Beaglehole led an unsettled existence, moving from one temporary job to another, often in the unlikely role of Workers' Educational Association lecturer. His liberal views earned him a reputation for radicalism and lost him a university post in Auckland. More bitter still, in 1935 he failed in his bid for the chair of history at Victoria. In these adversities he had the unfailing support of his wife, Elsie Mary, daughter of Robert Arthur Holmes, a banker; they had married in 1930 and were to have three sons. And no set-back stemmed the flow of publications -- poems, articles, and notably, in 1934, 'The Exploration of the Pacific'. This book led to his later research and, belatedly, to academic preferment: in 1936 he was appointed lecturer at Victoria University College. 
Back in his native city (also the nation's capital), Beaglehole was drawn into many activities and enlarged his already wide acquaintance. The casually dressed scholar, somewhat resembling E. M. Forster, became a well-known figure not only in libraries and lecture halls but in government departments and more exalted centres of power. As a semi-official adviser on cultural matters he was in constant demand and took an active part in producing publications to mark the country's centennial. His contribution was 'The Discovery of New Zealand' (1939) but of greater moment was his close association with J. W. A. Heenan, the imaginative public servant behind the enterprise. It was Heenan who after the war ensured state backing for Beaglehole's edition of the 'Journals' of Captain James Cook, published by the Hakluyt Society. The first volume, dedicated to Heenan's memory, appeared in 1955 and the last in 1967. A bulky appendix was 'The Endeavour Journal' of Sir Joseph Banks (1962). When he died at his Wellington home, on 10 October 1971, he was revising his biography of Cook. Edited by the historian T. H. Beaglehole, his second son, it came out in 1974. 
In his last decade Beaglehole received many honours, academic and civic, culminating in the Order of Merit conferred in 1970. He was appointed CMG in 1958 and fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand in 1967. Victoria (now an independent university) appointed him to the chair of British Commonwealth history in 1963, made him an honorary LittD five years later, and following his death opened in his memory the superbly situated research room, fit setting for the fine portrait by W. A. Sutton. In 1966 he received an honorary DLitt from Oxford. His reputation rests firmly on the Cook journals, surely one of the classic works of historical scholarship. His personal qualities included generosity, a passion for justice, and a sometimes waspish humour. 
E. H. McCormick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30801


Beaton, Sir Cecil Walter Hardy (1904-1980), photographer and designer for screen and theatre, was born at 21 Langland Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 14 January 1904, the eldest of the two sons and two daughters of Ernest Walter Hardy Beaton (1867-1936), timber merchant, and his wife, Esther 
(Etty; 1872-1962)
, the daughter of Joseph Sisson, a blacksmith from Temple Sowerby, Westmorland. His first love was the theatre and a strong theatrical strain was evident in all his work. But early success came through photography, the love of which was inspired by a postcard of Lily Elsie (whose notice he contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'), which he found on his mother's bed. He cajoled his sisters, Nancy and Baba, into becoming his first photographic models, designing their costumes and entering them into fancy dress competitions. 
Beaton was educated at Heath Mount School, Hampstead, St Cyprian's School, Eastbourne, and at Harrow School. From there he went on to St John's College, Cambridge, ostensibly to read history and architecture. He did not graduate, however, and his main contribution was to the theatrical life of the university. He acted in and designed sets for the Amateur Dramatic Company (ADC) and Marlowe Society. In 1925 he came down without a degree, and, after spending six months 'doing very little apart from smoking Pera cigarettes and taking long hot baths' (Beaton, 'Photobiography', 38), spent some unhappy months working in the Holborn office of a friend of his father's. He knew that he had to escape from this life, which the author Truman Capote called 'a cocoon of middle-class' respectability ('Beaton by Bailey', television documentary). 
Beaton achieved this by his industry and imagination and the judicious use of publicity. He made a name for himself taking glamorous photographic portraits of the 'bright young things' of the day, who soon thirsted for his talents. His use of soft focus was in emulation of an existing technique; it was the unusual props and painted (or reflective) backgrounds, which he executed himself, that were the distinguishing feature of his portrait photographs. His backdrops made creative use of new materials such as cellophane, as well as mirrors -- a good example of the latter was his portrait of Mountbatten. Later he would urge aspirant photographers to 'break every photographic rule... a technical 'failure' which shows some attempt at aesthetic expression is of infinitely more value than an uninspired success' (Beaton, 'Photobiography', 183). He became a friend of the aesthete Stephen Tennant and others, notably Osbert and Edith Sitwell, and his rise to fame was meteoric. His ingenious photographic portraits of the Sitwells led to his employment with 'Vogue' as photographer, caricaturist, and illustrator, first in London and later in New York. In 1927 and 1930 he held one-man exhibitions at the Cooling Gallery, Bond Street, for both of which Osbert Sitwell wrote the introduction. He produced his first book, 'The Book of Beauty' (1930). By the end of the 1920s -- a decade which Beaton may be said to personify -- he had been granted sittings by all whom he had aspired to photograph, except Queen Mary and Virginia Woolf. 
In the 1930s Beaton was exposed to influences such as Jean Cocteau and Christian Berard, and his work became accordingly more baroque. He branched into the world of ballet and opera, designing revues for Charles Cochran -- 'Streamline' (1934) and 'Follow the Sun' (1936) -- while continuing to photograph in London, New York, and Hollywood. But he noted: 'Throughout my photographic career I have always felt that in five years' time I should no longer be a photographer' (Beaton, 'Photobiography', 184). In 1930 he forged a lifelong love of Wiltshire, renting Ashcombe, a derelict house in a glorious, Arcadian setting near Win Green. He converted Ashcombe into a jewel of a house, where he entertained friends such as Rex Whistler, Augustus John, and Edith Olivier, staged a 'fete-champetre', and made films. He was desolate when the landlord refused to renew his lease in 1945. 
In the 1930s Beaton had photographed some members of the royal family, notably the duchess of Gloucester, and in 1937 Mrs Wallis Simpson invited him to take the formal wedding photographs of her marriage to the duke of Windsor in France. Beaton's career was progressing well until he introduced some offensive antisemitic doodles into an illustration for American 'Vogue' in February 1938. He denied being anti-Jewish, and declared himself to be 'violently hostile to Hitler' (Vickers, 1993 edn, 208). But Conde Nast promptly dismissed him, and he did no work in the United States for a year and a half. The incident rose to haunt him periodically in later life. 
Beaton's career was saved by two events. First, Queen Elizabeth invited him to photograph her at Buckingham Palace in July 1939. Beaton created glorious portrait photographs of her, playing an important role in the creation of her image as queen. Some of these pictures were released during the war as a morale-boosting contrast to the sinister images of Nazi Germany. Second, the war itself came to his aid, because he was able to make an important contribution as a war photographer. He depicted Churchill behind his desk in Downing Street, but more famous was his study of a bombed-out child in hospital, 'Eileen Dunne in the Hospital for Sick Children' (1940). This picture was on the front cover of 'Life' magazine in September 1940 and was said to have influenced American feeling concerning the war more than any other picture. Beaton travelled throughout England for the Ministry of Information and later to the Middle East, north Africa, and the Far East. By his courage and dedicated approach he earned the respect of the three services. Six books emerged from these years. 
After the war, stage, film, ballet, and opera work gave Beaton more opportunities. In 1945 he designed the set for 'Lady Windermere's Fan', with an opulence of style that was a tonic for post-war Britain. The following year he took the part of Cecil Graham in the American production of the play. In 1948 he was responsible for the costumes for the films 'An Ideal Husband' and 'Anna Karenina' for Sir Alexander Korda. Other noted productions on which he worked were 'The School for Scandal' (1949), 'Quadrille', for Noel Coward (London, 1952; New York, 1954), 'Turandot' (New York, 1961; London, 1963), and 'La traviata' (New York, 1966). His greatest stage success was to design costumes for 'My Fair Lady' in 1956; its memorable black and white Ascot scene invariably drew a gasp of delight when the curtain rose. He repeated this success when he spent a year in Hollywood in 1963 working on the film adaptation. For his costume design and art direction he won two Oscars. (He had been awarded his first Oscar in 1958 for the film 'Gigi', arguably a more stunning screen production.) His own play, 'The Gainsborough Girls', was staged at Brighton in 1951 and in a revised version in 1959. Unfortunately it floundered on both occasions. 
Beaton also made a considerable contribution to the world of fashion. Perhaps his best book is his personal survey of fifty years of changing fashion, 'The Glass of Fashion' (1954). He gave a collection of the dresses he most admired to the Victoria and Albert Museum, and many of them were exhibited there in 1971. He was a dedicated and perceptive diarist from 1922 to 1980; six volumes of his diary were published in his lifetime, along with a 'Photobiography' (1951). 
Beaton continued to photograph throughout his later years. He photographed all the queen's children as babies, and he was the official photographer at the coronation and at several royal weddings. He also explored what the artist Michael Wishart called 'the Peacock Revolution', photographing rising figures of the 1960s such as the Rolling Stones, Twiggy, Jean Shrimpton, and the cast of the satirical revue 'Beyond the Fringe'. Shortly before his death he photographed Little Bo Bitch, one of the lesser lights of the punk rock scene. 
In 1968 Beaton's career was crowned with an important exhibition of his photographs at the National Portrait Gallery, where many remain on deposit or on show. In 1950 he was awarded the Legion d'honneur. He was created CBE in 1957 and knighted in 1972. Two years later he suffered a bad stroke, but he gradually learned to paint, write, and take photographs with his left hand. He died at his second Wiltshire home, Reddish House, Broadchalke, on 18 January 1980, and was buried on 23 January in the churchyard of All Saints, Broadchalke. 
Beaton was a man of immense style and sartorial elegance, forever fascinated by new ideas and attitudes. He possessed an extraordinary visual sense and an eye which, in a flash, took in every minor detail around him; Capote once ventured that 'The camera will never be invented that could capture or encompass all that he actually sees' (Beaton, 'The Best of Beaton', 11). Beaton's conversation was witty and penetrating, and, while he enjoyed the company of glittering society, above all he valued and sought out talent and individuality. He suffered from the intermittent accusation that much of his work was light or trivial, but the wide range of his achievements and the pleasure that he gave the world makes this an unfair assessment. 
Beaton was not granted much happiness in his personal relationships. During his younger years he was miserably and unrequitedly in love with the art connoisseur (Victor William) Peter Watson (1908-1956). He was essentially homosexual but pursued a tormented relationship for several decades with the screen actress Greta Garbo; he proposed to her, but was refused, and he remained unmarried. 
The many facets of Beaton's character and career are perhaps best caught in the 'bon mots' of his friends. Capote once noted that he was 'a total self-creation' ('Bailey on Beaton', television documentary); revealingly, Beaton himself once wrote in his diary (9 October 1923): 'I don't want people to know me as I really am but as I'm trying and pretending to be' (Vickers, 1993 edn, xvii). In this aim he appears largely to have succeeded. The critic Kenneth Tynan recorded that he managed to give the impression, on arriving at a society party, of 'an actor who has just made a superb exit; you would think that he had just come from some garish and exhausting rout on the floor above' (ibid., xxvi); more tersely, Cyril Connolly called him 'Rip-Van-With-It' ('Sunday Times', 13 March 1966). The playwright Alan Jay Lerner (1918-1996) said, of his work in the theatre: 'He was the only designer whose sketches were stunningly beautiful and outrageously funny at the same time' (Vickers, 1993 edn, xxv). Capote rated him as 'one of the three or four best photographers in this century' (ibid., xxvii) and an abiding influence on the succeeding generation. Beaton himself was apt to consider his work ephemeral, but it is certain that his considerable output, both visual and written, amounts to a unique and enduring portrait of the age in which he lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 30802


Beaumont, Hughes Griffiths (1908-1973), theatre manager, was born at 97 West End Lane, Hampstead, London, on 27 March 1908, the younger son of Morgan Morgan (died 1935), a barrister, and his wife, Mary Frances, 'nee' Brewer. His parents separated when he was two, and were divorced, his mother marrying a timber merchant, William Sugden Beaumont (died 1920). 'Binkie', as he became widely known (he was more formally known as Hugh), grew up believing that Beaumont was his true father. 
Throughout his life Hugh Beaumont preserved a passion for anonymity, and was given to disseminating fanciful accounts of his origins. He was brought up in Cardiff and attended Penarth grammar school. He formed an early friendship with Ivor Novello (a close neighbour) and secured a precocious appointment, at the age of sixteen, as assistant manager of the Prince of Wales Theatre, Cardiff. Still in his adolescence, he moved on to a series of other minor managerial jobs before joining the firm of Moss Empires as assistant to H. M. (Harry) Tennent, administrator of Drury Lane, with whom, in 1936, he founded the producing management of H. M. Tennent Ltd. Neither at that time, nor after Tennent's death in 1941, was anything done to publicize the name of Beaumont, but it was at his persuasion that the firm came into existence and through his gifts that it sustained its long supremacy in the West End. 
Beaumont and Tennent went into business with a $10,000 float from a stockbroking member of the Cripps family. That was a reasonable sum in the days when a West End play could be presented at the average cost of $1000. However, the partners lost much of their starting capital on a series of flops before they struck lucky with the 1937 production of Gerald Savory's 'George and Margaret' which ran for 799 performances at Wyndham's. This was followed by Dodie Smith's 'Dear Octopus' and other long-running shows which established Tennents as a highly profitable concern that magnetized backers like a triple-crown Derby winner. 
It was during these first years that Beaumont struck up a lifelong and professionally fertile friendship with John Gielgud. All Beaumont's early experience had been on the business side. He was, Gielgud said, 'a modern man with no pretensions to education at all and no knowledge except what he had learned as he became successful'. Throughout his career, his main objective was to have as many productions as possible playing in London. What those productions were, however, reflected a taste acquired partly from Gielgud, with whom he broke into classical territory with a 1939 'Hamlet', and continued with the famous wartime seasons at the Phoenix and the Haymarket, and again at the Phoenix and the Lyric, Hammersmith, during the 1950s. He also developed a love for superbly dressed, resplendently cast high comedy for which the name of Tennents became a byword. 
What won Beaumont such allies as Gielgud and Noel Coward in the first place was an array of personal and managerial skills which he put unreservedly at their disposal. He saw it as his mission to produce the best artists under the best possible conditions; and, having decided who the best were, he looked faithfully after their interests with an invincible blend of paternal care, business acumen, and courteously absolute authority. 'The iron fist', Tyrone Guthrie said of him, 'was wrapped in fifteen pastel-shaded velvet gloves' (Guthrie, 143). Those who worked with him, actors and playwrights alike, had total faith in his artistic judgement. His theatre followed the West End star system, but whereas the usual practice was for a star to appear with a supporting company, stars appeared in constellations on the Tennents stage, persuaded by Beaumont to exchange solitary glory for the satisfaction of working with their equals. 
Tennents never owned theatres. They had a long-standing tenancy at the Queen's and the Globe, and periodically occupied the Haymarket and theatres of the Albery group. During the war their profits were subject to the 40 per cent entertainments tax from which Beaumont sought exemption by forming a non-profit-making subsidiary -- Tennent Productions -- for the presentation of classical work. By the end of the war he had thus amassed a surplus of $70,000 with which, in 1946, he also took over the Lyric, Hammersmith, for classical seasons and West End try-outs by the newly created Company of Four. 
The immediate post-war years marked the zenith of Tennents' prestige: a gathering of major stars and new names (including Christopher Fry and Peter Brook) mobilized in a lavish firework display exactly matching the anti-austerity mood of the time. However, there were also growing murmurs against Tennents' non-profit-making status, which reached a head with the officially 'educational' premiere of 'A Streetcar Named Desire' (1949), at which the Arts Council withdrew its support and the Inland Revenue promptly converted the charitable surplus into unpaid tax, and put in a large demand which Beaumont unsuccessfully contested in the House of Lords. 
This defeat did nothing to shake the firm's theatrical fortunes or diminish Beaumont's power (in Guthrie's words) as the man, more than any other, who could 'make or break the career of almost any worker in the British professional theatre' (Guthrie, 142). 
What did bring the firm into decline was the explosion of new writing that began from the Royal Court theatre in 1956, and the growth of subsidized theatre at the expense of the commercial sector. Beaumont's West End flourished like a traditional grocery shop, selling reliable brands to regular customers. The fashions of 1956 consigned these brands to the dustbin although Beaumont struggled to replace them with such newcomers as Robert Bolt and Peter Shaffer. Nor was there any effective way of fighting subsidized competition by a manager who believed that the theatre should stand on its own feet. 
During his twenty years of supremacy Beaumont did more to raise the standard of the London theatre than any other manager, past or present. The new stage that overwhelmed him was one that he had done much to create. A homosexual, he had no family; the theatre was his business, his pleasure, and his life. He died at his home, 14 Lord North Street, London on 22 March 1973. 
Irving Wardle', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30803


Beaver, Stanley Henry (1907-1984), geographer, was born on 11 August 1907 at 69 Clifford Gardens, Willesden, London, the second son and fifth child in the family of two sons and three daughters of William Henry Beaver, Post Office letter sorter, and his wife, Hypatia Florence Hobbs. He was educated at Kilburn grammar school (1919-25), and at University College, London (1925-8) where he gained a first-class honours degree in geography (1928) and the Morris prize in geology. After a course of teacher training he was appointed in 1929 to the staff of the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE). He quickly earned a high reputation as an economic geographer and collaborated with L. Dudley Stamp in writing the successful 'The British Isles' (1933). Beaver's studies concentrated on the mineral, manufacturing, and transport industries. He contributed 'Yorkshire, West Riding' (1941) and 'Northamptonshire' (1943) to Stamp's 'Land of Britain'. On 5 August 1933 at Battersea parish church he married Elsie Barbara (1908/9-1992), daughter of William Wallace Rogers, chief traveller for the Jaeger Company. They had a son and three daughters. 
After the outbreak of war Beaver's knowledge proved valuable to the geographical section of the naval intelligence division of the Admiralty: he worked at Cambridge, 1941-3, especially on western and south-eastern Europe, on railway matters, and afterwards occasionally contributed to the 'Geographical Handbooks'. In 1943 he joined the Ministry of Town and Country Planning in the research division working on mineral problems and derelict land, and developed the collection of air photographs. He continued to advise the ministry after his return to academic life as Sir Ernest Cassel reader in economic geography at the LSE in 1946. As exemplified by his 'Derelict Land in the Black Country' (1946), based on field survey, and by his work on minerals (notably ironstone) and planning, Beaver made contributions of lasting policy significance. His studies of sand and gravel resources were particularly influential at a time of strong demand for wartime construction purposes (such as airfields) and for post-war urban reconstruction and new town development. He contributed pioneer studies of the reclamation of industrial waste land. He was a member of the Waters advisory committee on sand and gravel from 1946. In 1950 Beaver was appointed to a foundation chair in the University College of North Staffordshire at Keele and threw his energies wholeheartedly into the development of the University of Keele (1962). He was chairman of the grounds committee. He founded a climatological station and produced (with E. M. Shaw) 'The Climate of Keele' (1971). He wrote vividly on the evolution of the industrial landscape of the Potteries. Through his efforts the library of Air Ministry wartime air photographs, mainly of Europe, was placed on permanent loan at Keele in 1963 and opened in 1966. He also secured for Keele the Le Play House Library and the archive of the Institute of Sociology. 
Fieldwork which threw light on the relationships between environment, economy, technical skills, and social conditions lay at the heart of Beaver's work as a geographer. He had been early attracted to the work of the Le Play Society and took part in field surveys, for example in Bulgaria, Albania, and Norway. He joined societies to serve them, not for recognition. His work for the North Staffordshire Field Club was recognized by his election to its presidency, 1961-2. A founder member of the Institute of British Geographers, he was president in 1964. The Geographical Association elected him to its presidency in 1967 and he was twice president of section E of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1961, 1981). He served on the council of the Royal Geographical Society (1943-7) and received its Murchison award in 1962. He was chairman for many years of the Dudley Stamp Memorial Trust. He was elected an honorary fellow of the LSE in 1982. He was elected also to honorary membership of the Geographical Society of Poland. He maintained strong international links and gained pleasure from translating into English a number of salient works by French geographers. Nearer home, chairmanship of the Staffordshire Community Council occupied time and energy. 
Beaver was short, spare, and energetic. His mind was quick: he did not enjoy long committee discussions. He loved railways and knew his Bradshaw. He was a kind man, though when principles were at stake he could speak sharply. He had what was described as a 'pungent humour'. He enjoyed teaching and students responded to his enthusiasm. A central theme was the environmental consequences of technical change. He linked a grasp of geological conditions, detailed knowledge of places, reading in economic history, and an understanding of industrial technologies to analyse the revolution in the British landscape that had resulted from industrial change. Technical development, he argued, did not lead to mastery over nature but rather to increasingly interdependent relationships between societies and environments. Beaver died on 10 November 1984 at his home, The Mount, Stafford Road, Eccleshall, Staffordshire. His work on industrial land reclamation was a starting point of a process which is still in train and much recent work in economic geography, though it deals with knowledge-based rather than manufacturing industry, has similar objectives to his. 


@@@@@


doc= 30804


Beeching, Richard, Baron Beeching (1913-1985), businessman, was born on 21 April 1913 in Sheerness, Kent, the second of the four sons of Hubert Josiah Beeching, journalist, and his wife, Annie Twigg, schoolteacher. He was educated at Maidstone grammar school and at Imperial College of Science and Technology, London, where he was awarded a first-class degree in physics in 1934 and a PhD in 1937 for his research into electrons. He published 'Electron Diffraction' (1936). In 1938 he married Ella Margaret, daughter of William John Tiley, engineer, of Maidstone. They had no children. 
After a year's work at the fuel research station in Greenwich in 1936, Beeching was recruited by William Griffiths (1895-1952) to work at the new research laboratory set up by the Mond Nickel Company Ltd in Birmingham, and in 1943 was seconded to the Ministry of Supply to work in the armaments design department, which dealt with the design and development of weapons and ammunition for all three services. He continued working there after the war as deputy chief engineer of armaments design from 1946 until he joined the technical department of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd (ICI) in London at the invitation of Sir Ewart Smith (1897-1995), technical director of ICI, who had headed the armaments design department during the war. At ICI he worked on the development of man-made fibres as a member of the Terylene Council, which became the board of the ICI fibres division. As a vice-president of ICI of Canada Ltd from 1953, Beeching spent two years in charge of building a fibres plant at Millhaven, Ontario, and was appointed chairman of the metals division of ICI in 1955. He became technical director of ICI in 1957, with a seat on the board. 
But it was as chairman of the British Railways board that Beeching became a national figure. He had been a member of the special advisory group on the British Transport Commission set up in 1960 by the minister of transport, Ernest Marples, under the chairmanship of Sir Ivan Stedeford, chairman of Tube Investments Ltd, which advised the government that the railways should be run as a business. Helped by the advice of the Stedeford group, the government published a white paper, 'The Reorganization of the Nationalized Transport Undertakings', in December 1960, proposing to break up the British Transport Commission, which presided over not only British Railways but also British Road Services, London Transport, British Transport Hotels, and Thomas Cook, and to put the railways under a British Railways board appointed by the minister of transport. General Sir Brian Robertson, chairman of the British Transport Commission since 1953, who saw the railways as a public service, was retired two years early, and Beeching was appointed in his place as chairman of the British Transport Commission and chairman-designate of the proposed British Railways board for a five-year period, with a salary of $24,000 p.a. (equal to his existing ICI salary), far higher than that of any other head of a nationalized industry. 
Beeching's brief was to modernize British Railways and turn it into a profitable business. By the time he was appointed, the modernization plan of 1955 was being implemented, including investment in diesel locomotives, and the House of Commons select committee on the nationalized industries had published its report in July 1960 concluding that the losses sustained by British Railways -- a $42 million deficit in 1959 -- were mainly due to the uneconomic passenger services. At the British Transport Commission's headquarters, Stanley Raymond, who was to be Beeching's successor as chairman of British Railways, had commissioned regional studies of the rail system to find out which lines were making a loss and which parts of the system were commercially viable. Beeching spent most of his first two years drafting the report 'The Reshaping of British Railways' (1963), always known as the 'Beeching report'. Although what he proposed was not new, he came to be identified in the public mind with the argument that British Railways should concentrate on those tasks for which the railways were best qualified. In his report he revealed that half of the 7000 railway stations generated only 2 per cent of the total rail traffic, one-third of the track carried only 1 per cent of the traffic, and only one-third of the stock of railway carriages was used all the year round. In the appendix he listed 2000 stations and 250 lines which he thought should be closed on economic grounds, with a reduction of 70,000 staff, and the term 'Beeching axe' was coined by the press. Bitterly criticized at the time by the railway unions and large sections of the public, especially in communities which lost their branch lines, Beeching continued to be branded as the man who destroyed the railway system. Less publicity was given to the more positive aspects of the report, the development of those parts of the system which were economically viable, including liner trains, the forerunner of the Freightliner service. Beeching followed this with 'The Development of the Major Trunk Routes' (1965), a survey of how rail traffic could be concentrated on the 3000 miles of main lines. He also completely reorganized the management structure of British Railways, bringing in businessmen to middle and senior management posts. 
With the Labour victory in October 1964, Beeching's unpopularity led him to resign at the end of May 1965, one year earlier than intended. Appointed minister of transport in December 1965, Barbara Castle began to take a fresh look at transport policy, and although she admired Beeching's intellect, and agreed with much that he had done, especially in light of the expansion in the use of road transport, she found that he approached transport policy 'with an arrogance that comes, I suspect, from a clear mind that sees a logical answer to a situation and cannot tolerate any modification of it to meet human frailty' ('Castle Diaries, 1964-70', 122). Although not all his recommendations were implemented, by 1969 the track had been reduced from 18,214 miles in 1961 to 12,098, and the number of railway stations from 7025 in 1961 to 3002. Critics later pointed out that he should have been more aware of the interdependence of the parts of the railway system: for example, many passengers used main-line services only because they connected with local branch lines. British Railways continued to run at a deficit ($134 million in 1963, $147 million in 1969), but Beeching's four years at British Railways succeeded in bringing public attention to bear on the question of how to run the railway system and make it pay. Even before his resignation, Beeching allowed himself to be drawn into political arguments. Tony Benn, after a lunch in January 1965 at which Beeching had launched an attack on 'overblown democracy', observed: 'I think Beeching imagined himself as a new de Gaulle, emerging from industry to save the nation' (Benn, 205). Unwisely, he continued to rise to the bait, as when he found himself arguing in a Cambridge Union debate in 1968 that managerial efficiency was the ultimate goal. 
Beeching received a life peerage in 1965. He returned to ICI as deputy chairman, but, disappointed at having been passed over as chairman, he left in 1970 to serve as chairman of Redland Ltd, the building materials group, until 1977. He remained as a director until 1984 and continued to advise on research and development. He was also a director of Furness Withy & Co. Ltd, the shipowners, from 1972 to 1975, and chairman from 1973 to 1975. He served on several public bodies, including the National Economic Development Council from 1962 to 1964 and the Top Salaries Review Body from 1971 to 1975. He was also chairman of the royal commission on assizes and quarter sessions in 1966: his report was implemented in the 'Courts Act' of 1971. Beeching was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of London in 1966. He died on 23 March 1985 in the Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead, Sussex. 


